

Gomez (Non-state actors: Acero-Garces disapproved) Colombia *  [2000]  UKIAT
00007


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date heard: 03/10/2000
                                                  Date notified:..24/11/2000


                                   Before


                       MR JUSTICE COLLINS (PRESIDENT)
                              DR. H. H. STOREY
                                 MR G. WARR

                                   Between


                     EMILIA DEL SOCORRO GUTIERREZ GOMEZ


                                               Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. This case has been starred for the purpose of clarifying the law  on  the
1951 Refugee Convention ground of political opinion in  relation  to  claims
to persecution at the hands of non-state actors.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Colombia. The basis of her claim to  asylum
was that as part of her training as a law student at the  Universidad  Libre
de Pereira  she was required to  work  at  the  Consultorio  Juridico  which
provided free legal advice and was connected to the court system. She  along
with  several fellow students  had investigated a request for advice from  a
farmer who lived in a rural area on the outskirts of the  town  of  Pereira.
He had complained that he was the victim of extortion  from  armed  men  who
had come to his farm demanding money.  She  thought  they  were  guerrillas.
Subsequently the appellant was visited at her place of work  by  some  armed
men. She also began receiving threatening telephone calls at home.  Two  co-
workers who had  helped  with  the  investigation  disappeared  soon  after.
Before she left Colombia she had also learnt that her  university  tutor  Dr
Herrera had been kidnapped. She produced to verify this a newspaper  article
together with a letter from her faculty dean confirming that Dr Herrera  had
been her tutor.  In addition whilst out driving she and  her  boyfriend  had
been chased by two motorcycles each with two men on, one  of  them  carrying
some kind of machine gun. After they had stopped  at  a  police  checkpoint,
police had escorted them home. Having no confidence  in  the  police  to  do
anything to catch the men on bikes, however, she did not pursue this  matter
further with them.  Originally it  had  been  her  intention  to  leave  her
country temporarily by way of a holiday in  Switzerland  until  the  problem
ended. But she realised after talking  to  a  friend  in  the  UK  that  her
experiences  justified  making  a  claim  for   asylum.   She   had   learnt
subsequently - in March 2000  -   that  Dr  Herrera  had  been  released  on
payment of a ransom. If  returned  she  feared  she  would  be  murdered  or
abducted by the guerrillas. She believed they were members of FARC and  that
this organisation had the wherewithal to pursue her  anywhere  in  Colombia.
Even three years later, she felt  that   the  threats  facing  her  remained
real.

3. The Special Adjudicator rejected  the  appellant's  claim  for  two  main
reasons:

a) he found her of poor credibility;
a) even had he accepted her  account  he  was  not  satisfied  there  was  a
   Convention reason. Relying  in  this  regard  on  Auld,  J  in  ex  parte
   Hernandez [1994] Imm AR  506  he wrote:

   "The  facts  of  that  case  were  that  the  applicant  had  feared  the
   consequences of refusing to co-operate with guerrillas to the  extent  of
   supplying drugs  and  medicines  to  them.  He  had  not  asked  for  the
   protection of government forces but had asserted they would be unable  to
   protect him. Although Mr Southey had sought to distinguish that authority
   from Arcero Garces by stating that the victims of  crime  themselves  may
   not qualify  under  the  Convention  but  those,  who  for  example,  are
   assisting the victims of crime and come into contact with  criminals  can
   qualify under the Convention, I  found  that  argument  unpersuasive.  It
   seems to me that if the victims of crime, such as the farmer who was said
   to have suffered extortion at the hands of guerrillas by  this  appellant
   cannot qualify for protection under the Convention then  it  must  surely
   follow that those who assist the victims of crime cannot be placed in any
   better position insofar as Convention protection is  concerned  than  the
   actual victims of crime themselves".

4. In granting leave  the  Tribunal  put  the  parties  on  notice  that  it
intended to review whether Acero-Garces accurately reflected United  Kingdom
case law on the subject of claims to face persecution in Colombia from  non-
state actors  likely  to  impute  a  political  opinion  to  all  those  who
obstructed their aims and activities. In Acero-Garces  [1999]  INLR  460,  a
Tribunal chaired by Mr R G Care, the appellant had witnessed the  murder  of
a policeman in her  home  town.  She  had  identified  the  murderer  in  an
identification parade. She was then threatened by this man`s  brother.  Both
the murderer and his brother were members of a criminal gang  (Los  Prispos)
that operated  throughout  Colombia.  Thereafter  she  received  threatening
phone calls and notes and her shop was burnt down by the gang. She moved  to
another part of town, but the threats continued. The  police  had  not  been
able to help her. She travelled to the UK and claimed  asylum.  In  allowing
the appeal the Tribunal held that the appellant  feared  persecution  for  a
Convention reason, namely imputed political opinion. The Tribunal held  that
she would be seen by her persecutors to be on the side  of  law,  order  and
justice and that the Colombian authorities would be unable  to  protect  her
against the persecution. The Tribunal noted the argument that the  perceived
political opinion arose:

      "out of a combination of evidence that all forces  of  law  and  order
      operate only where the drugs barons or  whatever  one  may  call  them
      permit. In other words the authorities protect the criminals  but  not
      members of the public. Any attempt to reverse that state of affairs is
      seen by the barons as a threat. To  disentangle  that  situation  from
      political opinion is, it is argued, impossible".

The Tribunal concluded:

      "The appeal is allowed on the basis that imputed political opinion  is
      the Convention ground. The reason that the appellant is seen to be  on
      the  side  of  law,  order,  justice  and  against  disorder,   chaos,
      injustice, and it is these dark forces  that  control  government.  We
      need make no decision on the basis of particular social group".

Tribunal determinations to similar effect include Mezal (14377).

5. At the  hearing  the  representatives  addressed  us  on  the  issues  of
credibility, sufficiency of protection and political  opinion.  In  relation
to the  issue  of  credibility  it  was  broadly  agreed  that  the  Special
Adjudicator had fallen into error in his assessment of credibility.  He  had
sought to reject the core of her  account  by  reference  to  loose  surmise
about her conduct on arrival in the United Kingdom.  Contrary  to  the  view
taken by the Special Adjudicator we do not  consider  that  her  conduct  on
arrival rendered her story implausible. In view of the fact that  the  great
majority of the points relied upon by the Special  Adjudicator  against  the
credibility of the appellant's  account  concerned  matters  of  detail,  we
considered that at worst the story she had told was exaggerated rather  than
invented. Key  parts  of  it  were  supported  by  unchallenged  documentary
evidence corroborating that she was a law  student,  that  as  part  of  her
training she was employed earning $720 a month to do advice  work  and  that
Dr Herrera, a teacher from the same University and faculty as her, had  been
kidnapped. Whilst therefore we do not necessarily  believe  her  account  in
its entirety we are satisfied that we can accept its essential  elements  as
credible for the purposes of determining this appeal.

6. As  regards  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  political
opinion, the respective views of the parties were  as  follows.  Mr  Southey
for the appellant contended that  the  appellant  had  shown  that  she  had
become the target  of  threats  and  serious  harassment  from  a  guerrilla
organisation which she believed to be FARC. Her personal tutor, Dr  Herrera,
for whom she and her colleagues had done investigative work on the  case  of
the farmer was the victim of extortion demands from  these  guerrillas,  had
been kidnapped. Two of her colleagues had disappeared.  She  had  also  been
threatened in a motorcycle incident. She had not felt  confident  enough  in
the police to afford her protection against these threats  and  the  general
country materials bore out that in this regard her feelings were  justified.
It was plausible that the motives of the guerrillas who threatened her  were
political. As regards the situation now, it was not likely that  FARC  would
forget; an  expert  witness,  Professor  Pearce,  had  assessed  that  "once
targeted by  an  armed  group,  individuals  are  systematically  persecuted
through the use of sophisticated  intelligence  which  enables  them  to  be
located when they flee to other parts of  the  country".  If  the  appellant
had suffered past persecution, one had to ask whether  there  had  been  any
significant change in general country conditions. There  had  not  been.  No
internal flight would be available for this appellant.

7. Citing Hernandez, Mr Saunders argued that  just  because  someone  was  a
victim of FARC did not  mean  that  they  would  have  a  political  opinion
attributed to them. Individual cases of persons  in  danger  from  non-state
agents ran along a continuum. At the one end there would be clear  cases  of
people with no political opinion, e.g.  mere  victims  of  muggers.  At  the
other end would be persons  with  a  clear  political  opinion,  e.g.  those
organising high-profile  demonstrations  against  a  guerrilla  organisation
whose aims include overthrow of the state.  The  appellant`s  situation  was
clearly at the non-political end of the spectrum. Since law  and  order  and
justice were central issues in  the  policy  agendas  of  most  governments,
being for or against law and order (as in Acero-Garces)  was not  enough  to
give rise to a political opinion, imputed or otherwise. There was  also  the
question of causation: the key determining factor to be  given  most  weight
was why the persecutors were taking action. Whilst in Colombia  there  might
be an inability to protect, there was not necessarily an unwillingness.

8. The Tribunal would begin by noting that one obvious and key  question  in
relation  to  claims  from  citizens  of  Colombia  is  the  sufficiency  or
otherwise of protection there.

9. Before proceeding to deal with this  and  related  matters  further,  the
Tribunal needs to say something about  the  relevance  in  this  case  of  a
report  from  a  leading  country  expert  on  Colombia,  Professor  Pearce.
Although her CV was not adduced before us, we note that it  was  before  the
Special Adjudicator  and  that  it  establishes  her  academic  credentials.
Author of Colombia: Inside the Labyrinth, Professor Pearce is  a  recognised
expert on the situation in Colombia. Her  studies  of  Colombia  in  general
taken together with her May 29 2000 report on Miss Gomez in  particular  are
of assistance to  the  Tribunal  in  describing  relevant  features  of  the
Colombian political system, the very considerable power  held  by  guerrilla
groups such as FARC, the ascendancy of paramilitarism  and  the  failure  of
the system of  criminal  justice  in  particular  to  afford  protection  to
ordinary citizens. But the report on Miss Gomez has aspects which render  it
of limited assistance to us. At paragraph 5 for example, she writes:

      "The latter [ the failure of  the  Colombian  authorities  to  protect
      citizens] explains why elements which  appear  contradictory  in  your
      client`s case to outsiders are explicable in  the  Colombian  context.
      Despite the dangers, your client and  her  fellow  students  tried  to
      investigate this case, encouraged by their tutor. Partly they hoped to
      do well in their law studies, but partly they probably felt they  were
      simply carrying  out  their  duty  to  make  the  legal  system  work.
      Nevertheless, your client`s unwillingness to report to the police  the
      threat from the men on the  motorbikes  reflects  the  other  side  of
      Colombia, the reality that the law does not in fact operate and  those
      charged with implementing it cannot and do no carry out this task. Her
      fears that guerrillas would get to hear about any denunciations to the
      authorities reflects the profound lack of faith in the  integrity  and
      capacity of the country`s security forces to protect citizens."

Later on she concludes that: "I  would  disagree  therefore  with  the  Home
Office`s statement that your client cannot be a  victim  of  persecution  if
she is targeted by non-state armed groups".

10. Whilst the Tribunal recognises that Professor Pearce has  a  great  fund
and depth of knowledge in relation to the situation in Colombia, it  is  not
assisted by her efforts to apply this  knowledge  to  the  circumstances  of
this particular appellant in the form of speculation  about  an  appellant's
motives.  Except in unusual cases, an expert report should  not  attempt  to
usurp the fact-finding function of the appellate authorities whose  duty  is
to test and evaluate the evidence  in accordance  with  the  legal  criteria
contained in the 1951 Refugee  Convention.  An  expert  is  not  a  judicial
decision-maker. A country expert`s function is to set out the general  facts
in the light of the objective evidence. Insofar as he or she has  reason  to
comment on an individual  case,  his  or  her  remarks  should  normally  be
confined  to  assessing  whether  what  is  said  to  have   happened  to  a
particular individual or individuals correlates or  not   with  the  general
evidence about persons similarly situated. A competent  expert`s  report  is
always entitled to respect and due consideration; but   from  the  point  of
view of the judicial decision-maker such reports will often  amount  in  the
end to just one among many other items of evidence which have to be  weighed
in the balance. As the Tribunal said in Lando Kapela v  Secretary  of  State
[1998] Imm AR 294 evaluation of background material  and  reports  by  those
claiming to have special knowledge of a country was a  matter  of  fact  for
the adjudicator.


The protection issue

11. As the Tribunal has found in previous cases dealing with  Colombia  over
the past decade, the objective country materials show very plainly  that  in
general the authorities are both unable and unwilling to provide  sufficient
protection to ordinary citizens. In   reaching  this  conclusion  in  Acero-
Garces the Tribunal relied on U.S. State Department  reports,  Human  Rights
Watch, Amnesty International, an expert  report  from  Professor  Pearce,  a
1997 UNHCR  Position  paper  augmented  by  subsequent  comments  and  press
cuttings. It also cited the Home Office`s own country assessment that:

      "Hundreds of people have  been  killed  by  the  security  forces  and
      paramilitary groups operating "with their support  and  acquiescence".
      Death squad style killing of people regarded as  disposable  continued
      in urban areas  and  armed  opposition  groups  were  responsible  for
      numerous human rights abuses".

In Jaramillo-Aponte (00/TH/00428) a Tribunal chaired  by  Professor  Jackson
and determined on 19 April 2000 drew the same  conclusion,  it  being  noted
that:

      "In the Home Office Report it  is  said  that  credible  sources  have
      alleged that members of paramilitary groups committed 69 per  cent  of
      all politically motivated extrajudicial killings. The killings by such
      groups increased  significantly  in  1996  and  1997.  The  government
      figures show that in 1997 law-breakers were not brought to justice  in
      99.5 % of all crimes and that during the first 6 months of 1996 12,824
      citizens were victims of homicide.


      The United  States  Reports  includes  comments  that  19,665  murders
      occurred in 1998. In  1996  the  Superior  Council  of  the  Judiciary
      reported that 74 per cent of all crimes went unreported and between 97
      per cent and 98 percent went unpunished."




We ourselves observe that in the March 1999 report of the  UN  Human  Rights
Commissioner on the Office in Colombia noted at paragraph 40  that:

      "The increase in violence,  the  deterioration  of  the  human  rights
      situation in the armed conflict, the expansion of paramilitarism,  the
      disregard for international humanitarian law on the part of  both  the
      guerrilla and the paramilitary forces, the  attacks  on  human  rights
      advocates, the worsening internal displacement  situation,  widespread
      impunity, the serious prison crisis, and the precarious  situation  of
      the most vulnerable  population  groups  together  make  up  a  sombre
      picture which reflects the gravity of the human  rights  situation  in
      Colombia".

12. In regard to the group of guerrillas whom the appellant in  the  instant
case believed were responsible for her difficulties  (FARC),  we  note  that
the US State Department report of February 2000 states that:

      "The  FARC  and  the  ELN  regularly  attacked  civilian  populations.
      Guerrillas were responsible for the  majority  of  cases  of  forcible
      recruitment of indigenous people and of  hundreds  of  children,  they
      were also responsible for the majority of kidnappings. Guerrillas held
      more than 1,000 kidnapped civilians, with ransom payments  serving  as
      an important source of revenue. Other kidnap victims were  killed.  In
      some places, guerrillas collected "war taxes", forced members  of  the
      citizenry into their ranks, forced small farmers to sow illicit crops,
      and regulated travel, commerce and other activities".

We note also that in her May 2000 report concerning  Miss  Gomez,  Professor
Pearce identifies a deterioration rather than  an  improvement  in  Colombia
since the appellant left.

However, the fact of insufficiency of  protection  in  general  in  Colombia
today  does  not  establish  the  appellant`s  claim   under   the   Refugee
Convention. In our view she has failed to make out other essential  elements
to such a claim.


The appellant`s fear of persecution

13. Even accepting the appellant`s account in its  essentials  the  Tribunal
is not persuaded that she has a current well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
Even disregarding inconsistencies  in  her  evidence  as  to  why  she  left
Colombia when she did, it seems to  us  that  the  guerrillas`  interest  in
targeting the appellant previously would be very unlikely to remain. On  her
own account she had incurred their wrath by taking part in an  investigation
into  their  extortion  racket.  Two   of   her   fellow-investigators   had
disappeared. Dr Herrera had been kidnapped. However, in March 2000  she  had
heard from her father that   Dr  Herrera  had  recently  been  released.  In
addition there is no evidence that the advice centre`s  investigations  into
this particular extortion racket had proceeded any  further  since  she  had
left Colombia. We are prepared to accept  that in relation to  some  persons
seen as enemies guerrilla groups such as FARC would not forget them; but  we
cannot agree with the appellant (or Professor Pearce) that this would  apply
to all persons. Whether FARC forgot or not would depend  on  the  particular
circumstances which had brought someone to  their  attention  in  the  first
place. From the point of view of the guerrillas  in  this  case,   it  would
surely appear to them three years  later  that  their  earlier  actions  had
achieved their purpose of ending  the  investigation  into  their  extortion
racket. Even if, at the precise time the appellant left Colombia,  they  had
been still intent on targeting the appellant  and  others,  it  is  unlikely
they would now. In this regard it must be recalled that the  appellant  said
that she was not a political person.  Unlike  Dr  Herrera  who  was  both  a
university tutor and a local politician and who had provided  legal  defence
for people accused of drug trafficking offences, there is no  evidence  that
she had a political identity in her own right or that she had ever  taken  a
visible stand against guerrillas. Her involvement in the investigations  was
clearly ad  hoc.  Nor  did  she  fall  within  any  of  the   categories  of
"preferred victims" of kidnappings identified in  the  US  State  Department
report for Feb 2000: ("According  to  Pais  Libre,  politicians,  cattlemen,
children, and businessmen were guerillas` preferred victims").


The issue of protection for this appellant

14. In view of our conclusions as to the appellant's  current  fear,  it  is
not necessary for us to consider  in  separate  fashion  the  issue  of  the
sufficiency of protection for this appellant. It  should  be  apparent  from
what we have said earlier, however, that had we considered  her  to  face  a
real risk of serious harm from FARC, we would  have  very  likely  concluded
that it was a risk against which the  authorities  of  the  state  would  be
unable to protect her.


The issue of a Convention ground of particular social group

15. Mr Southey for the appellant rested his  main  argument  concerning  the
Convention ground on that of political opinion, to which  we  return  below.
However he also submitted that there  Miss  Gomez  would  in  any  event  be
persecuted on account of her membership of a particular social  group.  That
group could be variously defined as students doing human rights work  or  as
lawyers who stood up for peasant rights. In Ouanes  [1998]  Imm  AR  76  the
Court of Appeal had accepted  in  principle  that  a  common  characteristic
defining the group could include past employment. The common  characteristic
in this case was that in  the  past  members  had  investigated  guerrillas.
Although  not  an  innate  characteristic  it  was   a   common,   immutable
characteristic based on what Lord Steyn in Shah & Islam [1999]  Imm  AR  283
had described as "shared past experience". There  was  clear  evidence  that
people in Colombia who do this type of work are  targeted.  He  referred  to
passages from the report of  the  UN  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights
Office in Colombia recounting events "typical of the general  atmosphere  of
suspicion, pressure and open harassment to which many human rights NGOs  are
subjected, despite public recognition of their work by the Government".

16. With respect to Mr  Southey`s  argument  on  this  point,  the  Tribunal
considers that the particular social group relied upon consists  in  reality
in a disparate a group of  individuals.  Bearing  in  mind  the  appellant`s
account, the group could not said to be a dedicated group of lawyers or  the
like. At best it was a collection of individuals  who  had  had  an  ad  hoc
involvement in a potential criminal investigation. As  Mr  Saunders  rightly
put it, such activities were not and are not such as to imbue those  sharing
them with an immutable characteristic. They are not a  group  which  can  be
said to exist independently of their persecution.

The issue of a Convention ground of political opinion.
17. In view of our negative conclusion on current fear, it is  not  strictly
necessary for us to consider whether or not that fear was on account  of  an
imputed political opinion either. However, this hearing was   convened  with
a view to resolving uncertainties  in  the  case  law  concerning  political
opinion in non-state agent cases; we invited  and  received  submissions  on
the these issues from both of the parties to this appeal;   and  it  is  our
intention to set out such guidance as we can in order that adjudicators  are
better able to apply a consistent approach.


The political opinion ground in Convention jurisprudence

18. Despite being the most commonly invoked ground, United Kingdom case  law
elaborating upon the political opinion ground  has  been  extremely  sparse.
However, taking  significant  U.K.  cases  together  with  leading  overseas
cases, the 1979 UNHCR Handbook and the commentaries of leading  authors,  it
is possible to summarise the position as follows:

19. A claim cannot succeed under the Convention unless  a  person  can  show
that he faces a well-founded fear of persecution for one or five  Convention
reasons or grounds; in addition to establishing a Convention  ground  it  is
necessary for a claimant to show that the persecution feared is  on  account
of one or more Convention grounds.

20.  The  grounds  of  persecution  are  founded  on  principles   of   non-
discrimination under  international  law:  Shah  and  Islam  [1999]  Imm  AR
283(HL); Omoruyi v Secretary of State for the Home Department,  judgment  of
12 October 2000 (CA); J. Hathaway,  Law  of  Refugee  Status,  1991,  p.135;
G.Goodwin-Gill,  The  Refugee  in  International  Law  39  (1ST  ed.  1983);
Canada(Attorney General) v Ward [1993] 2 S.C.R.689, 734;  In  re  Acosta  19
I.& N. Dec.211, 233 (BIA  1985)  it  was  said  that  the  grounds  identify
qualities of  fundamental  difference  that  distinguish  the  refugee  from
others in his society.

21. In keeping with the proper interpretation of an international  treaty  a
broad purposive  construction  must  be  accorded  to  all  five  Convention
grounds, including the political opinion ground: Shah and Islam  [1999]  Imm
AR 283 at 293. Interpretation must not narrow the  definition  of  political
beyond recognition nor rely on intricate  distinctions  of  definition  that
might deny political opinion status in contexts where  a broad  usage  would
accord it.

22. By the same token interpretation of the nexus test, whether  persecution
is "on account of" one of the five  Convention  grounds,  must  also  eschew
narrow or restrictive interpretation. In this connection, it must always  be
borne in mind that motives of  the  persecutor  may  be  mixed;  it  is  not
necessary to show that they are purely political. As was stated by the  U.S.
Ninth Circuit in the case of Harpinder Singh v Ilchert,  63  F.3d  at  1501,
"...persecutory conduct may have more than one motive, and so  long  as  one
motive is one of the statutorily enumerated grounds, the  requirements  have
been satisfied" (cited in D. Anker, Law of Asylum in the United  States,1999
p.280). To similar effect it has been stated  in  leading  Australian  cases
that it is not necessary that the  Convention  ground  should  be  the  sole
reason for the fear: see  Jahazi  v  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Ethnic
Affairs (1995) 133 ALR  437,  443  (French,  J)  approved  in  Minister  for
Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs  v  Abdi  (1999)  162  ALR  105,  112
(FC;FC) O`Connor, Tamberlin and  Mansfield  JJ.   Whilst  in  the  U.K.  our
courts have been reluctant to exclude the possibility that  persecution  can
arise  from  a  state  practice  without  there  being  any   clear   motive
(Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97), there has been similar recognition,  as  we
shall see,  that where motives are involved, they can be mixed.

23. Leading commentators have seen the political opinion  ground  to  differ
in character from  the  other  five  Convention  grounds  in  at  least  one
important  respect. As noted by A.Grahl-Madsen, The Status  of  Refugees  in
International Law,1966 at n.5  217  and  223,  the  grounds  fall  into  two
categories.  First  are  those  which  are  "beyond  the  control   of   the
individual, namely race, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
group, and  - in certain respects - religion.  Secondly  are  the  political
opinion ground and "active religion"" The latter two  are  distinguished  by
their ""individual character"".  However,  although  grounds  in  the  first
category are inherently "group-based", the political opinion ground  too  is
often a group-based phenomenon. As was noted by the U.S.  Ninth  Circuit  in
Kotasz v INS F.3d 847, 853 n.9(9th Cir.1994), although:

      "It  is  not  inconceivable  that  a  person  would  be   individually
      persecuted on the basis of his uniquely abhorrent (in the persecutor`s
      view)  political  beliefs,  [but]  such  occurrences  would  be  rare.
      Political parties,  factions,  ideologies,  and  movements  are  group
      phenomena. Moreover, it is generally  the  existence  of  a  group  of
      opponents that concerns a government or other persecutor sufficient to
      provoke oppression."

24. In order to show persecution on account of political opinion, it is  not
necessary to show political action or activity, although action activity  or
conduct may be an important indication of political opinion: UNHCR  Handbook
para 81. As the Tribunal noted in  Orlov  (18505)  the  distinction  between
political actions and political beliefs is of limited value in  asylum  law,
for a political belief  may  be  manifested  in  more  than  one  way  -  an
intellectual might pen a tract or a pamphlet, a cinematographer  might  make
a propaganda film, a political activist might campaign for his or her  party
in an election, or someone may simply  fight  for  a  cause  in  which  they
believe. Furthermore, as Kirby J in the High  Court  of  Australia  case  of
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo [1997] 191 CLR 559 at  598
noted, "political opinion" may be shown by repeated conduct which  is  never
(or  rarely)  converted  into  articulate  political  protest  of  the  kind
familiar to democratic societies.

25. Furthermore, even political opinions that do not fall within  the  ambit
of those protected by internal human rights  norms  (freedom  of  expression
and conscience etc.) would  appear  to  be  covered:  Macdonald  and  Blake,
Immigration Law and  Practice  at  p.60  of  their  supplement  cite  Asante
[1991] Imm AR 78 and  give the example of a  negligent  bank  clerk  who  is
accused of politically motivated sabotage to the national  economy  who  may
not have been expressing a political opinion when  performing  his  function
but  where  the  imputation  of  such  opinions  by  his  persecutors  would
establish the Convention reason for such persecution.,

26. Political opinion may be express or imputed: R v Secretary of State  for
the Home Department ex parte Jeyakumaran (of 28 June 1985)   [1994]  Imm  AR
45. Adan and Lazarevic v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [1997]
Imm AR 251 at 273; Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Patrick
Kwame Otchere [1988] Imm AR 21; Asante [1991] Imm AR;  Duodo  (5803),  Darko
(7315) Quijano (10699); Bobe (10838); Nsimba (13176); Okwu  (14518);  Boteju
(18630); UNHCR Handbook paragraph 80.

27. The  term "political" within the phrase "political opinion"  has  to  be
given a broad meaning but not one  that  is  entirely  undifferentiated.  In
conventional political science and political theory,  the  term  "political"
is confined to matters pertaining  to  government  or  governmental  policy.
This is reflected in some of the dictionary  definitions,  e.g.  the  Oxford
English Dictionary defines political as:

      "of, belonging, or pertaining to the state or body  of  citizens,  the
      government and policy, esp. in  civil  and  secular  affairs;  public;
      civil; or or pertaining to the science or art of politics".

28. It is clearly this classical definition which  Lord  Diplock  wished  to
affirm in R v Governor of Pentonville Prison ex parte Cheng [ 1973] AC 931:

      "Politics are about  government.  `Political`  as  descriptive  of  an
      objective to be achieved must, in my view, be confined to  the  object
      of overthrowing or changing the government of a state or  inducing  it
      to change its policy or escape from its territory the better so to do.
      No doubt any act done with any of these objects would be a  `political
      act`.

29. However, as noted by Hill,  J  in  a  recent  Australian  Federal  Court
judgment, V v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [1999]  FCA
428 on the term "political" within Art 1A(2):

      "It clearly is not  limited  to  party  politics  in  the  sense  that
      expression is understood in a parliamentary democracy. It is  probably
      narrower than the usage of the word in connection with the science  of
      politics, where it may extend to almost every aspect  of  society.  It
      suffices here to say that the holding of an opinion inconsistent  with
      that held by the government of a country explicitly  by  reference  to
      views contained in a political platform or implicitly by reference  to
      acts (which where corruption is involved, either demonstrate that  the
      government itself is corrupt or condones corruption) reflective of  an
      unstated  political  agenda,  will  be  the  holding  of  a  political
      opinion."


30. The need for the "political opinion"  ground  to  be  construed  broadly
arises in part from the role of the Refugee Convention in the protection  of
fundamental human rights, which prominently include the  rights  to  freedom
of thought and conscience, of opinion and expression  and  of  assembly  and
association:  A.Grahl-Madsen,  The  Status  of  Refugees  in   International
Law,1966  supra n.5 at 227. This entails that even  in  contexts  where  the
persecutor may be simply another  private  individual,  if  his  persecutory
actions against a claimant are motivated by an intention to  stifle  his  or
her beliefs, the opinion being imputed can be seen as  political,  at  least
where the state  authorities  are  unable  to  afford  effective  protection
against such actions.

31. A broad construction is also required by the fact that  the  ground  has
to operate to protect a person against harm from non-state  agents  as  well
as state agents of persecution. Reference to "non-state agents" is  not,  in
our view always helpful since it can wrongly imply that such  entities  have
agency in the context of state responsibility.   This  Tribunal  prefers  to
talk of "non-state actors" In the context of state  agents  of  persecution,
it is difficult to quarrel with the formulation given by  Hathaway,  Law  of
Refugee Status, 154:

      "Essentially any action which  is  perceived  to  be  a  challenge  to
      governmental authority is therefore appropriately considered to be the
      expression of a political opinion".

Where however the claim is of persecution at the hands of non-state  actors,
a definition of political which was confined to the machinery of  government
or to  governmental authority in any narrow sense would have the  effect  in
many cases of rendering the political opinion  ground  inoperative.  In  the
context of non state actors the  need  for  a  more  inclusive,  multi-sided
definition  of  political   was  made  very   evident   in   the   case   of
Canada(Attorney-General) v Ward (1993) 2 SCR 689, 746.  In  concluding  that
the term went wider than a simple question of party allegiance  the  Supreme
Court held:

      "Political opinion as a basis for a well founded fear  of  persecution
      has been defined quite simply as persecution of persons on the  ground
      "that they are alleged or known to hold opinions that are contrary  to
      or critical of the policies of the government or  ruling  party"...The
      persecution stems from the desire to put down any dissent viewed as  a
      threat to the persecutors. Grahl-Madsen`s definition assumes that  the
      persecutor from whom the claimant is fleeing is always the  government
      or ruling party, or at least some party having parallel  interests  to
      those of the government.  As  noted  earlier,  however,  international
      refugee protection extends to situations where the  state  is  not  an
      accomplice to the persecution, but is unable to protect the  claimant.
      In such cases, it is possible that a claimant may be seen as a  threat
      by a group unrelated, and even opposed, to the government  because  of
      his or her political viewpoint, perceived or real.  The  more  general
      interpretation of political opinion  suggested  by  Goodwin-Gill...ie,
      "any opinion on any matter  in  which  the  machinery  of  the  state,
      government, and policy may be engaged" reflects more care in embracing
      situations of this kind".

32. In Klinko  v  Canada  (Minister  of  Citizenship  and  Immigration)  the
Federal Court of Appeal on 22 February 2000 clarified that:

      "In Ward, the Supreme Court found that Mr Ward  who  belonged  to  the
      Irish national Liberation  Army  (INLA),  had  expressed  a  political
      opinion in allowing the hostages under his guard  to  escape  when  he
      discovered that they would be executed.  For  his  act,  he  would  be
      assassinated by the ruthless para-military organisation  of  which  he
      was a member. There was no state complicity in the persecution that Mr
      Ward faced. Indeed the alleged persecution  emanated  from  the  INLA.
      Neither the Irish nor the British governments condoned, sanctioned  or
      supported execution of hostages as a means of achieving secession from
      Great Britain. Mr Ward was in harmony with the state in opposing  such
      violence....The act for which Ward was so punished was his  assistance
      in the escape of the hostages  he  was  guarding.  From  this  act,  a
      political opinion related to the proper limits to means used  for  the
      achievement of political change can be imputed. The position taken  by
      Mr Ward with respect to the proper means of achieving  secession  thus
      satisfied the definition of "political opinion "as any opinion on  any
      matter in which the machinery of state, government, and policy may  be
      engaged".

33. Reading these passages from Ward and Klinko,  the  Tribunal  has  doubts
(we put them no higher than  that)  that  even  Goodwin-Gills`s  definition,
which places focus on the machinery of the state or government, is  in  fact
broad enough to encompass every  type of situation  relating  to  non  state
actors of persecution.

34. It is true that this definition allows one to consider government  as  a
process or system rather than simply as a set of institutions  (The  Concise
Oxford Dictionary 10th Ed. gives, as  one  meaning  of  "government",   "the
system by which a state or community is governed"). It  is  also  true  that
the term government can embrace government at all levels, local as  well  as
central. It would easily cover, therefore, cases at either the  national  or
local level where  the  persecutors  are  plainly  political  entities  e.g.
members  of  opposition  parties  or  local  groups  at  odds   with   local
politicians. However in principle the non-state actor category would  appear
to be capable of covering less overtly political  entities.

35. The definitional consequences for construing political  opinion  in  the
context of non-state actor cases are spelt  out  more  fully  than  anywhere
else in the U.S. case law.

36. In Sanga v INS, 103 F.3d 1482, 1487 (9th Cirri. 1997) the Ninth  Circuit
judge  held that:

      "In establishing an imputed political opinion, the  focus  of  inquiry
      turns away from  the  views  of  the  victims  to  the  views  of  the
      persecutor. We consider, however, not the persecutor`s  own  political
      opinions, but rather the political views the persecutor rightly or  in
      error attributes to  his  victims.  If  the  persecutor  attributed  a
      political opinion to the victim, and acted upon the attribution,  this
      imputed view becomes the applicant`s  political  opinion  as  required
      under this Act".

This approach was endorsed in Agbuya v INS 219 F.3d 9962,  a  Ninth  Circuit
opinion of July 18, 2000.

 37. Where  thus  the  persecutor  is  a  non-state  actor  it  becomes  the
persecutor`s  perception of a political opinion  held  by  the  victim  that
matters.

38. However the fact that even state agents who are  not  overtly  political
can impute a political opinion does not in our view warrant  the  conclusion
that any opinion imputed by a non-state  actor   qualifies  as  a  political
opinion. As Hill, J noted in a passage already cited from V v  Minister  for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs , the meaning of  political  is   "...
narrower than the usage of the  word  in  connection  with  the  science  of
politics, where it may extend to almost every aspect of  society".  Even  in
the  case  of  non-state  actors  therefore  one  cannot  easily   see   how
differences they may have with someone they persecute could be described  as
political unless they themselves  have or express a  political  ideology  or
set of political objectives, i.e. views which have a bearing  on  the  major
power transactions relating to  government  taking  place  in  a  particular
society. That is to say, the Tribunal doubts  that  the  Refugee  Convention
ground of political opinion was meant to cover  power-relationships  at  all
levels of society. It may well make sense to speak in other contexts of  the
"politics of the family" or of "sexual politics" taking  place  between  two
persons, but to engage the Convention  these  power  relationships  must  in
some way link up to major power transactions that take place  in  government
or government-related sectors such as industry and the  media.  Put  another
way, politics at the "micro" level must in some  meaningful  way  relate  to
politics at the "macro" level. In Shah and Islam  [1999] Imm AR 283 at  296,
298 both  Lords  Steyn  and   Hoffman  noted  that  the  evidence  that  the
applicants` husbands  practised  domestic  violence  against  them  did  not
demonstrate that they were persecuted for  a  political  opinion.  We  doubt
that absent very unusual circumstances, for example where a violent  husband
sees his wife as an enemy of the state  or  regime,  political  opinion  can
ever  be established at the purely domestic or interpersonal  level. By  the
same taken, a neighbour from hell who targets a claimant may be someone  who
will inflict serious harm upon him; but without  more  one  cannot  sensibly
attribute to the relationship between that neighbour and such a  claimant  a
political dimension. Cases where an individual has been accepted as  a  non-
state actor capable of imputing political opinion appear to  be  ones  where
that individual is effectively implementing the political  views  of  either
the state or some other body with political aims and objectives.


39.  The  approach  we  take  here  is  reflected   in   previous   Tribunal
determinations, see for example  Allie  (14814)  dealing  with  a  political
opinion imputed to those who were "against" rather than "with"  a  group  of
rebels in Sierra Leone; see also Galvis (22502).

40. As well as the need to adopt a broad definition of the term  "political"
there is also a need to recognise that the term is a malleable one.  In  the
nature of politics, the  boundaries  between  the  political  and  the  non-
political shift in historical time and place. In  Shah and Islam  the  point
was made by Lord Hoffman that although women in contemporary Pakistan  could
constitute a particular social group, that did not mean that women  anywhere
or at any time could.  It seems to  us  that  the  parameters  of  time  and
historical place are  even  more   present  in  relation  to  the  political
opinion ground. That  the  definition  of  the  adjective  "political"  must
always be to some extent malleable flows from the fact that  the  nature  of
the power relationships and transactions  that  compose  what  is  political
vary from society to society. Sometimes political opinion may be located  in
a particular type of expression or activity, e.g.  wearing  western  clothes
in  a  highly  fundamentalist  Muslim  country  with  strict  social  mores;
sometimes not. In society A where trade unions  adopt  a  combative  posture
towards the government, membership of a trade union  may  be  tantamount  to
holding a political opinion; in society B it may not  be  so.  The  risk  of
extortion threats from a criminal gang will not normally be  on  account  of
political opinion, but  in  some  societies  where  criminal  and  political
activities heavily overlap, the picture may be different. Persons  who  hold
posts in governmental agencies of the state at central or local  level  will
not normally be capable of having political opinions attributed to  them  by
groups opposed to the government. But if for example there is a major  armed
conflict going  on  between  the  authorities  and  guerrilla  groups  (e.g.
Islamic fundamentalists in Algeria in the 1990s) then it may  be  that  they
will have  attributed  to  them  the  political  opinion  of  being  on  the
government`s side rather  than  the  fundamentalist  Islamic  side  (Doufani
(14798); see also Woldemichael (17663)).

41.   One  important  consequence  of  this  recognition  of  the   shifting
boundaries of the political in different societies is that  it  will  be  an
error  to rely upon any fixed distinctions between the "political"  and  the
"criminal".  As  was  stated  in  Jerez-Spring  v  Canada  [1981]   2   F.C.
527[F.C.A.] , the "political" nature of a  claimant`s  actions  or  opinions
must be assessed in the context of his or her  country  of  origin.  In  the
Federal  Court  of  Australia  in  V  v   Minister   for   Immigration   and
Multicultural Affairs [1999] FCA 428, Wilcox, J cited Davies J in   Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Y [1998] FCA, 15 May 1998,  in  support
of the view that there is no justification in the Convention definition  for
a  dichotomy  between  criminal  activity  and  persecution  on  account  of
political opinion:

      "The abduction and torture of Y and his friend, and the abduction  and
      rape of Y`s wife, were undoubtedly serious criminal acts,  but  nobody
      suggested this prevented them  being  categorised  as  persecution  on
      account of political opinion".

Hill, J added in relation to V that:

      "The exposure of corruption itself is an act, not a belief. However it
      can be the outward manifestation of  a  belief.  That  belief  can  be
      political, that is to say a person who is opposed to corruption may be
      prepared to expose it, even  if  so  to  do  may  bring  consequences,
      although the act may be in disregard of  those  consequences.  If  the
      corruption is itself directed from the highest levels  of  society  or
      endemic in the political fabric of society such that it either  enjoys
      political protection, or the government of that society is  unable  to
      afford protection to those  who  campaign  against  it,  the  risk  of
      persecution can be said to be for reasons of political opinion".


42. In another Australian case Daljit Singh v Minister for  Immigration  and
Multicultural Affairs [1999] FCA 1599 which concerned the concept  of  "non-
political crime" at Art IF(b), Mansfield  J  criticised  the  Administrative
Appeals Tribunal for characterising the appellant`s help  to  the  Khalistan
Liberation Front in identifying a police officer who was  then  murdered  by
them as simply an act of revenge for the torture of a KLF member  by  police
and there was  no  direct  causal  connection  between  the  crime  and  the
political objectives of the KLF:


      "The Tribunal failed to  properly  consider  whether  the  appellant`s
      crime in being an accessory to the murder of a police  officer  was  a
      political offence. The Tribunal eliminated the appellant`s crime  from
      the rubric of "political" protection because it was an act of revenge.
      To characterise a criminal  act  as  an  act  of  "revenge"  does  not
      necessarily preclude it from being a political  one.  Revenge  may  be
      personal or it may be political."


43. For very similar reasons it will not always be  possible  to  treat  the
categories of "political" and "economic" as dichotomies As was said  by  the
U.S. Second Circuit in Osorio v INS, 18.F.3d  1017,  1028  (2d  Cir.  1994),
"...the conclusion  that  a  cause  of  persecution  is  economic  does  not
necessarily imply that there cannot exist other causes of the persecution".

 With reference to  the  1979  UNHCR  Handbook  paras  62-64  this  decision
continued:

      "What appears at first sight to be primarily an  economic  motive  for
      departure may in reality also involve a political element, and it  may
      be the political opinions of the individual that expose him to serious
      consequences, rather than his  objections  to  the  economic  measures
      themselves".


44. For very similar reasons also, it  will  be  unwise  to  rely  on  rigid
divides drawn between actions motivated by "personal interests" rather  than
political opinions ( Desir v Ilchert, 840 F.2d 723, 725 (9th Cir.1988).

 45.  In  consequence  of  the  shifting  boundaries  of  the  political  in
different societies and at different  periods  neither  is  it  possible  to
identify any fixed categories of persons or bodies   that  will  qualify  as
political entities.The assessment of whether there is  a  political  opinion
ground in any particular case  will  depend  very  much  on  the  individual
circumstances.

46. The above approach also explains why in certain circumstances  a  person
who is himself an agent of the state, e.g. a  civil  servant  or  policeman,
may be   at  risk  of  persecution  on  political  opinion  grounds  if  the
circumstances are such that non-state  actors  impute  a  political  opinion
opposed to theirs. The decision as to whether a civil servant is at risk  of
persecution on the grounds of political opinion  should  never  be  made  by
reference to an a priori argument based on a fixed notion that all that  can
be imputed to a person in such a position is that he is doing  his  job.  It
will always be necessary to examine whether  or  not  the  normal  lines  of
political  and  administrative  responsibility  have  become  distorted   by
history and  events  in  that  particular  country.   This  perception  also
explains  why  refugee  law  has  come  to   recognise   that   in   certain
circumstances "neutrality" can constitute a political  opinion.  In  certain
circumstances, for example where both  sides  operate  simplistic  ideas  of
political loyalty and political treachery, fence-sitting can  be  considered
a highly political act.  In  Sanga  v  INS,  103  F.3d  1482,  1488-90  (9th
Cir.1997) it was stated that  political  opinion  can  be  an  affirmatively
expressed opinion, an imputed political opinion, or political neutrality  in
a dangerous environment; see  also  the  Belgian  cases  cited  in  J  Yves-
Carlier, Who is a Refugee 1997, p. 104 n.215.

47. It also follows  from  this  approach  that  it  cannot  be  said  as  a
universal proposition that those on the side of law and  order  and  justice
who face persecution from non-state actors, be they guerrilla  organisations
or political gangs or criminal gangs, will have a political opinion  imputed
to them. If that is  what  Acero-Garces  meant  then  we  must  respectfully
disagree.  Rather  it  will  depend  on  the  particular  country  and   its
particular circumstances whether that is so. Thus in Storozhenko (19935),  a
Tribunal chaired by the President, it was held that those  on  the  side  of
law and order in the Ukraine would not have a political opinion  imputed  to
them by criminals intent on persecuting them.

48. This approach to imputed political opinion entirely  accords  with  that
taken in ex parte Walteros-Castenada a High Court judgment of  the  27  June
2000 (CO/2383/99) Mr Justice Munby considered the  case  of  a  national  of
Colombia who had been an active trade  union  member  at  the  oil  refinery
where he worked. As a result of his activities on behalf  of  the  union  in
publicising his company's involvement in corruption, he  became  the  victim
of threats, physical assault and kidnapping at the hands of  a  paramilitary
group involved in that corruption. The  Special  Adjudicator  had  concluded
that the applicant`s well-founded fear of persecution by the  paramilitaries
was not for reasons of his political opinion. On the basis  that  his  trade
union membership was "in reality little  more  than  an  adjunct  to  common
employment". About this Mr Justice Munby said:

      "That  observation,  which  I  suspect  many   would   find   slightly
      surprising, even in the context of trade unionism in Western Europe in
      the comparatively recent past, seems to me to give  significantly  too
      narrow and restricted a view of the purpose, objectives and activities
      of trade unions and members of trade  unions,  struggling,  either  on
      their own or in conjunction with other groups or individuals, for what
      they conceived to be social and economic justice in second  and  third
      world countries characterised by  societies  and  regimes  which  they
      perceive as socially and economically oppressive and unjust".

He added:

      "In paragraph 13 of the determination, as I  have  already  indicated,
      the  special  adjudicator   was   at   pains   to   characterise   the
      paramilitaries`s activties as "criminal". Implicitly, as it  seems  to
      me, the special adjudicator was treating the "criminal" nature of  the
      persecutors`s activities as inconsistent with the applicant`s fear  of
      persecution being, within the meaning of the Convention  "for  reasons
      of ...political opinion". That may or may not be right on the facts of
      any particular case but,  in  my  judgment,  is  a  very  questionable
      proposition if put forward as a universal truth..."

49. It seems to the Tribunal that the point made  by  Mr  Justice  Munby  in
this case is very much in line  with  the  leading  overseas  cases  already
cited.

50. One consequence of the need in countries such as Colombia to  avoid  any
dichotomy of the criminal and the political when  dealing  with  persecution
by   criminal  gangs  is  that  adjudicators  should  recognise  that  mixed
motives, non-political and political may be involved. We  must  respectfully
differ, therefore,  from the approach   taken  in  Erazoyuco  (18012)  which
concerned a Colombian appellant who was employed in support services  for  a
bank and who had refused to recommend authorisation of an overdraft  because
he was aware that the money was required for drug dealing by members of  the
Cali cartel. Agreeing with the adjudicator who had said that  "the  purposes
of the drug traffickers are  criminal  in  nature  and  not  political"  the
Tribunal in that case sought to drive a distinction between aims and means:

      "We entirely accept that the evidence is that the Cali cartel has  had
      some success in infiltrating the Colombian government and authorities.
      In our judgement, however, it does not follow that it is a  body  with
      political aims. We think it is more properly characterised as  a  body
      with aims which are entirely criminal, which has  discovered  that  it
      can further those aims  partly  by  political  means.  That  does  not
      entitle it to be  regarded  as  political,  nor  does  it  entail  the
      proposition that its  opponents  are  to  be  regarded  as  holding  a
      political opinion".

51. Whilst we entirely agree with the decision of the Tribunal in  Erazoyuco
in finding that the demands for money made of the  appellant  in  this  case
were not motivated by political considerations primarily, we  do  not  think
that the aims of this drugs cartel could easily be described as  wholly non-
political. This cartel was a powerful  one.  According  to  the  U.S.  State
Department report  covering  1999  :  "Narcotics  traffickers  continued  to
control large  tracts  of  land  and  other  assets  and  exerted  influence
throughout society, the economy and political life". Part  of  the  evidence
in the Erazoyuco case was that  in  1997  the  presidency  itself  had  been
financed by the Cali  cartel.  Bearing  in  mind  the  considerable  overlap
between governmental activities  and  those  of  leading  drugs  cartels  in
modern-day Colombia, it seems to us that this is an example  of  a  decision
relying on too narrow a view of the political dimensions to  the  activities
of drugs cartels in that country.


The nexus question

52. It is necessary at this point to recall that even in  a  case  where  an
appellant can make out a Convention ground of political opinion, he  or  she
must also establish that the persecution is on  account  of  that  political
opinion. Without entering upon the question of whether the correct  test  of
causation in relation to the nexus test is a  "but  for"  or  an  "effective
cause" test, two things are clear: just because   persecutors  may  in  some
cases attribute political opinions to victims or  opponents  does  not  mean
they will necessarily do so in every case. A family wishing to  revenge  the
killing of their son may not impute a political  opinion  to  the  murderer,
notwithstanding that the murderer is one of their  political  opponents.  Of
course the family`s motives  in  a  particular  case  may  be  both  private
revenge and political animus, but that will not always be so.

53. It is also common sense that although one may hold a political  opinion,
not everything one does is motivated by that political opinion.

54. Reflecting these common sense notions, the Tribunal would  categorically
reject  the  idea  that  even  in  countries  such  as  Colombia  where  the
boundaries between the political and the  non-political  have  been  heavily
distorted by the conduct of paramilitary  bodies  and  drug  cartels,  every
case where such a body persecutes someone must be on account of  an  imputed
political opinion. We would reaffirm the point made in Quijano (10699)  that
where the concern of persecutors was not  a  political  one  but  rather  to
maintain their economic position through criminal  activities  and  to  that
end intimidate, and, if necessary, eliminate those that oppose  the  pursuit
of that aim, then there will be no conflict based upon  refusal  to  perform
political acts, but only criminal ones.

 56. The assessment  will all depend on the particular circumstances of  the
case  examined  in  the  light  of  all  the  evidence,  circumstantial   or
otherwise. In Re Jeah  the New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals  Authority  in
a case chaired by R P G Haines  (No.  2507/95)  considered  the  case  of  a
Peruvian businessman who claimed  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  on  the
grounds of political opinion from the  Senderos  Luminoso  who  he  believed
would impute a political opinion to him for his failure to continue  meeting
their extortion demands. It concluded that the appellant would  not  face  a
real chance of persecution and went on to say that the appeal must fail  for
the additional reason that there  was  no  Convention  reason  of  political
opinion:


      "On the evidence given by the  appellant,  no  political  opinion  was
      involved in his failure to pay "taxes" to the Sendero Luminoso. Having
      complied with their extortion demands for  some  period  of  time,  he
      simply ran out of money when his business failed.


      As counsel recognised, if this case is to succeed at all, it  must  be
      on the ...imputed political opinion [limb]. The  evidence  establishes
      that the money was extorted from the appellant (and others)  in  order
      to fund the Sendero Luminoso in their attempt to overthrow the  state.
      But the mere existence of a generalised "political" motive  underlying
      the  terrorist's  forced  extraction  of  money  from  businessman  is
      inadequate to establish  the  proposition  that  the  appellant  fears
      persecution on account of his actual or imputed political opinion.  In
      this regard, see INS v Elias-Zacarias 112  S.Ct.  812,816  (1992)  and
      Bartesaghi-Lay F 3d 819 (10th Cir.1993). The evidence does not in  any
      way even suggest that the terrorists  erroneously  believed  that  the
      appellant's refusal to pay  the  "taxes"  was  politically  based.  In
      short, there is simply no evidence that a political opinion  had  been
      imputed by the Sendero Luminoso to the appellant. The fallacy  of  the
      appellant's argument is that  the  mere  existence  of  a  generalised
      political motive underlying the terrorist`s demand for money does  not
      lead to the conclusion that the terrorist's perceive  his  refusal  to
      pay to be political".

57. In ex parte Hernandez [1994] Imm AR 506 Mr  Justice  Auld  rejected  the
argument that a veterinary assistant who had  suffered  persecution  at  the
hands of FARC would be at risk upon return of persecution for  a  Convention
reason:

      "The reason for such fear as the applicant may have had, went  to  the
      danger that he would be in as a vetinerary assistant and a person with
      access to drugs, who,  for  that  reasons  might  be  of  interest  to
      guerrilla groups seeking drugs for their own purposes in Colombia"

58. Very much the same point is made in ex parte Gedrimas [1999] Imm AR  486
in relation to the particular social group  ground.  This  case  involved  a
successful businessman subject to protection  money  demands  from  criminal
elements. Collins, J held that:

      "The only reason that he has attracted the attention of the  Mafia  is
      because they see in him a source of money.  They  are  criminals.  One
      suspects they  may  well  have  targeted  any  person  who  was  worth
      threatening with a view to paying some sort of protection".

To similar effect see the observations of Burton,  J  in  ex  parte  Sigitas
Roznys [2000] Imm AR 57.



Imputed political opinion in the Colombian context

59. In Acero-Garces and Jaramillo-Aponte reference was  made  to  the  UNHCR
letter commenting on the existence or otherwise of a  Convention  reason  of
political opinion in the context of those suffering persecution from gangs:

      "In the Colombian context it is not  difficult  to  deduce  that  your
      client's  testimony  could  be  seen  by  her  persecutors   (criminal
      elements. Drug cartels) as representing a political opinion in  favour
      of establishing law and order and contrary to the status  quo.  Indeed
      in the  Colombian  context  law  and  order  has  been  the  principal
      political issue for some years."

 60. In a September 1997 update UNHCR noted in relation to elections  taking
place in 1997 and scheduled to take place in 1998, "the  army,  paramilitary
forces, guerrillas and  other  armed  (private)  groups  are  competing  for
political power and control of economic resources,  particularly  drugs  and
land.""

61. In Storozhenko[19935]  the Tribunal stated:

      "We do not regard Garces as authority for  the  proposition  that  any
      victim of crime  who  seeks  redress  but  cannot  because  of  police
      corruption or the  power  of  criminal  element  is  entitled  to  the
      protection of the Convention ground because he may be perceived to  be
      on the side of law and order. Normally, imputed political opinion will
      arise where there is perceived opposition to a policy espoused by  the
      government or its agents. Since protection can be  extended  to  cover
      those who are persecuted not by  the  government  or  its  agents  but
      because the government is unable or  unwilling  to  afford  protection
      from the persecutors, witnesses to crime may, if they come forward  to
      help, be properly regarded as coming under  the  umbrella  of  imputed
      political opinion. But we think that such  cases  would  be  rare  and
      limited to situations such as exist in Colombia  where  no  protection
      can be given because the criminals are in effective control."

62. In the U.S. State Department Report for 1999 it was noted:

      "Two main guerrilla armies, the FARC and the ELN, as well as the  much
      smaller EPL and other groups commanded an estimated total  of  between
      11,000 and 17,000 full-time guerrillas  operating  in  more  than  100
      semiautonomous groups in 30 of  the  nation`s  32  departments.  These
      groups  undertook  armed  actions  in  nearly  1,000  of   the   1,085
      municipalities. Both the FARC and the ELN systematically attacked non-
      combatants and violated citizen's rights through the  use  of  tactics
      such as killings, forced disappearances,  the  mutilation  of  bodies,
      attacks on  ambulances,  and  executions  of  patients  in  hospitals.
      Guerrillas also killed indigenous people and religious leaders""

63. In a March 1999 report the United Nations High  Commissioner  for  Human
Rights on the Office in Colombia noted that  in  July  1998  President-elect
Andres Pastrana met with members  of  the  FARC  National  Secretariat.  The
purpose of the meeting was  to  explore  ways  of  carrying  on  a  fruitful
dialogue with this insurgent group. It was agreed that five towns had to  be
cleared so that a negotiating table and a dialogue could be  set  up  during
the new Government`s first 90 days. In October,  the  Government  recognised
the political nature of the ELN and FARC.

64. Commenting on the nature of the motives involved  in  guerrilla  actions
such as kidnappings, the U.S. State Department  report  noted  that  of  the
2,945 cases of kidnapping during the year, "Pais  Libre  said  that  1,  985
cases were financially motivated and 372 cases were politically motivated".


Application of these general facts about Colombia to the individual case

65. For reasons  already  given,  The  Tribunal  does  not  agree  with  the
implicit logic of the Special Adjudicator that persons who  support  victims
of crime can never be able to show a Convention  ground  where  the  victims
themselves may not. Historically many political groups have  started  up  as
bodies taking up the cause of the oppressed. By  so  doing  they  can  often
given political expression  to  what  were  hitherto  inchoate  feelings  of
powerlessness. Be that as it may, for reasons already given   the  essential
point is that in relation to any category of person - whether  a  victim  of
crime or someone who is a witness to a crime or someone taking up the  cause
of a victim or victims of crime -  it is necessary to look at the  claim  in
relation to the particular society concerned and the objective  facts  about
it.

66. In view of the above, the Tribunal considers that  in  a  case  such  as
this  where   the  threat  is  said  to  come  from  a  powerful   guerrilla
organisation  like  FARC  or  ELN,   there  will  be  less  difficulty  than
otherwise in establishing that a possible opinion which such  a  group  will
impute to those who stand in their way will be a political one.

67. However, as noted by D. Anker, op.cit. 277 it must still remain that:


      "Evidence of imputed political opinion cannot consist  solely  of  the
      general political purposes  of  the  persecutor.  Such  evidence  may,
      however, derive  from  an  analysis  of  the  structure  and  specific
      purposes of the persecutory agent or its past actions; it may  consist
      of statements made by individuals or organisational actors that reveal
      an intent to harm persons with characteristic like  the  applicant  or
      attribute political opposition to them."

Even where the non-state actor  is  a  guerrilla  organisation  (like  FARC)
carrying out state-like functions in parts of the country there  will  arise
cases in which no political motive is involved. Such organisations for  some
if not much of the time may act for purely economic reasons.  Their  reasons
for seeking retribution against victims may for some  if  not  much  of  the
time  be purely criminal. Indeed the background evidence suggests that  most
of the kidnappings undertaken by FARC and  ELN  are  financially  motivated"
(1,985 in 1999) rather than "politically motivated ( 372 in 1999).  Deciding
whether any kidnapping is purely financial or purely  political  or  is  for
mixed financial and political motives will  obviously  therefore  depend  on
the particular circumstances of each case.

68. Earlier we found that  Miss  Gomez  did  not  have  a  current  fear  of
persecution largely on the grounds that any risk of harm to  her  will  have
abated. However for the avoidance of doubt we should clarify that we do  not
 see her previous situation as being one in  which  she  would  have  had  a
political opinion attributed to her. It is true that the work  she  and  co-
students did in investigating extortion appears to  have  been  carried  out
under the supervision of a tutor who was also  an  active  local  politician
holding the post of Councillor of La Virginia: Dr Herrera. Furthermore,  the
investigations she carried out were not confined to one farm.  Her  evidence
was that she and her co-students had  conducted  wide-ranging  enquiries  in
the locality, investigating which farms had been affected and doing so  with
a view to discovering who the people might be who were demanding  extortion.
Additionally, the actions which were taken by the  guerrillas  were  against
both Dr Herrera himself (who was kidnapped in December 1998), two of her co-
students who disappeared and the appellant who  received  threatening  calls
and was chased by men on motorcycles with guns. Furthermore  the  guerrillas
doubtless  had  a   vested   political   interest   in   maintaining   their
(extortionate) economic operations in that area. Doubtless their power  base
could be threatened by investigations capable  of  weakening  their  control
over local farmers. Possibly that in turn  could  weaken  their  pursuit  of
broader political objectives to operate  as  an  alternative  government  in
certain parts of Colombia.

69. However, even taking full account of these factors we  cannot  see  that
the specific actions taken against the  appellant  were  by  reason  of  any
imputed political opinion. Given that Dr Herrera himself  was  apparently  a
farmer affected by the extortion racket we even have some doubts that  their
motives  in  kidnapping  him  were  anything   other   than   criminal   and
retaliatory. However, even assuming that in Dr Herrera`s case their  motives
were in part political, we cannot see that their motives could have had  the
same character in relation to the appellant. Unlike Dr Herrera  she  had  no
political profile and unlike Dr Herrera it  is  highly  unlikely  that  they
would impute a political opinion to her actions. It seems  clear  they  knew
that she was a law student and knew the  ad  hoc  basis  on  which  she  had
become involved in the investigations into their extortion racket.  We  also
attach particular significance to the  fact  that  on  the  appellant`s  own
account those who threatened her never at any stage said anything to her  to
convey that they viewed her as a political threat

70. This case is thus far removed from the example mentioned in the  hearing
of a human  rights  lawyer  who  embarks  on  a  crusade  against  guerrilla
extortion rackets. In such an example one would  at  least  need  to  assess
whether the guerrillas would see  such  a  crusade  as  a  threat  to  their
struggles to overthrow the state and as an expression  of  defiance  towards
their own political objectives.

71. Having found that the appellant has not shown a Convention ground,  past
or present, it is not necessary for us to go on to consider whether she  can
establish a causal nexus.

72. The Tribunal would emphasise, however, that in reaching its findings  in
this case  it has not had recourse  to  broad  "Star  Wars"  generalisations
about the appellant being seen as on  the  side  of  law  and  order  or  in
opposition to "dark forces". In contrast to  certain  isolated  passages  to
this effect in Acero-Garces  it has examined the different elements  in  the
appellant's situation pointing to  the  presence  or  absence  of  political
motives in the actions of her persecutors and  doing  so  on  the  basis  of
concrete evidence as to the  general  situation  pertaining  in  present-day
Colombia as set out in the U.S. State Department report and other sources.


 Summary of main conclusions

73.To summarise our main conclusions in this case:

I. The  Special  Adjudicator's  approach  to  establishing  credibility  was
  flawed; but even treating the appellant's story as essentially true,  she
  had  not  shown  either  a  past  or  a  current  fear  of   persecution;
  furthermore, even if she had shown a fear of  persecution  it  would  not
  have been or be for a Convention reason;

II. In  Colombia  there  is  in  general  an  insufficiency  of  protection,
  although this fact does not assist the case of this appellant;

III. The evidence did  not  establish  a  Convention  ground  of  particular
  social group;

IV. The Tribunal confirms established  case  law:  that  in  order  to  show
  persecution on account of political opinion, it is not necessary to  show
  political action or activity; that in the context of both state and  non-
  state actor cases the ground cannot  be  interpreted  so  as  to  exclude
  fundamental rights of the  person  protected  under  international  human
  rights law, the  rights  to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience,  opinion,
  expression, association and assembly in particular;  and  that  political
  opinion may be express or imputed.

V. The political opinion ground requires  a  broad  definition  but  not  so
  broad as to cover any opinion which a non-state actor may impute.

VII. To qualify as political the opinion in  question  must  relate  to  the
  major power transactions taking place in that particular society.  It  is
  difficult to see how a political opinion can be imputed by  a  non  state
  actor who (or which) is not itself a political entity.

IX. It is an error to try to rely on a fixed  category  of  persons  on  the
  side of law order and  justice.  Reference,  Star  Wars-style,  to  "dark
  forces" does not serve the interests of objective decision-making. To the
  extent that Acero-Garces relies on such an  approach  it  is  not  to  be
  followed;

X. Even in a case where an appellant can make out  a  Convention  ground  of
  political  opinion,  he  or  she  must  still  also  establish  that  the
  persecution is on account of that political opinion. It is  common  sense
  under this nexus test that even where persecutors  have  political  views
  about those they target, it may not always be the political opinion  that
  motivates their actions. As was said in Jeah, the  mere  existence  of  a
  generalised political motive does not lead to  the  conclusion  that  the
  persecutor perceives what the claimant has said or done as political;

XI. Certain features of the current Colombian context make it more  possible
  than otherwise that criminal elements  or  guerrilla  organisations  will
  view the words or actions of  those  they  persecute  as  representing  a
  political  opinion.  This  is  certainly  true  of  FARC,  the  guerrilla
  organisation being considered in this case.

XII.Even in cases involving criminal gangs or guerrillas, however,  evidence
  of imputed  political  opinion  cannot  consist  solely  of  the  general
  political purposes of the persecutor.

XIII. When  the  appellant  left  Colombia  guerrillas  had  not  imputed  a
  political  to her  nor would they do so now.

73. The appeal is dismissed.




DR H H  STOREY
VICE- PRESIDENT
