
Pardeepan (Pre-2000 decision: human rights?) Sri Lanka * [2000] UKIAT 00006




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
                                                      Date heard:  5/10/2000
                                                   Date notified: 12/10/2000


                                   Before



                       Mr Justice Collins (President)
                              Mr C M G Ockelton
                                  Mr G Warr


                           SELVARATNAM  PARDEEPAN
                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT



                     DETERMINATION OF PRELIMINARY ISSUE


1.    Selvaratnam Pardeepan who, as his  name  suggests,  is  a  Sri  Lankan
      Tamil, appeals against the decision of an adjudicator  given  as  long
      ago as September  1998  to  refuse  his  asylum  application.   Before
      considering the merits of the appeal we have to  deal  with  an  issue
      which has been raised whether the Tribunal is entitled to take account
      of the Human Rights Act and to permit the appellant to raise the issue
      that to remove him would be not only a breach of the Geneva Convention
      but also a breach of the Human Rights Act.

2.    The Human Rights Act  came  into  force  on  2  October,  as  did  the
      Immigration & Asylum  Act  1999.   The  relevant  provision,  for  our
      purposes, of the 1999  Act  is  Section  65.   That  section  gives  a
      specific  new  right  of  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  to   the
      Immigration Appellate Authority, that is to say, the adjudicators  and
      the Tribunal.  Section 65 has two parts to it. First,  it  permits  an
      appeal under Section 65(1) if a person alleges that an authority  has,
      in taking a decision under  the  Immigration  Acts  relating  to  that
      person's entitlement to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom,  acted
      in breach of his human rights.  Secondly, sub-section 3  enables  what
      we may describe as the  human  rights  point,  to  be  raised  in  any
      existing appeal before an adjudicator or the Tribunal.   On  the  face
      of it, once  that  came  into  effect,  it  should  have  enabled  the
      adjudicator or the Tribunal to consider human rights in respect of the
      appeal before him, no matter when the decision to remove, or to refuse
      leave to enter, the effect of which would be removal, had been made.

3.    However, the order which brings into force the relevant  part  of  the
      1999 Act, which includes Section 65, provides otherwise.  The order in
      question is the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (Commencement  no.  6
      Transitional and Consequential Provisions) Order 2000, no. 2444, which
      was made on 11 September of this year.  It is a sad  fact  that  there
      has been considerable difficulty in obtaining before this week  copies
      of that order, and the  Immigration  Appellate  Authority  was  wholly
      unaware of what was proposed by the Home Office and had been preparing
      itself for Human Rights  day  on  the  assumption  that  it  would  be
      applying human rights as from last Monday.  However, Article 3 of  the
      Order provides by paragraph 1(a), subject to Schedule 2, that the  new
      appeal provisions (that includes Section 65) are not to have effect in
      relation to events which took place before 2 October 2000.  Events are
      defined in Article 4.2 in this way:

             "For the purposes of Article 3 an event takes place when (a) a
             notice is  served  (b)  a  decision  is  made  or  taken,  (c)
             directions are given, and (d) a certificate is issued."

      In the circumstances of a case such as this it is (b), the  making  of
      a decision.

4.    Notwithstanding that, Schedule 2 paragraph 1(7) provides:

              "Section 65 Human Rights Appeals is not to have  effect  where
             the decision under the Immigration Acts  was  taken  before  2
             October 2000."

      We asked Mr Thompson who has appeared on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
      State whether he could explain the need for those two provisions,  and
      other than a reference to belt and braces he was unable  to  help  us.
      We should say before going further that we are  indeed  most  grateful
      both to him and to  Mr  Walsh  who  has  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant for their assistance, given the short notice in  respect  of
      the point which we are considering now, which is by no means  an  easy
      one.

5.    The result of the Commencement Order,  and  the  provisions  which  we
      have just cited, seem to us  to  be  clear  beyond  any  doubt.   They
      prevent the Tribunal from  considering  human  rights  issues  in  any
      existing appeal, because sub-section 3 of Section 65 cannot be  relied
      on in relation to decisions made before 2 October 2000, and of  course
      before adjudicators, and more particularly before the  Tribunal  there
      are at present, and are likely to be probably until about the  end  of
      the year, only decisions made before 2 October.  We have, of course, a
      particular case in front  of  us,  and  as  Mr  Thompson  has  rightly
      reminded us, we are strictly concerned only with the circumstances  of
      that case.  However, we are well aware that the Immigration  Appellate
      Authority in general, and I am referring  more  particularly  here  to
      adjudicators, have some doubts  whether  they  should  consider  human
      rights issues at present and it seems therefore not only sensible  but
      necessary that the Tribunal should seek to give guidance as to what is
      the correct approach.  Accordingly, in hearing argument on this point,
      we have considered the matter far more widely than merely the facts of
      this case.  This decision is a starred decision.  The result  of  that
      is that it must be followed by all adjudicators and should be regarded
      as binding by all Tribunal members.  If we are wrong in what we decide
      the matter can only be corrected by the Court of Appeal. Otherwise, of
      course, there will not be consistency of  approach  which  is  clearly
      essential in the situation that arises.

6.    It is, we  are  bound  to  say,  perhaps  somewhat  ironic  that  this
      Tribunal of all Tribunals should be precluded from  considering  human
      rights issues from the inception of the Human Rights Act.   We  should
      say, as will be apparent when we go through the matter, that that does
      not mean that human rights will not be taken into account  because  we
      are assured by Mr Thompson, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  that
      those whose appeals are refused, for example, on asylum grounds,  will
      be given the opportunity to raise, if they  think  fit,  human  rights
      objections to removal, should the Secretary of State decide to  remove
      them.  We are equally assured that the Secretary  of  State  will  not
      seek to argue that they do not have a right of appeal under Section 65
      in respect of such a subsequent decision to remove.  We hope  that  we
      have correctly understood the extent of the assurances  that  we  have
      been given by the Secretary of State.

7.    Again, for reasons that will become apparent, in the absence  of  such
      assurances, we would have had grave doubts whether we were correct  in
      the decision that we are reaching that the adjudicators  and  Tribunal
      should not consider human rights, but should  apply  the  Commencement
      Order and defer  consideration  under  Section  65  until  faced  with
      decisions made after 2 October of this year.  We should  say  that  Mr
      Walsh has left open the argument that the Commencement Order,  insofar
      as it seeks to defer the application of Section  65,  is  ultra  vires
      because it is in conflict with the Human Rights Act of 1998.  In those
      circumstances, he argues, we would be entitled  to  disregard  it  pro
      tanto because it would not be in accordance with the law.  Suffice  it
      to say that we would need a very great deal of persuasion indeed  that
      we had the power to disregard any legislative provision, be it primary
      or secondary legislation.  That is a matter essentially  for  decision
      by the Administrative Court, as it now is, and not for a tribunal such
      as ourselves.  We have therefore to consider whether, independently of
      the 1999 Act, the Human Rights Act of 1998  requires  the  Immigration
      Appeal Authority to consider the question of human rights.

8.    The argument that it does stems from Section 6 of the 1998 Act,  which
      provides by sub-section 1 that it is unlawful for a  public  authority
      to act in a way which is incompatible with a Convention right.  Public
      authority includes not only  the  Secretary  of  State  but  also  the
      Immigration Appellate Authority, be it adjudicators or  Tribunal.   It
      is said that Section 7(1) enables the appellant before  the  Authority
      to raise human rights issues.  Section 7(1) provides:

             "A person who claims that a  public  authority  has  acted  or
             proposes to act in a way which is  made  unlawful  by  Section
             6(1) may rely on the Convention right or rights  concerned  in
             any legal proceedings , but only if he is or would be a victim
             of the unlawful act."

      It is quite plain that the appellant, and indeed we would  expect  any
      appellant in a similar situation, is likely to  be  a  victim  of  the
      unlawful act if there has been one.   Legal  proceedings  include  the
      proceedings before the  Tribunal  and  specifically  include  by  sub-
      section 6 of section 7 an appeal against the decision of  a  court  or
      tribunal. That has led to a refinement of the argument that an  appeal
      by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  this  Tribunal   could   constitute
      proceedings instituted by the Secretary of State.  The reason for that
      refinement is to be found in Section  22(4)  of  the  1998  Act  which
      provides:

             "Paragraph (b) of  sub-section  1  of  Section  7  applies  to
             proceedings brought by or  at  the  instigation  of  a  public
             authority  whenever  the  Act  in  question  took  place,  but
             otherwise that sub-section does not apply  to  an  Act  taking
             place before the coming into force of that section."

9.    Subject to  appeals  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  it  is  therefore
      submitted by Mr Thompson that  Section  22(4)  prevents  human  rights
      questions being considered in existing appeals  in  relation  to  acts
      which took place before 2 October, and therefore there is no breach of
      the 1998 Act by the Authority in applying the Order and therefore  not
      applying Section 65.

10.   In addition, we have to take account of Section 6 sub-section 2  which
      disapplies sub-section  1  if  (a)  as  the  result  of  one  or  more
      provisions of primary legislation the Authority could not  have  acted
      differently, or (b) in the case of one or more provisions of  or  made
      under primary legislation which cannot be read or given  effect  in  a
      way which is compatible with the Convention rights, the Authority  was
      acting so as to give effect to or in enforce those provisions.  So far
      as Section 6(2)(a) is concerned, we note that  Section  21(1)  of  the
      1998 Act defines primary legislation as including an order made  under
      primary legislation to the extent to which it operates to bring one or
      more provisions of that legislation into force, or amends any  primary
      legislation.

11.   It is argued that the Commencement Order,  or  rather  the  provisions
      with which we are concerned of the Commencement Order, is the bringing
      into force of a provision of the 1999 Act.  In reality, as it seems to
      us, it is doing no such thing.  It is declaring that it does not  come
      into force in  particular  circumstances,  although  generally  it  is
      brought into force.  So, if it is relevant to decide  that  issue,  in
      our view it does not come within Section 6(2)(a).  However, so far  as
      the Authority is concerned, it seems to us that the Order in  question
      is a provision made under primary legislation which  cannot  be  given
      effect in a way which is compatible with Convention rights,   that  is
      if it would otherwise not be compatible with human rights to  fail  to
      consider the arguments raised under the Human Rights Act.  However, in
      our view, it would not in any event be even arguably incompatible with
      human rights because the Tribunal is not making a decision which means
      that it is acting in a way incompatible with a Convention right.   All
      it is doing is dismissing, if it does, the appeal which is in front of
      it.  That in itself does not affect the human rights of the appellant.
      What is required to affect his human rights is for a subsequent action
      to be taken by the Secretary of State to effect the removal.    It may
      be argued that when one is dealing with, for example, the  refusal  of
      an entry clearance in relation to a family reunion  case,  then  there
      may be an existing and continuing breach of Article 8 as a  result  of
      any delay in permitting the individual to join his family, and it  may
      be  said that in that sort of a case as opposed  to  a  removal  case,
      there is a breach.  In our view  that  is  not  the  correct  analysis
      because still the matter is up  to  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
      relevant Entry Clearance Officer under  the  supervision  of  the  the
      Secretary of State to reach the necessary decision  so  far  as  human
      rights are concerned. Accordingly, we take the view that the  Tribunal
      itself would not be acting unlawfully under Section 6(1)  if  one  was
      looking purely at the decision of the Tribunal

12.   However, we have looked at the matter somewhat more widely.  It  seems
      to us that one must look at the reality of what the Secretary of State
      is doing.  It is not enough merely to look at  the  decision  and  say
      that because the decision was made before 2 October, therefore  it  is
      not a matter that can be raised and is covered by Section 22(4).   The
      reality is  that  the  Secretary  of  State  in  making  his  decision
      indicates that he proposes to remove this appellant and the same would
      apply to any asylum seeker.  That is the reality, that is what  he  is
      proposing to do and it is that action which allegedly is a  breach  of
      the individual's human rights.

13.   If we were persuaded that the result of our decision not  to  consider
      human rights would mean that the Secretary of  State  was  enabled  to
      remove without the human rights question being considered, then, as it
      seems to us, we would be permitting the Secretary of State to act in a
      way which was unlawful under Section 6(1)  and  that  would  at  least
      arguably mean that we ourselves were acting in  a  way  which  was  in
      breach of Section 6(1) by aiding and abetting the Secretary  of  State
      in his unlawful act.  We would not on that scenario  be  protected  by
      Section 6(2) because it would be quite impossible for the Secretary of
      State to argue that he was obliged to remove because of the provisions
      of any primary or secondary legislation.  That of course  would  be  a
      nonsense.  The Secretary of State is not, because we  cannot  consider
      Section 65, obliged  himself  to  refuse  to  consider  human  rights.
      Indeed, he does not seek to  argue,  as  we  would  expect,  that  the
      contrary is the case.  That is why, in the course of argument, we were
       concerned to satisfy ourselves that, were we  to  dismiss  an  asylum
      appeal, a human rights appeal would exist in relation to any  decision
      to remove an appellant  in  consequence,  and  that  is  why  we  have
      referred to the  assurances  which  we  were  given  earlier  in  this
      judgment.

14.   We are satisfied from what we have been told, that  the  Secretary  of
      State is not intending to act in such a  way  as  does  not  give  the
      proper opportunity to anyone whose appeal is before the  Tribunal,  or
      the adjudicator, who loses and who wishes  to  raise  a  free-standing
      human rights claim, to be able to do so. This is of vital  importance,
      because we must be satisfied that  the  Secretary  of  State  or   his
      officials would not, for example, take someone to London Airport to be
      put on to a plane without being given notice of that intention, or  at
      least a proper opportunity of being able to  raise  the  human  rights
      point.

15.   We note that the Notices Regulations are so drafted as  to  avoid  the
      need for any decision made by the Secretary of State to give notice of
      any appeal rights on  human  rights  grounds.    We  do  not  need  to
      consider, indeed we would have no jurisdiction  to  consider,  whether
      those provisions were or were not ultra vires. But we note them and we
      are aware that as a result of this judgment  the  Secretary  of  State
      will be aware of our concerns about them, and we would hope  that  the
      Secretary of State will appreciate that those who come before the  IAA
      and are unable to  raise  human  rights  points,  should  be  properly
      informed of the right to raise them when the decision is made,  if  it
      is, to remove. It is essential, so that the Tribunal can be  satisfied
      that the IAA is not condoning any breach, that anyone to be removed is
      given proper information so that he knows what his rights are.

16.   We are concerned, we emphasise,  only  with  those  who  have  already
      appealed whose appeals are being considered between now  and  whenever
      pre-October 2 decisions cease to be in issue, because they  are  those
      whom we are unable to assist on human rights grounds.

17.   In those circumstances, and because of the  assurances  that  we  have
      been given, we take the view that having regard to the legislation  to
      which we have referred, the adjudicators and the Tribunal are not able
      to consider human rights issues in relation to decisions made before 2
      October 2000.

18.   We have been asked to give some guidance as to  what  adjudicators  do
      when faced with an application by an appellant for  them  to  consider
      human rights issues.   So far as asylum appeals or appeals relating to
      removal from this country are concerned, in our view  the  adjudicator
      should in general not adjourn the matter  but  should  deal  with  the
      issues which are before him.

19.   There are a number of reasons for this.   First, the findings of  fact
      that are made may lead him to allow the appeal that is before him,  in
      which case of course the human rights issues will  never  need  to  be
      considered.   Secondly, his findings of fact may be the other way.  He
      may decide that the appellant's case is wholly incredible, that  there
      is no question whatever of, for example, his being persecuted  in  any
      way were he to be returned, in which case the Secretary of State would
      no doubt be considerably assisted by those findings and would be  able
      fairly easily if human rights were raised, to find that there  was  no
      conceivable breach because in such a case one would imagine that human
      rights other than Article 3 would be unlikely to arise.  Of course  we
      recognise that there may be arguments advanced other than on Article 3
      which would have to be considered on their merits.   Thirdly,  and  in
      any event, any findings of fact by the adjudicator  upon  the  matters
      before him, would be able to be used by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
      reaching his decision.  Indeed, we would anticipate the  Secretary  of
      State would not be able to disregard those findings of fact or to make
      contrary findings unless of course he had good reason to  do  so.   So
      much is implicit in the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  ex  parte
      Danaie [1998] Imm AR 84.

20.   What we would not consider correct is for an adjudicator  to  consider
      material which was relevant only to any human rights claim.  That,  it
      seems to us, is not a matter which  the  adjudicators  should  concern
      themselves with, because this is not a situation which is  appropriate
      for a recommendation. Adjudicators, as we know, are  frequently  asked
      to consider matters outside the specific grounds of appeal with a view
      to making a recommendation.

21.   Since we know that human rights applications can be made,  we  do  not
      regard it as in general appropriate for consideration to be  given  as
      to whether there was likely to have been a  human  rights  breach  and
      therefore a recommendation to be given.  The  matter  might  well  not
      have been properly ventilated, there may be facts which  are  material
      to that which need to be gone into in greater  detail,  and  we  think
      that the Secretary of State would quite rightly take the view that  he
      would be reluctant to be bound by any facts found which gave  rise  to
      such a recommendation.   In  any  event,  the  adjudicator's  time  is
      precious and we think that if they were to go into  the  human  rights
      issue in every case with a view to making a recommendation their  time
      would in truth be wasted.

22.   We emphasise, of course, that we are giving general guidance and  that
      there may be special circumstances in special cases which  lead  to  a
      different conclusion, but in general, in our view, the matters  should
      not be adjourned, but should be dealt with in the  way  that  we  have
      described.  If, of course, as may happen, an appellant indicates  that
      he accepts that he has no asylum appeal, to take an example, but  does
      have a human rights appeal, or he has no chance  of  success  on,  for
      example, an entry clearance appeal but he does have an Article 8 point
      alone, in those circumstances, in  our  view,  in  general  the  right
      course would probably be for the adjudicator to dismiss the appeal and
      leave it to the appellant to make a fresh application to the Secretary
      of State or
      to the Entry Clearance Officer, as the case may be, that the  decision
      should go in  his favour on human rights grounds.

23.   We think the Secretary of State  should  consider  carefully  in  such
      circumstances whether it would be proper to require the payment of any
      further fee from such an applicant in the event, at  least,  that  the
      decision is made, that it would now be contrary to his human rights to
      prevent him from coming to join his family, or  whatever  may  be  the
      situation, in this country.

24.   What we say on that is  subject  to  this.   As  is  well  known,  the
      Secretary of State has directed himself in many such  cases,  that  he
      has already had regard to Article 8.  In those  circumstances,  as  it
      seems to us, the adjudicator  is  entitled  and  indeed  is  bound  to
      consider  Article  8  because  the  Secretary  of  State  himself  has
      considered it.  There is then  nothing  to  be  gained  from  a  fresh
      application because,  as  we  say,  human  rights  have  already  been
      considered, and in such cases, as now, following the decision  of  the
      High Court in ex parte Ali [2000] INLR 89, we think that it is clearly
      appropriate for this issue to be decided.  Subject to that, as we say,
      we think that the approach should be as we have indicated.

25.   That being so, we decide so far as this appellant is  concerned,  that
      he is not entitled on this appeal before  us  to  raise  human  rights
      issues because the decision was made as long ago as 1997.   We  should
      say that Mr Walsh accepts that his client is not in any way prejudiced
      because of the assurance that he will have a right to raise the matter
      should he lose before us and should the Secretary of State  decide  to
      remove him as a result of  that  decision.  Accordingly  that  is  our
      decision on the preliminary point that has been raised before us.



                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                                  PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      2


