
Kacaj (Article 3 - Standard of Proof - Non-State Actors) Albania * [2001]
UKIAT 00018

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Date of Hearing:       |10/04/2001 &        |
|                       |21/05/2001          |
|Date Determination     |  19/7/2001         |
|notified:              |                    |



                                   Before


                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                    The Deputy President, Mr CMG Ockelton
                                Mr J. Freeman


|Secretary of State for the Home Department         |APPELLANT    |
|and                                                |             |
|Klodiana KACAJ                                     |RESPONDENT   |
|                                                   |             |
|Klodiana KACAJ                                     |APPELLANT    |
|And                                                |             |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department         |RESPONDENT   |

|Mr Robin TAM, Counsel       |For the Secretary of   |
|                            |State                  |
|Mr Mungo BOVEY              |For Ms. Kacaj          |
|Q.C.(Scotland)              |                       |
|Mr David JONES, Counsel     |                       |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  Ms. Kacaj is a 21 year old citizen of  Albania.   She  arrived  in  this
country concealed in a lorry on 12 November  2000  and  claimed  asylum  the
following day.  She was detained at Oakington and her claim  was  considered
and refused on 20 November 2000.  In his refusal letter,  the  Secretary  of
State also refused to allow Ms.  Kacaj  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
despite her claim that to remove her would constitute a breach of her  human
rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.  Ms. Kacaj appealed to an adjudicator relying on  both  the  Refugee  and
the Human Rights Conventions.  On  5  January  2001  the  adjudicator  (C.C.
Wright Esq.) dismissed her asylum appeal but allowed her appeal  under  s.65
of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on  the  ground  that  removal  would
constitute a breach of Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   The
Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  leave  to  appeal  against  the
allowing of the human rights appeal.   Ms.  Kacaj  sought  leave  to  appeal
against the dismissal not  only  of  her  asylum  appeal  but  also  of  her
assertions that there had been a breach of Articles 4 and  8  of  the  Human
Rights Convention in addition to Article 3.  Leave was granted  in  relation
to the alleged human rights breaches but  not  in  relation  to  the  asylum
claim.  At the hearing,  we  indicated,  following  an  application  by  Ms.
Kacaj, that we would permit the asylum appeal to be pursued.

3.  Since the appeal raised  three  issues  of  considerable  importance  in
dealing with claims under the Human Rights Convention, it was  decided  that
it would be starred.  It was originally anticipated that the argument  would
be concluded within one day.  Unfortunately, that proved impossible  and  it
was necessary to find a second day.  While we were anxious to  conclude  the
argument as soon as possible since the issues were of  great  importance  to
other appeals, we were naturally concerned that the same counsel, from  whom
we obtained the greatest  assistance,  should  attend  and  should  not,  if
possible be required to break other commitments.  In addition, the  tribunal
as constituted was  constrained  by  holidays  and  the  forthcoming  Easter
vacation.  In the result, it was not possible  to  arrange  the  second  day
until 21 May 2001.  Any delay since that is regretted but results  from  the
need  for  careful  consideration  of  the  issues.   In  addition  to   the
submissions of counsel appearing before us, we have received and taken  into
account written submissions prepared by Mr. Nicholas Blake, Q.C.  on  behalf
of Liberty.

4.  The issues are as follows:-

      (1)  What is the correct standard of proof to be applied  in  deciding
      whether to return an applicant to a country where it is  alleged  that
      his human rights, particularly under Article 3, would be breached?

The Secretary of State contended that the  facts  upon  which  the  risk  of
treatment contrary to Article 3 had  to  be  assessed  must  be  established
beyond reasonable doubt.  This, of course, contrasts  with  the  test  under
the Refugee Convention established by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Karanakaran
[2000] Imm A.R. 271.

      (2) Can there be a breach  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and  in
      particular of Article 3 where the treatment which may  result  if  the
      removal takes place is by non-state actors?  Does the approach adopted
      by the House of Lords in  Horvath[2000]  3  WLR  379  to  the  Refugee
      Convention apply equally to the Human Rights Convention or  are  there
      differences?

The Secretary of State submits that the  existence  of  a  system  which  is
designed to provide the necessary protection is enough even if  that  system
may in individual  cases  operate  imperfectly.   Ms.  Kacaj  submits  that,
however Horvath is to be interpreted in relation to the Refugee  Convention,
in human rights terms what is needed is that there  should  in  fact  be  no
risk that the individual who is to be returned is treated in such a  way  as
to violate his or her human rights.  Thus if it can be shown that  there  is
a real risk that he or she will, whatever the general system  in  being,  be
treated in a way contrary to Article 3, return should not be permitted.   It
is no good saying, if there is a real risk of torture, that the police  will
investigate and seek to prosecute the torturers.

           (3) Does any Article of the Human Rights Convention  other  than
           Article 3 have what has been called 'extra-territorial' effect?

In this case, the Secretary of State submits  that  neither  Article  4  nor
Article 8 can be relied on where the breach complained of will or may  occur
outside the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  Kingdom.   The  same  submission
applies to all Articles except Article 3.  Article 3 is singled out  because
of the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in a number of  cases,
particularly Chahal v United Kingdom (1996) 23 E.H.R.R. 413.


Issue (1):  Standard of Proof

5.  Mr. Tam's starting point is Ireland v United Kingdom (1978)  2  E.H.R.R.
29.  That case
concerned an allegation by the Republic of Ireland that the  United  Kingdom
had been guilty of breaches of Article 3 in the investigation  of  suspected
terrorists in Northern Ireland.  In determining whether any practices  which
contravened Article 3 had been adopted, the Court approved the standard  set
by the Commission, saying this (at paragraph 161 on Page 79):-


      "The  Court  agrees  with  the  Commission's  approach  regarding  the
      evidence on  which  to  base  the  decision  whether  there  has  been
      violation of Article 3.  To assess this evidence, the Court adopts the
      standard of proof 'beyond reasonable doubt' but adds that  such  proof
      may follow from the co-existence of  sufficiently  strong,  clear  and
      concordant inferences or of similar unrebutted presumptions  of  fact.
      In this context, the conduct of the Parties  when  evidence  is  being
      obtained has to be taken into account".

In HLR v France (1997) 26 E.H.R.R. 29 (an important case to which  we  shall
have to return), the opinion of the majority of the Commission  includes  in
Paragraph 35 on Page 37 the following observations:-

           "The Government adds that, according to  the  Commission's  case
           law,  an  individual's  allegations  of  treatment  contrary  to
           Article 3 ..., if he is deported to a specific country, must  be
           supported by persuasive prima facie  evidence.   In  this  case,
           however, the evidence supplied by the applicant is not  such  as
           to support his allegations.  The Convention institutions require
           allegations of treatment prohibited by Article 3  to  be  proved
           'beyond reasonable doubt'".

The Commission is there setting out the Government's argument.  It does not
itself approve it and, as we shall see when we consider the judgment of the
Court, there is no reflection let alone approval of the argument.   Indeed,
in Paragraph 39 on Page 38 the Commission sets out the test which has  been
said to be applicable in deportation cases since at least Soering v  United
Kingdom (1989) 11 E.H.R.R. 439 thus:-


           "However,  according  to  the  case  law   of   the   Convention
           institutions,  the  decision  to  deport  an  individual  to   a
           particular country may, in certain circumstances, be contrary to
           the Convention, in particular Article 3, where there are serious
           reasons to believe that the individual will be subjected, in the
           receiving state, to treatment proscribed by that Article."



6.  It is not in the least surprising that where an allegation is made  that
a State itself has been guilty of acts of torture or  inhuman  or  degrading
treatment or  punishment  the  allegation  must  be  strictly  proved.   The
allegation is  of  intentional  conduct  which  violates  one  of  the  most
fundamental of human rights.  But the Court  has,  in  addition,  recognised
that a failure to prevent such violations may itself constitute a breach  of
Article 3.  Thus in A v United Kingdom (1998) 27 E.H.R.R.  611,  the  United
Kingdom Government conceded that the applicant, a 9 year old boy,  had  been
beaten by his stepfather so severely as to amount to a breach of Article  3,
but did not accept that it was responsible.  The Court decided that  it  was
because under English Law there was a  defence  of  reasonable  chastisement
which had in the case of A persuaded the  jury  to  acquit  his  stepfather.
The existence of that defence meant that the law for which the State was  of
course  responsible  did  not  provide  adequate  protection  to  A  against
breaches of Article 3.  Thus children were exposed to  the  risk  that  they
would be treated in such a way as  breached  Article  3  because  no  proper
sanctions existed.  It was not necessary to prove more than  that  the  lack
of proper sanctions would expose a child  to  a  real  risk  that  treatment
contrary to Article 3 would be meted out.



7.  In deportation cases (a term which we do not use in its technical  sense
but to cover all cases where removal from the United  Kingdom  is  required)
the decision maker and, on appeal, the  adjudicator  and  tribunal  must  be
concerned to decide whether there is a real risk that Article 3  (or  indeed
any other Article,  assuming  the  Secretary  of  State's  extra-territorial
submission to be incorrect) will  be  violated.   This  approach  was  first
spelt out in detail by the Court in  Soering  v  United  Kingdom  (1989)  11
E.H.R.R. 439.  The applicant in that  case  was  to  be  extradited  to  the
United States where he would face trial for murder and, if convicted,  might
be sentenced to death.  He could not allege a breach of Article 2 (right  to
life) because it expressly recognised a right to impose  capital  punishment
nor was the imposition of the death penalty prohibited  by  Article  3.   He
alleged that the American system whereby a convicted prisoner endured  years
on death row constituted a violation of Article  3  and  the  Court  agreed.
The case  is  relevant  and  helpful  in  relation  to  extra-territoriality
because it explains the scope of Article 1, which requires that  all  States
shall secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights  and  freedoms
defined in the Convention, and we shall return to it in that  context.   But
it was primarily concerned with Article 3 and, as  we  have  said,  Mr.  Tam
accepts (as he must unless he seeks  to  persuade  us  not  to  follow  well
established jurisprudence of the Convention institutions) that a  State  can
breach Article 3 by deporting to  a  country  where  relevant  ill-treatment
occurs.  In Soering,  the  Court  records  the  submissions  of  the  United
Kingdom Government on standard of proof thus (Paragraph 83 on Page 465):-


           "...  [T]he  United  Kingdom  Government  submitted   that   the
           application of Article 3 in extradition cases should be  limited
           to those occasions in which the treatment or  punishment  abroad
           is certain, imminent and serious.  In its view, the fact that by
           definition the  matters  complained  of  are  only  anticipated,
           together with the common and legitimate interest of  all  States
           in bringing fugitive criminals to justice, requires a very  high
           degree of  risk,  proved  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  that  ill-
           treatment will actually occur."

The Court then proceeded to  explain  what  in  its  view  was  the  correct
approach  and  in  so  doing  rejected  the  United   Kingdom   Government's
arguments.  The passages cover extra-territoriality as well as  standard  of
proof but we should cite them in full.  Paragraphs 86 to 91 on Pages  466  -
469 read as follows:-


      "86... Article 1 of the Convention,  which  provides  that  'the  High
      Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their jurisdiction
      the rights and freedoms defined in Section 1' sets  a  limit,  notably
      territorial, on the reach  of  the  Convention.   In  particular,  the
      engagement undertaken by a Contracting State is confined to 'securing'
      ('reconna�tre' in the French text) the listed rights and  freedoms  to
      persons within its own 'jurisdiction'.  Further, the  Convention  does
      not govern the actions of States  not  Parties  to  it,  nor  does  it
      purport to be a means of requiring the Contracting  States  to  impose
      Convention standards on other States.  Article 1  cannot  be  read  as
      justifying a general principle to  the  effect  that,  notwithstanding
      its extradition obligations, a Contracting State may not surrender  an
      individual unless satisfied that the conditions awaiting  him  in  the
      country of destination are in full accord with each of the  safeguards
      of the Convention.  Indeed, as the United Kingdom Government stressed,
      the beneficial purpose of extradition in preventing fugitive offenders
      from evading justice cannot be ignored in  determining  the  scope  of
      application of the Convention and of Article 3 in particular.




      In the instant case it is common  ground that the United  Kingdom  has
      no  power  over  the  practices  and  arrangements  of  the   Virginia
      authorities, which are the subject of the applicant's complaints.   It
      is also true that in other  international  instruments  cited  by  the
      United Kingdom Government  -  for  example  the  1951  United  Nations
      Convention relating to the  Status  of  Refugees,  the  1957  European
      Convention on Extradition  and  the  1984  United  Nations  Convention
      against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading  Treatment  and
      Punishment - the problems of removing a person to another jurisdiction
      where unwanted consequences may follow  are  addressed  expressly  and
      specifically.




      These considerations cannot, however, absolve the Contracting  Parties
      from responsibility under  Article  3  for  all  and  any  foreseeable
      consequences of extradition suffered outside their jurisdiction.



      87.  In interpreting the Convention regard must be had to its  special
      character as a treaty for the collective enforcement of  human  rights
      and fundamental  freedoms.   Thus,  the  object  and  purpose  of  the
      Convention as an instrument for the  protection  of  individual  human
      beings require that its provisions be interpreted and applied so as to
      make  its  safeguards  practical  and  effective.   In  addition,  any
      interpretation of  the  rights  and  freedoms  guaranteed  has  to  be
      consistent with the general spirit of the  Convention,  an  instrument
      designed to maintain and promote the ideals and values of a democratic
      society.



      88.   Article 3 makes no provision for exceptions and  no  derogations
      from it are permissible under Article 15 in   time  of  war  or  other
      national emergency.  This absolute  prohibition  under  the  terms  of
      inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under the  terms  of  the
      Convention shows that Article  3  enshrines  one  of  the  fundamental
      values of the democratic societies making up the Council   of  Europe.
      It is also to  be  found  in  similar  terms  in  other  international
      instruments such as the  1966  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
      Political Rights and the 1969 American Convention on Human Rights  and
      is generally recognised as an internationally accepted standard.



      The question remains whether the extradition of a fugitive to  another
      State where he would be subjected or be  likely  to  be  subjected  to
      torture or to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment  would
      itself engage the responsibility of a Contracting State under  Article
      3.  That the abhorrence of torture has such implications is recognised
      in Article 3 of the United  Nations  Convention  Against  Torture  and
      Other Cruel, Inhuman  or  Degrading  Treatment  or  punishment,  which
      provides that 'no State Party shall ... extradite a person where there
      are substantial grounds for believing that he would be  in  danger  of
      being subjected to torture'.   The  fact  that  a  specialised  treaty
      should spell out in detail a  specific  obligation  attaching  to  the
      prohibition of torture does  not  mean  that  an  essentially  similar
      obligation is not already inherent in the general terms of  Article  3
      of the European Convention.  It would hardly be  compatible  with  the
      underlying values of the Convention, that human  'common  heritage  of
      political traditions, ideals, freedom and the rule of  law'  to  which
      the Preamble refers, were a Contracting State knowingly to surrender a
      fugitive to another State where there  were  substantial  grounds  for
      believing that he would be in danger of being  subjected  to  torture,
      however heinous the crime allegedly committed.   Extradition  in  such
      circumstances, while not explicitly  referred  to  in  the  brief  and
      general wording of Article 3, would plainly be contrary to the  spirit
      and intendment of the Article, and in the Court's view  this  inherent
      obligation not to  extradite  also  extends  to  cases  in  which  the
      fugitive would be faced in the receiving  State  by  a  real  risk  of
      exposure to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment proscribed by
      that Article.

      89.  What amounts to 'inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment'
      depends on all the circumstances of the case.   Furthermore,  inherent
      in the whole of the Convention is a search for a fair balance  between
      the  demands  of  the  general  interest  of  the  community  and  the
      requirements of the protection of the individual's fundamental rights.
       As movement about the world becomes  easier  and  crime  takes  on  a
      larger international dimension, it is increasingly in the interest  of
      all nations that suspected offenders who flee abroad should be brought
      to  justice.  Conversely,  the  establishment  of   safe  havens   for
      fugitives would not only result in danger for  the  State  obliged  to
      harbour the protected person but also tend to under the foundations of
      extradition.  These considerations must also  be  included  among  the
      factors to be taken into account in the interpretation and application
      of the notions of inhuman and degrading  treatment  or  punishment  in
      extradition cases.

      90.  It is not normally for the Convention institutions  to  pronounce
      on  the  existence  or  otherwise  of  potential  violations  of   the
      Convention.  However, where an applicant claims  that  a  decision  to
      extradite him would, if implemented,  be  contrary  to  Article  3  by
      reason of its foreseeable consequences in the  requesting  country,  a
      departure from this principle is necessary, in view of the serious and
      irreparable nature of the alleged suffering risked, in order to ensure
      the effectiveness of the safeguard provided by that Article.

      91.   In sum, the decision by  a  Contracting  State  to  extradite  a
      fugitive may give rise to an issue under Article 3, and  hence  engage
      the  responsibility  of  that  State  under  the   Convention,   where
      substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  the  person
      concerned, if extradited, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
      torture or to inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  in  the
      requesting  country.   The  establishment   of   such   responsibility
      inevitably involves an assessment  of  conditions  in  the  requesting
      country  against  the  standards  of  Article  3  of  the  Convention.
      Nonetheless, there is no question of adjudicating on  or  establishing
      the responsibility of the receiving  country,  whether  under  general
      international law, under the Convention or otherwise.  In  so  far  as
      any liability under the Convention  is  or  may  be  incurred,  it  is
      liability incurred by the extraditing Contracting State by  reason  of
      its having taken action which as a direct consequence the exposure  of
      an individual to proscribed treatment."




8.  The test is that set  out  in  Paragraph  91,  namely  have  substantial
grounds been shown for believing that the person  concerned,  if  extradited
(or deported) faces a real risk of being subjected to torture or to  inhuman
or degrading treatment  or  punishment  in  the  requesting  (or  receiving)
country?  The  application  of  this  principle  to  deportation  cases  was
confirmed in Varas v Sweden (1991) 14 E.H.R.R. 1.   That  case  concerned  a
number of Chileans who had sought asylum.  Cruz Varas  had,  he  said,  been
tortured  in the past by the police and feared that the  same  would  happen
if he were returned.  Normally, the Commission will determine the facts  and
in  the  Cruz  Varas  case,  the  Commission  undertook  that  exercise:   E
Commission H. R. 7/6/1990.  In Paragraph 80 of its opinion,  the  Commission
sets out the Court's test in Paragraph 91 of Soering, and continues:-


      "81.   In the Commission's view, this test also applies  to  cases  of
      expulsion.  Consequently, it must be examined whether, at the time  of
      the expulsion, there were substantial grounds for believing  that  Mr.
      Cruz Varas faced a real risk of being subjected to treatment  contrary
      to Article 3 ... if deported to Chile.

      82.   This examination involves, on the one hand,  an establishment of
      the facts as regards Mr. Cruz Varas' personal background and,  on  the
      other hand, an assessment of the  general  situation  in  Chile.   The
      Commission considers that  the  general  situation  in  Chile  at  the
      relevant time was not such that an expulsion to Chile would  generally
      be a violation of Article 3  ...In  order  to  raise  an  issue  under
      Article 3 ... there must be some substantiation that there  existed  a
      specific risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  for  the  first
      applicant in the particular circumstances of this case.

      83.   The Commission considers that  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
      applicants suggest that Mr. Cruz Varas has in the past been  subjected
      in  Chile  to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  ...  The   medical
      certificate ... and the evidence that  Mr.  Cruz  Varas  has  been  so
      treated.  Although there are,  as  the  Government  suggests,  certain
      elements which reduce the credibility of Mr. Cruz  Varas'  story,  the
      Commission accepts, on the basis of the material before it,  that  Mr.
      Cruz Varas has been subjected  in  the  past  in  Chile  to  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 ..."




9.  This is not  language which supports the need for proof  of  past  facts
beyond reasonable doubt, although it  is  interesting  to  note  that  those
representing Mr. Cruz Varas had submitted that past breaches  of  Article  3
had been proved beyond reasonable doubt (see Paragraph 78).  The Court  says
nothing to support the approach espoused by Mr. Tam.  At Paragraphs  75  and
76 of its judgment it states:-


      "75. In determining whether substantial grounds have  been  shown  for
      believing in the existence of a real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 the Court will assess the issue in  the  light  of  all  the
      material placed before it or, if necessary, material obtained  proprio
      motu (see the Ireland v United Kingdom judgment  of  18  January  1978
      (supra)).

      76.   Since the nature of the Contracting States' responsibility under
      Article 3 in cases of this  kind  lies  in  the  act  of  exposing  an
      individual to the risk of ill-treatment, the  existence  of  the  risk
      must be assessed primarily with reference to those  facts  which  were
      known or ought to have been known to the Contracting State at the time
      of the expulsion; the Court is not  precluded,  however,  from  having
      regard  to  information  which  comes  to  light  subsequent  to   the
      expulsion.  This may  be  of  value  in  confirming  or  refuting  the
      appreciation or the well-foundedness or otherwise  of  an  applicant's
      fears."


All that the Court says is consistent  with  the  conclusion  that  what  is
required is an overall assessment  whether  substantial  grounds  have  been
established to believe that there is a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to
Article 3.

10.  The link with the Refugee  Convention  is  obvious.   Persecution  will
normally involve the violation of a person's  human  rights  and  a  finding
that there is real risk of persecution would be likely to involve a  finding
that there is a real risk of a breach of the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.  It would therefore be  strange  if  different  standards  of  proof
applied.  There is nothing in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  which  requires
us to adopt the approach which Mr. Tam submits is appropriate.  As  we  have
sought to demonstrate, it supports the submissions made  by  Mr.  Bovey  and
Mr. Blake.  Since the concern under each Convention is whether the  risk  of
future ill-treatment will amount  to  a  breach  of  an  individual's  human
rights, a difference of approach would be  surprising.   If  an  adjudicator
were persuaded that there was a well-founded fear  of  persecution  but  not
for a reason which engaged the protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  he
would, if Mr. Tam is right, be required to reject a human  rights  claim  if
he was not satisfied that  the  underlying  facts  had  been  proved  beyond
reasonable doubt. Apart from the undesirable result of such a difference  of
approach when the effect on the individual who resists return  is  the  same
and may involve inhuman treatment or torture or even death,  an  adjudicator
and the tribunal would need to indulge in mental gymnastics.  Their task  is
difficult enough without such refinements.

11.  In our view, the decision of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
Vilvarajah v United Kingdom (1992) 12 E.H.R.R. 2118 provides  added  support
for our conclusion.  At Paragraph 69 of its judgment, the Court referred  to
the decision of the House of Lords in Sivakumaran v Secretary of  State  for
the Home Department [1988] 1 All E.R. 193.  The Court continued:-


      "The House of Lords found that the test [for  establishing  whether  a
      person was a refugee] was an objective one and that there  has  to  be
      demonstrated  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  or   a  real  or
      substantial risk, that the person will be persecuted  if  returned  to
      his own country."




The Court then proceeded to cite substantial extracts from the  speeches  of
Lord Keith, Lord Templeman and Lord Goff.  When formulating  the  test  that
there must be 'substantial grounds for believing that the  person  concerned
faced a real risk of being subjected to torture or to inhuman  or  degrading
treatment or punishment in the country to which he was  [to  be]  returned',
(Paragraph 103) the Court is clearly intending to follow the  same  approach
as was considered correct for the Refugee Convention.  It is  true  that  in
Sivakumaran their Lordships did not answer  the  issue  of  how  past  facts
should be established, but what they said was  consistent  with  the  global
approach and the Court of Appeal  has  now  confirmed  that  in  Karanakaran
[2000] Imm A.R. 271.

12.  Various expressions have been used to identify the correct standard  of
proof required for asylum claims.  These stem from  language  used  by  Lord
Diplock in R v Governor of Pentonville Prison ex p. Fernandez [1971]  2  All
E.R. 691 at p.697, cited by Lord Keith in Sivakumaran at [1988] 1  All  E.R.
198.   Lord  Diplock  said  that  the  expressions  'a  reasonable  chance',
'substantial grounds for thinking' and 'a serious possibility' all  conveyed
the same meaning.  There must be a real or substantial risk of  persecution.
 The test formulated by the European Court requires the decision  maker  and
appellate body to ask themselves whether there are substantial  grounds  for
believing that the applicant faces a real risk  of  relevant  ill-treatment.
That is no  different  from  the  test  applicable  to  asylum  claims.  The
decision maker and appellate body will consider  the  material  before  them
and will decide whether the existence of a  real  risk  is  made  out.   The
words 'substantial grounds for believing' do not and  are  not  intended  to
qualify the ultimate question which is whether a real risk of relevant  ill-
treatment has been established.  They merely  indicate  the  standard  which
must be applied to answer that question and demonstrate that it is not  that
of proof beyond reasonable doubt.The adjudicator in the  instant  case  used
the expressions "'a reasonable chance'  or  'a  serious  possibility'"  when
considering the asylum claim, both of which are used by  Lord  Diplock.   In
our view, now that the European Court has fixed on a  particular  expression
and it is one which is  entirely  appropriate  for  both  asylum  and  human
rights claims, it should be adopted  in  preference  to  any  other,  albeit
others may be intended to convey  the  same  meaning.   This  will  lead  to
complete consistency of approach and avoid arguments such as were raised  by
Mr.  Tam  that  the  adjudicator  in  using   the   expression   'reasonable
likelihood' in relation to Article 3 was applying too low a test.   The  use
of the words 'real risk' also has the advantage of making clear  that  there
must be more than a mere possibility.  The adjective 'real'  must  be  given
its proper weight.  Anxious though the scrutiny must be and  serious  though
the effect of a wrongful return may be, the applicant  must  establish  that
the risk of persecution or other violation of  his  human  rights  is  real.
The standard may be a relatively low one, but it is  for  the  applicant  to
establish his claim to that standard.

13.  It is unnecessary to  consider  whether  the  adjudicator  applied  the
correct test.  As will  be  apparent  when  we  consider  his  determination
against  the  proper  criteria  and  the  material  before  him,  it  is  so
unsatisfactory that we have had to reconsider the whole claim.

14.  Before leaving this first issue, we should  refer  to  Osman  v  United
Kingdom (1998) 29 E.H.R.R. 245.  The applicant alleged  a  breach  of  inter
alia Article 2 in the alleged failure by the State to protect  him  from  an
attempted   murder   and  his  father  from  being  murdered.    The   Court
underlined an important aspect of  the  Convention  rights,  namely  that  a
State might have a  positive  obligation  to  take  preventive  measures  to
protect an individual whose life was at risk from criminal acts  of  others.
The same approach is to be seen in A v United  Kingdom   to  which  we  have
already referred.  At Page 306 in Paragraph 116 the Court said this:-


      "For the Court, and having regard to the nature of the right protected
      by Article 2, a right fundamental in the scheme of the Convention,  it
      is sufficient for an applicant to show that the authorities did not do
      all that could be reasonably expected of them  to  avoid  a  real  and
      immediate risk to life of which they have or ought to have knowledge."



The same approach is appropriate for Article 3 which is also, as  the  Court
has  frequently said, a fundamental right in the Convention.  That  language
is far from requiring proof beyond reasonable doubt.  The  duty  to  protect
against a real risk can readily be equated to a duty  not  to  expose  to  a
real risk.



15.  There is nothing in the jurisprudence of the  human  rights'  Court  or
Commission which requires us to adopt a different approach to  the  standard
applicable to the Refugee Convention; indeed, in our view,  there  is  every
reason why the same approach should be applied.  Different  standards  would
produce confusion and be likely to  result  in  inconsistent  decisions   We
therefore reject the argument of the Secretary of State on this issue.



Issue (2): Violation by non-state actors


16.  There is no doubt that the obligations of  a state which  is  intending
to deport an individual can extend  to  the  need  to  protect  him  against
relevant ill-treatment by non-state actors.  This is consistent with  duties
to provide protection initially expounded in cases such as  Osman  v  United
Kingdom and A v United Kingdom.  Thus in HLR v France (supra) the Court  was
concerned with  a  Colombian  drug  trafficker  who  had  given  information
against dealers in Colombia and claimed that there was a real risk that,  if
returned to Colombia,  he  would  be  subjected  to  treatment  contrary  to
Article 3 at their hands.  He claimed that  the  authorities  would  not  be
able to provide him with adequate protection.  At Paragraph 40  on  Page  50
we find the majority (the decision was by 15 votes to 6) saying:-



      "Owing to the absolute character of the right  guaranteed,  the  Court
      does not rule out the possibility that Article 3 ...  may  also  apply
      where the danger emanated from persons or groups of  persons  who  are
      not public officials.  However, it must be shown that the risk is real
      and that the authorities of  the  receiving  State  are  not  able  to
      obviate the risk by providing appropriate protection."




The Court  concluded that, despite the general violence and tense  situation
in Colombia, the applicant had not made out his claim.  At Paragraph  43  it
said:-


      "The  Court  is  aware,  too,  of  the  difficulties   the   Colombian
      authorities face in containing the violence.  The  applicant  has  not
      shown  that  they  are  incapable   of   affording   him   appropriate
      protection."

The language is cautious and understandably so.   No  guarantees  of  safety
could conceivably be required and the prospect of the  Convention  providing
a haven for criminals who have fallen out with  their  erstwhile  colleagues
is an unattractive one.

17.  Thus the threshold is a high one, as the Court has  recently  confirmed
in Bensaid v United Kingdom (E.  Ct.  H.R.  6  February  2001).   That  case
concerned an Algerian suffering from  schizophrenia  who  claimed  that  the
unavailability of proper medication and treatment coupled with  the  dangers
of travel due to the activities of the GIA  terrorists  would  result  in  a
violation of Article 3.  At Paragraph 34 of the unanimous  decision  of  the
Court we find this:-


      "While it is true that Article 3 has been more commonly applied by the
      Court in contexts in  which  the  risk  to  the  individual  of  being
      subjected to any of the proscribed forms of  treatment  emanates  from
      intentionally inflicted acts of the public  authorities  or  non-State
      bodies in the receiving country, the Court has, in the  light  of  the
      fundamental importance of Article 3,  reserved  to  itself  sufficient
      flexibility to address  the  application  of  that  Article  in  other
      contexts which  might  arise.  It  is  not  therefore  prevented  from
      scrutinising an applicant's claim under Article 3 where the source  of
      the risk of proscribed treatment in the receiving country  stems  from
      factors  which  cannot  engage  either  directly  or  indirectly   the
      responsibility of the public authorities of that country,  or,  which,
      taken alone, do not in  themselves  infringe  the  standards  of  that
      Article.  To limit the application of Article 3 in this  manner  would
      be to undermine the absolute character of its protection.  In any such
      contexts, however,  the  Court  must  subject  all  the  circumstances
      surrounding the case to rigorous scrutiny, especially the  applicant's
      perceived situation in the expelling State."




This goes beyond deliberate acts  by  non-State  actors  against  which  the
State ought to provide protection.  But the  observations  in  Paragraph  40
are material.  It is there said:-


      "... Having regard ...  to  the  high  threshold  set  by  Article  3,
      particularly where the case does not concern the direct responsibility
      of the Contracting State for the infliction of harm,  the  Court  does
      not find that there is a sufficiently real risk that  the  applicants'
      removal in those circumstances would be contrary to the  standards  of
      Article 3.  It does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of [D v
      United Kingdom (1997) 24 E.H.R.R. 423] where the applicant was in  the
      final stages of  terminal  illness,  AIDS,  and  had  no  prospect  of
      medical care or family support on expulsion to St Kitts."



In deportation cases, there will rarely be a direct  responsibility  of  the
expelling State for  the  infliction  of  harm  (we  do  not  rule  out  the
possibility that the mere act of removal may  contravene  Article  3  having
regard  to  the  physical  or  mental  condition  of  the  individual  being
expelled).

18.  Mr. Tam has submitted that  it  cannot  be  right  that  an  individual
cannot complain against his own State because the alleged violation was  not
caused by a public body but he can when  the  violation  occurs  in  another
State.  That submission ignores the State's responsibility  to  provide  the
necessary protection.  In any event, as we shall see when we consider  issue
(3), the so-called extra-territoriality of the Convention, the complaint  is
that it  is  the  United  Kingdom  which  is  violating  the  Convention  by
expelling him to face a real risk that he will suffer  a  violation  of  his
human rights.

19.  We have already identified  the  desirability  of  a  similar  approach
under each Convention to the standard of  proof.   In  our  view,  the  same
ought to apply to the  question  whether  a  real  risk  of  harm  has  been
established.  The nature of the harm and the circumstances in which it  will
arise may produce different results depending on the  Convention  in  issue.
Thus it must amount to persecution and be for  a  Convention  reason  if  an
asylum claim is to succeed.  Persecution and breaches of Article 3  are  not
necessarily the same, although we doubt  whether  treatment  which  did  not
amount to persecution could nonetheless cross the Article 3  threshold.   We
recognise the possibility that Article 3 could be violated by actions  which
did not have a sufficiently systemic character  to  amount  to  persecution,
although we doubt that this refinement would be likely to  be  determinative
in any but a very small minority of cases.  But apart from this and  a  case
where conduct amounting to persecution but not for a Convention  reason  was
established, we find it difficult to envisage a sensible possibility that  a
breach of Article 3 could be established where an asylum claim failed.


20.  In Horvath v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2000]  3
W.L.R. 370, the House of  Lords  considered  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
protection  in  the  context  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   Lord  Hope  of
Craighead effectively approved the test, which he formulated thus  (p.382G),
that there should exist in the receiving State:-


      "... a system of criminal law  which  makes  violent  attacks  by  the
      persecutors punishable and a reasonable willingness  to  enforce  that
      law on the part of the law enforcement agencies."



There was no dissent in any other speech.  Lord Clyde at p. 398 cited  Osman
v United Kingdom, referring in particular to the  European  Court  of  Human
Rights'  recognition  that  account  must  be  taken  of   the   operational
responsibilities and the constraints on the provision of  police  protection
so that the obligation to protect must not be so interpreted  as  to  impose
an  impossible  or  disproportionate  burden  upon  the  authorities.    The
observations in Soering at Paragraph 86 which  we  have  already  cited  are
also material.  Regard must be had to the general situation in  the  country
in question and the degree of protection to be expected  by  the  population
as a whole.


21.It may be said that it is no consolation to an applicant to know that  if
he is killed or tortured, the police will take steps to  try  to  bring  his
murderers or assailants to justice.  He is concerned with the risk  that  he
may be killed or tortured and, if the authorities cannot  provide  effective
protection to avoid that risk, there will be a breach of the  Convention  if
he is returned.  Practical rather than  theoretical  protection  is  needed.
We see the force of that contention, but in our view it fails  to  recognise
that the existence of a system should carry with it a willingness to  do  as
much as can reasonably be expected to  provide  that  protection.   In  this
way, the reality of the risk is removed.  Since the result will be  similar,
namely persecution or a violation of a human right, it  would  be  wrong  to
apply a different approach.  We do not read Horvath as deciding  that  there
will be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  whenever  the  authorities  in  the
receiving State are doing their best.  If this  best  can  be  shown  to  be
ineffective, it may be that the applicant will have established  that  there
is an inability to provide the necessary protection.  But it is clear  that,
as Lord Hope said (p.388F):-


      "... [I]t is a practical standard, which takes proper account  of  the
        duty which the State owes to all its own nationals."



The fact that the system may break down because of incompetence or  venality
of individual officers is generally  not  to  be  regarded  as  establishing
unwillingness or inability to provide protection.  In  many  cases,  perhaps
most, the existence of the system will be sufficient to remove  the  reality
of risk.

Issue (3): Extra-territoriality


22.  The submission of the Secretary of State, which  was  accepted  by  the
adjudicator and which is repeated  before  us  by  Mr.  Tam,  is  that  only
Article 3 has extra-territorial effect.  The argument relies  on  Article  1
which provides that

      "The High Contracting Parties shall secure to  everyone  within  their
      jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section 1."


This it is said imposes a territorial limit on the reach of the  Convention.
 That argument was rejected by the Court in Soering  (supra)  at  paragraphs
86 et seq.  That rejection was not limited to Article 3; indeed, in  Soering
itself reliance was also placed on an alleged  breach  of  Article  6  about
which the Court said this (at Paragraph 113 on Page 479):-


      "The right to a fair trial in criminal  proceedings,  as  embodied  in
      Article 6, holds a prominent place in a democratic society.  The Court
      does not exclude that an issue might  exceptionally  be  raised  under
      Article 6 by  an  extradition  decision  in  circumstances  where  the
      fugitive has suffered or risks suffering a flagrant denial of  a  fair
      trial in the requesting country."

   We see no reason to limit this to extradition.   Furthermore,  there  are
Articles other than Article 3 from which there  can  be  no  derogation  and
which can properly be regarded as fundamental  and  breach  of  which  would
result in suffering  of  a  serious  and  irreparable  nature.   An  obvious
example is Article 4.  To an extent it is  qualified  but,  where  any  such
qualification does not apply, the right is fundamental and there can  be  no
derogation.  Thus it can be equated to Article 3.

23.  Mr. Tam has sought to rely on a decision of the Commission  in  Dehwari
v Netherlands (E.Comm.HR 29.10.8).  That case involved an application by  an
Iranian who alleged his return would place him  at  risk  of  death  and  of
torture so that Articles 2 and 3 were relied on.  The Commission  adopted  a
narrow construction of Article 2, pointing out  that  there  was  a  general
requirement in  the  first  sentence  that  the  right  to  life  should  be
protected by law, and a prohibition  in  the  second  sentence  against  the
intentional deprivation of life.  This led the  Commission  to  reason  thus
(Paragraph 61):-


      "As to the prohibition of intentional deprivation of  life,  including
      the execution of a death penalty, the Commission does not exclude that
      an issue might arise under Article 2 of the Convention or Article 1 of
      Protocol No. 6 [abolition of death penalty] in circumstances in  which
      the expelling State knowingly puts the person concerned at  such  high
      risk of losing his life as for the outcome to  be  a  near  certainty.
      The Commission considers, however, that a 'real  risk'  -  within  the
      meaning of the case-law concerning Article 3 - of loss of  life  would
      not as such necessarily render an expulsion contrary to Article  2  of
      the Convention or Article 1 of Protocol No.6 although it would  amount
      to inhuman treatment within the meaning of Article 3."



We confess we do not find the  reasoning  persuasive.   It  places  far  too
great an  emphasis  on  the  word  'intentionally'.   The  duty  to  provide
protection against breaches of the Convention should extend to the duty  not
intentionally to deprive of life.  This is  consistent  with  Osman,  albeit
the focus was there on the first sentence.  To expel someone  to  a  country
where there is known to be a real risk  of  death  seems  to  us  to  be  an
intentional exposure to that risk and  just  as  such  exposure  can  engage
Article 3 so it ought  to  engage  Article  2.   However,  the  argument  is
academic since, as the Commission found in Dehwari, there was  a  breach  of
Article 3 involved in the imposition of a death penalty for the  applicant's
activities.  Dehwari does not help Mr. Tam  since,  even  if  its  reasoning
should be followed, it depends upon the precise words used in Article 2  and
particularly the adverb 'intentionally'.

24.  Mr. Tam also prays in aid the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Holub
v Secretary of State for the Home Department   [2001]  l  WLR  1359.   Holub
involved a claim that the right to  education  contained  in  Article  2  of
Protocol No.1 was breached where the applicant and his  family  were  to  be
returned to Poland.  Mr. Tam  relies  particularly  on  Paragraph  21  where
Schiemann LJ, giving the judgment of the Court, said:-


      "We are not bound to follow the decisions of  the  European  Court  of
      Human Rights but simply to take them into account.  Nevertheless,  the
      jurisprudence of the Court does point clearly to the fact that  rights
      which are not absolute, such  as  the  right  to  education,  are  not
      engaged where a State is exercising legitimate immigration control."

He went on to say that the Secretary of State was not therefore required  to
"take a view as to whether the child's Article 2 right will be infringed  in
Poland".  But he concluded the paragraph thus:-


      "However, in the spirit of restraint to which we have referred, we  do
      not think it is necessary to decide this point authoritatively in this
      case, in view of our decision on the other  issues  to  which  we  now
      turn."

25.  With great respect to the Court of Appeal, we are  not  persuaded  that
the rights are not engaged in  immigration  cases.   That  in  our  view  is
contrary to Soering.  The true analysis is that, although the rights may  be
engaged, legitimate immigration control  will  almost  certainly  mean  that
derogation from the rights will be proper and will not be  disproportionate.
 There may be exceptions, as the reference in Soering to  flagrant  breaches
of Article 6 indicate.  This is because the  court  has  recognised  that  a
country is entitled, "as a matter of well-established international law  and
subject to their treaty obligations including  the  Convention,  to  control
the entry, residence and expulsion of aliens". (See Hilal v  United  Kingdom
E.Ct.HR 6 March 2001 at Paragraph 59).  In Salazar v  Sweden  (E.Comm  HR  7
March 1996) the Commission observed:-


      "In the field of immigration Contracting States enjoy a wide margin of
      appreciation in determining the steps to be taken to ensure compliance
      with the Convention, with due regard to the needs and resources of the
      community and of individuals."

Among other cases, it cites Abdulaziz v United Kingdom   (1985)  7  E.H.R.R.
471, which concerned an alleged breach  of  Article  8  in  the  refusal  to
permit the applicant to join his family in the United  Kingdom.   The  Court
decided that Article 8 could  apply  where  immigration  control  was  being
enforced but that in the circumstances of that case there was no breach.

26.  We therefore see no reason to exclude the possible application  of  any
relevant Article (save, perhaps Article 2 if the reasoning in Dehwari is  to
be followed) in deportation cases, but it will be virtually  impossible  for
an applicant to establish that control on immigration  was  disproportionate
to any breach.  In particular, if  Article  3  is  not  established,  it  is
difficult to see how Article 8 could be if, as in  this  instant  case,  the
alleged breach will occur in the  receiving  State  when  the  applicant  is
removed.  In the context of this case,  the  adjudicator  was  in  error  in
concluding that Article 4 could not be relied on because it did not,  as  he
put it, have extra-territorial effect.  That definition is misleading  since
there is no question of extra-territorial effect in the true sense  of  that
word since the breach, if any, will have occurred  within  the  jurisdiction
by the decision to remove  which  will  have  the  effect  of  exposing  the
individual to whatever violation of his human rights is in issue.   We  have
used the word as a convenient label for the argument, but, for  the  reasons
given, we reject the argument.

The adjudicator's determination


27. We  now  turn  to  consider  the  adjudicator's  determination  and  his
findings of fact.  Mr. Bovey and Mr. Tam  understandably  sought  to  uphold
the adjudicator's favourable findings and to demolish his unfavourable.   In
our view, the demolition on each side was successful.  The determination  is
regrettably unsatisfactory.  In Paragraph 4 the adjudicator   sets  out  the
evidence of Ms. Kacaj which came from her statement and interview.  She  did
not give evidence before him and so her account was  not  tested  by  cross-
examination.   In summary, she said that her father, who owned a  bakery  in
a town called Kucove, was an active member of  the  Democratic  Party  (DP).
In 1997 a demand was made from him for  $10,000.   He  and  Ms.  Kacaj  were
threatened and assaulted by armed men when he refused to pay.   He  believed
the Socialist Party (SP) was behind this.  Anonymous  threats  followed  and
in June 1997 a cousin was shot and killed.  This led her father  to  pay  up
and to close the bakery.  Shortly after, the premises were  destroyed  in  a
robbery.  In September 1997 her father assisted the DP in the elections.

28.  There then followed the Kosovan civil war and the need to assist  their
fellow Albanians.  This meant that they were able to  live  in  peace  until
September 2000 when again elections were  to  take  place.   This  time  her
father, who again was assisting the DP, was faced with a demand for  $20,000
coupled with threats that if he did not pay Ms.  Kacaj  would  be  taken  to
Italy and make the   money  for  them.   These  threats  were  contained  in
anonymous letters, but they were not taken to the police because her  father
believed they would not help because they were  corrupt.   On  24  September
2000 Ms. Kacaj was abducted by three masked  men  who  raped  her  in  turn.
They said that all democrats would suffer in the same way.  She went to  the
police, but they asked only  a few questions and said they would  not  help.
Further demands for money and  threats  followed  although  her  father  had
ceased his activities on behalf of the DP.  Fearing that she would be  taken
to Italy and forced into prostitution, Ms. Kacaj decided  to  leave  Albania
and her father arranged with an agent for her to be brought to England.

29   In giving reasons for refusing her claim on 20 November  2000,  only  7
days after she had claimed asylum, the Secretary of State did not  in  terms
reject any part of her account (which at that stage consisted  of  what  she
had said in interview) or impugn  her  credibility,  but  pointed  out  that
there was no evidence of  recent  persecution  on  political  grounds.   The
abduction and rape was  regarded  as  criminal  conduct  against  which  the
Albanian authorities were able and willing to provide effective  protection.
 The adjudicator under the  heading  'Credibility'  refers  to  the  refusal
letter and  comments  that  it  did  not  "in  general  terms"  dispute  the
credibility of Ms. Kacaj's account.  He  then  in  Paragraph  11  under  the
heading  'Conclusion  on  the  1951  Convention'  refers  to  the  lack   of
corroboration of her medical  condition  and  the  absence  of  any  medical
report and the lack of evidence corroborating  her  father's  membership  of
the DP.  He continues:-


      "For reasons which [her representative] did not, and did not need  to,
      explain, [Ms Kacaj] has  not  given  evidence.   The  result  of  this
      decision is that [Ms Kacaj] has not discharged the burden of proof  on
      her, required under the 1951 Convention, that she has  the  subjective
      element of fear as she asserts.  As the burden  of  proof  is  on  [Ms
      Kacaj] to satisfy me that at the date of her application, and  at  the
      date of the hearing of her appeal, she had such a fear,  the  totality
      of  the  evidence  does  not  satisfy  me  either  that  [Ms  Kacaj's]
      experience amounts to torture or that she  has  a  Convention  reason,
      namely imputed political option, on account of  her  father's  support
      for and membership of DP, as she asserts."

30.  The reasoning is muddled and defective.  It is far from  clear  whether
the adjudicator is accepting her account of what happened to her   since  he
appears not to have believed that she had  any  fear  of  persecution.   The
reason for finding that she had not discharged the burden of  proof,  namely
her failure to give evidence, is self-evidently erroneous.  Failure to  give
evidence establishes nothing: it may in  appropriate  cases  enable  adverse
findings to be made where no explanation is given of matters which point  in
a particular direction.  Whether or not what Ms. Kacaj suffered amounted  to
torture is not material.  The question was whether there  was  a  real  risk
that she would be abducted as she said she feared and sent  to  prostitution
in order to extort money  from  or  punish  her  father  for  his  political
activities.  Her political opinions, imputed or otherwise, were  irrelevant;
 her case was that she was being persecuted because she was the daughter  of
her father and the persecution was because of  his  political  views.   Thus
the adjudicator's dismissal of the asylum appeal cannot stand  and  we  have
to consider it for ourselves since we are in just as good a position as  was
the adjudicator as no live evidence  was  called  before  him  or  has  been
called before us.

31.  The Article 3 claim was upheld because the  adjudicator  believed  from
what he describes as the summary provided by the  Refugee  Legal  Centre  of
the documentary evidence  concerning  the  position  of  women  and  women's
rights in Albania that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that  she
would be at risk of kidnap.  He seems, judging  by  what  he   said  on  the
asylum claim, to have reached  this  conclusion  because  Ms.  Kacaj  was  a
woman.  In any event, it is far from clear how much of the account given  by
her he accepts and why he is  satisfied  that  she  faced  a  real  risk  of
kidnap.  The so-called summary  is  in  fact   a  distillation  of  all  the
observations favourable to  Ms.  Kacaj's  claim  rather  than  an  objective
summary.  We deprecate the submission of a document in such a form since  it
is misleading and the adjudicator seems to have  been  persuaded  by  it  to
find it unnecessary to look at the source  documents  to  which  it  refers.
Naturally, representatives are entitled to identify and  draw  attention  to
passages in reports which assist their case, but they  must  make  it  clear
that this is what they are doing.  However, we accept  that  there  is  much
material to show  that  women  in  Albania  are  treated  with  considerable
cruelty and have little redress  against  male  violence,  both  sexual  and
other, particularly within family relationships.  But there is very  little,
if any, material which supports a  case  that  such  conduct  has  been  for
political ends.  We shall return to consider the objective material  in  due
course when deciding whether Ms. Kacaj has made out her claim  under  either
Convention.

32.  The reasoning is sparse  and  we  are  bound  to  say  defective.   The
adjudicator  makes no explicit findings of fact when considering Article  4,
but he does say in Paragraph 14:-


      "The evidence satisfies me that [Ms Kacaj] was never forced to perform
      compulsory labour in Albania and that  her  fear  arose  from  threats
      uttered to her father that if he did not meet demands for payment  [Ms
      Kacaj] would be abducted and sent to Italy where she would  be  forced
      into prostitution."

Is that meant to imply an acceptance of her account of her fear?  If so,  it
does not sit well with his conclusion that she had  no  subjective  fear  in
relation to the asylum claim.  Furthermore, Ms. Kacaj had never alleged  she
had been  forced  to  perform  compulsory  labour  in  Albania  and  so  the
adjudicator's statement that 'the evidence satisfied him' that she  had  not
reads somewhat curiously.

33. Here too the adjudicator's conclusions cannot stand.   Although  we  are
bound to record that we have a  degree  of  scepticism  about  some  of  the
account given by Ms. Kacaj, we have decided that it would be fair to  assume
that her account is generally true and to decide the  appeal  on  the  basis
that she is to be believed.





Conclusions


   34. There can be no doubt that Albania still faces  serious  problems  of
lawlessness and corruption.  In 1997,  when  many  criminals  were  released
from prison, violent crime was rampant and it  is  by  no  means  surprising
that anyone who was perceived to have money should  have  been  targeted  by
criminals.   There  was  political  violence  and  upheaval  following   the
collapse of the pyramid schemes in early 1997.  Those schemes had  been,  it
was believed, promoted by the government, then run by the DP,  and  had  led
to a disastrous loss of money which impoverished many.  The  DP  was  ousted
in 1997 and in November 1998 a new constitution was  established.   In  2000
the restructuring of the police began and there was a relatively  successful
crackdown on armed gangs.  In October 2000 there  were  municipal  elections
(no doubt those referred to by Ms. Kacaj).  Only  a  few  violent  incidents
were reported, leading the Human Rights Watch Report of December 10 2000  to
say that this was:-

      "a tribute to the governments' efforts, as well as to the restraint of
      the political parties themselves."

Nonetheless, criminal groups still exist and Albania is a  major  route  for
drug and people   smuggling.  Organised crime is a powerful force,  assisted
by corrupt police and weak and corrupt judiciary.  Nonetheless it  is  clear
that real efforts are being made  by  the  authorities  to  try  to  improve
things and some success is being achieved.

35.  Women are still regarded in some parts  of  Albania  as  no  more  than
chattels.  Domestic violence is widespread and violations of  women's  human
rights  is  a  serious  problem.   Trafficking  in  women  for  prostitution
continues, as the Human Rights Watch Report confirms.  But  a  fair  reading
shows that the major problems arise from women being  lured  with  deceptive
offers of lucrative work abroad.  Other  reports  show  that  families  sell
daughters  to  those  traffickers  and  that  abduction  and  kidnapping  of
children occurs.  In addition, there  is  widespread  trafficking  in  women
from the various countries which made up the old Soviet Union.   We  do  not
overlook the reports of abduction and kidnapping of women, but these do  not
suggest that such occurrences are as frequent as the other  means  by  which
women may find themselves forced  into  prostitution.   Furthermore,  as  we
have said, there are no reports that suggest that  such  abductions  are  or
have been used for political purposes.  They are the  actions  of  criminals
out for gain.  In addition, the abuse of women and the low regard  in  which
they are held mean that rape is not treated as seriously as it should be.

36. We have, of course, read the material which has been put before us.   We
note that Ms. Kacaj's family, including her sister and  brother,  remain  in
Albania, albeit her sister is married and no longer  lives  in  Kucove.   No
evidence has been produced to suggest that any of them  have  recently  been
threatened or troubled, and we gather that  her  father  has  given  up  his
political  activities.   The  rapists  told  Ms.  Kacaj,  according  to  her
interview, that they were dealing with her because:-


      "Your father didn't want to please us so you are paying the  bill  for
      him.  We will use you to hurt him."

That is  consistent  with  their  failure  to  extort  money  and  does  not
necessarily show any political motivation.  The only  evidence  which  could
suggest a political motive is the observation on releasing  Ms.  Kacaj  that
all democrats would suffer in the same manner.   Even  if  that  remark  was
made, in our view it was intended to make Ms. Kacaj's  father  believe  that
he was being targeted for political reasons, perhaps because then  he  might
be more reluctant to involve the police.  The objective  evidence  persuades
us that Ms. Kacaj has suffered at the hands  of  criminals  motivated  by  a
desire to extort money and not because of a desire to dissuade  Ms.  Kacaj's
father from continuing his political activities on behalf of the DP.

37. The general lawlessness and position of women in  Albania  does  not  in
our view mean that every Albanian woman can have a  claim  to  remain  under
either Convention.  Actions are being taken to  stem  such  lawlessness  and
the police are undoubtedly willing to provide protection.  It is  said  that
such protection is not effective and that there is  therefore  a  real  risk
that the feared abduction will take place.   It  is  important  to  remember
that the fear relied on is that of  abduction  and  forced  prostitution  in
Italy.  As we have said, the  threats  were  made  by  criminals  to  extort
money.  There is no reason to believe that they intended to  put  them  into
effect; indeed, it is in our view probable that  they  did  not.   The  rape
underlined their ruthlessness; the threats were to reinforce the blackmail.

38.  There is in our view no real  risk  that  what  Ms.  Kacaj  fears  will
occur.  That finding, which  we  regard  as  inevitable  upon  the  material
before us, means that no claim can succeed under either  Convention,  since,
in the absence of such a risk, there will be no  persecution,  no  violation
of Article 3 and no violation  of  Article  4.   So  far  as  Article  8  is
concerned, any breach of that (which of course falls well  below  Article  3
in terms of seriousness) will be acceptable because of Article 8.2  and  the
need to maintain proper immigration control.  We should say that we are  far
from saying that there is a real risk of a breach of Article 8,  but  we  do
not need to reach a firm conclusion about  it.   Any  such  breach  will  be
common to all women in Albania.

39.  It may be helpful if we summarise here our conclusions on  the  general
issues raised by this appeal.



      (i)  Where a prospective breach of  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention is alleged under section 65 of the 1999 Act,  the  standard
      of proof is the same as in an asylum appeal.  The question is, has the
      claimant established that there is a real risk that his  rights  under
      Article 3 will be breached?

      (ii) The approach  adopted  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Horvath  to
      persecution applies equally to prospective breaches of Article  3.   A
      claimant whose claim is that his Article 3 rights will be breached  by
      non-state agents must also show that the state is unwilling or  unable
      to offer him such protection as is necessary.

      (iii) Within the context of immigration law, all the Articles  of  the
      Human Rights Convention (save perhaps Article 2) have  what  has  been
      called extra-territorial effect, because what is being alleged is that
      by removing the applicant the United Kingdom Government  is  breaching
      his or her human rights.




40.  For the reasons we have given in paragraph 38,  we allow the appeal  by
the Secretary of State and dismiss that by Ms. Kacaj. Her removal  will  not
contravene either Convention.








                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                                      PRESIDENT

