
Rajan (Related claimants: Kimbesa explained) Sri Lanka * [2001] UKIAT 00008



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date of Hearing : 30/01/2001
                                       Date Determination notified: 8/2/2001


                                   Before



                       Mr Justice Collins (President)
                              Mr C M G Ockelton
                         His Honour Judge J Townend

                                   Between

                               MUNIGESU  RAJAN
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, Munigesu Rajan, is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born
      on 26 January 1970.  He is a Tamil.  He arrived  in  this  country  in
      April 1998 with his wife and claimed  asylum.  His  asylum  claim  was
      considered but was rejected on 27 September 1998 and  he  was  refused
      leave to enter.  He appealed against the refusal and  his  appeal  was
      originally listed for hearing on 19 August 1999. For some reason  that
      appeal was abortive and there was an order for transfer which  led  to
      the next listing of his appeal for hearing on 6 January 2000.  Counsel
      then appearing for the appellant requested an adjournment. The  record
      of proceedings indicates that  Counsel told the adjudicator  that  the
      appellant's wife had now made an application for  asylum  in  her  own
      right and had been interviewed but that no decision had been  reached.
      That does not appear to be wholly  accurate  because  there  is  other
      information suggesting that the wife had not in fact been  interviewed
      until July 2000.

2.    Be that as it may, Counsel applied for an adjournment relying  on  the
      authority of ex parte  Kimbesa,  a  decision  of  Mr  Justice  Ognall,
      unreported, dated 29 January 1997.   We will come back to  Kimbesa  in
      due course but according to the record, Counsel submitted  that  there
      was a strong factual nexus between the appeal of the appellant and the
      application of  his  wife,  and  that  the  matters  should  be  heard
      together.  There was of course at that stage no  appeal  by  the  wife
      because no decision had been made and the  assumption  seems  to  have
      been that her application  would  be  rejected.   In  any  event,  the
      adjudicator then decided that  the  matter  should  be  adjourned  and
      should be listed 'For Mention' in six months time.

3.    On 10 July the appeal came before  another  Special  Adjudicator,  who
      was  informed  that  the  appellant's  wife's  application  was  still
      awaiting consideration.  A further adjournment followed and the matter
      came before another Special Adjudicator on 11 September 2000.  On that
      occasion it seems that the Home Office was not  represented  but  that
      the adjudicator was told that still no decision had been  made  and  a
      direction was given that  the  matter  be  listed  'For  Mention'  the
      following month.

4.    So it was that it came before Professor  Casson  on  11  October  2000
      when the appellant was represented by Counsel, not Mr Pretzel who  has
      represented him before  us,  and  the  respondent  by  a  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer who  had no file.  Professor Casson noted that  the
      appellant's solicitors, Sri & Co.,  who  we  are  told  are  also  the
      solicitors acting on behalf of his wife, had in  June  1999  signed  a
      Certificate of Readiness which stated: 'We are now  in  every  respect
      ready to proceed  with  this  appeal'.  Counsel  requested  a  further
      adjournment to enable the appeal to be heard together with that of the
      appellant's wife whose claim had still not been  decided.   Again,  we
      comment that there was and still is no appeal by the wife.   Thus  any
      question of a combined hearing under Rule 42 cannot arise.

5.    Professor Casson took the view that the interests of justice  required
      that the appeal be heard without further  delay  and  he  refused  the
      adjournment.  He directed that a witness statement be produced and the
      matter came on for hearing on the merits on 30 October  2000.   Sri  &
      Co. failed yet again to comply  with  the  direction  and  no  witness
      statement was available. Again Counsel repeated  his  request  for  an
      adjournment.  He informed Professor Casson  that  the  wife  had  been
      interviewed  in connection with her asylum  application  in  July  but
      that no decision had been  reached.   The  wife  did  not  attend  the
      hearing, had not attended it on 11 October, and there was no statement
      available or produced to indicate that her case impinged  in  any  way
      upon that of the appellant or, more importantly, that the  appellant's
      ability to present his case as he would wish was in any way prejudiced
      by the fact that a decision on his wife's application had not yet been
      reached, or that his wife was in any way inhibited  from  giving  such
      evidence as he might have wished her to give in connection  with   his
      own appeal.  There was absolutely no  material  put  before  Professor
      Casson which could have led him to believe that  there  would  be  the
      slightest prejudice to the appellant's case.

6.     In  his  determination,  Professor  Casson  has  considered  the  law
      applicable to decisions to adjourn.  He has noted  that  reliance  was
      placed upon the decision of Mr Justice Ognall in Kimbesa.  Kimbesa  is
      unreported and understandably and properly so because  it  is  a  case
      which turns entirely  on  its  own  facts.   It  also  turns  upon  an
      application of Rules which are now superseded by  the  2000  Procedure
      Rules in a way which indicates that adjournments should  be  sparingly
      granted.  The relevant present Rule is 31 of the Immigration &  Asylum
      Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000.  Rule 31.1 reads:

             'Where an adjournment of the appeal is requested the Appellate
             Authority shall not adjourn a hearing unless it  is  satisfied
             that refusing the adjournment would prevent the just  disposal
             of the appeal.'

7.    As we have already  indicated,  there  was  nothing  before  Professor
      Casson that could conceivably have begun to satisfy him that  refusing
      the adjournment would prevent  the  just  disposal  of  the  husband's
      appeal.

8.    In Kimbesa the situation was very different.  The  appellant  in  that
      case had two brothers who had very shortly before the hearing  arrived
      in this country and claimed asylum.  Their cases were  very  much  the
      same as, and factually involved with, that of the appellant and it was
      necessary in order to do justice that the facts of all three should be
      considered together.  Further, Mr Justice Ognall was persuaded that it
      would be unfair to  expect  either  of  the  brothers  to  have  their
      accounts  tested  before  they  had  had  the  opportunity  of   being
      interviewed and only a short time  after  they  had  arrived  in  this
      country. Accordingly, it was not in the interests of justice  to  have
      refused the adjournment in that case.  And that is  all  that  Kimbesa
      decides, that on the facts before Mr Justice Ognall it was unjust  for
      the adjudicator to have proceeded.   At  the  time  that  Kimbesa  was
      decided, as we have said, the relevant rules were not as they now are.
       We have to, and adjudicators have to, apply the rules as they  stand.
      What Professor  Casson  said  in  summary,  in  paragraph  16  of  his
      determination,  was this:

             'Whatever the position may have been in the past, it is in  my
             judgement now clear  that  ex  parte  Kimbesa  is  not  to  be
             regarded as authority for any proposition which  requires  the
             adjournment of a pending appeal on  the  grounds  that  asylum
             applications  by  relations  of  the   appellant   are   under
             consideration. Rule 31 of  the  current  Rules  overrides  any
             general principle which might be thought to have emerged  from
             the decision in ex parte Kimbesa.  In  this  case  I  was  not
             satisfied that refusing the adjournment would prevent the just
             disposal of this appeal and I directed that the hearing should
             proceed.'

9.    The general principle that Professor Casson is there referring  to  is
      the one he had referred to in the previous sentence, namely  that   ex
      parte Kimbesa is authority for the proposition that an adjournment  of
      a pending appeal must follow if there are concurrent  applications  by
      relations. If Kimbesa has been used for that proposition it  has  been
      misused.  It is not authority for any such proposition, it  never  has
      been and it is as well that it should be laid completely  to  rest  by
      this determination.  We hope that Kimbesa will never  again  be  cited
      for any such proposition.

10.   The reality is that an adjudicator must look  at  the  words  of  Rule
      31(1) and will refuse an adjournment unless satisfied that refusing it
      would prevent the  just  disposal  of  the  appeal.   Of  course,  the
      existence of concurrent applications by members of  the  family  is  a
      relevant consideration and it may, in an appropriate case, point to an
      adjournment.  This is  manifestly not such a case on the facts, as  we
      have already indicated.

11.   One point that was taken by Mr  Pretzell  was  that  Professor  Casson
      said that he was taking into account  the  remarks  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Deen-Koroma [1997] Imm  AR  242,  which  were  made  in  the
      context of the 1996 Rules.  He complains that that authority  had  not
      been referred to in the course of argument and Counsel  had  not  been
      able to deal with it, and he submits that that is in itself unfair and
      renders the decision reached one which should be set aside.

12.   Of course, as a general rule, if there is a material  authority  which
      a judge finds after argument, and which may have a significant bearing
      on the outcome of the appeal, he ought to take steps  to  ensure  that
      Counsel or representatives who have appeared before him are made aware
      of it and are given the opportunity to make any observations about it.
       That is a general proposition but like all such propositions it  will
      depend upon the nature of the authority and the  circumstances.   This
      particular authority, with respect to Professor  Casson,  is  not  one
      which so far as we can see  takes  the  matter  anywhere.   It  merely
      reiterates the point that an adjournment should be granted if it would
      be unjust to refuse it.  That is a statement,  with  respect,  of  the
      obvious, indeed we are not quite sure why the learned  editor  of  the
      Immigration Appeal Reports thought it  right  to  report  Deen-Koroma.
      It seems to us that it is an authority for nothing which is not  self-
      evident.  Certainly, it  is  not  an  authority  which  Counsel  could
      conceivably have  made  any  useful  observation  about,  and  in  the
      circumstances, whatever may be the general principle, the reference to
      Deen-Koroma cannot be said to have prejudiced the matter.

13.   As will be apparent, we have not referred to  the  detailed  facts  of
      this case.  That is because Professor Casson  carefully  reviewed  the
      material before   him  and  the  evidence  that  had  been  given  and
      concluded that the appellant did not   have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in Sri  Lanka  for  any  Convention  reason,  and  in  the
      alternative that he had failed to show that it would  be  unreasonable
      or unduly harsh for him to relocate to Colombo. It is  not  suggested,
      nor could it be suggested, that  there  is  anything  wrong  with  the
      decision on the merits.  The appeal is brought solely  on  the  ground
      that an adjournment should have been  granted  in  the  circumstances.
      As we have made clear, in our judgment not only was  Professor  Casson
      not wrong to refuse an adjournment, there was no other course that  he
      could properly have taken having  regard  to  the  Rules  and  to  the
      information that was placed before him.  In those  circumstances  this
      appeal must be dismissed.





                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS

                                  PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      1


