
                                        Jazayeri (Removal Directions) Iran
* [2001] UKIAT 00014
                                                      Appeal No: HX/59198/00
                                                              *(01 TH 0110)*
                                                                     STARRED
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Dates of hearing: 26 March 2001

                                      Date determination notified: 16/5/2001


                                   Before:
                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Mr J. Barnes
                               Mr D. K. Allen




Between
                              SHOHREH JAZAYERI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, appealed  on  asylum  grounds  to  an
     Adjudicator (Mrs J. E. Nichols) against the decision of the  Respondent
     on 5 August 2000 directing her removal  as  an  illegal  entrant.   The
     Adjudicator dismissed her appeal.  The Appellant applied for,  and  was
     granted, leave to appeal to the Tribunal.  She then sought to amend her
     grounds to include a claim that the notice of the Respondent's decision
     was invalid and that there was accordingly no  decision  against  which
     she could appeal.  That question  comes  before  us  as  a  preliminary
     issue.  The Appellant  is  represented  by  Mr  D.  Jones  of  counsel,
     instructed by Irving & Co and much assisted at the  hearing  by  Mr  A.
     Caskie, a member of that firm.  The Respondent is represented by Mr  W.
     Nicholls of counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.

  2. The form and terms of the  notice  of  decision  are  clearly  of  some
     importance.  We reproduce it here.













































  3. There is evidence before us  further  to  that  which  was  before  the
     Adjudicator.  It consists  of  two  notes  of  telephone  conversations
     between  Mr  Caskie  and  members  of  the  Respondent's  staff.   Both
     conversations were initiated by Mr Caskie on  26  February  2001.   The
     first was to the Enforcement Directorate at Croydon and the note  reads
     as follows:

                   Phoned E[nforcement] D[istribution] D[esk] @ Croydon  to
           ask which airline Removal Directions served on.  They  say  need
           to contact  Status  Park  +  to  simply  quote  their  ref  [the
           appropriate telephone number follows].

  4. The second call was to Status Park, which is another of the Immigration
     and Nationality Department's offices.  The note is:

                   Phoned Status Park who say that  no  removal  directions
           have been given to any airline company.  They will only do  this
           after  appeal  process  ended.   Richard  Murray,  I[mmigration]
           O[fficer], advised of this.

  5. On the basis of that evidence, and on the basis of the notice which  we
     have reproduced above, the Appellant's representatives now  argue  that
     the Appellant has in fact never been subject to any decision carrying a
     right of appeal and that the Appellate Authorities  therefore  have  no
     jurisdiction to decide her case.  We should perhaps add at  this  stage
     that we call her 'the Appellant' without prejudice to  the  success  of
     those arguments: she is in any event appealing to the Tribunal  against
     the Adjudicator's determination.

     THE LEGISLATION

  6. Before we give our views on the arguments advanced on  the  Appellant's
     behalf, we must set out the relevant  legislation.   The  law  for  the
     purposes of this appeal is that in force before 2 October 2000, but the
     primary and delegated legislation that came into  force  on  that  date
     contains no material differences.  The starting point is section  8  of
     the Immigration and Asylum Appeals Act 1993.  It is to  be  noted  that
     that section does not give a right of appeal  against  the  refusal  of
     asylum.  It gives a right of appeal against the consequent  immigration
     decision.  Section 8(4) is as follows:

               Where directions are given as mentioned in section  16(1)(a)
           or (b) of the 1971 Act for a person's removal  from  the  United
           Kingdom, the person may appeal to a Special Adjudicator  against
           the directions on the ground that his removal  in  pursuance  of
           the  directions  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
           obligations under the Convention.

  7. Section 16(1) of the 1971  Act  mentions  two  circumstances  in  which
     directions for removal may be given.  Only one is relevant for  present
     purposes: a person who is an illegal entrant  may  be  the  subject  of
     removal directions.  There is in the present appeal no doubt  that  the
     Appellant  is  an  illegal  entrant  and,  anyway,  nobody  subject  to
     immigration control has an in-country right  of  appeal  against  being
     treated as an illegal  entrant.   The  power  to  give  directions  for
     removal of an illegal entrant is contained in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of
     Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act:

       8(1)  Where a person arriving in the United Kingdom is refused  leave
       to enter, an immigration officer may, subject  to  sub-paragraph  (2)
       below-
          a) give the captain of the ship or aircraft in which  he  arrives
             directions requiring the captain to remove him from the United
             Kingdom in that ship or aircraft; or
          b) give the owners or agents of that ship or aircraft  directions
             requiring them to remove him from the United  Kingdom  in  any
             ship or aircraft specified or  indicated  in  the  directions,
             being a ship or aircraft of  which  they  are  the  owners  or
             agents; or
          c) give those owners or agents directions requiring them to  make
             arrangements for his removal from the United  Kingdom  in  any
             ship or aircraft specified or indicated in the directions to a
             country or territory so specified, being either-
                  i) a country of which he is a national or citizen; or
                 ii) a country or territory in  which  he  has  obtained  a
                     passport or other document of identity; or
                iii) a country or territory in which he  embarked  for  the
                     United Kingdom; or
                 iv) a country or territory to which  there  is  reason  to
                     believe that he will be admitted.
       (2) No directions shall be given under this paragraph in  respect  of
       anyone after the expiration of two months beginning with the date  on
       which he was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom  [except  that
       directions may be give under sub-paragraph (1) (b) or (c)  after  the
       end of that period if the immigration officer has within that  period
       given written notice to the owners  or  agents  in  question  of  his
       intention to give directions to them in respect of that person].

       9(1) Where an illegal entrant is not given leave to enter  or  remain
       in the United Kingdom, an  immigration  officer  may  give  any  such
       directions in respect of him as in a case within  paragraph  8  above
       are authorised by paragraph 8(1)

       ...
       10.(1) where it appears to the Secretary of State either-
            (a) that directions might be given in respect of a person  under
       paragraph 8 or 9 above, but that it is not practicable for them to be
       given or that, if given, they would be ineffective; or
            (b) that directions might have been given in respect of a person
       under paragraph 8 above [but that the requirements of paragraph  8(2)
       have not been complied with];
       then the Secretary of State may give to the owners or agents  of  any
       ship or aircraft any such directions in respect of that person as are
       authorised by paragraph 8(1)(c).

       (2) Where the Secretary of State may give directions for  a  person's
       removal in accordance with sub-paragraph (1) above,  he  may  instead
       give directions for his removal in accordance with arrangements to be
       made by the Secretary of State to any country or territory  to  which
       he could be removed under sub-paragraph (1).

       (3) The cost of  complying  with  any  directions  given  under  this
       paragraph shall be defrayed by the Secretary of State."

  8. There is one other section of the 1971 Act to which  we  need  to  make
     reference.  Section 18(1)  enables  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make
     regulations prescribing the form and contents  of  the  notice  of  any
     decision that is subject to the statutory appellate system, or would be
     so subject but for the ground upon which the decision  was  made.   The
     Regulations are the Immigration Appeals (Notices) Regulations 1984  (SI
     1984/2040).   They  require  the  giving  of  a  notice  detailing  the
     decision, the ground on which t was made,  and  any  right  of  appeal.
     Although it was not referred to at the hearing, we had better  set  out
     the relevant part of Regulation 3.   Paragraph  1  of  that  Regulation
     requires the giving of  the  notice  to  the  person  affected  by  the
     decision.

       3(2) Any such notice as is referred to  in  paragraph  (1)  shall  be
       given-

          a) in the case of a decision or action taken  by  an  immigration
             officer in the exercise of powers conferred on him as such, by
             the immigration officer;

          b) [relates to entry clearance decisions]

        c) where the officer required by sub-paragraph (a) or (b)  of  this
           paragraph to give the notice is for any reason unable to do  so,
           by such an immigration officer or entry clearance officer as may
           be designated for the purpose by the Secretary of State;

        d) in the case of a decision or action other than one mentioned  in
           subparagraph (a) or (b) of this paragraph, by the  Secretary  of
           State.

  9. Section 18(2) of the Act is as follows

         For the purpose of any proceedings under this Part of this  Act  a
         statement included in a notice in pursuance of  regulations  under
         this section shall be conclusive of the person by whom and of  the
         ground on which any decision or action was taken.

 10. We need only add that one of the effects of paragraph 4 of  Schedule  2
     to the 1993 Act is that the present appeal is governed by section 18 of
     the 1971 Act in the same manner as if it were an appeal under that Act.

     CONTEXT

 11. We shall consider the Appellant's  case  on  its  own  merits,  but  we
     nevertheless think it right to record three aspects of the  context  in
     which this preliminary issue is raised for  our  decision.   First,  it
     appears to be a new point.  There  have  been  notices  of  removal  of
     illegal entrants since the coming into force of the 1971 Act and  there
     have been in-country rights of appeal against such  notices  on  asylum
     grounds since 1993.  To our own knowledge notices in the form  used  in
     this case have been issued in many cases;  the  total  number  of  such
     notices is probably many tens of thousands.  Until recently it has not,
     so far as we are aware, been suggested that the notices are invalid.

 12. Secondly, it is by no means clear that those who raise these  arguments
     have any faith in them.  If they be well-founded, one would not  expect
     appellants' representatives  to  give  notice  of  appeal  against  the
     decision invalidly made: one would expect them simply to  advise  their
     client that the notice of decision could be safely ignored.  It is true
     that in this case the issue is said to have come to notice  only  after
     the Adjudicator hearing.  But in other cases of which we are aware  the
     representatives have expended resources in giving notice of  appeal  to
     an adjudicator, only to argue before the  adjudicator  that  there  was
     nothing to appeal against.

 13. Thirdly, it has to be said that the arguments now put to  us  are  very
     unlikely indeed to be put by anybody who had, or whose  representatives
     had, any confidence at all in the substantive merits of the appeal.   A
     person who is genuinely a refugee and has been refused  refugee  status
     will wish to take every possible opportunity to reverse the refusal  by
     succeeding in an appeal against the consequential immigration decision.
      It is only a person who is not actually a refugee  who  is  likely  to
     seek to delay an appeal on technical grounds and so remain in  a  state
     limbo rather than have the refusal confirmed.

 14. The arguments are, of course, none the worse for any of these  factors.
     We record them for two reasons.  The first is that  this  determination
     may be read by those outside this specialised jurisdiction.  The second
     is that, if any  of  the  legislation  is  capable  of  more  than  one
     interpretation, we should incline towards that which makes sense of the
     appeal process and gives a right of appeal to those who may need it.




     THE POWER TO MAKE REMOVAL DIRECTIONS

 15. The statutory provisions  for  making  removal  directions  against  an
     illegal entrant have a coherent structure.   First,  the  power  is  by
     paragraph 9(1) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act equated with the power  to
     remove those refused leave  to  enter.   The  various  powers  to  give
     directions then comprise a series in which  each  envisages  directions
     less specific than the last.  The first is directions for the  person's
     removal in the very vessel (ship  or  aircraft)  in  which  he  arrived
     (paragraph 8(1)(a)).  The second is directions for the person's removal
     in any specified vessel owned  or  operated  by  the  same  carrier  as
     brought him (paragraph 8(1)(b)).  The  third  is  directions  to  those
     carriers to remove him in any specified or indicated  vessel  (even  if
     they are not the owners or agents of it)  to  a  specified  country  or
     territory (paragraph 8(1)(c)).  The fourth is directions to any carrier
     to remove him in a specified or indicated vessel to a specified country
     or territory (paragraph 10(1)). The fifth is directions for removal 'in
     accordance with arrangements to be made by the Secretary of  State'  to
     any country or territory to which he could have been removed under  the
     previous two powers paragraph 10(2).

 16. There are two differences between the first three powers and  the  last
     two.  The powers under paragraph 9 by reference to paragraph  8  -  the
     first three powers - are exercisable by an immigration officer, but the
     powers under paragraph 10 are exercisable by the  Secretary  of  State.
     Further, the Secretary of State's  powers  are  exercisable  only  (for
     present purposes) if 'it appears to  the  Secretary  of  State...  that
     directions might be given [under one of the  first  three  powers]  but
     that it is not practicable for them to be given or that, if given, they
     would not be effective' (paragraph 10(1)(a)).

     WAS THERE A DECISION BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE?

 17. It is not suggested in the present case that directions have been given
     to any carrier,  nor  has  any  ship  or  aircraft  been  specified  or
     indicated.  If the directions are valid they must have been given under
     the fifth power, that is to  say  under  paragraph  10(2).   The  first
     question that arises is accordingly whether the notice is good  on  its
     face.  For under paragraph 10(2) the decision has to  be  made  by  the
     Secretary of State,  whereas  the  notice  is  signed  in  a  box  also
     containing the words 'Immigration Officer'.  Mr  Jones  argues  that  a
     removal decision under paragraph 10(2) by  an  immigration  officer  is
     bad: and, he submits, it follows that if this decision was made  by  an
     immigration officer it is bad because it does not specify enough to  be
     an exercise of power under paragraph 8 or 9.  On the other hand, if the
     decision was actually by the Secretary of State, he says that there  is
     no reason to think it was actually ever made, because the only evidence
     of it is a notice signed by somebody else.

 18. As we remarked at the hearing, this may  not  be  the  ideal  case  for
     taking these points.  The signature on the notice is not legible.   One
     interpretation of it is that it  is  that  of  an  immigration  officer
     avowedly signing on behalf of the Secretary of State (in which case  it
     may read 'SS pp').  Let us suppose, however, that the signature on  the
     notice is that of an immigration officer.  Can  it  be  said  that  the
     decision was that of the Secretary of State?

 19. In our view that answer to that question is in the affirmative, even if
     the notice of decision constitutes the decision itself.  The reason  is
     as expressed by Lord Greene MR in Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works
     [1943] 2 All ER 560 CA:

        In the administration of government in this country  the  functions
        which are given to ministers (and constitutionally  properly  given
        to ministers because they  are  constitutionally  responsible)  are
        functions so multifarious that no minister  could  ever  personally
        attend to them. ...  The duties  imposed  upon  ministers  and  the
        powers  given  to  ministers  are  normally  exercised  under   the
        authority  of  the  ministers  by  responsible  officials  of   the
        department.  Public business could not be carried on if  that  were
        not the case.  Constitutionally, the decision of such  an  official
        is, of course, the  decision  of  the  minister.  The  minister  is
        responsible.

 20. In the specific context of immigration decisions to  be  taken  by  the
     Secretary of State the Carltona principle was applied by the  House  of
     Lords in Oladehinde v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1991]  Imm  AR  111,
     which, for some reason we are not immediately able to appreciate, those
     acting for the Appellant did not cite to  us.   There  Lord  Griffiths,
     with whom all the  other  members  of  the  House  agreed,  noted  that
     immigration officers are required, by paragraph 1(3) of Schedule  2  to
     the 1971 Act, to act in compliance with instructions (not  inconsistent
     with the immigration rules) given to them by the  Secretary  of  State.
     He held that immigration  officers  are  civil  servants,  not  office-
     holders.  It followed that there  was  no  reason  why  an  immigration
     officer could not be authorised to exercise on the Secretary of State's
     behalf the powers given to him by the statute.

 21. In Oladehinde there was an express  process  of  delegation  which  was
     explained to the court. That, however, does not appear to have been  an
     essential feature of the decision. No such arrangements were  published
     in Carltona, where the position was simply that the official  had  been
     'entrusted with the work'. We doubt whether it  can  be  necessary  for
     there to be express delegation. In any event, the Secretary of State is
     a party to this appeal, and accepts the decision as his.  There  is  no
     basis to treat it as a decision not made by him.

 22. Mr Jones submitted that if that were the position, there  would  be  no
     reason for the Act to make the distinction it does in paragraphs  8,  9
     and 10 of Schedule 2 between  decisions  by  immigration  officers  and
     decisions by the Secretary of State.  That argument was also dealt with
     by Lord Griffiths.  He pointed out that there are in the 1971 Act three
     express limitations on  the  Secretary  of  State's  power  to  devolve
     decision-making on an official, and expressed himself unwilling in that
     context to regard any other restrictions as implicit.  In  fact  it  is
     right to say that the distinction between decisions made by immigration
     officers, the Secretary of State, and indeed entry  clearance  officers
     pervades the Act.   It appears to be related to  the  position  of  the
     person affected by the decision at the relevant time - at  a  port,  or
     within the United Kingdom, or abroad.  An immigration officer does  not
     have a power 'conferred on him as' an immigration officer (to  use  the
     words of the Notices Regulations) to make a decision in relation  to  a
     person within the United Kingdom.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  he
     cannot, as an official  within  the  Secretary  of  State's  department
     exercise a power conferred on the Secretary of State.

 23. The foregoing discussion is based, as we said in paragraph 18,  on  the
     assumption that  the  notice  incorporates  the  decision.   Under  the
     Carltona principle, the decision of the Secretary of State may be  made
     by an immigration officer and so the decision would not be bad for want
     of authority.

 24. Mr Jones' alternative (or perhaps  additional)  argument  is  that  the
     notice  does  not  incorporate  the  decision.   He  submits  that  the
     documents we reproduced in paragraph 2 is not itself  the  decision  to
     remove, but merely purports to be the record  of  a  decision,  of  the
     taking of which there is no other evidence.  He prays in aid the  notes
     of the telephone calls made by  Mr  Caskie.   He  says  that  the  true
     position is that no actual decision to give removal directions  can  be
     shown to have been made.

 25. That is an argument without substance.  In the first  place,  the  fact
     that no  arrangements  have  been  made  with  a  carrier  is  entirely
     irrelevant.  If the decision is made under paragraph 10(2), it will not
     incorporate such arrangements.  The argument appears  to  depend  on  a
     confusion between directions for removal and the arrangements  for  the
     process of removal.  In paragraph 8 (as applied by paragraph 9) and  in
     paragraph 10(1) there is no material difference between them,  but  the
     distinction has to be made  where  the  direction  is  under  paragraph
     10(2).  If the decision could not have been made under paragraph  10(2)
     the absence of arrangements might be fatal to  it.   But  if  it  is  a
     decision under paragraph 10(2), the absence of travel  arrangements  is
     precisely what one would expect.

 26. Secondly, there is no basis at all for disbelieving  the  statement  in
     the notice.  It says 'Directions have now been given for your removal.'
      Even if Mr Caskie's  interlocutor  had  professed  ignorance  of  that
     decision there would have been no basis for thinking that  it  had  not
     been made.

 27. Thirdly, we remind ourselves of the provision of  section  18(2).   The
     notice is conclusive of the person by whom and the ground on which  the
     decision was taken.  That provision would not make any sense except  in
     the context that the notice is also conclusive that  the  decision  has
     been taken: one could not sensibly have a  position  in  which  it  was
     unarguable that the decision had been taken by X, but arguable  whether
     X had taken the decision.

     DOES THE NOTICE GIVE SUFFICIENT INFORMATION?

 28. Mr Jones also argues that the notice is defective in that it  does  not
     state the reason for which the decision was taken, as required  by  the
     Notices Regulations.  There is no merit in that argument either.  It is
     true that the notice does not state why the directions are in the  form
     they are: that is, why they are subject to arrangements yet to be made,
     or, to put it another way, why they have been given under paragraph  10
     rather than paragraph 9.  That, however, is not required by the Notices
     Regulations.  The notice  states  that  the  Appellant  is  an  illegal
     entrant and that her asylum claim has been refused.  No other reason is
     required.

 29. Mr Jones submits that even if the Notices Regulations do not require  a
     reason why the directions are in a particular form,  the  Appellant  is
     entitled under the general law to know  the  reason  for  an  executive
     decision affecting her.  To that we would reply that she does know  the
     reason for the decision.  The form of the decision - with  arrangements
     yet to be made - is of itself incapable of affecting  her,  because  if
     arrangements had been made they  would  have  been  suspended  for  the
     period while her appeal was pending (paragraph 9 of Schedule 2  to  the
     1993 Act; paragraph 28 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act)..  For an  actual
     or intending appellant the position is always that, if  the  appeal  is
     unsuccessful, arrangements for removal will in due course be made.   To
     require more in the notice would be to impose a  burden  on  one  party
     where  there  would  be  no  advantage  to  the  other.   We   see   no
     justification for doing that.

 30. We are not at all persuaded by Mr Nicholls' suggestion  that  in  cases
     where there is an in-country right of  appeal  the  removal  directions
     should be in the form  permitted  by  paragraph  10(2)  simply  because
     otherwise  effort  would  be  wasted  in  making  and   re-making   the
     arrangements.

 31. Mr Nicholls also pointed  out  that  the  1993  Act  produced  a  great
     increase in in-country appeals against removal directions in respect of
     illegal entrants.  It followed  that  it  was  now  very  likely  that,
     following refusal of asylum, any arrangements actually made  'would  be
     ineffective' for the reason mentioned in paragraph 29.  That would  not
     assist him if it were right that the Secretary of State is required  to
     indicate his reasons for acting under paragraph 10.  We  are,  however,
     not  persuaded  that  there  is  any  such  obligation.   Mr  Nicholls'
     explanation would no doubt assist  in  rebutting  any  claim  that  the
     Secretary of State's decision to act under paragraph 10 was irrational:
     but that is not a matter for us.  So  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the
     giving of directions in this form  indicates  of  itself  that  it  did
     appear to the Secretary of State that more precise directions would  be
     impracticable or ineffective.  His conclusion to  that  effect  is  not
     reviewable here or, perhaps, anywhere.

 32. In our judgement the  notice  contains  all  that  it  is  required  to
     contain.  It is a valid notice of a decision that gives the Appellant a
     right of appeal.

 33. It follows that paragraph 10(2) read in its legislative context and  in
     the light of the Carltona  principle  means  that  a  decision  may  be
     routinely made in the vaguest form allowed by the statute.  We are  not
     troubled by that conclusion because it means  that  those  affected  by
     such decisions have the right of appeal.  We refer to the principle  we
     set out at the end of paragraph 14 of this determination.

     CONCLUSIONS

 34. (1). Save in the few cases where the statute prohibits delegation,  the
     Secretary of State's power to make a decision can be  exercised  by  an
     immigration officer.

     (2) The notice of a decision to remove to a specified destination 'at a
     time and date to be notified', and without nominating any  carrier,  is
     capable of being a decision under paragraph 10 of  Schedule  2  to  the
     1971 Act and is not rendered invalid by either

      (a)   the fact that no arrangements for removal have yet been made, or

      (b)   the absence of any explanation of why  the  Secretary  of  State
             considers   that   more   particular   directions   would   be
             impracticable or ineffective.

     (3) The notice of a decision to remove in the form used in this case is
     conclusive that the decision has been taken.

 35. We have before us a decision in appropriate form,  complying  with  the
     Notices regulations, and giving a right  of  appeal.   The  Appellant's
     appeal will now proceed to hearing on the merits.

                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton
                                                            Deputy President
