
Noruwa ( Proportionality appeal: assessment, not discretion) Nigeria *
[2001] UKIAT 00016

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of hearing: 3 July 2001
                                                Date determination notified:
                                                                  11/12/2001



                                   Before:
                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Mr J. Barnes
                              Mr M. W. Rapinet


Between:
                            EDDY EDOKPOLAR NORUWA
                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. This is a starred  determination.   In  it  we  aim  to  set  out  the
      principles to be adopted in appeals under the Human  Rights  Act  1998
      that raise questions relating to proportionality





   The Facts


   2. The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appeals, with leave, against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs  R.  J.  Tiffen,  dismissing  his
      appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  on  26  January  2001
      refusing to revoke a deportation order made against him on  30  August
      1996 and served on him on 19 October 2000.  The Appellant claims  that
      requiring him to leave the United Kingdom is in breach  of  his  human
      rights.  Before us he was represented by Mr P. J.  Kishore  instructed
      by Rosetta Offonry & Co and the Respondent was represented  by  Mr  A.
      Hunter.

   3. The Appellant came to this country as  a  visitor  in  December  1990,
      leaving a wife in Nigeria.  He was granted six months leave to  enter.
      He has never had any further leave.  He overstayed.   He  applied  for
      asylum on 8 June 1993.  That application was refused and on 24  August
      1994 he was served with notice of a decision  to  make  a  deportation
      order.  He appealed on asylum grounds.

   4. The Appellant's first wife had, it is  said,  divorced  him  in  March
      1994.  The Appellant went through a ceremony of marriage  with  Devika
      Christina Tulsie (or Tulsi), a British citizen, on  11  October  1994.
      She has two children, both born  in  1988  (not  twins)  who  are  the
      Appellant's stepchildren.  On 12 October 1994  the  Appellant  applied
      for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
      marriage.  That application was refused, first on the  basis  that  at
      the time of his marriage the Appellant was still married to a wife  in
      Nigeria.  Following represenations by the Appellant's representatives,
      the refusal was maintained on the ground that the Appellant's marriage
      postdated the beginning of enforcement proceedings.

   5. On 8 November 1995 the Appellant withdrew his  asylum  appeal.   There
      were further representations made to the Respondent  in  the  hope  of
      persuading him to change his decision on the marriage application, but
      those representations were rejected by letter dated 31  January  1996.
      By the time the deportation order was signed on  30  August  1996  the
      Appellant could not be traced.  It was served on  him  on  19  October
      2000 when he attended at Croydon intending to take  advantage  of  the
      regulation period for overstayers, instituted under section 9  of  the
      1999 Act.  He then  began  proceedings  for  judicial  review  of  the
      decision to deport him.  That application was then withdrawn  and  the
      Appellant alleged that his deportation would be in breach of the Human
      Rights Act.  Thus his appeal came before the Adjudicator.

   6. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant did not have  a  family  life
      with his wife and stepchildren.  She dealt with matters going only  to
      proportionality in tandem with matters relating to  the  existence  of
      family life, however, and concluded that 'I do not  believe  that  the
      family life exists, but if it did so the Appellant and his  wife  were
      aware of the immigration status at the time of their marriage and  the
      previous employment of the Appellant in Nigeria and his qualifications
      indicate that the Appellant would be able to establish a marital  home
      in Nigeria'.

   7. The Appellant appealed  against  the  Adjudicator's  determination  on
      grounds based solely on Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
      Rights (although in the grounds he calls it Article 3).   The  grounds
      aver that  the Adjudicator too readily  dismissed  the  existence  and
      import of the Appellant's  marriage,  failed  to  take  properly  into
      consideration the Respondent's deportation policy and the position  of
      the Appellant's stepchildren, as well as the Appellant's  own  medical
      condition.  Leave to appeal was granted (with the comment that it  was
      not arguable that the Adjudicator's judgement was erroneous) in  order
      for the Tribunal to consider whether, in the light of B v SSHD  [2000]
      Imm AR 478 and R (Isiko) v SSHD (C/2000/2937, CA  20  December  2000),
      questions of proportionality under Article 8  should  be  regarded  as
      questions of law.




     The Task


   8. That is a matter of  some  importance,  because  an  appeal  from  the
      Tribunal to the Court of Appeal can only be on a question of law  (see
      below);  and  the  Tribunal  itself  will  be  slow  to   replace   an
      Adjudicator's  judgement  with  its  own.   If   the   assessment   of
      proportionality is a question of law, then  leave  to  appeal  to  the
      Tribunal and from the Tribunal to the Court  of  Appeal  ought  to  be
      given whenever it is arguable that the  assessment  should  have  been
      different, even if no error can be shown in  the  assessment  actually
      made.  If it is not a question of law then  leave  to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal could only be  given  if  the  process  of  assessment
      disclosed an error of law: it could not be given merely because  there
      was a prospect that the court would  assess  the  matter  differently.
      Similar considerations would apply on  an  application  for  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal.  Although such an appeal is not restricted  in
      the same manner, leave would be less likely to be granted  in  a  case
      where it was not shown to be arguable that there was any error in  the
      way the Adjudicator assessed the issue.

   9. Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  incorporated
      into English law by the Human Rights Act 1998, is as follows:

              8.  Right to respect for private and family life

         1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
            life, his home and his correspondence.

         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
            exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
            law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
            national security, public safety or the economic well  being  of
            the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
            protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
            rights and freedoms of others.

  10. At the beginning of his submissions, relying on the first part of  his
      skeleton argument, Mr Hunter suggested that  we  should  not  in  this
      appeal consider questions relating to proportionality  as  they  would
      not be material to its outcome.  He reminded us that  the  Adjudicator
      had found that the Appellant had no meaningful family life that  could
      be the subject of a breach of Article 8.  The grant  of  leave  stated
      that  it  was  not  arguable  that  the  Adjudicator's  judgement  was
      erroneous and, in Mr  Hunter's  submission,  that  view  was  'clearly
      right'.  If the Appellant failed to show any interference with a right
      protected by Article 8.1, the question whether the government's action
      was nevertheless permitted by Article  8.2  did  not  arise,  and  any
      remarks by us would be obiter.

  11. We are not persuaded.  The Adjudicator's brief  consideration  of  the
      Appellant's circumstances relates to both parts of Article 8  and  the
      Appellant has submitted grounds challenging her findings on each part.
       We have jurisdiction to determine an  appeal  even  if  there  is  no
      reasonable prospect of success (see rule  18(7)),  and  the  grant  of
      leave makes it clear that this is a case where there is  a  compelling
      reason why the appeal should be heard.  Further, both  parties  before
      us are fully prepared to deal with the issue raised in  the  grant  of
      leave.

  12. Finally, that issue is one on which we clearly  need  to  express  our
      view, and preferably soon.  Appeals under  the  Human  Rights  Act  or
      under section 65 of the 1999 Act already form  a  large  part  of  the
      Authorities' work.  The way in which we classify matters  relating  to
      proportionality will have a considerable effect  on  our  approach  to
      applications for leave to appeal to ourselves,  and  applications  for
      leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Those  applications  are  all
      made without notice and are required by the Rules (rr 18(8) and 27(4))
      to be determined without a hearing.  It is in our view right  that  we
      should take the present opportunity to review the developing authority
      on the question in order to guide Tribunal chairmen in those functions
      as well as to indicate the way in which we would expect the  issue  of
      proportionality to be treated in  determinations  of  adjudicators  as
      well as the Tribunal.




   The Law

  13. Before we go any further, we  must  set  out  the  relevant  statutory
      provisions.

  14. Human Rights Act 1998

         1. - (1) In this Act 'the Convention rights' means the  rights  and
            fundamental freedoms set out in-

           (a)   Articles 2 to 12 and 14 of the Convention ...

         6. - (1) It is unlawful for a public authority  to  act  in  a  way
            which is incompatible with a Convention right.

         7. - (1) A person who claims that a public authority has acted  (or
            proposes to act) in a way which is made unlawful by section 6(1)
            may-

           (a)   bring proceedings against the authority under this Act  in
            the appropriate court or tribunal, or

           (b)   rely on the Convention right or rights  concerned  in  any
            legal proceedings,

           but only if he is (or would be) a victim of the unlawful act.

         (2)      In subsection (1)(a) 'appropriate court or tribunal' means
            such court or tribunal as may be determined in  accordance  with
            rules;  and  proceedings  against   an   authority   include   a
            counterclaim or similar proceeding.  [Subsection (9)  gives  the
            rule-making power.  The Immigration Appellate  Authorities  have
            not been designated as 'the appropriate court or  tribunal'  for
            any purposes.]

  15. Immigration and Asylum Act 1999

         65. - (1)     A person who alleges that an authority has, in taking
            any  decision  under  the  Immigration  Acts  relating  to  that
            person's entitlement to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom,
            racially discriminated against him or acted  in  breach  of  his
            human rights may appeal to an adjudicator against that  decision
            unless he  has  grounds  for  bringing  an  appeal  against  the
            decision under the Special Immigration  Appeals  Commission  Act
            1997.

         (2)      For the purpose of this Part-

              a) an authority racially discriminates against a person if  he
                 acts, or fails to act, in relation to that other person  in
                 a way which is unlawful by virtue of  section  19B  of  the
                 Race Relations Act 1976; and

              b) an authority acts in breach of a person's human  rights  if
                 he acts, or fails to act, in relation to that other  person
                 in a way which is made unlawful  by  section  6(1)  of  the
                 Human Rights Act 1998.

         (3)      Subsection (4) and (5) apply if, in proceedings before  an
            adjudicator or the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on an  appeal,  a
            question arises as to whether an authority has,  in  taking  any
            decision under the Immigration Acts relating to the  appellant's
            entitlement to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom,  racially
            discriminated against the appellant or acted in  breach  of  the
            appellant's human rights.

         (4)      The adjudicator, or  the  Tribunal,  has  jurisdiction  to
            consider the question.

         (5)      If the adjudicator, or  the  Tribunal,  decides  that  the
            authority concerned-

           (a) racially discriminated against the appellant; or

           (b) acted in breach of the appellant's human rights,

           the appeal may be allowed on the ground in question.

         (6)       ...

         (7)      'Authority' means-

           a) the Secretary of State;

           (b) an immigration officer;

           (c) a person responsible for  the  grant  or  refusal  of  entry
            clearance.

         Schedule 4

         21. - (1)     On an appeal to him under  Part  IV,  an  adjudicator
            must allow the appeal if he considers-

            (a)   that the decision or action against which  the  appeal  is
            brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  with  any
            immigration rules applicable to the case, or

            (b)   if the decision or  action  involved  the  exercise  of  a
            discretion by the Secretary of State or  an  officer,  that  the
            discretion should have been exercised differently,

           but otherwise must dismiss the appeal.

          (2)     Sub-paragraph (1) is subject to paragraph 24  and  to  any
            restriction on the grounds of appeal.

         (3)      For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1), the adjudicator may
            review any determination of a question  of  fact  on  which  the
            decision or action was based.

         (4)      For the purposes  of  sub-paragraph  (1)(b),  no  decision
            which is accordance with the immigration rules is to be  treated
            as having involved the exercise of a discretion by the Secretary
            of State by reason only of the fact that he has  been  requested
            by or on behalf of an appellant to depart, or  to  authorise  an
            officer to depart, from the rules and has refused to do so.

         22. - (1)     Subject  to  any  requirement  of  rules  made  under
            paragraph 3 as to leave to appeal, any party to an appeal, other
            than an appeal under section  71,  to  an  adjudicator  may,  if
            dissatisfied with his determination, appeal to  the  Immigration
            Appeal Tribunal.

         23. - (1)  If the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  has  made  a  final
            determination of an appeal brought under Part IV, any  party  to
            the appeal may bring a further appeal to the appropriate  appeal
            court [ie the Court of Appeal, unless the  appeal  was  from  an
            Adjudicator sitting in Scotland] on a question of  law  material
            to that determination.




   The Authorities: (i) B v SSHD

  16. Our starting point must be B v SSHD [2000] Imm AR 478.   That  was  an
      appeal to the Court of Appeal against a determination of the  Tribunal
      dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to deport him in the public interest.  He  was,  in  fact,  a
      person who had been convicted on a series of counts of sexual offences
      against his daughter.  The Appellant was  Italian  and  was  therefore
      entitled to the benefit of Article 39 (ex-48) of the Treaty  of  Rome,
      which  protects  free  movement  by  prohibiting  deportation  of   EU
      nationals save in certain circumstances.  He could be removed only  if
      his deportation was a proportionate measure in all the  circumstances.
      It was common ground before the Court of Appeal (and was therefore the
      subject of no argument) that 'among the  questions  of  law  that  may
      arise on further appeal [from the  Tribunal]  to  this  court  is  the
      question whether the decision to deport  infringes  the  principle  of
      proportionality' (para 6).  It was further agreed (or at any rate  not
      disputed) that there was no material difference between  the  test  of
      proportionality for the purposes of EU  law  and  that  test  for  the
      purposes of the  application  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.  In that context Sedley LJ  summed  up  the  court's  task  as
      follows at para 18:

         [A]mong the issues of law for this court in  a  case  such  as  the
         present  is  the  question  whether   deportation   constitutes   a
         proportionate response  to  the  appellant's  offending.   Being  a
         question of law, it has to be answered afresh, even if reaching  an
         answer involves taking a much closer look than we are accustomed to
         at the merits.

  17. He then considered the merits  of  the  case,  and  then  went  on  to
      consider what deference, if any, was due to the Tribunal's  assessment
      of proportionality.  After considering  the  words  of  Lord  Hope  of
      Craighead in R v DPP ex parte Kebilene [1999] 3  WLR  972,  993-4,  he
      noted that although the Tribunal had found primary facts, its decision
      included inferences of fact, propositions of law and reasoning leading
      to conclusions.  He held that the Court of Appeal was as  well  placed
      as the Tribunal to decide what to make of the  facts  which  had  been
      found, and that the Tribunal had erred  in  law  in  considering  that
      Article 8 added nothing to the Appellant's case.  He went on to reason
      to his own conclusions.  In the course of that process he said this at
      para 36:
         I have no doubt that the Home Secretary's view that deportation was
         nevertheless merited was legitimately open to him ...  .   But  our
         public law, for reasons I have explained, now  has  to  accommodate
         and give effect to the requirements of EU law and, through EU  law,
         [this was before the coming into force  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
         1998] of the European Convention.  It means making up our own minds
         about the proportionality of a public  law  measure  -  not  simply
         deciding whether the Home Secretary's or the Tribunal's view of  it
         is lawful and rational.

  18. Simon Brown LJ said this at para 47:
         It was common ground before  us  that  proportionality  involves  a
         question of law and that, on a statutory appeal of this nature, the
         court is required to form its own  view  on  whether  the  test  is
         satisfied, although, of course, in  doing  so  it  will  give  such
         deference to the Tribunal's decision  as  appropriately  recognises
         their advantage in having heard the evidence.   This  task  is,  of
         course, both different from and more onerous than  that  undertaken
         by the court when applying the  conventional  Wednesbury  approach.
         It would not be proper for us to say  that  we  disagree  with  the
         Tribunal's conclusion on proportionality but that, since  there  is
         clearly room for two views and their view cannot be stigmatised  as
         irrational, we cannot interfere.  Rather, if our view differs  from
         the Tribunal's, then we are bound to say so and allow  the  appeal,
         substituting our decision for theirs.

  19. Ward LJ expressly agreed with both judgements.  He summarised (at para
      41) the court's task as  deciding  'whether  or  not  the  appellant's
      personal conduct is such a threat to the requirements of public policy
      that his deportation is a proportionate response'.  Like his brethren,
      he decided that it was not: and so the court allowed  the  Appellant's
      appeal.

  20. We add a few words to explain the context of that appeal.   First,  it
      was an appeal that (under the statutory provisions then in force)  lay
      directly to the Tribunal: the Tribunal had not been hearing an  appeal
      from an Adjudicator.  The court's words about the Tribunal's  findings
      of fact need to be read with that in mind.

  21. Secondly, it was an appeal in which (under section 15 of the 1971 Act,
      taken with the relevant immigration rules and section 19 of the  Act),
      the Appellant  was  entitled  to  appeal,  whilst  within  the  United
      Kingdom, against the decision to  make  a  deportation  order  on  the
      ground that  the  discretion  inherent  in  that  decision  under  the
      immigration rules should have been exercised differently.  Section  19
      is replaced (in terms that are not materially different) by  Paragraph
      21 of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act, which we have set  out  above.   The
      1999 Act has made various changes to the regime of rights  of  appeal,
      but  it  retains  distinctions  between  wide-ranging  appeal   rights
      (possessed, broadly speaking, by persons who are or were  lawfully  in
      the United Kingdom) and limited appeal  rights.   A  person  appealing
      against a decision not to revoke a deportation  order,  and  a  person
      appealing against removal as an illegal entrant or an overstayer,  can
      raise grounds based on the Refugee Convention (under section 69 of the
      1999 Act) or on the European Convention on Human Rights (under section
      65).  But the Act does not give such persons  a  right  of  appeal  on
      other grounds while they remain in the United Kingdom.

  22. Thirdly, it was an appeal under the statutory  procedure  provided  at
      that time by section 9 of the 1993 Act but now by paragraph  23(1)  of
      Schedule 4 to  the  1999  Act.   The  appeal  against  the  Tribunal's
      determination lay (only) 'on  a  question  of  law  material  to  that
      determination'.

  23. It is interesting to note that, according to the Court of Appeal in  B
      v SSHD, the review in such an appeal is particularly intrusive.  There
      can be no doubt that the Court had in mind that the right of appeal to
      it could only be on a question of law material  to  the  determination
      being appealed.  Yet all three members of the  Court  clearly  decided
      that in a case raising issues  of  proportionality  the  Court  should
      substitute its own view even if it were unable to point to  any  error
      in the decision taken elsewhere.  Further, Sedley LJ (with  whom  Ward
      LJ expressly agreed) took the view that in such a case  inferences  of
      fact could be 'readily scrutinised and  evaluated'  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal, whereas Simon Brown LJ  (with  whom  Ward  LJ  also  expressly
      agreed) stated that even if two views could rationally  be  taken,  it
      was the Court's duty to substitute its own.  This  is  what  might  be
      called a  wide  interpretation  of  a  jurisdiction  based  solely  on
      questions of law.

  24. The effect of B v SSHD is, however,  clear.   Because  a  question  of
      proportionality is a question of law, the Court of Appeal has power to
      assess any decision affected  by  the  principle  of  proportionality.
      Having done so, it substitutes its own decision for whatever  decision
      has previously been made.  It does so even if it  considers  that  the
      previous decision was a lawful response.  It  would  follow  that  any
      decision involving a question of proportionality is one in  which,  on
      proper application, the Tribunal should give leave to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal, save in the quite exceptional case where there is  no
      reasonable prospect that the Court would reach a view  different  from
      that of the Tribunal.  Similarly,  in  any  such  case,  the  Tribunal
      should give leave to appeal to itself, and reconsider the Secretary of
      State's decision on the merits.  To go one stage further  back  again,
      the duty of an Adjudicator would be, in any such appeal,  to  consider
      generally whether the question of proportionality ought to  have  been
      assessed differently.  If he thought it ought, he would substitute his
      decision for that of the Secretary  of  State  even  if  the  latter's
      decision disclosed no error.




   The Authorities: (ii) Judicial Review

  25.  There  is  a  clear  and  inherent  contrast  between  an   appellate
      jurisdiction and the jurisdiction on judicial review.   We  must  cite
      the judicial review cases, however, not only  in  order  to  make  the
      comparison but also because of certain remarks about B v SSHD.  We  do
      not need to set out here all the passages to which Mr Hunter  referred
      us.  The following will suffice.

   26. In R v DPP ex parte Kebilene [1999] 3 WLR 972, Lord Hope of Craighead
      said this at p 993-4:

                     The discretionary area of judgement
         This brings me to another matter on which  there  was  a  consensus
         between counsel and which, I believe, needs now  to  be  judicially
         recognised.  The doctrine of the  "margin  of  appreciation"  is  a
         familiar part of the jurisprudence of the European Court  of  Human
         Rights.  The European Court has acknowledged  that,  by  reason  of
         their direct and continuous contact with the vital forces of  their
         countries, the national authorities are in principle better  placed
         to evaluate local needs and conditions than an international court:
         Buckley v. United Kingdom (1996) 23 E.H.R.R. 101, 129, paras.   74-
         75.  Although this means that, as the European Court  explained  in
         Handyside v.  United Kingdom (1976) 1 E.H.R.R. 737, 753, para.  48,
         "the machinery of  protection  established  by  the  Convention  is
         subsidiary to the national systems safeguarding human  rights,"  it
         goes hand in hand with a European supervision.  The extent of  this
         supervision will vary according to such factors as  the  nature  of
         the Convention right in issue, the importance of that right for the
         individual and the nature of the activities involved in the case.
           This  doctrine  is  an  integral   part   of   the   supervisory
         jurisdiction  which  is  exercised  over  state  conduct   by   the
         international court.  By conceding a margin of appreciation to each
         national system, the court has recognised that the Convention, as a
         living system, does not need to be applied uniformly by all  states
         but may vary in  its  application  according  to  local  needs  and
         conditions. This technique is not available to the national  courts
         when they are considering Convention issues  arising  within  their
         own countries.  But in the hands of the national  courts  also  the
         Convention  should  be  seen  as  an  expression   of   fundamental
         principles rather than as a set of mere rules.  The questions which
         the courts  will  have  to  decide  in  the  application  of  these
         principles will involve  questions  of  balance  between  competing
         interests and issues of proportionality.
           In this area difficult choices  may  have  to  be  made  by  the
         executive or the legislature between the rights of  the  individual
         and the needs  of  society.   In  some  circumstances  it  will  be
         appropriate for the courts to recognise that there is  an  area  of
         judgement within which the  judiciary  will  defer,  on  democratic
         grounds, to the considered opinion of the elected  body  or  person
         whose  act  or  decision  is  said  to  be  incompatible  with  the
         Convention.  This point is well made at p. 74, para. 3.21 of  Human
         Rights Law and Practice (1999), of which Lord Lester of Herne  Hill
         and Mr. Pannick are the general editors, where the  area  in  which
         these choices may arise is conveniently and appropriately described
         as the "discretionary area of judgement".  It will  be  easier  for
         such an area of judgement to be  recognised  where  the  Convention
         itself requires a balance to be struck,  much  less  so  where  the
         right is stated in terms which are unqualified.  It will be  easier
         for it to be recognised  where  the  issues  involve  questions  of
         social or economic policy, much less so where  the  rights  are  of
         high constitutional importance or are of a kind  where  the  courts
         are especially well placed to assess the need for protection.   But
         even where the right is stated in terms which are  unqualified  the
         courts will need to bear in mind the jurisprudence of the  European
         Court which recognises that due account  should  be  taken  of  the
         special nature of terrorist crime and the threat which it poses  to
         a democratic society: Murray v. United Kingdom (1994)  19  E.H.R.R.
         193, 222, para. 47.

  27. The next three cases all concern applications for judicial  review  of
      decisions by the Secretary of State to  remove  individuals  from  the
      United Kingdom.  In each case it was argued that the removal  was,  in
      the circumstances  of  the  case,  prohibited  by  Article  8.   In  R
      (Mahmoud) v SSHD  [2001]  1  WLR  840,  Laws  LJ  made  the  following
      observations:
         3.       [Miss Webber, counsel for  the  applicant,  submits]  that
         this court is  effectively  in  as  good  a  position  as  was  the
         Secretary of State to form a judgment as to the competing interests
         which militate  for  and  against  the  applicant's  removal.   The
         submission promotes the  question,  how  intensive  is  the  proper
         standard of judicial review of the Secretary of  State's  decision?
         And it is connected with  the  issue:   does  the  proper  standard
         differ according  to  whether  or  not  the  court  is  considering
         incorporated Convention rights, and, if so, how?
         ...
         16.           Upon the question, "What is the correct  standard  of
         review in a case such as this?", there are at least in theory three
         possible approaches.  The  first  is  the  conventional  Wednesbury
         position which Miss Webber says the judge wrongly adopted.  On this
         model the court makes no judgement of its own as  to  the  relative
         weight to be attached to this or that factor taken into account  in
         the decision-making process; it  is  concerned  only  to  see  that
         everything relevant and nothing irrelevant has been considered, and
         that a rational mind has been brought to bear by the  Secretary  of
         State in reaching the decision.   The  second  approach  recognises
         that a fundamental right, here family life, is engaged in the case;
         and in  consequence  the  court  will  insist  that  that  fact  be
         respected by the decision-maker, who  is  accordingly  required  to
         demonstrate either that his  proposed  action  does  not  in  truth
         interfere with  the  right,  or,  if  it  does,  that  there  exist
         considerations which may reasonably be accepted as amounting  to  a
         substantial objective jurisdiction for the interference.  The third
         approach directly engages the rights guaranteed by the  Convention;
         it would require the court to decide whether  the  removal  of  the
         applicant would constitute a  breach  of  article  8.   This  third
         position engages the first of the two issues which I identified  at
         the outset. ...
         17.      If the first approach is the right one, the  challenge  to
         the Secretary of State's decision is in my judgement wholly without
         merit.  Miss Webber submitted that  there  were  certain  important
         matters not referred to in the letter  of  29  September  1999.   I
         shall have to refer to those in due course, but it  is  enough  for
         present purposes to state that,  if  the  test  of  review  is  the
         conventional Wednesbury principle, it  is  impossible  to  conclude
         that the decision was an irrational one or that  the  Secretary  of
         State  had  failed  to  consider  any  facts   put   to   him,   or
         misapprehended the law.
         18.      However the application  of  so  exiguous  a  standard  of
         review would in my judgement involve a failure  to  recognise  what
         has become a settled principle of the  common  law,  one  which  is
         entirely independent of our incorporation of the Convention by  the
         Human Rights Act 1998.  It is that the intensity  of  review  in  a
         public law case will depend on the subject matter in hand;  and  so
         in particular any interference by the action of a public body  with
         fundamental   right   will   require   a   substantial    objective
         justification. ...
         19.      With respect [the cases I have cited show] that in a  case
         involving human rights the second  approach  which  I  outlined  at
         paragraph 16 as to the intensity  of  review  is  generally  to  be
         followed, leaving aside incorporation of the Convention;  but  that
         approach and the basic Wednesbury rule are by no means hermetically
         sealed one from the other.  There is, rather, what may be called  a
         sliding scale of review; the graver the impact of the  decision  in
         question upon the individual affected by it, the  more  substantial
         the justification that will be required.  It is in  the  nature  of
         the human condition that cases where, objectively,  the  individual
         is most gravely affected will be those where what we have  come  to
         cal his fundamental rights are or are said to be put  in  jeopardy.
         In the present  case,  whether  or  not  the  Convention  is  under
         consideration, any reasonable person will  at  once  recognise  the
         right to family life, exemplified in the right of the parties to  a
         genuine marriage to cohabit  without  any  undue  interference,  as
         being in the nature of a fundamental right (I prefer the expression
         fundamental freedom).
         ...
         33.      [The submission that the Court of Appeal is in as  good  a
         position  as  the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide   whether   the
         applicant's removal would infringe Article 8] seems to me to engage
         a question  of  some  constitutional  significance.   Much  of  the
         challenge presented by the enactment of the 1998  Act  consists  in
         the search for a principled measure of scrutiny which will be loyal
         to the Convention rights, but loyal also to the  legitimate  claims
         of democratic power.  In this case Miss Webber's  submission  comes
         close to the proposition that the court should stand in  the  shoes
         of the Secretary of State and retake the decision in  the  case  on
         its merits.   In  fairness,  when  tested,  she  disavowed  such  a
         proposition.  But in that case her submission is without principle:
         the courts are in as good a position as the Secretary of  State  to
         decide; but they must not decide as if  they  were  his  surrogate.
         This antithesis at  the  same  time  commends  but  deprecates  the
         imposition by the courts of their own views of the  merits  of  the
         case  in  mind.   It  is  of  no  practical  assistance  and  lacks
         intellectual  coherence.   The  Human  Rights  Act  1998  does  not
         authorise  the  judges  to  stand  in  the  shoes  of  Parliament's
         delegates, who are decision-makers given their responsibilities  by
         the democratic arm of the state.  The arrogation of such a power to
         the judges would usurp those  functions  of  government  which  are
         controlled and distributed by powers  whose  authority  is  derived
         from the ballot box.  It follows that there must  be  a  principled
         distance between the court's adjudication in a case  such  as  this
         and the Secretary of State's decision, based on his  perception  of
         the case's merits.  For present purposes that  principled  distance
         is to be found in the  approach  I  have  taken  to  the  scope  of
         judicial review in this case, built on  what  the  common  law  has
         already done in R v. Ministry of Defence, Ex p Smith [1996] QB 517,
         R v. Lord Saville of Newdigate, Ex p A [2000] 1 WLR 1855 and  R  v.
         Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex p Launder  [1997]  1
         WLR 839.  For the future, when the court  is  indeed  applying  the
         Convention  as  municipal  law,  we  shall  no  doubt   develop   a
         jurisprudence in which a margin of discretion, as I would call  it,
         is allowed to the statutory decision-maker;  but  in  the  case  of
         those rights where the Convention  permits  interference  with  the
         right where that is  justified  by  reference  to  strict  criteria
         (articles 8-11, paragraph (2) in each  case)  its  length  will  no
         doubt be confined by the rigour of those criteria in light  of  the
         relevant Strasbourg case law,  and  the  gravity  of  the  proposed
         interference as it is perceived here.  But that is for the future.

  28. May LJ agreed.  Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers MR  referred  in  his
      judgement to the passage from Kebilene that we have set out above.  We
      hope it is fair to say that on this point he did not differ  from  his
      colleagues.

  29. In R (Isiko) v SSHD (C/2000/2937, 20  December  2000),  Schiemann  LJ,
      giving the judgement of the Court of Appeal, said this:
         28.  Since  submissions  were  made  to  us  in  the  present  case
         judgments have been delivered in Mahmood, a decision of the  Master
         of the Rolls, May L.J. and Laws L.J., in which, so far as  one  can
         judge from the report of the judgements which we have  seen.   B  v
         SSHD was not cited.
         29. The approach of this court in Mahmood was  arguably  marginally
         different from that adopted by consent in B.  ...
         30. In our respectful judgment  the  approach  in  Mahmood  is  the
         correct approach in these cases.  It is not entirely clear whether,
         read as a whole, the judgements in  B  are  at  variance  with  it,
         particularly  since  there  is  no  indication  that  Sedley   L.J.
         disagreed with the approach of Lord Hope of Craighead in  Kebilene.
         If there is a difference between them then we consider that we  are
         at liberty to follow the approach in Mahmood even if, as may be the
         case, the court in Mahmood, was not referred to the judgments in B.
          That is because the court  in  B  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  a
         proposition of law which was not the subject  of  consideration  by
         that court.  In such circumstances a later court is not bound by it
         - [see below].

  30. In another case decided at about the same time  as  both  Mahmood  and
      Isiko, Thomas J had to reach a conclusion on the same issue.   In  his
      judgement in R (Samaroo) v SSHD (CO/4973/1999; 20 December   2000)  he
      wrote this:
         30.      The second issue in B v Secretary of State related to  the
         way in which the court should approach its task in relation to  the
         justification for an interference with rights under Article 8.   It
         was common ground between counsel in that case, as a  result  of  a
         concession by the Secretary of State in that case, that  among  the
         questions of law that arose on the appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
         was whether the decision  to  deport  infringed  the  principle  of
         proportionality.
         31.           In the present case, Mr Howell QC for  the  Secretary
         of State expressly disavows the concession made by the Secretary of
         State in B.  He contends that proportionality is not a question  of
         law and that the approach of the Court  should  be  to  review  the
         decision of the Secretary of State and not to come to a view of its
         own and substitute that view if it differed from  the  decision  of
         the Secretary of State.  As B was based on a concession, he submits
         I am not bound by it.  However, before considering that submission,
         it is necessary to refer to the decision in Mahmood.
         32.           In Mahmood, the Court of Appeal expressed their views
         on a similar question though the issue arose not on an appeal  from
         the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  but  on  a  judicial  review  of
         decision of the Secretary of State.   Unfortunately the decision in
         B was not cited.  The decision under review  in  Mahmood  had  been
         made just before the Human Rights Act 1998 came into  force.   Laws
         LJ's approach was to apply the law as it existed at  the  time  the
         decision was made, but stated he saw no different conclusion  would
         be reached if the court had been engaged in the direct  application
         of the Convention.  Counsel for the applicant  submitted  that  the
         court was in as good a position as the Secretary of State  to  make
         the actual decision on Article 8 and should take it.
         ...
         43.           It must follow therefore that, as  a  decision-maker,
         the Secretary of State has a  discretionary  area  of  judgment  in
         relation to the issues which he has  to  determine,  including  the
         issue of  proportionality.   That  is  what  Parliament  must  have
         intended when it gave to him that  decision  making  power  without
         conferring  a  general  right  of  appeal  to  the  courts;  if   a
         discretionary area of judgment was not accorded to the Secretary of
         State and the issue of proportionality was therefore treated  as  a
         question of law, there would in effect be a right of appeal on each
         decision, not review, to the Court which would then make up its own
         mind on the issue.  It is, in my judgment, entirely consistent with
         the Convention for Parliament to have accorded  the  power  to  the
         Secretary of State, subject only to the jurisdiction of the  Courts
         in their supervisory role and not their appellate  role.   For  the
         Court to treat the issue of proportionality as a  question  of  law
         for it and for the Court to make up its own mind on  the  issue  of
         proportionality under Article 8 would in reality be  to  take  upon
         itself an appellate role as the final decision making power, as the
         decision on proportionality is at the heart of the  decision  under
         Article 8.  That is not what  Parliament  has  provided  under  the
         Immigration Acts and is not a conclusion brought about by the Human
         Rights Act or the Convention.  The role of the court remains one of
         review.
         44.           For this reason,  it  is  my  view,  on  the  present
         authorities, that the task of the court is not to make up  its  own
         mind on the question of proportionality.  The decision-maker is the
         Secretary of State  and  it  is  he  who  must  decide  within  his
         discretionary area of judgment whether the interference with family
         life by deportation is necessary in a democratic society,  that  is
         to say justified by a  pressing  social  need,  and  in  particular
         proportionate to the legitimate  aim  pursued.   In  that  decision
         making process, he has in accordance with the  Convention  and  the
         Human Rights Act, a discretionary area of judgment in achieving the
         necessary balance.

  31. We must finally refer to R (Daly) v SSHD [2001] UKHL 26, now  reported
      at [2001] 2 WLR 1622.  Lord Bingham of Cornhill's leading speech  ends
      with these words:
         23.            ...  Now,  following  the   incorporation   of   the
         convention by the Human Rights Act 1998 and the  bringing  of  that
         Act fully into  force,  domestic  courts  must  themselves  form  a
         judgment whether a convention right has been  breached  (conducting
         such inquiry as is necessary to form that judgment) and, so far  as
         permissible under the Act, grant  an  effective  remedy.   On  this
         aspect of the case, I agree with and adopt the observations  of  my
         noble  and  learned  friend  Lord  Steyn  which  I  have  had   the
         opportunity of reading in draft.

  32. The relevant part of Lord Steyn's speech is as follows:
         27.           ... The starting point is that there  is  an  overlap
         between the traditional grounds  of  review  and  the  approach  of
         proportionality.  Most cases would  be  decided  in  the  same  way
         whichever approach is adopted.  But  the  intensity  of  review  is
         somewhat greater under the  proportionality  approach.  Making  due
         allowance for  important  structural  differences  between  various
         convention rights, which  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss,  a  few
         generalisations are perhaps permissible.   I  would  mention  three
         concrete  differences  without  suggesting  that  my  statement  is
         exhaustive.  First, the doctrine of proportionality may require the
         reviewing court to assess the balance which the decision maker  has
         struck, nor merely whether it is within the range  of  rational  or
         reasonable decisions.  Secondly, the proportionality  test  may  go
         further than the traditional grounds of review inasmuch as  it  may
         require attention to be directed to the relative weight accorded to
         interests and considerations. Thirdly, even the heightened scrutiny
         test developed in R v Ministry of Defence, Ex  p  Smith  [1996]  QB
         517, 554 is not necessarily appropriate to the protection of  human
         rights.  It will be recalled that in  Smith  the  Court  of  Appeal
         reluctantly felt compelled to reject a limitation on homosexuals in
         the army.    The challenge based on article 8 of the Convention for
         the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the  right
         to respect for private and family life) foundered on the  threshold
         required even by the anxious scrutiny test.  The European Court  of
         Human Rights came to the opposite conclusion:  Smith  and  Grady  v
         United Kingdom (1999) 29 EHRR  493.   ...   The  intensity  of  the
         review, in similar cases, is guaranteed by  the  twin  requirements
         that the limitation of the right  was  necessary  in  a  democratic
         society, in the sense of meeting a pressing social  need,  and  the
         question whether the interference was really proportionate  to  the
         legitimate aim being pursued.
         28.           The differences in approach between  the  traditional
         grounds of review and the proportionality  approach  may  therefore
         sometimes yield different results.  It is therefore important  that
         cases involving convention rights must be analysed in  the  correct
         way.  This does not mean that there has  been  a  shift  to  merits
         review.  On the contrary, as Professor Jowell [2000]  PL  671,  681
         has pointed out the respective roles of judges  and  administrators
         are fundamentally distinct and will remain so.  To this extent  the
         general tenor of the observations in Mahmood [2001] 1 WLR  840  are
         correct.  And Laws LJ rightly emphasised in Mahmood, at p 847, para
         18, "that the intensity of review in a public law case will  depend
         on the subject matter in hand".  That is so even in cases involving
         Convention rights.  In law context is everything.




   The Status of B v SSHD

  36. In two of the passages we have cited, there  are  references  to  B  v
      SSHD.  It appears that the courts that decided those cases  would  not
      have taken the view of the jurisdiction of the Court  of  Appeal  that
      that Court did in B v SSHD.  Nevertheless the  formal  position  would
      appear to be that those remarks (which were made in  relation  to  the
      Court of Appeal's approach on an appeal unrelated to judicial  review)
      were not part of the rationes  decidendi  of  judgements  on  judicial
      review; and B v SSHD, being a decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  on
      appeal from this Tribunal, would appear to be binding on us.

  37. There is, however, an exception to the rule of binding precedent.   It
      has recently been the subject of analysis and explanation in the Court
      of Appeal itself.   Where  a  decision  is  predicated  on  an  agreed
      assumption, neither argued  by  the  parties  nor  considered  in  the
      judgement or judgements, the case will not be a binding  precedent  if
      the assumption transpires to have  been  misplaced.   It  is  to  this
      principle that  Schiemann LJ and Thomas J referred in the passages  we
      have cited above from their judgements in Isiko and  Samaroo.   It  is
      set out as follows by  Buxton LJ, giving the judgement of the Court in
      R (Khadim) v Brent Housing Board [2001] 2 WLR 1674.
         33.      We therefore conclude, not without some  hesitation,  that
         there is a principle stated in  general  terms  that  a  subsequent
         court is not bound by a proposition of law assumed  by  an  earlier
         court that is not the subject of argument before  or  consideration
         by that court. ...
         38.      Like all exceptions to, and modifications of,  the  strict
         rule of precedent, this rule must  only  be  applied  in  the  most
         obvious cases, and limited with great care.  The  basis  of  it  is
         that the proposition in question must have been  assumed,  and  not
         have been the subject of  decision.   That  condition  will  almost
         always only be fulfilled when the  point  has  not  been  expressly
         raised before the court and there has been no argument upon it:  as
         Russell LJ went to some lengths in National Enterprises Ltd v Racal
         Communications Ltd [1975] Ch 397 to demonstrate had occurred in the
         previous case Davies Middleton & Davies Ltd v Cardiff Corpn 62  LGR
         134.  And there may of course be cases, perhaps many cases, where a
         point has not been the subject of argument,  but  scrutiny  of  the
         judgement indicates that the court's acceptance of the  point  went
         beyond mere assumption.  Very little is likely to  be  required  to
         draw that latter conclusion: because a later court will start  from
         the position, encouraged by judicial comity, that  its  predecessor
         did indeed address all the matters essential for its decision.

  35. The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to examine the whole  question
      of proportionality as a question of law was assumed  without  argument
      in B v SSHD: the Court's treatment of the matter did not, in our view,
      go 'beyond mere assumption'.  It would not be open to us to decline to
      follow that decision on the basis simply that we considered  that  the
      assumption was such as to have caused the Court arguably to exceed its
      jurisdiction, if indeed we took that view.  The position is,  however,
      that the decision is  not  strictly  binding  because  of  the  Khadim
      principle.  That too would  not  alone  cause  us  to  depart  from  a
      decision of high authority.  On the other hand, given that it  is  not
      binding, we have  to  consider  whether  to  follow  it  or  the  view
      expressed in  more  recent  cases.   We  choose  the  latter  for  the
      following reasons.  First, the consensus appears to be that B  v  SSHD
      was not correct on  this  issue.   Second,  that  consensus  has  been
      reached after argument, rather than being the result of an assumption.
       Third, the more recent view is shared by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  in
      which Court B v SSHD was  decided.   Fourth,  the  more  recent  cases
      reflect the opportunity of more mature reflection on the  implications
      of the European Convention on Human Rights in our law.

  36. We have therefore decided with the greatest respect that B v  SSHD  is
      not to be followed insofar  as  it  indicates  that  the  question  of
      proportionality is a question of law with the corollary that, where  a
      decision  involves  any  question  of   proportionality,   any   court
      exercising an appellate jurisdiction on matters of law has a  duty  or
      power to substitute its own decision for that of  the  decision-maker.
      Nor do we think it right to say in general  that,  where  there  is  a
      question of proportionality, the challenge to a  ministerial  decision
      will in principle entitle a court to substitute its own  decision  for
      that of the minister.  So much follows, in  our  view,  from  Daly  in
      particular.




   Appeal and Judicial Review

  37. Without B v SSHD to assist, we must attempt to set out  what  are  the
      powers and duties of  the  Appellate  Authorities  in  cases  of  this
      nature.  We observe that so far as concerns  judicial  review  of  the
      Secretary of State's decisions, when human rights issues  are  engaged
      the courts will undertake an examination that  is  more  intense  that
      would be adopted for other issues.  That review will not, however,  be
      so intense as to cause the judicial arm of government  to  invade  the
      arena of the executive arm.  In judicial review the task of the courts
      is to oversee the Secretary of State, not to make or remake  decisions
      for him.

  38. We have  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  purpose  of  the  Appellate
      Authorities is to hear appeals, not to engage in judicial review.   It
      would be quite wrong to impose upon ourselves the restrictions adopted
      by the Court in its judicial  review  jurisdiction.  Those  principles
      have no direct relevance to ascertaining the role of this Tribunal  on
      appeals relating to such  issues,  save  that  one  would  expect  the
      scrutiny on appeal to be no less intense, and in all probability  more
      intense, than  that  on  review.   We  have  no  general  or  inherent
      jurisdiction, however.  We must  carry  out  the  duties  set  out  in
      paragraphs 21 and 22 of Schedule 4  to  the  1999  Act  and  must  not
      attempt to do anything else.  Further, as a part of the  judicial  arm
      of government, we too must avoid intruding unduly into the role of the
      executive.




   The Jurisdiction of the Appellate Authorities (i) General

  39. The first issue is the relationship between the 1998 Act and the  1999
      Act.  Mr Hunter asks us to say that section 65  of  the  1999  Act  is
      'purely jurisdictional'.  He relies on Butterworth's  Immigration  Law
      Handbook (2000) at paragraph [A.1.928]:


         It is often forgotten (although not by the editor of the BILS March
         1999 Special Bulletin on the Human Rights Act - see note 15 at page
         29 of the Special Bulletin) that  this  is  essentially  a  section
         about jurisdiction.  Section 7 of the Human Rights Act 1998 gives a
         'victim' (see section 7(1)) the right to bring proceedings  against
         a public authority which 'has acted (or proposes to  act)  in  away
         which is made unlawful by  section  6(1)'.   Section  65  does  not
         create the right of a person in the circumstances set out in  65(1)
         to bring proceedings, it simply designates the forum in which  such
         proceedings should be brought and the procedures  to  be  followed.
         This is important, because it means that  any  restrictions  placed
         upon the exercise of section 65 appeal rights,  for  example  under
         paragraph (7) of Schedule 2 of SI 2000/2444,  as  described  above,
         are restrictions on the right to appeal to  the  adjudicator  under
         these procedures.  In such cases the would-be appellant may  retain
         rights to bring proceedings in the courts.  The  same  is  true  in
         respect of the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000.  Section 65  of
         this  Act  is  about  jurisdiction   to   hear   claims   of   race
         discrimination; it does not create the right to  bring  proceedings
         but simply designates forum and procedures.



  40. We have to say that we have considerable difficulty  in  understanding
      that passage.  If the legislator had  intended  to  make  a  provision
      'essentially about jurisdiction' he would surely have used  the  power
      under section 7 of the 1998  Act  to  nominate  Adjudicators  and  the
      Tribunal as the 'appropriate court or tribunal' for the  determination
      of certain issues arising under that  section.   This  was  not  done.
      Instead, we have section  65  of  the  1999  Act,  which  incorporates
      variations from the terms of section 7.  Some of those variations  may
      be material.  One is that the 1999 Act does  not  include  an  express
      reference to future acts, as section 7  does.   Another  is  that  the
      action under section 65 has to  be  brought  by  a  person  whose  own
      'entitlement to enter or remain' has been the subject of  a  decision,
      whereas the action under section 7 can be  by  any  person  who  is  a
      victim of the decision.

  41. Because of the importance we accord to  human  rights,  we  should  be
      unwilling to reach a view that any part of section 65 was at  variance
      with rights granted by the 1998 Act: but that does not  mean  that  we
      see the appeal rights under the 1999 Act as restricted by or dependent
      on those in the 1998 Act.  On the contrary: no legislation to which we
      have been referred indicates that the rights of appeal  given  by  the
      1999 Act operate in any sense to reduce those available under the 1998
      Act.  The appeal rights under the 1999 Act exist in addition to  those
      in the 1998 Act.  Section 65 of the 1999 Act  clearly  does  create  a
      right to bring proceedings, a right added to any  right  already  (and
      remaining) available under the 1998 Act.

  42. The powers and duties of an Adjudicator (and,  by  incorporation,  the
      Tribunal) are those set out in paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 to the  1999
      Act.   The  powers  and  duties  differ,  and  always  have  differed,
      according to whether the  decision  against  which  the  appellant  is
      appealing 'involved the exercise of a discretion by the  Secretary  of
      State or an officer'.  Some decisions involve such an exercise: others
      do not.  Most decisions to grant or refuse Entry Clearance involve  an
      assessment of evidence; but, once the facts are decided, there  is  no
      discretion under the rules.  There is a duty to grant, or  to  refuse,
      according to whether the individual has demonstrated that he or she is
      entitled to what is sought.  Other decisions, for example the decision
      to make a deportation order, are essentially discretionary.   But  the
      mere fact that the Secretary of State always has  a  dispensing  power
      does not make the decision one  which  'involved  the  exercise  of  a
      discretion by the Secretary of State or  an  officer':  see  paragraph
      21(4).  Nothing in the Human Rights Act 1998 changes this.

  43. Whether or not there is any  real  difference  between  the  appellate
      jurisdiction under the two provisions, there  can  be  no  doubt  that
      section 65 of the 1999 Act is framed by reference to section 6 of  the
      1998 Act.  For present purposes  it  is  important  to  observe  that,
      whatever may be the tone of the Convention itself, the 1998  Act,  and
      section 6 in particular, is framed in terms of prohibition.  Section 6
      of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes unlawful  certain  acts  by  public
      authorities that might otherwise have been lawful.  Section 7 of  that
      Act and section 65 of the 1999 Act give rights of appeal against  acts
      and decisions on the ground that the act or decision is one  which  is
      prohibited by section 6.




   The Jurisdiction of the Appellate Authorities (ii) Proportionality

  44. It is a general principle relating to the Convention that no  decision
      affecting an individual is lawful  unless  it  is  proportionate.   In
      addition, some of the matters governed by the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights are matters where a public authority may have to  make  a
      judgement or balance competing interests.  Hence is derived the phrase
      'the allowable area of discretion', seized upon so happily in some  of
      the judgements we have cited.

  45. 'Discretion' however, is a word that can easily be misunderstood.   In
      performing the act of balancing or of judgement to which we refer, the
      decision maker is not, or is not only, informing himself  about  which
      decision he should make from an allowable range of decisions.  He  is,
      for the purposes of the Human  Rights  Act,  informing  himself  about
      which decisions would be prohibited as disproportionate.   He  is,  in
      this particular exercise, laying out the boundaries within  which  his
      decision-making discretion can lawfully be  exercised.   This  is  the
      allowable (that is to say, lawful) area of his discretion.

  46. By prohibiting certain acts and  decisions  that  would  otherwise  be
      lawful, the Human Rights Act  may  conceivably  invalidate  some  non-
      discretionary decisions  and  will  certainly  narrow  the  boundaries
      within which some discretions might be exercised.  It can do no  more.
      It does not itself confer any discretions on decision-makers.  Where a
      decision-maker exercises a discretion, the Act may operate to restrict
      the range of permissible responses to the facts.  Certain exercises of
      the discretion which might have been lawful but for the  Act  are  now
      prohibited.   But  nothing  in  the  Act  imports  a  discretion  into
      decisions in which previously there was no discretion.  Nor  does  the
      Act widen any existing discretion.

  47. This has important implications for our  jurisdiction.   Although  the
      Appellate Authorities may be concerned with whether a  decision  falls
      within the allowable area of discretion, it does not follow  that  the
      decision in question was one where the 'decision  or  action  involved
      the exercise of a discretion by the Secretary of State or an officer',
      so as to give the Appellate  Authority  a  jurisdiction  to  allow  an
      appeal on the ground that 'the discretion should have  been  exercised
      differently'.  So far as the human rights  element  of  the  claim  is
      concerned, the Appellate Authority will be concerned with whether  the
      decision is shown to have been one which  was  outside  the  range  of
      permissible responses.

  48. In this context, a person  who  claims  that  his  human  rights  were
      breached by a decision  which  did  not  involve  the  exercise  of  a
      discretion by the Secretary of State or an  officer  may  nevertheless
      succeed in a human rights claim  if  in  his  case  the  decision  was
      disproportionate.  If he does so succeed, it will not be  because  the
      decision involved the  exercise  of  a  discretion,  but  because  the
      decision was prohibited by section 6 of the 1998 Act.

  49. We add one further point.  Where a decision is  one  which  under  the
      rules does not involve the exercise of a discretion, the fact that the
      decision-maker has considered human rights issues,  including  perhaps
      issues of proportionality, does not mean that it is converted  into  a
      decision which does involve the exercise of a discretion.   The  issue
      of proportionality is a matter  of  judgement  and  balance,  but  not
      itself a matter of discretion.

  50. Similarly, a person who claims that a decision which did  involve  the
      exercise of a discretion by the Secretary of State or an officer  will
      only be able to succeed on human rights grounds if  the  decision  was
      outside the allowable area of discretion.  Within that area, he may be
      able to show, quite apart  from  human  rights,  that  the  discretion
      should have been exercised differently.  But his human  rights  appeal
      has to be on the basis that the particular decision was  in  his  case
      made unlawful by section 6 of the 1998 Act. That ground is nothing  to
      do with any discretion.

  51. The question whether a decision was  outside  the  allowable  area  of
      discretion is the same as the question whether the  decision  is  made
      unlawful by section 6. No other question is posed by section 6  or  by
      section 65 of the 1999 Act.   If the  decision  is  not  shown  to  be
      outside the allowable area of discretion, it does  not  appear  to  us
      that it is challengeable as involving a question of law simply because
      human rights are pleaded.  If the decision was not prohibited  by  the
      Human Rights Act, the questions for the Appellate Authority are  those
      implied in paragraph 21 of Schedule 4.  Indeed, we would  go  further,
      and say that if the decision is not shown to be so prohibited,  it  is
      extremely unlikely that the 1998 Act as such  will  have  any  further
      bearing on the decision of the Adjudicator or the Tribunal.   For,  as
      we have said, the Act does not regulate the manner in which  decisions
      are to be taken or discretions exercised.  Its function is to regulate
      the bounds within which decisions can be taken.

  52. The decision to make a  deportation  order  is  perhaps  the  clearest
      example of one  which,  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  involves  the
      exercise of a discretion.  The provisions are in  paragraphs  362  and
      following of HC 395 (as amended).   The  rules  make  clear  that  the
      decision is discretionary.  They also require  the  decision-maker  to
      take into account 'all relevant factors known  to  him'  in  making  a
      decision in the light of the particular  circumstances  of  the  case.
      Questions  of  proportionality  may,  as  we  have  indicated,  render
      unlawful the deportation of a particular individual in his  particular
      circumstances.  In that case there is no possibility of  the  exercise
      of a discretion to deport.  If the decision is not made unlawful as  a
      matter of proportionality, it is difficult to see  that  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights adds  anything  to  a  duty  to  take  into
      account all relevant factors.




   The Jurisdiction of the Appellate Authorities (iii) Conclusions

  53. We should emphasise that we are not concluding that  the  jurisdiction
      of the Appellate Authorities on an appeal to them is the  same  as  or
      narrower  than  the  jurisdiction  on  judicial  review  -  quite  the
      contrary.  What we have attempted to do is to  delineate  the  precise
      place that an argument on human rights grounds has in such an  appeal.
      We have attempted to answer  a  hypothetical  Adjudicator's  question,
      "What  role  should  the  argument  on  proportionality  play  in   my
      determination of an appeal?".  The answer is as follows.

  54. If an appellant claims that a decision was disproportionate, that is a
      matter which he is entitled to bring to the  Appellate  Authority  and
      which the Authority must determine.  In doing so  the  Authority  will
      examine all relevant material (going both to law and to the facts) and
      will reach its own conclusion.  This is a genuine appeal - not  merely
      a review of whether the Respondent's conclusion on proportionality was
      open to him.   If  the  Authority  reaches  the  conclusion  that  the
      decision was disproportionate, that is the  end  of  the  matter:  the
      decision was unlawful and the appeal must be allowed.

  55. If, on the other hand, the conclusion is that  the  decision  was  not
      disproportionate, the argument based on human rights is  over.   There
      may nevertheless remain a question whether the decision was in all the
      factual circumstances of the case correct.  That  is  a  matter  which
      must be determined according to  the  well-established  principles  on
      which the Appellate Authorities act.  A decision that was  within  the
      allowable area of discretion may have itself involved an  exercise  of
      discretion or it may not.  Only where the decision itself involved the
      exercise of a discretion will the Adjudicator,  or  the  Tribunal,  be
      concerned with the exercise of a discretion.

  56. In particular, the fact that an argument based on proportionality  has
      been raised and has failed (because the decision was not  outside  the
      allowable area of discretion) does not of itself allow an  Adjudicator
      or the Tribunal to intervene in the exercise  of  a  discretion.   Nor
      does it of itself allow an Adjudicator or the Tribunal  to  substitute
      its own discretion for that of the Respondent.  That power only arises
      where the original decision involved the exercise of a discretion.

  57. The judgement of proportionality sets the boundaries for the  exercise
      of a discretion if one exists: the judgement of proportionality is not
      itself a matter of discretion, nor does it import  a  discretion  into
      the decision.  An appeal can be allowed only in the circumstances  set
      out in paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 to  the  1999  Act  (not  forgetting
      paragraph 21(4)).  The Human Rights Act 1998 has no general effect  on
      the operation of those provisions.




   Application to the Facts of the Present Case

  58. The facts we have set out in paragraphs 3-5 are, broadly speaking,  as
      they appear in the Adjudicator's summary of the Appellant's  evidence.
      She did not make any clear findings on a number of them.   We  do  not
      criticise her because she did not, in the circumstances, need to do so
      and nor do we.  We merely note that it is difficult to state the whole
      if the  Appellant's  history  concisely  because  there  are  so  many
      contradictions in the documents on file.

  59. We draw attention to the most important.  (1)  The Appellant states in
      his witness statement produced for the hearing before the  Adjudicator
      that his English marriage  was  on  5  October  1994.   The   marriage
      certificate  gives  the  date  as  11  October.   (2)   The   marriage
      certificate describes the Appellant's wife  as  a  spinster,  but  the
      Appellant's solicitor lists, as a  document  he  proposed  to  produce
      before the Adjudicator, a certificate of her divorce.   (The  document
      does not  in  the  end  appear  to  have  been  produced.)   (3)   The
      Appellant's father says in a document relating to the  dissolution  of
      the Appellant's first marriage that there were two  children  of  that
      marriage.  The Appellant told the Adjudicator there  were  four.   (4)
      The Appellant states in his witness statement for the Adjudicator that
      he 'applied for political asylum on 8 June 1993 on the ill  advice  of
      my Immigration Consultant' but in  Rosetta  Offonry's  representations
      dated 5 February 2001 it is said that the Appellant intended to  claim
      asylum as soon as he arrived in the United Kingdom.  (5)  If  that  is
      right, the declarations  he  must  have  made  on  arrival  about  his
      intentions as a visitor must be in some  doubt.   (6)   The  Appellant
      states that he was not aware that enforcement  proceedings  had  begun
      before his English marriage, but there is a notice of  appeal  against
      the decision to make a  deportation  order  against  him,  purportedly
      signed by the Appellant and dated 24 August 1994.

  60. In this context what might otherwise appear to be  mere  errors,  like
      the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  British  wife's  name  is   spelled
      differently on the marriage certificate and on her birth  certificate,
      raise further suspicions.  It is clear that not very much reliance can
      be placed on the evidence adduced on behalf of the  Appellant.   There
      is one other difficulty or possible difficulty for the Appellant.  The
      Respondent originally took  the  view  that  the  Appellant's  English
      marriage was not valid because he was still married  to  his  Nigerian
      wife.  So far as we are aware the Respondent has never withdrawn  that
      reason for his refusal of the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
      remain, although he has added other reasons.  The dissolution  of  the
      Appellant's first  marriage  is  said  to  have  taken  place  in  the
      Okha/Ologbo district Customary  Court.   We  have  no  information  on
      whether that divorce was effective in English  law.   The  Appellant's
      human rights appeal, however, is likely to turn more on the reality of
      the relationship between the Appellant and Devika Tulsie than  on  its
      formal status.

  61. The Adjudicator made her findings on the Appellant's  family  life  on
      the basis of the evidence before her.  She  noted  that  although  the
      Appellant said he lived with his wife and his stepchildren she had not
      come to give oral evidence in support of his appeal, allegedly because
      she was 'depressed'.  The Appellant did not know what his wife earned.
       He mentioned the names of two of his wife's friends.  When asked what
      he and his wife did together he  could  only  say  that  hey  went  to
      parties.  He did not know what school his stepdaughters attended.   He
      did not know the name of their doctor.  He did not know  whether  they
      take part in any after-school activities.  He  had  never  been  to  a
      parents' evening.  He said that they receive money from their  natural
      father, but did not know how much or how often.  He was able  to  name
      one of the younger child's friends, but none of the elder child's.

  62. The Adjudicator accepted that there might be cultural reasons for some
      of the Appellant's ignorance about his wife's affairs, but came to the
      conclusion that he had not established that he had a family life  with
      his wife and children  that  could  be  affected  by  his  removal  to
      Nigeria.  It is right to say, as the grounds  do,  that  there  is  no
      specific finding on whether the Adjudicator accepted the reason  given
      for the absence of the wife from the hearing; but the Adjudicator also
      noted that there was no written evidence from  the  wife  and  in  any
      event the explanation could not of itself  supply  evidence  of  their
      relationship.  On the evidence it seems to us that  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion, that the Appellant had  not  established  that  he  had  a
      family  life  that  would  be  interfered  with  by  his  removal,  is
      unassailable.

  63. The Adjudicator did not give separate consideration  to  the  question
      whether the Appellant's private life would be affected by his removal.
       The only factors mentioned in the grounds are his health and the fact
      that he has been working in  the  United  Kingdom  continuously  since
      1995.  He is, and was  at  the  time  of  the  decision,  an  insulin-
      dependent diabetic.  He stated to the Adjudicator that he did not know
      whether insulin would be available in  Nigeria  and  thought  that  it
      would cost a lot.  There is no other evidence on this  issue  and  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to take the view, as she evidently did,  that
      the evidence did not establish that the Appellant's return would cause
      any disruption in his treatment regime.  The Appellant's  work  record
      might conceivably  support  a  claim  that  in  the  exercise  of  his
      discretion the Respondent should not decide to  deport  him:  but  the
      time for that is past.  His appeal is on human rights grounds only and
      there is no reason to suppose that the  Appellant  will  not  work  in
      Nigeria.  Thus the position again, as it  seems  to  us,  is  that  no
      interference with his private life is shown.  Similar arguments  apply
      to the grounds based specifically on the Respondent's declared  policy
      on deportation.

  64. In case we are wrong  about  that,  we  have  considered  whether  the
      Appellant's removal is justified by Article 8.2.  On the basis of  the
      same evidence, coupled with the Respondent's wish to  maintain  proper
      immigration control in the public interest, it is absolutely clear  to
      us that the proposed removal of the Appellant lacks the slightest hint
      of a disproportionate response to his circumstances.

  65. Nothing in the material before us establishes that  the  action  taken
      and to be taken by the Respondent is prohibited by section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act.  As this is an in-country appeal against the refusal
      to revoke a deportation order, we have  no  jurisdiction  to  consider
      further whether that refusal was right on the merits, or to substitute
      our own decision for that of the Respondent.




   Conclusion

  66. Our conclusions on the general issues relating  to  the  treatment  of
      proportionality are in paragraphs 54-57.  For those  reasons  and  the
      reasons given in paragraphs 60-63, this appeal is dismissed.















                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton
                                                            Deputy President



