
Dag (Nationality - Country of Habitual Residence -TRNC) Cyprus * CG
                                                                [2001] 00002
                                                      Appeal No: HX/70783/98
                                                              *(01 TH 0075)*


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
                                    Dates of hearing: 7 and 28 November 2000

                                    Date of determination notified: 14/03/01



                                   Before:
                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                               Mr J. R. A. Fox
                                 Mr G. Warr






Between
                                  VEYSI DAG
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. The appellant describes himself variously as a citizen of Cyprus and  a
     Turkish Cypriot.  He holds a  document  purporting  to  be  a  passport
     issued by the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'.  He appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of a special  adjudicator  (Mr  D.  J.
     Jefferson) dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent
     on 18 November 1997 refusing him leave  to  enter  having  refused  him
     asylum.  The removal directions set by the respondent are for Cyprus by
     Turkish Airlines.  The appellant's appeal is under section 8(1) of  the
     1993 Act  and  is  accordingly  on  the  ground  that  his  removal  in
     consequence of refusing him leave to enter would  be  contrary  to  the
     United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.  Before  the
     Tribunal he is represented by Mr E. Grieves of counsel,  instructed  by
     Howe & Co, and the respondent is represented by Mr R. Tam  of  counsel,
     instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.

  2. This is a 'starred' determination.  We have heard  full  argument  from
     both counsel on issues relating to the status of the 'Turkish  Republic
     of  Northern  Cyprus'  in  so  far  as  that  status  may  affect   the
     determination of refugee appeals.  This determination will be  followed
     by other divisions  of  the  Tribunal  and  by  adjudicators  on  legal
     questions arising in appeals by individuals claiming to be, or who  are
     alleged to be, nationals of the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'.

History

  3. Cyprus was a British colony: it became independent as the  Republic  of
     Cyprus on 16 August 1960.  On that date two treaties  were  also  made.
     The first, made between the United Kingdom, Greece and  Turkey  of  the
     one part and the Republic of Cyprus of the other part,  is  the  Treaty
     concerning the Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus (Cmnd 1252).  It
     provides amongst other things, that the territory of  the  Republic  of
     Cyprus shall comprise the Island of Cyprus together  with  the  islands
     lying off its coast, with the exception of two United Kingdom  military
     bases.  The second treaty, made between the Republic of Cyprus  of  the
     one part and Greece, Turkey and United Kingdom of the  other  part,  is
     the Treaty of Guarantee (Cmnd 1253).  By that Treaty  the  Republic  of
     Cyprus undertakes, amongst other things, to ensure the  maintenance  of
     its independence, territorial integrity and security  (Article  I)  and
     the other High Contracting parties (who are referred to in  the  Treaty
     as  the  three  guaranteeing  Powers)  'recognise  and  guarantee   the
     independence, territorial integrity and security  of  the  Republic  of
     Cyprus' and 'undertake to  prohibit,  so  far  as  concerns  them,  any
     activity aimed at promoting, directly or indirectly,  either  union  of
     Cyprus with any other State or partition of the Island'  (Article  II).
     With the unity of the Republic of  Cyprus  (particularly  in  Annex  B,
     Section 4 (7), relating  to  applications  for  citizenship),  and  the
     Constitution of the newly-established Republic, recognise the existence
     of both a Greek and a Turkish community in the Island.  In  particular,
     the Constitution provides for power and offices to  be  shared  between
     members of the two communities in proportion to their prevalence in the
     population - approximately 70 percent Greek and 30 percent Turkish, and
     for the President of  the  Republic  always  to  come  from  the  Greek
     community while the Vice-President is to come always from  the  Turkish
     community.

  4. The Turkish community withdrew  from  central  government  in  December
     1963.   There  was  serious  fighting  between  the  two   communities,
     culminating in intervention by  the  United  Nations  Force  in  Cyprus
     (UNFICYP) in March 1964.  UNFICYP remains in the Island  to  this  day,
     enforcing separation between the communities and  patrolling  a  buffer
     zone.  Militant Greek Cypriots waged a campaign against the  government
     of the Republic of Cyprus and in July 1974 the Cypriot  government  was
     overthrown in a coup inspired by Athens.  An  extremist  Greek  Cypriot
     was appointed president: he also  controlled  the  National  Guard.  In
     reaction to these events, and at the request  of  the  Turkish  Cypriot
     leader, Denktash, Turkey landed troops in Northern Cyprus and soon took
     control of the northern third of the Island.  The  dividing  line  runs
     from  Morphou  through  Nicosia  to   Famagusta.    The   revolutionary
     government in the south  soon  collapsed,  and  the  lawful  President,
     Makarios, returned.  But the Turkish community now had de facto control
     of the north and in February  1975  the  'Turkish  Federated  State  of
     Cyprus' was declared.  There were  numerous  unsuccessful  attempts  at
     providing a solution to the division of the  Island.   On  15  November
     1983 Northern Cyprus made a unilateral declaration of  independence  as
     'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'.  Since that date, within Cyprus,
     the functions of government have, in practice, been  exercised  in  the
     north by organs of the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus',  although
     the Republic of Cyprus has not in any sense  ceded  its  claim  to  the
     whole of the Island.

  5. The general assembly of the United Nations had in May  1983  voted  for
     Turkish Troops to be withdrawn from Cyprus.  Following  the  unilateral
     declaration of independence, the United Nations Security Council passed
     Resolution 541 in the following terms, on 18 November 1983.

        The Security Council,
        Having  heard  the  statement  of  the  foreign  minister  of   the
        government of the Republic of Cyprus,
        Concerned at the declaration by  the  Turkish  Cypriot  authorities
        issued on 15 November 1983 which purports to create an  independent
        state in Northern Cyprus,
        Considering that this declaration is  incompatible  with  the  1960
        Treaty concerning the Establishment of the Republic of  Cyprus  and
        1960 Treaty of Guarantee,
        ...
     1. Deplores the declaration of the Turkish Cypriot authorities of  the
        purported succession of part of the Republic of Cyprus;
     2. Considers the declaration referred to above as legally invalid  and
        calls for its withdrawal;
        ...
     6. Calls upon all States to  respect  the  sovereignty,  independence,
        territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus;
     7. Calls upon all States not to recognise  any  Cypriot  states  other
        than the Republic of Cyprus;...'

   6. That resolution continues to represent the United  Nations'  position.
      Only Turkey has afforded any recognition to the  claimed  independence
      of Northern Cyprus.

   7.  The  geographical  border  between  the   two   communities   is   an
      exceptionally accurate reflection of settlement  patterns:  there  are
      about 600 Greek Cypriots and Maronites in  the  North  and  about  300
      Turkish Cypriots in the South.  That is to be seen in  the  context  a
      total population of rather over 830,000.

   8. Most of those resident in Cyprus in 1960 will have become nationals of
      the Republic of Cyprus on 16 February 1961 by  the  operation  of  the
      provisions of Annex 1, section 2 to the Treaty of  Establishment.   No
      doubt the law of the Republic of Cyprus  provides  for  succession  to
      such citizenship by birth: but no  such  provisions  are  in  evidence
      before us.  It suffices to say in general terms that many  inhabitants
      of Northern Cyprus  may  be  nationals  of  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,
      whatever other nationality they may have as well.

   9. The Turkish community apparently declined in numbers between 1960  and
      1974, but Northern Cyprus has been settled from Turkey  in  the  years
      since 1974.  By 1983 the Turkish community was little under  one-fifth
      of the population of Cyprus; it is  now  nearly  a  quarter.   Turkish
      nationals do not lose Turkish  nationality  by  settling  in  Northern
      Cyprus, even if they adopt, and use, nationality documents  issued  by
      the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'.





The Convention context

  10. Article 1A of the Convention reads, as amended, and so far as relevant
      for present purposes, as follows:

           For the purposes of the present Convention  the  term  'refugee'
           shall apply to any person who:

           ...
           (2)... owing  to  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
           reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership   of   a
           particular social group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the
           country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,
           is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country;
           or who, not having a nationality and being outside  the  country
           of his former habitual residence, is unable or,  owing  to  such
           fear, is unwilling to return to it.
           In the case of a person who has more than one  nationality,  the
           term 'the country of his nationality' shall  mean  each  of  the
           countries of which he is a national, and a person shall  not  be
           deemed to be lacking  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
           nationality if, without any valid reason based  on  well-founded
           fear, he has not availed himself of the protection of one of the
           countries of which he has a national.

  11. Three consequences follow  immediately  from  that  formulation.   The
      first is that  a  person's  refugee  status  has  to  be  assessed  by
      reference to the country or countries of which he is a national.   The
      second is that it is only if a person  has  no  nationality  that  his
      country of residence can become relevant in assessing his status as  a
      refugee.  The third is that the more countries a person is a  national
      of, the less likely he is to  be  able  to  establish  that  he  is  a
      refugee, because he will need to show a lack of protection in each  of
      the countries in question.

  12. There are many asylum  claimants  who,  like  the  present  appellant,
      describe themselves, or are described by the respondent, as  nationals
      of 'The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'.  Many, perhaps most,  of
      those individuals are nationals of another country as well.  Some  are
      nationals of the Republic of Cyprus; some  are  nationals  of  Turkey.
      Their link with Northern Cyprus might therefore have one of  a  number
      of consequences.  If they are in law capable  of  being  nationals  of
      Northern Cyprus, it  might  render  them  persons  of  more  than  one
      nationality.   Or,  if  they  have  no  other  nationality,  it  might
      constitute their sole nationality.  Alternatively, if they are in  law
      incapable of being nationals of Northern Cyprus, and if they  have  no
      (other) nationality,  it  might  establish  their  country  of  former
      habitual residence.  But that  will  be  relevant  only  if  they  are
      nationals of  no  other  country  for,  if  they  have  a  country  of
      nationality, that is what counts, and their country of former habitual
      residence is irrelevant  for  refugee  status  determination.   It  is
      therefore crucial  to  determine  whether  'The  Turkish  Republic  of
      Northern Cyprus' is  capable  of  being  the  country  of  a  person's
      nationality for the purposes of the  Convention.   The  fact  that  in
      numerous decisions in this jurisdiction, as well as in  Kadiroglu  and
      others v MIEE [1998] 1656 FCA, which Mr Tam cited to us, it  has  been
      tacitly assumed that a person may be a national of Northern Cyprus, is
      no assistance.

Northern Cyprus as a State in English Law

  13.  Although  our  prime  concern  is  with  the  interpretation  of  the
      Convention, an international instrument, our determination is made  in
      an English forum, exercising jurisdiction under statutory powers.  For
      that reason it is appropriate to begin by considering  the  status  of
      the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus'  in  English  law,  for  the
      result  of  that  investigation   provides   the   context   for   our
      determination of the questions at issue in this appeal.

  14. The process for deciding whether a body purporting to  exercise  power
      over an area of the world outside the United Kingdom is the government
      of a sovereign State is well established.   The  rule  was  stated  by
      Scrutton LJ in Aksionairnoye Obschestvo dlia Mechanicheskoyi Obrabotky
      Diereva A. M. Luther v James Sagor & Co [1921] 3 KB 532, 556:

        The courts in questions whether a particular person or  institution
        is a sovereign  must  be  guided  only  by  the  statement  of  the
        sovereign on whose behalf they exercise jurisdiction.  As  we  said
        by this court in Mighell v Sultan of Johore [1984] 1 QB  149,  158:
        'When once there is the  authoritative  certificate  of  the  Queen
        through  her  minister  of  state  as  to  the  status  of  another
        sovereign, that in the courts of this country is decisive'.

  15. The certificate of  the  Queen  is  given  by  a  properly  authorised
      official of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.   This  is  elegantly
      demonstrated by the decision of the House of Lords  in  The  Arantzazu
      Mendi [1939] AC 256.  AT first instance Bucknill J. had been asked  to
      set aside the writ as one impleading a foreign  sovereign  state.   He
      would be right to do that if the Nationalist  government  rather  than
      the Republican government was the sovereign government of Spain at the
      time the writ was issued in 1938.  In order to decide that question he
      directed a letter to be written to the Foreign Office.  Commenting  on
      that procedure, Lord Atkin (with whom the other members of  the  House
      of Lords agreed) said this:

         I pause here to say that not only is this the  correct  procedure,
         but that it is the only procedure by which the  Court  can  inform
         itself of the  material  fact  whether  the  party  sought  to  be
         impleaded, or whose property  is  sought  to  be  affected,  is  a
         foreign sovereign State.  This, I think,  is  made  clear  by  the
         judgments in this House in the Kelantan case [1934] AC 797.   With
         great respect I do not accept the opinion implied in the speech of
         Lord Sumner in that case recourse to His Majesty's  Government  is
         only one way in which the judge can ascertain the  relevant  fact.
         The reason is, I think, obvious.  Our State cannot speak with  two
         voices on such a matter,  the  judiciary  saying  one  thing,  the
         executive another.  Our Sovereign  has  to  decide  whom  he  will
         recognise as a fellow Sovereign in the family of states;  and  the
         relations of the foreign State with ours in the  matter  of  State
         immunities must flow from that decision alone.

  16. In the context of this appeal it is of some interest that in Mighell v
      Sultan of Johore it was  specifically  argued  that  the  government's
      statement might apply to only part of Spain. That argument was met  by
      pointing out that the letter from the Foreign  Office  indicated  that
      His Majesty's Government  recognised  Spain  as  a  foreign  sovereign
      state, that is to say, as a single state with a single government.

  17. There is before us a statement by Mr P.J.O.  Hill,  the  head  of  the
      Southern European Department of the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office,
      made under the authority of Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State
      for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs.  Paragraph 2  of  the  statement
      reads, in part, as follows:

         Her Majesty's Government have not accorded any form of recognition
         to the so-called 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC)'.  To
         the best of my knowledge no other State,  with  the  exception  of
         Turkey, has  recognised  the  'TRNC'.   Her  Majesty's  Government
         recognise only one State in the island  of  Cyprus,  that  is  the
         Republic of Cyprus established  in  1960  under  the  Treaties  of
         Guarantee and Establishment to which the United  Kingdom,  Greece,
         Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus are parties.  Under  Article  II
         of the Treaty of Guarantee,  the  United  Kingdom,  together  with
         Greece and Turkey,  'recognise  and  guarantee  the  independence,
         territorial integrity and security of the Republic of Cyprus'.

  18. That statement constitutes the certificate of the  sovereign.   It  is
      not open to any United Kingdom court or tribunal to give any degree of
      recognition  to  the  'Turkish  Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus'  as  a
      sovereign State.  As an English tribunal we have to bear that in  mind
      in reaching any conclusions on the status of Northern Cyprus  for  the
      purpose of the Convention as interpreted  in  this  jurisdiction.   In
      determining  the  autonomous  meaning  of  the  Convention   and   its
      application to the present situation, we, a  United  Kingdom  Tribunal
      with a limited jurisdiction, must  avoid  any  conclusion  that  would
      import United Kingdom recognition to the 'Turkish Republic of Northern
      Cyprus'.

Northern Cyprus as  a  Country  of  Nationality  for  the  Purposes  of  the
Convention

  19. As we observed in paragraph 11, and subject to our conclusions in  the
      preceding paragraph, the question is primarily  one  of  international
      law.  It will be apparent, from the historical summary in paragraphs 3-
      6, and the terms of Mr Hill's statement set out in paragraph 15,  that
      the international community's position on Northern Cyprus is the  same
      as that  of  the  British  Government.   The  Treaties  emphasise  the
      integrity of the Republic of Cyprus as established in  1960;  SCR  541
      declares the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus' illegal;  and  with
      the sole exception of Turkey no other State recognises Northern Cyprus
      as an autonomous or lawful State.  Mr Tam  nevertheless  submits  that
      Northern Cyprus might (although not a State in international  law  and
      not capable of being recognised as a State in an English tribunal)  be
      capable of being  the  country  of  a  person's  nationality  for  the
      purposes of the Convention.

  20. He puts his case  on  two  alternative  footings.   The  first  is  an
      argument based on the 'Namibia principle'.  The second argues that  as
      the  'Turkish  Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus'  does  so   many   acts
      characteristic of a lawful government, it should be regarded as having
      some of the powers of a lawful government.  Those arguments are inter-
      related, for both attempt to attribute legal effect to the acts of  an
      unlawful government.

  21. The 'Namibia principle' is a reference to the advisory opinion of  the
      International Court of Justice Legal Consequences for  States  of  the
      Continued Presence of South Africa  in  Namibia  (South  West  Africa)
      Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) [1971] ICJ  Rep
      16.  The background of that opinion is sufficiently indicated  by  its
      title: we need only add that Security Council Resolution 276  declared
      illegal South Africa's occupation of Namibia.  We have  been  referred
      in particular to the following passages of the Court's opinion.

         117. ... As this Court has held, referring to one of its decisions
         declaring a situation as contrary to  the  rule  of  international
         law:  'This decision entails a legal consequence, namely  that  of
         putting an end to an illegal situation' (ICJ Reports 1951, p. 82).

         118. South  Africa,  being  responsible  for  having  created  and
         maintained a situation which the Court  has  found  to  have  been
         validly declared illegal, has the obligation to put an end to  it.
         It is therefore under obligation to  withdraw  its  administration
         from the Territory of Namibia.  By maintaining the present illegal
         situation, and occupying the Territory without title, South Africa
         incurs international responsibilities arising  from  a  continuing
         violation  of  an  international  obligation.   It  also   remains
         accountable for any violations of its  international  obligations,
         or of the rights of the people of Namibia.  The  fact  that  South
         Africa no longer has any title to administer  the  Territory  does
         not release it from its  obligations  and  responsibilities  under
         international law towards other States in respect of the  exercise
         of its powers in relation to this Territory.  Physical control  of
         a territory, and not sovereignty or legitimacy of  title,  is  the
         basis of State liability for acts affecting other States...

         125.  In  general,   the   non-recognition   of   South   Africa's
         administration of the Territory should not result in depriving the
         people of Namibia of any advantages derived from international co-
         operation.  In particular, while official acts  performed  by  the
         Government of South Africa on  behalf  of  or  concerning  Namibia
         after the termination of the Mandate are illegal and invalid, this
         invalidity  cannot  be  extended  to  those  acts,  such  as,  for
         instance, the registration of births, deaths  and  marriages,  the
         effects of which can be ignored  only  to  the  detriment  of  the
         inhabitants of the Territory.

  22. There are material differences between Namibia  and  Northern  Cyprus.
      In the case of Namibia, there was no doubt that  the  occupying  power
      was itself a State.  It was therefore possible, in international  law,
      for the acts of the illegal government to be imputed to the  occupying
      State.  That is not the situation in Northern Cyprus.  If acts of  the
      illegal government in Northern Cyprus  'such  as,  for  instance,  the
      registration  of  births,  deaths  and  marriages'  are  to  be  given
      validity, it must be by allowing the illegal government to be regarded
      as empowered to do acts characteristic of a State.  We  are  far  from
      confident that the International Court of Justice would have taken the
      same view of such acts in Namibia  if  there  were  not  an  occupying
      State, itself possessing the powers of a State, to which  the  illegal
      acts could be imputed.  Thus an argument based on 'Namibia  principle'
      needs first to establish that the illegal government in  question  has
      the powers alleged.  Simply to cite the principle  without  more  begs
      the question of vires.

  23. In any event, however, the argument based on the  'Namibia  principle'
      was met by Mr Grieves, who pointed out that nobody has identified  any
      disadvantage which would accrue to the  appellant  by  reason  of  the
      international non-recognition of the  'Turkish  Republic  of  Northern
      Cyprus'.  That point appears to us to  be  a  good  one.   We  do  not
      consider that the 'Namibia  principle'  ought,  without  more,  to  be
      extended to cases where the illegal government is not itself a  State;
      but, if we are wrong  about  that,  this  is  not  a  case  where  the
      principle is shown to apply.

  24. We pass to Mr Tam's alternative argument.  This is  that  despite  the
      status of the 'Turkish Republic of  Northern  Cyprus'  as  illegal  in
      international law and not recognised as a State  in  English  law,  we
      should  nevertheless  consider  that  it  is   capable   of   granting
      nationality so as to be capable of being the  country  of  a  person's
      nationality for the purposes of the Convention.  That argument  is  to
      an extent based (although not expressly  so)  on  Article  31  of  the
      Vienna Convention on the Law of  Treaties  (1980)  (Cmnd  7964).   The
      principle  is  that  the  Convention  is  to  be  given  a   purposive
      interpretation and is not to  be  treated  like  an  English  statute.
      Phrases such as 'the country of his  nationality'  or  'not  having  a
      nationality' are, according to Mr Tam's argument, to be given  a  non-
      technical interpretation.  The illegal government in  Northern  Cyprus
      is for practical purposes in power; it fulfils, for the inhabitants of
      that part of the island, many of the functions of  government;  it  is
      regarded by those inhabitants as the lawful government and they  claim
      nationality of the Turkish Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus'.   Northern
      Cyprus is,  moreover,  their  home.   Why  should  the  Convention  be
      interpreted in such a way as to  deny  them  nationality  of  Northern
      Cyprus?

  25. As Mr Tam recognised, that argument has a formidable task  in  dealing
      with the dicta of Tamberlin J in Tjhe Kwet Koe v MIEA [1997] 912  FCA.



      That is one of the few decided cases on this area of the law.   It  is
      authority for the proposition that a person's country  of  ...  former
      habitual residence need not be a State.  It is also authority for  the
      proposition that  'country'  in  that  phrase  is  to  be  interpreted
      differently from 'country' in the phrase 'country of  ...nationality'.
      This second proposition does appear to be part of the  ratio,  because
      it was only by making the distinction between  the  two  phrases  that
      Tamberlin J found himself able to conclude that  Hong  Kong  (although
      not a State) was the claimant's country of former habitual  residence.
      He said this:

        The language of  Article  1A  of  the  Convention  itself  draws  a
        distinction between 'the country of nationality' and  'the  country
        of former habitual residence'.  The word 'country' in each of these
        expressions is used in a different sense.  In the first  phrase  it
        is used to designate a country capable of granting nationality.  In
        the second it is used to denote a country which need not have  this
        capability but in which the individual  resides.   The  concept  of
        'country' is broader than the concept of a State.

  26. The learned judge drew that distinction after reminding himself of the
      principle enunciated in Jong Kim Koe v MIMA (1997) 143 ALR  695,  706,
      that 'to interpret 'nationality' ... as something of a 'merely formal'
      character ... instead of something effective from the viewpoint  of  a
      putative refugee, would be liable to frustrate rather than advance the
      humanitarian objects of the Refugees Convention'.  But  Jong  Kim  Koe
      was a case in which the claimant was  of  dual  nationality,  and  the
      effect of the interpretation there set out was to enable the court  to
      ignore one of  his  nationalities  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not
      effective.  Nothing in Jong Kim Koe suggest that a  person  may  be  a
      national of a country that does not have status as a State.

  27. Mr Tam made the bold submission that Tamberlin J was simply  wrong  in
      drawing a distinction between the meaning of the word 'country' in the
      two phrases.  He argued that the interpretation adopted for the phrase
      'country of ...nationality' was too restrictive and formal.  He  cited
      the decision of the Canadian Court of Appeal in Ahmed  Ali  Zalzali  v
      MEI [1991] 3 CF 605 in support of his argument that an  authority  may
      be  effectively  able  to  grant  nationality  for  the  purpose   the
      Convention without itself being a State.  That again, however,  was  a
      different and, in our  view,  distinguishable  situation.   The  court
      found that that  claimant  was  a  refugee  because  he  was  able  to
      establish that he would be at risk of persecution from warring  armies
      in Lebanon.  But there was  no  doubt  that  he  was  as  national  of
      Lebanon.  It was for that reason that his claim was to be assessed  by
      reference to Lebanon.  The position was that the  national  government
      of Lebanon exercised effective control over no part  of  the  country.
      Nevertheless, there seems to have  been  no  doubt  that  it  was  the
      national  government  of  Lebanon  that  had  the   power   to   grant
      nationality.  The case is of interest for the discussion (at pp 614-5)
      of the effect, for the purposes of  the  Convention,  of  a  country's
      official government's having lost control of its territory.  The court
      recognises not only that the existence of civil war is not of itself a
      bar to refugee status, but also that it is practical  protection  that
      counts, rather than the protection of the official government.   Thus,
      as D�cary JA (giving the judgment of the court) says at P615:

        The  'country'   the   'national   government',   the   'legitimate
        government', the 'nominal government' will probably vary  depending
        on the circumstances and the evidence and it would be  presumptuous
        to attempt to give a general definition.  I will simply  note  here
        that I do not rule out the possibility that there  may  be  several
        established authorities in the same country which are each able  to
        provide protection in the part of the territory controlled by them,
        protection which may be adequate though not necessarily perfect.

  28. Everything in that paragraph, and, indeed, everything in the  judgment
      of the court, has  reference  to  a  situation  where  the  claimant's
      nationality was beyond doubt.  In the passage we have  quoted,  D�cary
      JA indicates that there may be various entities capable  of  providing
      protection within a specified country.  Nothing in that passage, or in
      the rest of the judgment, suggests that there may be various  entities
      capable of granting nationality.

  29. No authority cited to us favours Mr Tam's argument and Tjhe  Kwet  Koe
      is against it.  Quite apart from authority we should not have accepted
      it, for a number of reasons.  It appears to us to be self-evident that
      a distinction is being drawn in Article 1A(2) between persons who have
      a nationality and persons who do not have  a  nationality.   (It  also
      goes without saying that 'nationality' is to be taken in  a  different
      sense where it occurs, later in the definition of a refugee, as one of
      the 'Convention reasons'.)

  30.  Our  first  impression  was  that  nationality  is   a   concept   in
      international law recognising the relationship between a person and  a
      State.  We have not been persuade to change our initial  view  and  we
      therefore hold that  nationality  can  be  granted  only  by  a  State
      recognised as such by the international community.

  31. In the context of the Refugee Convention there are in  fact  at  least
      two reasons why we should prefer this, albeit  formal,  interpretation
      of the phrase 'country of ...nationality'.  One is that, being formal,
      it tends to promote consistency in interpreting the Convention between
      various jurisdictions.  If a particular territory is not a State, then
      none of the parties to the Convention will treat it as the country  of
      anybody's nationality for the purposes of the Convention.

  32. The other reason lies in the function of  the  Convention  to  provide
      protection for those who need it.  Here particularly we do invoke  the
      purposive interpretation of Article 31 of the  Vienna  Convention.   A
      territory  that  has  no  formal  or  legal  existence  as   a   State
      (particularly one whose  existence,  or  whose  government,  has  been
      declared  illegal)  cannot  be  a  signatory   to   an   international
      convention, and it may be more than a little difficult to  secure  its
      compliance with internationally  recognised  or  prescribed  norms  of
      conduct.  It  is  surely  not  right  to  regard  such  an  entity  as
      equivalent to a State for the purposes of defining and,  more  to  the
      point, returning refugees.  Of course, if a person has no nationality,
      it is necessary to consider him by reference to his country of  former
      habitual residence.  No country owes him duties as its  citizen,  and,
      against that background, the contrast between returning him to a State
      and to a territory that is not a State is less  damaging.  But  for  a
      person who has a nationality it cannot be appropriate to treat a State
      on the one hand and a power illegally occupying  a  territory  on  the
      other as equal partners  or  parallel  alternative  guardians  of  his
      future safety.

  33. We mentioned a further consideration at the hearing, and it  is  right
      to record it here, although it has, in the end, played no part in  our
      decision.  The British government's view of the 'Turkish  Republic  of
      Northern Cyprus'  as having no lawful identify or  power  lay  at  the
      heart of Mr Tam's submissions.  If an individual is capable  of  being
      regarded as a national of Northern Cyprus, he is, for reasons which we
      have set out  in  paragraph  9  above,  less  likely  to  qualify  for
      protection as a refugee.  Mr Tam's argument seeks to persuade us  that
      (while denying recognition for all other purposes) we should recognise
      the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus' in one sole  context,  whose
      sole  effect  would  be  that  of  hindering  its   inhabitants   from
      establishing status  as  refugees.   We  do  not  find  that  argument
      attractive.

Northern Cyprus as a Country of Former Habitual Residence

  34. Given that Northern  Cyprus  cannot  be  the  country  of  a  person's
      nationality, can it be the 'country of his former habitual  residence'
      for a person who has no nationality?  In Tjhe Kwet Koe,  Tamberlin  J.
      noted that Hong Kong at the relevant date had  a  distinct  area  with
      identifiable borders, its own immigration laws, and was inhabited by a
      permanent  identifiable  community.   Those  factors  may  be   useful
      pointers, but, for the reasons we  are  about  to  state,  we  do  not
      consider that they are necessary  or  sufficient  conditions  for  the
      existence of a 'country' for these purposes.

  35. We agree, with respect,  with  Tamberlin  J  in  Tjhe  Kwet  Koe  that
      'country' bears a wider, less formal meaning in the phrase 'country of
      ... former habitual  residence'  than  it  does  in  'country  of  ...
      nationality'.  To some extent our reasons  for  that  view  have  been
      given in our discussion of the latter phrase.  But there is a  further
      consideration.

  36. If the Convention is to  be  universal  in  application,  it  must  be
      capable  of  affording  protection  to  all  those  who  cannot  avail
      themselves of protection in the part of the world from which they come
      (to use a neutral phrase).  It does so by providing  a  definition  of
      refugee that  applies  to  those  of  several  nationalities,  of  one
      nationality, and of no nationality.  But, even for those in  the  last
      category, there remains a  condition,  which  is  that  the  applicant
      establish (broadly speaking) a well-founded fear of persecution in the
      relevant part of the world.  It cannot have been intended  that  those
      whose home is a part of the world that cannot formally claim to  be  a
      'country' should be for this reason excluded from the benefits of  the
      Convention.  'Country of ... former habitual residence' must therefore
      be capable of being understood to include not only a  State  of  which
      the claimant could have been a national, but  also  a  territory  area
      whose status is in that sense doubtful.  Hong Kong, governed from  the
      United Kingdom at the time when Tjhe Kwet Koe was decided, but not  in
      any real sense a part of the United Kingdom, is  an  obvious  case  in
      point.  The phrase must also be capable of being understood to include
      areas of the world where there is civil war and where, as result,  the
      allocation of territory  between  different  'countries'  is  not  yet
      clear.  The breakup of the Socialist  Republic  of  Yugoslavia  is  an
      example.  At the time we make this  determination  Bosnia-Herzegovinia
      and Croatia are separate States, recognised as such;  but  during  the
      war, people coming from those areas needed to  be  able  to  establish
      that they might be refugees without having  first  to  establish  that
      their country of former habitual residence was in a position to  grant
      nationality.  In the interests of universality, the phrase 'country of
      ... former habitual residence' must even be capable of applying  to  a
      new island arising in the sea,  although,  as  Justinian  points  out,
      'this rarely happens'.

  37. We have, however, the gravest doubt whether it is proper to  treat  an
      area as a 'country' for these purposes if it  clearly  forms  part  of
      State recognised as such in International  Law.   Admittedly,  we  are
      necessarily dealing with  people  who  have  no  nationality  and  who
      therefore may not have a free right of residence throughout the  State
      in question: this might suggest that their status should  be  assessed
      by reference to  an  area  rather  than  a  State.   But  it  must  be
      remembered that recognition of an individual as a refugee must  be  on
      the basis of a need for surrogate protection.  There is no  such  need
      if the State of origin is prepared to provide proper protection within
      its borders.

  38. Consider an example.  Suppose that  'Northern  Cyprus'  could  be  the
      country of former habitual residence for  a  Turkish  Cypriot  without
      nationality.  Then it must follow that it  could  be  the  country  of
      former habitual residence for any Greek  Cypriot  without  nationality
      who happened to live  there.   If  such  a  Greek  Cypriot  fled  from
      Northern Cyprus, claiming a fear of persecution  by  reason  of  being
      Greek, it would surely be wrong to assess him by reference to Northern
      Cyprus only.  His country of former habitual residence must be Cyprus,
      so that if he could obtain protection  in  Cyprus  (perhaps  by  being
      allowed to move to the south) he is not a refugee.

  39. Northern Cyprus is, by the clear consensus of  international  opinion,
      entirely contained within the Republic of Cyprus, a  State  recognised
      in international law through the  Treaties  and  SCR  541.   We  would
      therefore tentatively conclude that Northern Cyprus is not capable  of
      being the country of a person's former habitual residence  within  the
      meaning of the Convention.  In the case of Cyprus, however, we concede
      that it may not make any difference.  Because  of  the  very  accurate
      geographical division of the island between the  two  sectors  of  the
      population, there could be little doubt of the appropriate destination
      for a former resident of Cyprus.

The position of the appellant

  40. We return, rather belatedly it  may  be  thought,  to  the  particular
      appeal before us.  We have decided that the Appellant cannot, for  the
      purposes of the Convention, be regarded as a national of the  'Turkish
      Republic of Northern Cyprus'.  There is, however, no doubt that he  is
      a citizen  of  Turkey,  and  no  other  lawful  nationality  has  been
      suggested for him.  He is therefore not of dual  nationality.   He  is
      Turkish and his claim to be a refugee within the Convention definition
      has to be assessed by reference to Turkey alone.

  41.  The  adjudicator,  understandably  (because  he  was  misled  by  the
      description of the appellant on the cover-sheet  of  the  respondent's
      bundle) treated the appellant as a 'citizen of  Northern  Cyprus'  and
      assessed his claim by reference only to Northern Cyprus.   It  follows
      that the appellant's claim has  in  fact  not  yet  been  assessed  by
      reference to the Convention definition as it applies to him.  For that
      reason it will be necessary for this appeal to be reheard.

Return to Northern Cyprus

  42. An appeal under section 8 of the 1993 Act (or section 69 of  the  1999
      Act) is not an appeal against the refusal of asylum.  It is an  appeal
      against the immigration decision, the grounds of appeal being that the
      appellant's removal or expulsion would breach the Convention.  If (but
      only if) the appellant is a refugee, he is protected from  removal  or
      expulsion by Articles  32  and  33.   Article  32  imposes  a  general
      prohibition  on  the  Contracting  States'  expulsion  of  a   refugee
      'lawfully  in  their  territory'.   As  the  prohibition  is  general,
      destination is irrelevant under this Article.  The restriction of  its
      application to those lawfully in the country  of  reception,  however,
      means that this article only applies to those appealing under  section
      8 (2) of the 1993 Act (or section 69 (2) or  (3)  of  the  1999  Act).
      That is the effect, in this context, of the decision of the  House  of
      Lords in In re Musisi [1987] Imm AR 250: see the speech of Lord Bridge
      at 258.

  43. Where the appeal is under any of the other subsections of the relevant
      Acts, the removal or expulsion even of a refugee is not prohibited  by
      the Convention.  In such cases the  appellant  is  protected  only  by
      Article 33.  As interpreted, broadly speaking, that Article  prohibits
      return to a place where the individual would  either  be  at  risk  of
      persecution for a Convention reason or  would  be  at  risk  of  being
      expelled from there to a place where he would be at such risk.

  44. In English law, the possible destinations for a person who  is  to  be
      removed form the United Kingdom are restricted by the 1971  Act.   For
      those refused leave to enter, or declared to be illegal entrants,  the
      provisions are in paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2  to  the  act.   For
      those being deported, the provisions are in paragraph 1 of Schedule 3.
       In each case removal may be to 'a country or territory to which there
      is reason to believe that he will be admitted'.  Thus, a person  being
      removed from (or being required to leave) the United Kingdom will  not
      necessarily be returned to his country of nationality.

  45. In the case of persons coming from Northern Cyprus, and holding travel
      documents issued by the 'Turkish Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus',  the
      Secretary of State has reason to believe that they will be admitted to
      Northern Cyprus.  The journey to  that  territory,  however,  involves
      travelling through  Turkey,  because  of  the  internationally-imposed
      restrictions on flights to Northern Cyprus.

  46. If a person from Northern Cyprus establishes that he is a  refugee  by
      reference to Turkey as his only country of nationality, he  may  still
      be removed to Northern Cyprus, provided that his removal  there  would
      not breach Article 33.  Whether it would do  so  is  a  matter  to  be
      determined on the facts of each individual case and it  would  not  be
      right for us, in the present context, to offer any more than the  most
      general guidance.

  47. It may well be that a decision maker can properly reach the conclusion
      that there is little general risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason in Cyprus itself, either in the north or  in  the  south.   But
      that, of course, is not the end of the matter.  If the  appellant  has
      shown that he would be at risk of persecution for a Convention  reason
      in Turkey, then (putting aside for the moment any question of internal
      relocation) his removal to Cyprus will breach  the  Convention  if  it
      puts him at risk of the same persecution.  It appears to us  that,  in
      an individual case, an appellant might be able to show either that his
      passage through Turkey to Cyprus exposes him  to  risk;  or  that  the
      Turkish authorities would be able to secure his return  from  Northern
      Cyprus to Turkey; or that the Turkish authorities  might  be  able  to
      have access to him in Cyprus.

  48. Mr Grieves pointed us to a considerable quantity of  materials  which,
      he submitted, established Turkish responsibility for  many  events  in
      Northern Cyprus.  As well as  documentary  evidence,  he  referred  to
      proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights  in  Loizidou  v
      Turkey (preliminary objections  and  judgement  on  the  merits),  and
      Cyprus v Turkey (fourth application), and Prosecutor v Dusco Tadic,  a
      judgement of the Appeals Chamber of the International tribunal for the
      Prosecution  of  Persons  Responsible  for   Serious   Violations   of
      International Humanitarian Law Committed in Territory  of  the  Former
      Yugoslavia since 1991, dated 15 July 1999.  He produced transcripts of
      all those judgements form the internet.  We do not, however,  consider
      that any of the cases cited in this  context  are  authority  for  any
      proposition of law that could assist the appellant the  case  such  as
      the present. The individual risk to an individual appellant will  need
      to be proved as a matter of fact in each individual case.

  49. We emphasise that nothing we have said about the  status  of  Northern
      Cyprus has very much  application  to  a  person  who  actually  is  a
      national of the Republic of Cyprus, whether simply by operation of the
      1960 instruments (see paragraph 8) or otherwise.  Such a  person  must
      make his claim to be a refugee by reference  to  Cyprus  as  his  sole
      country of nationality or as one  of  his  countries  of  nationality.
      Issues relating to any threat  of  refoulment  will,  however,  remain
      applicable to such a person.

Conclusions

      50. (a)    Northern Cyprus is not capable of being the country  of  a
          person's nationality for the purposes of  Article  1A(2)  of  the
          Convention.

       b) It follows that, for a person who has  (another)  nationality,  a
          link with Northern Cyprus  is  irrelevant  for  the  purposes  of
          deciding whether he is a refugee.

       c) Northern Cyprus is, it seems, not capable of being the country of
          former habitual residence of a person  who  has  no  nationality.
          Cyprus, however, undoubtedly is capable of  being  a  country  of
          former habitual residence.

       d) If a person establishes that he is a refugee within  the  meaning
          of Article 1(A)(2) of the  Convention,  care  must  be  taken  to
          ensure that his return to Northern Cyprus will not breach Article
          33.

  51. For the reasons given in paragraph 41, this appeal to the Tribunal  is
      allowed and we direct that the Appellant's appeal be considered afresh
      by an adjudicator other than Mr Jefferson.


                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton
                                                            Deputy President
