
  Kehinde (Appeal - Section 65 1999 Act - Rights of Others) Nigeria * [2001]
                                                                 UKIAT 00010




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                       Date heard: 6/11/2001
                                                   Date notified: 19/12/2001

                                   Before


                 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President(Chair)
                                Dr H H Storey
                                  Mr G Warr

                                   Between


                          HAKEEM OLANREWAJU KEHINDE

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    We have 'starred' this determination because it raises two  short  but
important and general
      points on the interpretation of section  65  of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999. We give our decision on those points in paragraphs  7
      and 9 below.

2.    The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appeals, with leave, against  the
Determination of an
      Adjudicator, Mr K Heynes, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
      of the Respondent on 28  March 2001 refusing to revoke  a  deportation
      order made against him on 15 March 2000. Before us the  Appellant  was
      represented  by  Mr  P  Kishore,  instructed  by  Osibanjo  Ete  &  Co
      Solicitors, and the Respondent was represented by Mr C Buckley.

3.    The facts are, briefly, as  follows.  The  Appellant  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom on 28 June 1986. He was  given  leave  to  enter  as  a
      visitor for one month. He has had no subsequent leave. He sought,  and
      was refused, leave to remain as a student. The refusal  was  in  April
      1987. He remained in the United Kingdom. He did not come to the notice
      of the Immigration Authorities until he was arrested on 11 March  1998
      in connection with suspected criminal offences. On 15 June 1999 he was
      convicted of attempting to pervert the course of justice and obtaining
      property by deception. He was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment  and
      recommended for deportation. On 15 March 2000  the  deportation  order
      was signed against him,  and  on  7  July  2000  the  Respondent  gave
      directions for his removal to Nigeria. There  was  an  appeal  against
      removal directions, which was dismissed. On 5 December 2000, there was
      an allegation made that  his  deportation  would  interfere  with  his
      private and family life.
      That allegation was made on the basis of claims of a number of  family
 relationships. The
      first relates to the Appellant's daughter, Shaina, born on 26  October
      1991 to his former girlfriend Lyn Watson. Secondly, the  Appellant  is
      married to Zaroon, a British Citizen. The marriage was  in  1996.  The
      Appellant also makes reference in his notice of appeal to a  daughter,
      Renee, born to a third woman, Angela Bradley, on 8 January 1999.

4.    The appellant's  appeal  is  on  human  rights  grounds  only  and  is
accordingly brought under
            section 65 of the 1999 Act, which reads as follows:

      65.   Racial discrimination and breach of Human Rights

        1) A person who alleges  that  an  authority  has,  in  taking  any
           decision under the Immigration
           Acts relating to that person's entitlement to enter or remain in
           the United Kingdom,        racially discriminated against him or
           acted in breach of his human rights may appeal to an adjudicator
           against that decision unless he  has  grounds  for  bringing  an
           appeal  against  the  decision  under  the  Special  Immigration
           Appeals Commission Act 1997.

                   (2) For the purpose of this Part-
                       (a) an authority  racially  discriminates  against  a
person if he acts, or fails to act, in relation
             to that  other person in a way which is unlawful by  virtue  of
             section 19B of the Race Relations Act 1976; and
                (b) an authority acts in breach of a person's  human  rights
      if he acts, or fails to act, in
                      relation to that other person in a way which  is  made
      unlawful by section 6(1) of the
                      Human Rights Act 1986.

      (2) Subsection  (4)  and  (5)  apply  if,  in  proceedings  before  an
      adjudicator or the Immigration
           Appeal Tribunal on an appeal, a question arises as to whether  an
      authority has, in taking any
           decision under the Immigration Acts relating to  the  appellant's
      entitlement to enter or remain
            in  the  United  Kingdom,  racially  discriminated  against  the
      appellant or acted in breach of the
           appellant's human rights.


      (4) The adjudicator, or the Tribunal, has jurisdiction to consider the
question.


      (5)      If  the  adjudicator,  or  the  Tribunal,  decides  that  the
authority concerned-
            (a)  racially discriminated against the appellant; or
            (b) acted in breach of the appellant's human rights,
                        the appeal may be allowed on the ground in question.



      (6)    No appeal may be brought under this section by  any  person  in
respect of a decision if-
            (a)   that decision is already the subject of an appeal  brought
      by him under the Special
                          Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997; and
           (b)   the appeal under that Act has not been determined.


       (7) 'Authority' means-
            (a)    the Secretary of State;
            (b)    an immigration officer;
            (c)    a person responsible for the grant or  refusal  of  entry
clearance.

5.    The first question is whether the Appellant in fact  has  a  right  of
      appeal under that section. Can he point to a decision relating to  his
      entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom?
      On a narrow view the decision against which he now  appeals  does  not
"relate to his
      entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom". He has  had  no
      such entitlement since 1986. The decision relates only to his removal.
      A wider interpretation, however, would note that it appears  that  the
      Act was intended to give a general right of  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds against immigration decisions. We find it difficult to believe
      that it was intended to draw a distinction between (for  example)  the
      deportation of those who, until the making of the  deportation  order,
      were entitled to be in the United Kingdom and the deportation of those
      who, even before the deportation order, were not entitled to remain.

6.    It appears to us that it is not necessary to take the narrow  approach
      to the wording of section 65. In the case of  a  decision  (like  that
      under appeal in the present case)  made  after  1  October  2000,  the
      person who made the decision was required to  take  into  account  the
      subject's human rights, and indeed could not lawfully make a  decision
      in breach of the subject's human rights.

7.    An appeal on human rights grounds against removal  or  exclusion  from
      the United Kingdom is, essentially, an appeal on the grounds that such
      removal or exclusion was  or  would  be,  for  human  rights  reasons,
      unlawful. If a person's removal or exclusion is unlawful,  it  follows
      that he has a right to remain or enter. Thus, as it appears to us,  an
      appeal on human rights grounds against any decision which would  cause
      the subject to be excluded or  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  is
      indeed  an  appeal  against  a  decision  relating  to  that  person's
      entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom. It follows  that
      any person who is the subject of an  immigration  decision  which,  if
      carried out, would cause him to be excluded or removed from the United
      Kingdom may, in principle, appeal under section 65.

8.    The second question relates to the power  or  duty  of  the  Appellate
      Authorities to take into account human rights claimed or alleged to be
      possessed  by  individuals  who  are   not   appellants   before   the
      authorities. Section 6 of the 1998  Act  makes  it  unlawful  for  any
      public authority (including of course, a court, or the Tribunal, or an
      Adjudicator) to act in a way which is incompatible with  a  Convention
      right. That prohibition is quite general. It appears to indicate that,
      in making any judgement, a court, or the Tribunal, or the  Adjudicator
      must have in mind not only those who are parties and whose cases  have
      been argued, but also those who are not parties, and those whose cases
      have not been argued. In a case such  as  the  present,  it  might  be
      suggested that in order to make a  judgement  which  was  lawful,  the
      Adjudicator (or the Tribunal) would need to ensure not merely that the
      Appellant's human rights were not being infringed, but also  that  the
      human rights of members of his family (who  are  not  parties  to  his
      appeal) were not infringed. If the Authority did not  conduct  a  full
      enquiry into the human rights of everybody who  might  conceivably  be
      involved,  it  could  be  argued  that  there  was  a  risk  that  the
      determination would itself be unlawful.

9.    On this point  we  have  been  persuaded  by  the  submissions  of  Mr
      Buckley. He points out that the appeal under section 65 is limited  in
      its scope. The right of appeal is given to a person who alleges that a
      decision relating to that person's entitlement to enter or remain  was
      in of breach of his human rights. An appellant under section  65  must
      be the subject of the decision: and it is only his  own  human  rights
      that he may plead under section 65 against the decision  in  question.
      In an appeal under section 65, therefore, there is  no  obligation  to
      take into account claims made about the human  rights  of  individuals
      other than the appellant or individuals who have not  themselves  been
      the subject of a decision which is under appeal. Such matters (save in
      so far as they relate to the human rights of  the  appellant  himself)
      are irrelevant to the matter under consideration.

10.   Mr Buckley suggested that section 65 is, or may  be,  inconsistent  or
      incompatible with the 1998 Act. There is no  incompatibility,  because
      the right of appeal under the 1998 Act remains.  The  subject  of  the
      immigration decision has a right of appeal under  section  65  of  the
      1999 Act. Anybody else who claims that,  in  making  or  proposing  to
      carry out the decision a public authority will breach his or her human
      rights, may bring proceedings under section 7(1)(a) of the 1998 Act.

11.   We turn now to the facts of this appeal. Leave to appeal was given  on
      matters relating to Article 8 only. The  Adjudicator  appears  not  to
      have believed that the Appellant was married to Zaroon. We  have  seen
      the marriage certificate and it is not suggested that they  have  been
      divorced. There is a formal relationship between them. The Adjudicator
      noted that Zaroon did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  him  and  he
      rejected the Appellant's evidence about their matrimonial life.  There
      was no statement from Zaroon before him, and there is none before  us.
      There is no credible evidence that the  marriage  exists  in  anything
      other than a formal sense. The Appellant has failed to establish that,
      if he is removed to Nigeria, there will be any interference  with  his
      private or family life in respect of his relationship with Zaroon.

  12. The evidence relating to Shaina was based on a letter from Lyn  Watson
      who also did not attend the hearing. The Adjudicator's conclusions  in
      that matter were as follows:


           "On the basis of the letter from Ms Watson, I  accept  as  facts
           that the relationship between the Appellant and Ms Watson  broke
           down in 1997, that Ms Watson moved  from  Manchester  to  London
           without the Appellant in 1986, has custody of  Shaina  and  that
           Shaina has not seen the Appellant since 1999. I do not  need  to
           make a finding as to the veracity of the claims by the Appellant
           and Ms Watson that the Appellant made regular trips to London to
           stay with Shaina  in  a  hotel  because,  upon  a  common  sense
           definition of the term, it is evident from the letter that there
           is no family live subsisting as between the Appellant, Ms Watson
           and Shaina Watson."

13.   Mr Kishore points out that "family life"  does  not  necessarily  mean
      living in a family. A prisoner, who is deprived of day-to-day  contact
      with  his  family,  may  nevertheless  have  a  family   life.   Those
      submissions have substance. On the other hand, we are  concerned  with
      the actual facts relating to this appeal. The Appellant claims to have
      had regular contact with Shaina until his imprisonment.  Contact  then
      stopped because it was thought inadvisable for Shaina to know that the
      Appellant was in prison. There is no evidence that it is  in  Shaina's
      interests to  resume  contact  with  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant's
      contacts with Shaina have ceased and nothing in the material before us
      gives any reason to suppose that the Appellant's  removal  to  Nigeria
      would affect his family life  in  respect  of  his  relationship  with
      Shaina.

14.   Although as we noted, there is reference to  another  daughter,  Renee
      Bradley, Mr Kishore told us that he had no information about  her  and
      made no submissions based on a relationship with her.

15.   Looking at the matter as a whole, as we do, it appears to us that  the
      Appellant's various claimed relationships were not, at the date of the
      decision, being maintained in any substantial sense. He has not  shown
      that his removal to Nigeria would affect any of  those  relationships.
      As we have explained in paragraph 9, any human rights claimed  by  the
      other parties to each of  those  claimed  relationships  do  not  fall
      directly to be  considered  here.  The  Appellant's  appeal  based  on
      Article 8 must therefore fail.

16.   If we had been persuaded  that  there  is  (or  was  at  the  date  of
      decision) any substance to the Appellant's relationships with his wife
      and his two daughters, by two other women, we should have  noted  that
      those relationships are on any account very tenuous.  We  should  have
      had no hesitation in finding that, in view of the Appellant's flagrant
      breach of immigration laws, his conviction for criminal offences,  and
      the need to maintain immigration control in the public  interest,  the
      interference with those  tenuous  relationships  was  amply  justified
      under Article 8.2 and that his deportation would for that reason  also
      not be unlawful.

17.   This appeal is dismissed.




C M G OCKELTON (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)

