
Gremesty (Abandonment of Appeal - Non-Compliance with Directions) Lebanon *
[2001] UKIAT 00011


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date of Hearing : 18/01/2001
                                     Date Determination notified:  23/2/2001


                                   Before:


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                              Mr C M G Ockelton
                               Mr M W Rapinet


                           DANY  GEORGES  GREMESTY
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Lebanon, entered the United Kingdom on  25
      July 1993 with a valid entry clearance  and  was  granted  six  months
      leave to enter.  He obtained  extensions  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
      student until 30 November 1996.  On 6 November  1996  he  applied  for
      asylum.  After a quite appalling delay, he was requested  on  28  June
      2000 to complete and  return  within  fourteen  days  a  Statement  of
      Evidence.   He failed to do so.  On 27 July 2000 his  application  was
      refused.

2.    On 2 August  2000  he  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  refusal.  His
      representative was and is Mr David Grand  who  is,  according  to  his
      notepaper, a  non-practising  barrister.  On  11  September  2000  the
      appellant and his representative were sent copies of the usual  notice
      in respect of a hearing on 4 October  2000.  There  was  attached  the
      usual form which required notification by 20 September 2000 of details
      which would enable the length of the trial and evidence to  be  called
      to be ascertained. If the form was returned in time, there would be no
      need for the appellant or his representative to attend  on  4  October
      and the full hearing would be fixed for  a  later  date.   The  notice
      contained the following warning:

             'If this direction is not complied with and if  the  appellant
             or  his  representative  does  not  attend  the  hearing   the
             adjudicator may determine the appeal in  the  absence  of  the
             appellant unless there is a satisfactory  explanation  of  his
             absence.'

3.    The appeal was to be heard at Hatton Cross and so the reply was to  be
      sent there.  On 12  September  Mr  Grand  sent  a  reply  by  recorded
      delivery.  The envelope post-marked 12 September has been produced and
      the copy of the covering letter from Mr Grand's file has affixed to it
      the recorded delivery number.  For some reason which  can  only  be  a
      slip-up in the administration the reply was not put on the file and so
      was not before the adjudicator when the case was called on  4  October
      2000.  The original letter shows a Hatton Cross stamp dated 9  October
      2000.

4.    In the circumstances, the adjudicator decided to treat the  appeal  as
      abandoned pursuant to Rule 32 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
      (Procedure) Rules 2000.  Rule 32(1) reads:

           '32. (1) Where a party has, without a satisfactory  explanation,
                 failed:


                             (a) to comply with  a  direction  given  under
                 these Rules;
                                  (b)  to comply with a provision of  these
                 Rules;  or
                 (c)  to appear at a hearing of  which  he  had  notice  in
                 accordance with these rules;


             and  the  appellate  authority  is   satisfied   in   all   the
           circumstances, including the  extent  of  the  failure  and  any
           reasons for it, that the party is not pursuing his  appeal,  the
           appellate authority may treat the appeal as abandoned.'

      The appellant has appealed on the ground that he has (as  now  clearly
      is established) returned the reply form and the appeal  has  not  been
      abandoned.

5.     This  appeal  has  been  starred  because  the  adjudicator  did  not
      expressly dismiss the appeal but recorded that it had been  abandoned.
      It has been suggested that in those circumstances there is no right of
      appeal to the Tribunal.  When the appeal  was  called  on  before  the
      Tribunal, neither the appellant nor Mr Grand attended.  Mr  Grand  had
      informed the Tribunal  in  writing  that  he  would  not  attend.   He
      enclosed the evidence which confirmed that he had submitted the  reply
      on 12 September 2000 and  asked  that  the  case  be  remitted  to  an
      adjudicator for a fresh hearing.


6.    Mr  Harper,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  had  not
      appreciated the Tribunal's concern to establish whether  there  was  a
      right of appeal and asked for the opportunity  to  take  instructions.
      The Tribunal accordingly gave him fourteen days to submit any  written
      argument and Mr Grand was to have seven days thereafter to submit  any
      reply.  Mr Harper has put before the Tribunal written  submissions  in
      which he accepts that leave to appeal can and should in this  case  be
      granted and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction.

7.    We must nevertheless, albeit briefly, explain  why  we  are  satisfied
      that Mr Harper is correct.   The  relevant  statutory  provisions  are
      contained in s.58 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  which  came
      into force on 2 October 2000. This provides, so far  as  material,  as
      follows:

            's.58(5)   For the purposes of the Immigration  Acts  an  appeal
           under this Part is to be treated as pending  during  the  period
           beginning when notice of appeal is given  and  ending  when  the
           appeal is finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned.

            (6)  An appeal is not to be treated as finally determined  while
           a further appeal may be brought.

            (7)   If such a further appeal is brought, the  original  appeal
           is not to be treated as finally  determined  until  the  further
           appeal is determined, withdrawn or abandoned.

            (8)  A pending appeal under  this  Part  is  to  be  treated  as
           abandoned if the appellant leaves the United Kingdom.

            (9)  A pending appeal under any provision  of  this  Part  other
           than section  69(3)  is  to  be  treated  as  abandoned  if  the
           appellant is granted leave to enter or  remains  in  the  United
           Kingdom.

            (10)  A pending appeal under section 61  is  to  be  treated  as
           abandoned if a deportation order is made against the appellant.'

      Paragraph 1(3) of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  (Commencement
      No. 6, Transitional and Consequential Provisions) Order 2000  provides
      that s.58(5) to (10) shall apply to pending appeals under (inter alia)
      s.8 of the 1993 Act.  This appeal is made under  s.8(2)  of  the  1993
      Act.

8.     As  is  apparent  from  s.58(5),  a  distinction  is  drawn   between
      determination, withdrawal and abandonment and s.58(6) could be said to
      imply that an appeal can  only  be  brought  against  a  determination
      rather than an abandonment.  And paragraph 22 of  Schedule  4  to  the
      1999 Act (which deals with appeals to the Tribunal) gives a  right  of
      appeal to an  appellant  'if  dissatisfied  with  [the  adjudicator's]
      determination'.

9.    In this case, the  adjudicator  decided  that  she  should  treat  the
      appeal as abandoned because of the failure to  attend  and  to  comply
      with the directions. She accordingly determined on  the  material  put
      before her that the appeal had been abandoned.  Although her  decision
      is described as a notice, it is in reality  a  determination  and  her
      failure to call it a determination or  to  state  in  terms  that  the
      appeal is dismissed does not affect that reality.

10.   Appeals can only be abandoned within the meaning of  s.58(5)  if  they
      are actually abandoned or if s.58(8), (9) or (10) apply.  It is to  be
      noted that Rule 33 provides for alternative methods  of  dealing  with
      failures to comply with directions or any rule.  One of  these  is  to
      dismiss the appeal without considering the merits. It would be  absurd
      if to act under Rule 33 would but to act  under  Rule  32  would  not,
      allow a right of appeal.

11.   If an adjudicator is  persuaded  that  a  failure  to  comply  with  a
      direction or a rule merits dismissal of an appeal,  we  would  suggest
      that he acts under Rule 33 rather than 32.  If the appeal has  not  in
      fact been abandoned, the Tribunal may be  in  difficulty  in  refusing
      leave to appeal. In any event, the additional requirement in  Rule  32
      to be satisfied that the party is not pursing his appeal need  not  be
      fulfilled.  It is in fact difficult to see the point of  permitting  a
      decision that an appeal should be treated  as  abandoned  rather  than
      that it should be dismissed.

12.   Since leave to appeal  was  properly  granted  and  the  Tribunal  has
      jurisdiction, it is clear that the case must be remitted so  that  the
      appellant can have the hearing which has been  denied  to  him.   This
      appeal is therefore allowed and the  case  is  remitted  for  a  fresh
      hearing before an adjudicator other than Mrs F.C. Bremner.





                               C M G  OCKELTON
                              DEPUTY  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      4


