
Zenovics (Right of Appeal - Certification) Latvia * [2001] UKIAT 00013
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:       |11/04/2001   |
|Date Determination     |4.5.01       |
|notified:              |             |



                                   Before


                   The Hon Mr Justice Collins (President)

                            Mr  C  M  G Ockelton

                                Mr  K  Drabu

                                   Between

|Aleksejs ZENOVICS                                  |             |
|                                                   |APPELLANT    |
|and                                                |             |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT         |             |
|                                                   |RESPONDENT   |



|For the Appellant:|Ms. E. Saunders (RLC)            |
|For the           |Mr. A. Hunter (Counsel)          |
|Respondent:       |                                 |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Latvia who was granted leave to  enter  the
  United Kingdom as a visitor for  6  months  on  19  September  1998.   He
  overstayed.  He was apprehended on 22 September 2000 when he was returned
  to Holyhead having been refused leave to enter the Republic  of  Ireland.
  When he was served with a notice  that  he  was  an  illegal  entrant  he
  claimed asylum essentially on the ground that he feared persecution as  a
  businessman by organised criminals to whom he owed money.  His claim  was
  rejected by the respondent on 2 October 2000.  He had also  claimed  that
  it would be a breach of his human rights to  return  him  to  Latvia:  he
  specifically relied on Articles 2, 3 and 5 of the European Convention  on
  Human Rights.  This claim was also rejected.

2. The respondent in the letter rejecting  the  claims  certified  that  the
  asylum claim was one to which Paragraph 9(4)(a)  of  Schedule  4  to  the
  Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (the 1999 Act) applied and Paragraph 9(7)
  did not apply  so  that  rights  of  appeal  would  be  'subject  to  the
  accelerated appeals procedure'.  This would mean that there would, if the
  adjudicator agreed with the certification, be no right of appeal  to  the
  Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  But the  letter,  after  dealing  with  and
  certifying the asylum claim, went on to reject but  not  to  certify  the
  human rights claim.

3. The appellant appealed to an adjudicator against the  removal  directions
  served by the respondent.  In accordance with the provisions of ss.74 and
  75 of the 1999 Act, the notice served on him required him to include  all
  reasons he might have to enable him to remain in the  United  Kingdom  so
  that his appeal would cover not only asylum but human rights  and  indeed
  any other possible ground upon which he  might  be  entitled  to  remain.
  Thus any appeal would enable the adjudicator to deal  with  all  possible
  grounds that the appellant might have in accordance with the  'one  stop'
  procedure: see s.77(2) of the 1999 Act which provides:-

"... the appellant is to be treated as  also  appealing  on  any  additional
      grounds -

      (a) which  he  may  for  appealing  against  the  refusal,  variation,
      decision or      directions in question under any other  provision  of
      this Act ... "

4. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  asserted  that  he  should  not  be
  returned to Latvia because he had a well-founded fear of persecution  and
  because he had 'compelling reasons under the 1950 European Convention for
  the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental freedoms'.  His appeal was
  heard on 20 November 2000 by an adjudicator, Mr. P. W.  Cruthers.   While
  the adjudicator was, as  he  put  it,  "generally  satisfied   that  [the
  appellant's] evidence was honest",  he had some reservations but  decided
  that he did not qualify  for  asylum  nor  did  his  human  rights  claim
  succeed.  He agreed with the respondent's  certification  of  the  asylum
  claim.

5.  Following  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal,  the   appellant   and   his
  representatives were sent a notice informing them that the  asylum  claim
  was certified, that the adjudicator agreed with that certificate and that
  therefore the appellant had no right of appeal to the  I.A.T.    The  RLC
  challenged this, asserting that there was a right of appeal on the  human
  rights claim which had not been certified.  In due course,  a  notice  of
  appeal was lodged limited to human rights grounds.  It was  alleged  that
  the adjudicator had erred in a number of respects.  Leave to  appeal  was
  granted in the following terms:-

         "The adjudicator agreed with the respondent's certificate;  but  it
        is now suggested that the fact that this appellant  also  raised  a
        claim under the Human Rights Act  1998  nevertheless  gives  him  a
        right of appeal. Leave is granted, limited to  this  point  in  the
        first instance".

Rule 18(9) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2000
(the 2000 Rules)  clearly  enables  a  grant  of  leave  to  be  limited  to
particular  grounds.   In  this  case,  we  must  decide  whether  we   have
jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  That means deciding whether the  agreement
by the adjudicator with the asylum certification precludes any  appeal  even
on human  rights  grounds.   If  it  does,  this  appeal  will  have  to  be
dismissed.  If it does not, the tribunal will have to  consider  whether  to
hear an appeal on the merits since they have not yet been considered.

6. This appeal has been starred  since  the  question  whether  a  right  of
  appeal exists is important and there has been some difference of  opinion
  about it.  Furthermore,  it  seemed  desirable  that,  if  possible,  the
  tribunal should give some guidance to  adjudicators  to  assist  them  in
  dealing with appeals where part only of the claim has been certified.

7. The answer to the  problem  raised  in  this  appeal  lies  in  the  true
  construction of paragraph 9 of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act.  We should set
  it out in full as originally enacted.  It has since been amended  by  the
  Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000.  We shall consider the  significance
  of those amendments in due course.  We should say  that  Mr.  Hunter  was
  unable to tell us when the amendments came into force; he thought it  was
  within the fortnight or so before the hearing.  Suffice it to say at  the
  material time the unamended Paragraph was in force.  It read:-

         "Convention cases"
         9(1).  This paragraph applies to an appeal under Part  IV  of  this
        Act by a person who  claims  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
        Convention for him to be removed from, or to be required to  leave,
        the United Kingdom, if the Secretary of State has  certified  that,
        in his opinion, that claim is one which

           (a) sub-paragraph (3), (4), (5) or (6) applies; and
           (b) sub-paragraph (7) does  not apply.

        (2)  If,  on  an  appeal  to  which  this  paragraph  applies,   the
        adjudicator agrees that the claim is one to  which  this  paragraph
        applies, paragraph 22 does not confer on the appellant any right to
        appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.

        (3) This sub-paragraph applies to a claim if, on his arrival in  the
        United Kingdom,  the  appellant  was  required  by  an  immigration
        officer to produce a valid passport and -

           (a) he failed to do so, without giving a reasonable  explanation
           for his failure; or
           (b) he produced an invalid passport and  failed  to  inform  the
           officer that it was not valid.

         (4) This  sub-paragraph  applies  to  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
        Convention if

           (a) it does not show a fear of  persecution  by  reason  of  the
           appellant's  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership   of   a
           particular social group, or political opinion; or
           (b) it shows a  fear  of  such  persecution,  but  the  fear  is
           manifestly unfounded or the circumstances which gave rise to the
           fear no longer subsist.

         (5) This sub-paragraph applies to a claim under  the  Human  Rights
        Convention if-

           (a) it does not disclose a right under the Convention; or
           (b) it does not disclose a right under the Convention,  but  the
           claim is manifestly unfounded.

         (6) This sub-paragraph applies to a claim if -

           (a) it is made at any time after the appellant -
              (i)    has been refused leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
              under the 1971 Act;
              (ii)   has  been  recommended  for  deportation  by  a  court
              empowered by that Act to do so;
              (iii)  has been notified by the Secretary of State's decision
              to make a deportation order against him under section 5(1) of
              the 1971 Act as a result of his liability to deportation; or
              (iv)   has been notified of his liability  to  removal  under
              paragraph 9 of Schedule 2 to that Act;

           (b) it is manifestly fraudulent, or any of the evidence  adduced
           in its support is manifestly false; or

          (c) it is frivolous or vexatious.

         (7) This sub-paragraph applies to a claim if the  evidence  adduced
         in  its  support  establishes  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
         appellant has been tortured in the country to which  he  is  to  be
         sent.

         (8) "Contrary to the  Convention"  means  contrary  to  the  United
        Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human
        Rights Convention.

8. The first thing to note is that in sub-paragraph (1) the words  "contrary
   to the Convention" should be read as 'contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's
   obligations under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention':
   see sub-paragraph (8).  The 'one-stop' procedure which is dealt  with  in
   ss.74 -78 of the 1999 Act requires that asylum and human  rights  grounds
   should generally be considered in one appeal.  We have  already  set  out
   s.77(2).  We note that s.77(5)  defines  'additional  grounds'  as  those
   specified  in  response  to  a  notice  under  s.74(4).   The  'one-stop'
   procedure  does  not  prevent  a  human  rights   ground   being   raised
   subsequently and not included in an appeal against an asylum refusal (see
   s.76(3)).  However, the failure to raise it at the appropriate  time  may
   (apart from affecting its merit) justify a certificate  under  paragraphs
   9(5) or 9(6).

9. Ms Saunders, in a most helpful  skeleton  argument,  has  submitted  that
   there are two claims, one under the Refugee and the other under the Human
   Rights Convention.  Each claim has a right  of  appeal  attached  to  it.
   Those appeals are heard together, but are in reality two separate appeals
   each of which claims  its  own  certificate.    Paragraph  9(4)  and  (5)
   identify the separate certificates.  That, she submits, coupled with  the
   identification in paragraph 9(8)  of  the  possible  alternative  claims,
   underlines the intention that each claim must be  individually  certified
   and that rights of appeal can only be removed  from  the  claim  that  is
   certified and not from that which is not.  She also  makes  the  powerful
   point that to remove rights of appeal in respect of a claim which is  not
   certified would be manifestly unfair.  Although the expression 'right  of
   appeal' is used, in reality it is only if the  statute enables an  appeal
   to be brought that such a right exists.

10. Unfortunately in our judgment the terms of Paragraph 9 are too clear  to
   enable us to accept Ms Saunders' submissions.  Paragraph 9(1)  recognises
   that an appeal may contain claims under either or both  the  Conventions.
   But there is only one appeal before the  appellate  authority  which  may
   contain different grounds or claims.  The one-stop requirements are  that
   all relevant grounds are contained in any appeal: see ss.74(4)  and  (7),
   75(2), 76(2) and (3) and 77 passim.  Of course, particular appeals may be
   based only on one or other of the Conventions so that paragraphs 9(4) and
   (5) can apply with no possible unfairness.  The problem is that most will
   rely on both Conventions.  Paragraph 9(1)(a)  applies  to  a  certificate
   under any of paragraphs 9(3), (4), (5) or (6).  If the adjudicator agrees
   with the certificate, paragraph 9(2) precludes an  appeal  generally  and
   not only in respect of the certified claim.

11. We have said if the adjudicator agrees with the certificate,  an  appeal
   is precluded.  The wording of Paragraph 9(2) as unamended makes no sense.
    Paragraph 9(1) provides that Paragraph 9 applies to a Part IV appeal  if
   the respondent has certified that a relevant sub-paragraph applies.  Thus
   the adjudicator must inevitably agree that the paragraph applies  if  the
   respondent has so certified.  This is not what was intended.  The purpose
   of Paragraph 9(2) was to enable the adjudicator to  form  an  independent
   view whether the particular sub-paragraph certified did in fact apply  or
   whether the respondent was wrong to have certified that there had been no
   torture.  That is what the  provisions  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
   Appeals Act 1993 (the 1993 Act) had provided (Paragraph 5(7) of  Schedule
   2).  The amendment introduced by the Race Relations (Amendment) Act  2000
   makes Paragraph 9(2) read:-

        "If, on an appeal to which this paragraph applies,  the  adjudicator
        agrees with the opinion  expressed  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
        certificate, Paragraph 22 does not  confer  on  the  appellant  any
        right to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal "

This makes the position clear, albeit it is not  particularly  well  drafted
since there will normally be no certificate as such but only  an  indication
that the Secretary of State has certified.  The Race  Relations  (Amendment)
Act 2000 also introduces a new paragraph 9A enabling the Secretary of  State
to certify that an appeal under Part IV of the 1999 Act  claiming  that  the
appellant 'has been racially  discriminated  against'  (sic)  is  manifestly
unfounded.  This recognises that there must be a separate certificate for  a
claim based on racial discrimination although  again  it  is  badly  drafted
since its language is inapt for appeals which contain  claims  under  either
Conventions as well as racial discrimination.   However,  poor  drafting  in
Paragraph 9A cannot determine the true construction of Paragraph 9.

12. The purpose behind Paragraph 9 is in  our  view  clear.   Each  of  sub-
   paragraphs (3), (4), (5) and (6) identifies some misconduct or failure by
   the person concerned to do something he should have done.   Sub-paragraph
   (3) deals with misconduct on entry  and  sub-paragraph  (6)  with  claims
   which will be suspect because not made at a  proper  time  or  which  are
   palpably false.  Sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) deal with claims which do not
   engage either Convention or which are manifestly unfounded.  The penalty,
   if the certification is upheld, is the removal of an appeal to the I.A.T.
    The provisions contained in Paragraph 5(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1993 Act
   enabling particular countries to be designated in a statutory  instrument
   as in general safe have not been re-enacted.  The ability to  certify  in
   relation to a country so designated was always anomalous and the decision
   of Turner J in R (Javed) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   that to designate Pakistan was irrational shows how wise  Parliament  was
   to remove it.  It was in any event hardly fair that an asylum seeker  who
   had a reasonable although ultimately unsuccessful claim  should  have  no
   appeal to the I.A.T. simply  because  the  country  he  was  fleeing  was
   regarded as generally safe.  Furthermore, the situation in countries  can
   change rapidly and there is no guarantee that such a change  can  equally
   rapidly  be  reflected  in  an  amendment  to  the   relevant   statutory
   instrument.

13. In the circumstances we would expect that each  claim  is  in  some  way
   regarded as defective before an appeal right which otherwise exists could
   be removed. That is not the effect  of  Paragraph  9(4)  and  (5).    Mr.
   Hunter  argued  that  Parliament  did  deliberately  so  provide  because
   otherwise there would be problems if, as was likely, the I.A.T. needed to
   revisit  findings  of  fact  which  resulted  in  the  upholding  of  the
   certification on, say, the asylum  claim.   This  argument  assumes  that
   Parliament would have countenanced that justice and  fairness  should  be
   subordinated to convenience.  We find that unlikely; at least,  we  would
   be surprised if it were done consciously with no dissenting voices.   But
   in reality the argument contains the seeds of its  own  destruction.   If
   the claims under the two Conventions are based on the same facts  or  the
   findings on one should determine the other both ought to be certified  if
   certification under sub-paragraph (4) or (5) is considered appropriate.

14. In our view, the explanation for the difficulties created  by  Paragraph
   9 lies in the draftsmen's  incorporation  of  the  new  right  of  appeal
   created by s.65 of the 1999 Act with the existing paragraph dealing  with
   certification.  We strongly suspect that those responsible  at  the  Home
   Office did not initially realise that to certify sub-paragraph (4) would,
   if the adjudicator agreed, remove the right of appeal in respect  of  the
   Human Rights claim as well.  The form of the letter in this case supports
   our suspicion.  Ms Saunders has put before us a refusal letter in another
   case dated 23 October 2000 in which both claims have been certified,  the
   one under Paragraph 9(4)(b), the other under Paragraph 9(5)(b).   So  far
   as we are aware, there is no consistency.  It is our clear view that,  if
   a certificate is considered appropriate, and if there  are  claims  under
   both Conventions based on the same facts, both claims or  neither  should
   be certified.  Otherwise, unfairness will result.  Since  paragraph  9(2)
   requires, if the right to appeal is to be denied,  that  the  adjudicator
   agrees with the opinion expressed in the  certificate,  he  can  only  so
   agree if both claims were properly certified.  He  must  agree  with  the
   whole and not only part of the opinion.  We should add that claims should
   be certified only if the Secretary of State is sure that it is  right  to
   do so.  Any doubt should be resolved in favour of not certifying.  If the
   appeal fails before the adjudicator, the I.A.T. will not grant  leave  to
   appeal unless there is a real prospect of an appeal succeeding (see  Rule
   18(7) of the 2000 Procedure Rules).  To certify a case which is  doubtful
   is to run the risk of  delay  and  expense  because  judicial  review  is
   sought.

15. The nonsense created by Paragraph 9(2) further supports  our  view  that
   there has been a failure by Parliament properly to  scrutinise  Paragraph
   9.  Mr. Hunter did not concede that it  was  nonsense  but  did  not  put
   forward any argument that made sense of it.  We must however  try  to  do
   so, at least so that it enables the adjudicator  to  do  what  Parliament
   clearly intended to do  (or  so  we  presume  since  the  alternative  is
   absurd).  In McMonagle v Westminster City Council [1990] 1 All ER 993 the
   House of Lords regarded words in statutory provisions as mere  surplusage
   where those words frustrated what their Lordships regarded  as  the  true
   purpose of the legislation.  Here it is necessary to read in words  which
   have been omitted.  Thus we would provide  the  unexpressed  but  clearly
   intended object of the verb 'agrees' by  inserting  after  it  the  words
   "with the opinion of the Secretary of State".  This does not entirely  as
   a matter of pure grammar provide the desired result, but it may suffice.

16. While the difficulty is most apparent in relation to sub-paragraphs  (4)
   and (5),  it  can  arise  under  (3)  and  (6).   If  claims  under  both
   Conventions are made to the Secretary of  State,  he  must  in  our  view
   certify both under (3) or (6).  This is because the singular includes the
   plural and, unlike  (4)  and  (5),  neither  Convention  is  individually
   specified.  This construction  of  the  provisions  avoids  some  of  the
   possible unfairness.  But the Secretary of State may  certify  an  asylum
   claim which is the only claim made to him.  On  appeal,  a  Human  Rights
   claim may be added.  In those  circumstances,  we  would  hope  that  the
   Secretary of State, if necessary through the HOPO, would  decide  whether
   to maintain the  certification  as  applicable  to  both  claims  (as  it
   probably would be) or to withdraw it.

17. Parliament has provided that the right of appeal is to be  removed  only
   if the adjudicator agrees with the Secretary of State's opinion.   If  he
   says nothing, the right will remain.   He  must  positively  express  his
   agreement.  But he must act in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
    We have already expressed the view that to maintain the certification of
   a claim under one Convention but not the other and so prohibit an  appeal
   would be unfair.  Does that enable an adjudicator not to agree and so  to
   permit an appeal?  We have no doubt that it should since no  judge  would
   ever want unless constrained by the legislation in question to do what he
   believed to be unfair.  But there are difficulties.   Paragraph  9(2)  as
   amended speaks of agreement "with the opinion expressed in the  Secretary
   of State's certificate".  The Secretary of State will have certified that
   a particular sub-paragraph applies to the relevant claim.  And it is that
   opinion and only that opinion with which the adjudicator may agree.   His
   belief that it would be unfair to maintain the  certification  albeit  it
   was correctly given in respect of the claim to which it  related  is  not
   easily seen to be a reason to fail to agree with it.

18. This approach is consistent with the reasoning of Sedley LJ in  Bajwa  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000] IAR 364.  That  was  a
   decision of a single Lord Justice on an application for leave  to  appeal
   and so is not technically binding on us.  Nevertheless, it is entitled to
   be accorded great respect and we  should  not  disagree  with  it  unless
   satisfied that it is wrong.  Bajwa was  concerned  with  a  certification
   under Paragraph 5(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1993 Act because the  appellant
   was from Pakistan and had not been tortured.   There  was  therefore,  as
   Sedley LJ held, no basis for not agreeing with  the  certification.   But
   the argument on behalf of the appellant recorded in Paragraph 13  of  the
   judgment and its rejection in Paragraph 14 applies equally to  any  other
   sub-paragraph justifying certification once the facts  have  been  found.
   With very considerable regret,  we  have  to  accept  the  force  of  his
   reasoning.

19. We would add one proviso.  There are a number  of  Human  Rights  claims
   being made which, because of Pardeepan, could not have been made earlier.
    It would be manifestly perverse to use Paragraph 9(6)(i), (ii), (iii) or
   (iv) to certify  such  a  claim  if  any  of  those  sub-paragraphs  were
   applicable only because the claim could not have been made at an  earlier
   time.  It would in such a case be open to an  adjudicator  not  to  agree
   that the relevant sub-paragraph applied because he  should  not  properly
   agree with a perverse as opposed to an unfair opinion.

20. If faced with a situation such as arises in this  case,  an  adjudicator
   should in our view consider very carefully whether he can agree with  the
   factual basis of the certification.  As Mr Hunter recognises, it  may  be
   difficult to justify a certification under one  Convention  and  not  the
   other when the facts are common to both.   An  adjudicator  should  never
   agree with a certificate unless he is satisfied that he  should  and  the
   fact that to do so will produce unfairness will oblige  him  to  consider
   with the greatest care whether he is so satisfied.  If he is not  and  so
   does not expressly agree with the Secretary of State's opinion, the right
   of appeal will remain and the Tribunal can, if an  application  is  made,
   decide whether leave should be granted.

21. For the reasons we have given, we must with regret dismiss this  appeal.
    We hope that no such application will need to be made again because  the
   Secretary of State should only certify the whole and not merely part of a
   claim.

22. The appellant, who was in custody, had made an application for  bail  to
   the  tribunal  pursuant  to  Paragraph  29(4)  of   Schedule  2  of   the
   Immigration Act 1971 (the 1971 Act).  At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
   we stated that the appeal would be dismissed, but it is still technically
   pending until finally determined (1999 Act s.58(5)).  It is  not  finally
   determined until our determination is promulgated (see Rules 2 and 25  of
   the 2000 Procedure Rules).  However, Paragraph 29(4) limits the power  to
   grant bail to a recognizance "conditioned for his appearance  before  the
   Tribunal".  The hearing has been held and  there  is  to  be  no  further
   appearance.   Accordingly,  the  tribunal's  power  to  grant  bail   was
   exhausted.  The result  was  that  bail  could  only  be  granted  by  an
   immigration officer or an adjudicator pursuant  to  Paragraph  22(1A)  of
   Schedule 2 to  the  1971  Act.   With  no  objection  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent, it was decided to treat the  application  as  if  made  under
   Paragraph 22(1A) and the application was heard by the  President  sitting
   as an adjudicator.

23. We would only add this.  There was  listed  before  us  another  appeal,
   Hrbac v Secretary of State for the Home Department  CC/23208/2000.   That
   appeal raised the same matters as arise in the instant  appeal  with  the
   additional point that the certification was bad on its  face  because  in
   the refusal letter it was said:-

         "In addition the Secretary of State certifies that  your  claim  is
        one to which Paragraph 9(5)(b)  of  Schedule  4  to  the  1999  Act
        applies because your fear of persecution  is  manifestly  unfounded
        ..."

The appellant had made claims under both  Conventions  and  so  it  was  not
possible to know   which claim the Secretary of State was  really  intending
to  certify.    Unfortunately,   the   adjudicator   and   the   appellant's
representative (there being no attendance on behalf of the respondent )  had
failed to notice the defect and the adjudicator had purported to agree  with
the certification.  It was agreed by Mr. Hunter that a  certification  which
was bad on its face could have no legal effect and so  was  not  capable  of
affecting the rights of appeal.  The Secretary of State  could  not  in  the
circumstances be said to have certified  within  the  meaning  of  Paragraph
9(1).  Accordingly, the right of appeal remained.  In  Hrbac's  case,  leave
had been granted on other  grounds  and  so  we  directed  that  the  appeal
proceed in the usual way.

24.  On  25 April we received a fax from Ms Saunders asking us to  entertain
   a further argument based on the Human Rights Act.  There  is  before  the
   Administrative Court in R (Marcu) v  An  Adjudicator  a  claim  involving
   certification and  counsel  has  sought  leave  to  amend  to  include  a
   declaration that to preclude an appeal on human rights grounds when  only
   the asylum claim was certified would be  to  breach  Article  14  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights.

25.   We have been provided with a copy of the  proposed  amendment  and  we
   are asked to permit full submissions from both  sides.   We  refused  the
   request.  The argument is wholly misconceived and has  not  the  faintest
   chance of success.  Article  14  is  not  free  standing.   It  prohibits
   discrimination in securing the enjoyment of the rights and  freedoms  set
   out in  the  Convention.   Even  if  Article  6  applied  to  immigration
   decisions and appeals to the  IAA  (which  it  does  not),  there  is  no
   Convention right to more than one appeal.  Both the  Secretary  of  State
   and the adjudicator have considered  whether  the  rights  the  appellant
   alleges will be breached if he is removed have in fact been breached.  In
   those circumstances, there is no Convention right or freedom which  could
   be in issue for the purposes of Article 14.  To suggest that an applicant
   for asylum enjoys a status which is protected  by  Article  14  is,  with
   respect, nonsense.

26.  The application is too late and in any event we could not  be  assisted
   by any further submissions.






                                                               MR    JUSTICE
   COLLINS

PRESIDENT

