
Gardi (Asylum - KAA - Internal Flight Alternative) Iraq * [2001] UKIAT
00017

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:        |9 & 10 October 2001|
|Date Determination      |16/11/2001         |
|notified:               |                   |


                                   Before:

                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                            Mr. C. M. G. Ockelton
                               Mr. G. M. Warr

|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME       |APPELLANT    |
|DEPARTMENT                            |             |
|And                                   |             |
|AZAD GARDI                            |RESPONDENT   |

|Mr. R. Husain     |For the Appellant                |
|Mr. P. Deller     |For the Respondent               |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This appeal was listed together  with  9  others  all  of  which  involve
  claims by ethnic Kurds who had come from the so-called Kurdish Autonomous
  Area (KAA) in  North  Iraq.   In  each  case,  (save  one),  the  removal
  directions specified  that  removal  would  be  to  Iraq.   In  one  case
  (CC/22240/2001) which involved a refusal of leave to enter, there  was  a
  proposed direction  and  no  more  detail  was  given.   In  the  others,
  including this one, the removal directions stated:-


                       "Directions have now  been  given  for  your  removal
           from the United Kingdom by scheduled airliner to Iraq at a  time
           and date to be notified."

     At present, the only scheduled airline to Iraq must go to Baghdad.   In
  any event, there is no means of getting any of those  seeking  asylum  to
  the KAA by air except through Baghdad and  no  other  feasible  means  of
  return to the KAA exists.

2. One case was disposed of on 9 October and need not  concern  us  further.
  We have chosen this one to serve as a vehicle for  our  determination  of
  the  effect  of  the  inability  to  return  anyone  to  the  KAA.   That
  determination will decide what happens to the others and the  reasons  in
  those appeals can be stated very shortly.  Indeed, in all but  two  there
  has been no determination of the substantive issues or there has  been  a
  finding that the account given was not to be believed and  the  appellant
  did not leave  because  of  a  fear  of  persecution.   Nonetheless,  the
  adjudicator allowed the asylum claim because of an  inability  to  return
  except via Baghdad and the conclusion  (which  is  not  challenged)  that
  there is a well-founded fear of persecution in parts of Iraq under  Sadam
  Hussain's control.  In two cases, the appeal was  dismissed  because  the
  adjudicator in question  did  not  regard  the  inability  to  return  to
  establish that to remove in accordance with the  directions  would  be  a
  breach of the Convention because of an  undertaking  not  to  return  via
  Baghdad or so long as it was possible to avoid doing so through  an  area
  where persecution would be suffered.

3. Most of these cases involve appeals by the Secretary of State. Those  and
  the relevant representatives we should identify.  They are:-


The present case:                 Mr. R. Husain    (Gill & Co)

Mohammed Rashid RAMAZAN      Mr. R. Husain

(HX/14037/2001)

Adnan Ibrahim MOHAMMAD Mr. R. Husain

(HX/10878/2001)

Hushmar Abdul Razaq ISMAIEL  Mr. N. Moloney        (IAS)

(HX/10852/2001)

Aram Migid KRIM              Mr. N. Moloney

(HX/12014/2001)

Najat Rashed MAULUD          Mr. N. Moloney

(HX/10886/2001)

Behman Abdul MOHAMMED  Mr. N. Moloney

(HX/11698/2001)

There are two appeals against the Secretary of State.  These are:-


Hussain KAKAKHAN       Mr. J. Fountain       (IAS)

(HX/12015/2001)

Johar Rebas Adulah HAJI           Mr. L. Adio                 (IAS)

(CC/22240/2001)

In all the appeals, Mr.  P.  Deller,  HOPO,  represented  the  Secretary  of
  State.

4. We have been much assisted by a skeleton argument  submitted  by  Gill  &
  Co. on behalf of  their  three  clients.   In  addition,  we  heard  oral
  argument over a period of one day (split over two half days).  The points
  raised are not by any means easy and  there  has  been  a  divergence  of
  approach among adjudicators.  A considerable number of cases have had  to
  be adjourned pending this  determination.   We  are  also  aware  that  a
  judicial review of the refusal of  an  asylum  claim  when  there  is  no
  intention to return is due to be heard by the Court of Appeal sitting  as
  a Divisional Court on 21 November in Ex parte Hwez.   It  is  also  being
  said in Hwez that all these cases should be adjourned in accordance  with
  the approach of the Tribunal in Number 19 v Secretary of  State  for  the
  Home Department (the 'flying Afghan' case).   We  considered  whether  we
  should await that decision, but have decided that we should not and  that
  it would be of more assistance to the  Court  if  we  made  our  position
  clear.  For obvious reasons, we  have  decided  that  this  determination
  should be starred.





5. Mr. Gardi (whom we shall call the applicant) claims to  have  arrived  in
  the United Kingdom in the back of a lorry on 8  August  2000.   He  spent
  some 15 days in Turkey en route from Iraq to  the  United  Kingdom.   His
  claim to asylum was based on detention and ill-treatment because  of  his
  membership of the PUK, one of the two  main  groups  which  now  exercise
  power in different parts of the KAA.  He was, he said,  now  at  risk  of
  persecution by the other main party, the KDP.  At the hearing before  the
  adjudicator (Mrs. M. Austin), the applicant's representative claimed that
  she had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal since there were no reasonable
  prospects of removal.  He then and presumably in the alternative  applied
  for an adjournment until the Secretary  of  State  had  found  a  way  of
  returning to the KAA.  These submissions were correctly rejected.   There
  was then an application that there was no need to consider the merits  of
  the claim since the KAA could not provide the protection required by  the
  Convention and so the applicant must be found  to  be  a  refugee.   That
  submission was also rejected and the adjudicator  proceeded  to  consider
  the merits of the claim.

6. The adjudicator for good reason did not believe that  the  applicant  had
  been persecuted or ill-treated as he had alleged.  He did  not leave  the
  KAA because he feared persecution by anyone.   Nonetheless,  she  allowed
  his asylum appeal because at present the only means of  removal  was  via
  Baghdad and if he went there he ran a real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
  convention reason.  She records that the HOPO drew to her  attention  the
  undertaking not to return to a  part  of  Iraq  where  persecution  might
  occur, but decided that arrangements for a supervised return were not yet
  in place and so could not be taken into account.

7. In the refusal letter, the Secretary of State  suggested  that  if  there
  was a fear of persecution by the PUK or by the KDP, the individual  could
  resettle in a part of the KAA controlled by the party which was not going
  to persecute him.  Thus the possibility of internal flight is raised.  On
  the facts as found by the adjudicator, that  particular  issue  does  not
  arise, but we should consider it in due course since  it  does  arise  in
  some cases involving Kurds from the KAA.

8. Most of these cases involve illegal entry and so the  appeal  is  against
  removal directions under s.69(5) of the  1999  Act  on  the  ground  that
  'removal in  pursuance  of  the  directions  would  be  contrary  to  the
  Convention'.   There will usually be an appeal under s.65 as well on  the
  ground that in deciding to direct removal the Secretary of State acted in
  breach of the appellant's human rights.  It will be exceedingly rare  for
  the human rights appeal to avail the appellant if his  asylum  appeal  is
  dismissed.  Sometimes there is a refusal of  leave  to  enter  where  the
  appellant has arrived openly and claimed asylum.  The  approach  will  be
  similar (provided that Iraq is  specified  as  the  removal  destination)
  since the appeal under s.69(1) is on the  ground  that  'his  removal  in
  consequence of the refusal would be contrary  to  the  Convention'.   The
  existence of a removal destination would provide a contrast with  the  No
  19 case.

9. It is very difficult to understand why the Secretary of State chooses  to
  decide to direct removal when he knows that it cannot be  achieved.   The
  scheme of the Act is not in our view consistent with the existence  of  a
  status appeal since all the subsections in s.69 (save for the  incredibly
  badly drafted 69(3) of which we may have in due course  to  try  to  make
  sense) are based on removal and the tribunal has, in accordance with  the
  decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Ravichandran,  to  consider  whether
  there is a well-founded fear of persecution if removal takes  place.   We
  have in the No 19 determination given our reasons for adopting this  view
  and there is no need to  repeat  them.   Since  the  situation  may  have
  changed when removal can be effected, there may  have  to  be  a  further
  application and appeal.  Adjudicators and the Tribunal are under enormous
  pressure because of the large numbers of cases now in  the  system.   The
  tribunal is facing some 650 applications for leave to  appeal  each  week
  and the numbers are likely if anything to increase.  If  a  determination
  that an appeal should fail is  not  going  to  lead  to  removal  because
  removal cannot be achieved, there is no good reason why the I.A.A. should
  be burdened with that case.

10. However, we cannot  refuse to hear appeals simply because we believe  it
  to be a waste of our time and resources to do so.  If a removal direction
  is made,  a  right  of  appeal  is  triggered  and  the  matter  must  be
  determined.  As we said in No 19, that  was  a  wholly  exceptional  case
  because there had been a positive decision not to  return  those  on  the
  plane to any destination.  Here, there is a decision to return  to  Iraq,
  but it is accepted that that  can as a matter of fact only be done if the
  means to do it are established.  It seems that steps are being  taken  to
  try to establish such a means.  Since there is  a  present  intention  to
  remove to a particular country as soon as it is practical to do  so,  the
  tribunal is able to and must consider whether a real risk of  persecution
  or ill-treatment in breach of human rights has been established.

11. It is in our view important  that  the  purpose  behind  the  Convention
  should always be borne in mind.  It  is  intended  to  provide  surrogate
  protection for those who face persecution where they live in the  country
  of their nationality.  We must yet again remind ourselves of the relevant
  provisions of Article 1A(2).   These are:-


"For the purposes of the present Convention, the term 'refugee' shall  apply
           to any person who  ...  owing  to  well-founded  fear  of  being
           persecuted  for  reasons   of   race,   religion,   nationality,
           membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is
           outside the country of his nationality and is unable,  or  owing
           to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of
           that country..."

As the House of Lords decided in Adan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department [1998] 2 All E.R. 453, the language of the  Article  shows  by
  the use of the present tense that there must be  a  current  well-founded
  fear of persecution and  an  unwillingness  owing  to  that  fear  or  an
  inability to avail oneself of the protection  of  the  country  of  one's
  nationality.  Thus the existence of a fear when the  asylum  seeker  left
  his country will not suffice; that fear must persist and must continue to
  be well-founded.  What if there was no fear on leaving and such fear  did
  not lead to the leaving of the country of nationality?  Usually that will
  mean that the individual in question is not outside his country owing  to
  such fear.  Thus he will not meet the test.  This is, of course,  subject
  to the possibility that he may be a refugee sur place if the situation in
  his country has changed (for example, a coup has taken place which  means
  that  he  will  run  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return)  or  his
  circumstances have altered (for example, there has been  publicity  which
  exposes him to a real risk of persecution on return).  Sometimes a person
  may establish that he is a refugee because  the  mere  fact  that  he  is
  returned as a failed asylum seeker lays him open to persecution.

12. It is submitted that the expression 'the protection of the  country'  in
  Article 1A(2) requires that the State  or  at  least  a  body  which  can
  provide and protect the benefits  set  out  in  the  Convention  must  be
  available.  Reliance is placed on the views of Professor Hathaway who  in
  a recent paper commissioned by the UNCHR for the 50th anniversary of  the
  Convention said this (at p.46):-








"The fundamental problem ... is that  none  of  the  proposed  protectors  -
           whether it is ethnic leaders in Liberia,  clans  in  Somalia  or
           embryonic local authorities in portions of Northern  Iraq  -  is
           positioned  to  deliver  what  Article  1A(2)  of  the   Refugee
           Convention  requires,  namely  the   protection   of   a   State
           accountable under international law.  The protective obligations
           of the Convention and Articles 2 - 33 are specifically addressed
           to 'States'.  The very structure of the Convention requires that
           protection will be provided not by  some  largely  unaccountable
           entity with de facto control, but rather by a government capable
           of assuming and being held responsible under  international  law
           for its actions."

He expressed similar views in his book 'The Law of Refugee Status' at  pages
  124-125.

13. In the  starred  decision  Dyli  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department (00/TH/02100) the Tribunal said this (Paragraph 13):-


"The Convention is  designed  for  the  benefit  of  persons  who  need  the
           protection of the international community because  they  are  at
           risk of persecution in their own countries.  A person  who,  for
           whatever reason, has protection in his own country has no  basis
           for fear of persecution, and there  is  no  basis  for  imposing
           international duties of surrogate protection  in  respect  of  a
           person who has adequate protection in his own country.   How  it
           is achieved, whether directly by the authorities of the  country
           or by others, is irrelevant.  There can be no basis for allowing
           a person to require other countries to take him in as a  refugee
           if he is not in fact at risk at home."

In R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Vallaj (21.12.2000) Dyson J  upheld  the
  result in Dyli, namely that the protection provided by UNMIR and KFOR was
  sufficient, but, it is said,  did  not   expressly  approve  the  passage
  cited.  Neither did he disapprove  it.  However, he said at Paragraph 36:-




"... it is difficult to imagine circumstances in which the requisite  degree
           of protection can be provided except by or on behalf of (a)  the
           country of nationality or (b) a body (such as  UNMIK)  to  which
           the duty of protection has been transferred both as a matter  of
           fact and of international law ...   it  seems  to  me  that  the
           better analysis is  that 'protection of that country' refers  to
           the protection by the entity that is charged with  the  duty  of
           protection, and that, on the true construction of Article 1A(2),
           a person may have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  only  if
           there has been a failure  to  protect  by  that  entity  or  its
           agent."



This provides some, albeit limited, support for the view  that  is  espoused
  by Professor Hathaway.





14. A person cannot be a refugee unless he is outside  the  country  of  his
  nationality (assuming that is, as in this  case,  the  relevant  part  of
  Article 1A(2))  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
  convention reason.  If he has no such  fear,  he  cannot  qualify  within
  Article 1A(2).  Nor in our view should he since it is not  necessary  for
  him to be provided with surrogate protection.  There are two elements  to
  Article 1A(2).  Both must be satisfied.  We see no reason to  write  into
  the first element any requirement other  than  that  he  is  outside  the
  country of  his  nationality  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
  persecuted.  If there is no persecution and if he left for other reasons,
  there is no reason why he should require protection from  another  State.
  An inability to obtain protection from the State rather than in any other
  way seems to us to be an irrelevant consideration.

15. We see no reason to depart from  the  approach  in  Dyli.   If  that  be
  right, there is no reason to construe the phrase 'the protection of  that
  country' in the narrow way suggested by Professor Hathaway and perhaps by
  Dyson, J, whose observations were obiter.   It  would  be  strange  if  a
  person who did not leave his  native  country  because  of  any  fear  of
  persecution could not be returned simply because he  was  protected  from
  persecution not by the State but by another agency.  This would mean  the
  mere act of leaving transferred him into a refugee.   That  in  our  view
  would be to extend the ambit  of  the  Convention  far  beyond  what  was
  intended.  In our view, the phrase 'the protection of  that  country'  is
  descriptive of  a  factual  situation  and  does  not  require  that  the
  protection is provided by the State or indeed by  anyone  in  particular.
  If it exists, that suffices.

16. The next question is whether an inability to return except to a part  of
  the country where a well-founded fear of persecution is established means
  that a person becomes a refugee.  In Dyli at Paragraph 37  the  tribunal,
  speaking of Kosovans, said this:-


"It follows that a Kosovan who fails to establish  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution for a Convention reason in Kosovo, and who is to  be
           returned to Kosovo, is not a refugee.  If such a person is to be
           returned to another part of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia,
           he is a refugee if and only if he cannot get to  Kosovo  without
           being at risk of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  on  the
           way."

So here the analogy is if the only method of getting to the KAA  is  by  way
  of Baghdad, an applicant will be a refugee.  He clearly ought not  to  be
  returned to a real risk of persecution in the country of which  he  is  a
  national and whether or not he is  a  refugee  he  would  in  the  United
  Kingdom be protected by Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
  Rights. Article 33 of the Refugee Convention   prohibits  refoulement  of
  refugees only.  It seems to us that it  does  no  real  violence  to  the
  language of Article 1A(2) to construe it to prevent a refoulement in such
  circumstances since the lack of fear in the part of the country where the
  person was living is translated into a fear in the part to which he is to
  be returned and he can then be truly said to be outside  the  country  of
  nationality and        unwilling to avail himself of the protection of it
  because of such fear.

17. But he is only a refugee if he is to  be  returned  to  a  part  of  the
  country where he fears persecution.  If he is not to be so  returned,  he
  is not to be regarded as a refugee.  It is said by the Secretary of State
  that there is a general undertaking not to return to  Baghdad.   This  is
  based on a report approved by the then Minister,  Barbara  Roche,  on  26
  March 2001, which reads as follows:-





"ENFORCED RETURNS TO NORTHERN IRAQ

The government recognises that there may be  certain  people  from  northern
           Iraq who are in need of international protection under the terms
           of the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to the Status  of
           Refugees.  However, there are also some asylum seekers from that
           region who, after careful consideration of their application, do
           not appear to meet the criteria set out in the Convention.   The
           Office of the United Nations High Commissioner is on  record  as
           saying that it would not object to the return to  northern  Iraq
           of asylum seekers from that area who  have  been  found  through
           fair and objective procedures not to be in need of international
           protection.

To that end, the Government is in the process of exploring the  options  for
           returning Iraqi citizens of Kurdish origin to the northern  part
           of Iraq, and these arrangements will  be  used  to  return  such
           Iraqi nationals who do not qualify for leave to enter or  remain
           in the United Kingdom. "

18. That hardly amounts to an undertaking  that  in  every  case  a  removal
   direction will not be put into effect until some means can  be  found  to
   avoid Baghdad, particularly as the Secretary of State has chosen to refer
   to a scheduled flight.  If a HOPO has attended  the  hearing  before  the
   adjudicator,  an  express  undertaking  is  often  given.   Judging  from
   Paragraph 4.4 of the adjudicator's determination in this case,  the  HOPO
   did  not  give  such  an  explicit  undertaking.   We   find   it   quite
   extraordinary that an explicit undertaking has still not been  given  and
   the directions for removal continue to refer to a scheduled  flight.   It
   is even more extraordinary that where a HOPO has not  been  provided  the
   undertaking is not sent in writing.  We strongly  suggest  that  problems
   will be avoided if an explicit  undertaking  is  given  and  the  removal
   directions are changed so it is clear that return is  being  directed  to
   the KAA  part  of  Iraq.   An  adjudicator  should  accept  any  explicit
   undertaking given in an individual case.

19. On the facts of this case no question of internal flight arises.   There
   is no fear of persecution in his home area.  The conclusion in Dyli  (see
   Paragraphs 34 and  35)  that  that  means  that  questions  pertinent  to
   internal location, simply do not arise was upheld by the Court of  Appeal
   in Canaj - see Paragraphs 30 and 31 in the judgment of Simon Brown L.J.

20. Sometimes it is said by the Secretary of State  (as  was  done  in  this
   case) that there can  be  internal  location  within  the  KAA  to  avoid
   persecution  in  a  particular  part.   In  such  cases,   the   ordinary
   considerations applicable to  internal  location  will  become  material.
   None of these cases raises that particular issue on the facts  found  (or
   in some cases not found) by  the  various  adjudicators.   We  see  great
   difficulties in the way of the Secretary of State since not only  can  he
   not return to the KAA but there is no guarantee that,  if  he  could,  he
   would be able to return a particular individual to the  correct  part  of
   the KAA.  The absence of any proper State authority might raise issues of
   undue harshness.  On the other hand given that  the  precise  process  of
   return is at present unknown, an Appellant (who has the burden of  proof)
   would no doubt have difficulty in showing a risk of his being returned to
   a part of the KAA where he would be persecuted.  It would be quite  wrong
   to assume that the Secretary of State would return any  individual  to  a
   place of persecution.  However, particularly as the issue  has  not  been
   fully argued before us, we do not think it is necessary or  desirable  to
   reach any concluded views in these cases, but it must not be assumed that
   we necessarily accept the approach set  out  in  the  so-called  Michigan
   Guidelines.

21. We come back to the facts of this case.  The  adjudicator  rejected  the
   applicant's account.  He has failed  to  established  any  real  risk  of
   persecution.  He is therefore not a  refugee.   The  adjudicator   should
   have accepted the HOPO's  assertion  that  the  applicant  would  not  be
   returned by way of  Baghdad,  as  binding  on  the  Secretary  of  State,
   particularly as it was consistent with  the  statement  approved  by  the
   Minister to which the adjudicator referred.  She was therefore  wrong  to
   regard the applicant as refugee and to allow the appeal. This  appeal  by
   the Secretary of State is accordingly allowed.

22.   We summarise our conclusions thus;-

         (1) An adjudicator should always consider the facts of a particular
         case.  If the particular appellant does have a well-founded fear of
         persecution in some part of  the KAA, he may be a refugee since  he
         will probably be unable and certainly unwilling to seek  protection
         from the government of Iraq.  If his account is rejected, he is not
         likely to be a refugee.

         (2)An adjudicator should never find that an appellant is a  refugee
         or can claim the    protection of the European Convention on  Human
         Rights without considering the       facts.

         (3)  Since it is by now apparent that an undertaking not to  return
         to Baghdad is given, if the Secretary of  State  is  unrepresented,
         the adjudicator should not assume that a  return will be to a  part
         of Iraq  other  than  the  KAA  without  giving  the  Secretary  of
         State the opportunity of clarifying the position.

         (4)  If there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  the
         appellant's home area, internal location does not arise.







Sir Andrew Collins
President
