
Chang (EEA Nationals - Spouses) Malaysia * [2001] UKIAT 00012


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                 Date of Hearing: 10/10/2000
                                      Date Determination notified: 24/4/2001



                                   Before:


                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr K. Drabu
                               Dr H. H. Storey

                                   Between


                             PIN-WAH JEFF CHANG

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Malaysia,  appeals,  with  leave,  against
the decision of an Adjudicator (Mr G. Warr) that he has no right  of  appeal
against the decision of the Respondent on 9 October 1996 refusing  to  issue
him with a confirmation of a right to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the
spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  Before the Tribunal  he
was represented by Mr C. J.  Brion  of  Brion  &  Co,  solicitors,  and  the
Respondent was represented by Mr P. Saini  of  counsel,  instructed  by  the
Treasury Solicitor.

2.    The formal status of this appeal to the Tribunal  is  that,  following
service of the Appellant's notice of appeal, the  Respondent  alleged  as  a
preliminary issue that the Appellant has no right  of  appeal.   The  stated
reason for that allegation  may  be  explained  for  the  purposes  of  this
determination as follows.  (i) The Appellant could have an in-country  right
of appeal only under Article 18 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
Order 1994 (SI 1987/465) as the family member of  a  national  of  a  Member
State.  (ii) Article 2(2) of that Order provides that for  the  purposes  of
the Order 'spouse' does not include a party to a  marriage  of  convenience.
(iii) The Appellant has no claim  except  as  a  spouse.   (iv)  He  is  (as
alleged by the Respondent) a party to a marriage of convenience.  Hence  (v)
he has no in-country right of appeal.

3.    The Adjudicator was requested to determine the right of  appeal  as  a
preliminary issue, as provided for by Rule 8(3) and 11(1) of the  applicable
rules, the Immigration Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1984.  In determining  that
preliminary issue, however, the  Adjudicator  was  concerned  with  the  law
relating to the rights of spouses of  EEA  nationals,  and  the  burden  and
standard of proof (if any) imposed on those who  seek  to  obtain  documents
granting or evidencing their rights to enter or remain in a Member State  as
a spouse.  Those are the matters in issue before us.

4.    The primary facts are not in dispute.  We take them largely  from  the
Adjudicator's determination.  The Appellant was born  on  19  January  1968.
He arrived in this country on 27 December 1991.  He  was  refused  leave  to
enter, but was granted temporary admission for  two  days,  expiring  on  29
December 1991, when he was expected to return to Bangkok.  He failed  to  do
so, and remained here illegally.   On  29  November  1994  he  married  Edel
Adrienne Mary McCarthy, who is a citizen of the Republic  of  Ireland.   Her
status is not in evidence, but she is said to have  been  in  employment  in
the  United  Kingdom  as  a  traffic  warden  (according  to  the   marriage
certificate that was her occupation at the date  of  the  marriage)  and  to
have been unemployed through illness since an  unknown  date  subsequent  to
the marriage.  The marriage is valid in English law.  On  16  December  1994
the Appellant applied to the Respondent to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
the  spouse  of  his  wife.   The  Respondent  invited  the  couple  to   be
interviewed,  but  that  invitation   was   declined.    There   were   then
investigations by immigration officers.  We do  not  need  to  set  out  the
terms of the officers' reports.  Given  that  the  second  report  is  by  a
person who purports to recognise the Appellant's wife, it may be that  there
were investigations not recorded  in  either  report.   In  any  event,  the
Respondent took the view that the Appellant  was  not  cohabiting  with  his
wife and, further, that his marriage had been entered into 'solely to  evade
statutory immigration controls'.  He refused to issue a  residence  document
on the ground that the Appellant's marriage 'is one of convenience'.

5.    The Adjudicator noted that, before him,  the  representatives  of  the
two parties agreed that, given that the Appellant and his wife were  validly
married, the Secretary of State bore  the  burden  of  proving,  to  a  high
degree, that the marriage was a sham.  He took account  of  the  immigration
officers' reports and an allegation,  not  contradicted  by  the  Appellant,
that the Appellant's wife  had  been  claiming  Income  Support  and  Severe
Disability Allowance as a single person  living  alone.   He  found  on  the
evidence that the marriage was  without  substance,  contracted  solely  for
immigration purposes, and giving rise to no community rights.

6.    The Adjudicator further declined to hold in the Appellant's favour  on
two specific arguments put by Mr Brion.  The first was that  the  fact  that
the Appellant had entered into a valid marriage was the end of  the  matter.
The second was that, if the Respondent failed to refuse an  application  for
a residence permit within six months of the application, he was  obliged  to
grant it.  These arguments are put again before us.

7.     If  we  may  summarise  the  Appellant's  arguments,  they  are  that
Community law, in order to promote rights of residence  and  free  movement,
severely restricts the power of Member  States  to  require  information  or
documentation before granting a residence permit to members  of  the  family
of a national of a Member State.   If  a  family  member  has  produced  the
documents required by Community legislation, he is entitled to  his  permit.
It is therefore not open to the Respondent  to  categorise  the  Appellant's
marriage  as  a   'marriage  of  convenience':  he  is  required  merely  to
recognise the existence of a valid  marriage  and,  consequently,  a  lawful
relationship.  It follows that the provision in  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Order 1994, Article 2 (2) that 'spouse' does  not  include  a
party to a marriage of convenience,  is  contrary  to  Community  law.   (We
should add, for the sake of completeness, that, with effect from  2  October
2000, that provision was replaced by an identical definition of 'spouse'  in
Article 2(1) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000
(SI 2000/2326).)

8.    Mr Brion does not argue that the recognition of a marriage which is,
in fact, a sham does anything to promote Community principles.  He submits
that the question is what the Secretary of State is entitled to do in order
to check on the reality of a relationship which is formally valid.  His
position is that the Secretary of State's powers are effectively restricted
by the Community legislation and by Article 8 of the European Convention on
Human Rights.  In the context of the present case, he argues, first, that
the Appellant had done at all that he was required to do; and, secondly,
that the inquiries made were an interference with his private life
disproportionate to the aim the Respondent sought to achieve.

9.    Both representatives produced full  skeleton  arguments  and  bundles.
We are grateful to both for their guidance in an area  of  some  complexity.
Reference was made to decisions of the European Court of Justice  in  Knoors
[1979] ECR 399, Diatta (Case 267/83) [1985]  ECR  567,  Levin  (Case  53/81)
[1982] 2 CMLR 454, Lair v Universit�t Hannover  [1988]  ECR  3161,  Surinder
Singh (Case 370/90) [1992] Imm AR 565, Brennet  v  Palletta  ('Paletta  II')
[1996] ECR I-2357, Bouchoucha [1990] ECR I-3551, Kefalas [1998]  ECR  I-2843
and Centros Ltd [1999] ECR I-1459; decisions of the High Court  in  Husseyin
[1988] Imm AR 129 and Cheung  [1994]  Imm  AR  104;  determinations  of  the
Tribunal in Kwong (10661), Lau (10859), Wong (12602), Yuen (12960),  Desmond
(15063) and Yuen (18283); and a determination of an  adjudicator,  Professor
A. Grubb, in Chu (TH/4019/95).

10.   We must consider first the Community legislation,  because  any  right
the  Appellant  has  under  Community  law  would  survive   any   purported
restriction of it by national law.  The materials  to  which  we  have  been
referred are the following.  We set out only the parts appearing  to  us  to
be relevant.

Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 of the Council

Article 10
1. The following shall, irrespective of their nationality,  have  the  right
to install themselves with a worker who is a national of  one  Member  State
and who is employed in the territory of another Member State:
(a) his spouse and their descendants who are under the age of  21  years  or
are dependants;
(b) dependent relatives in the ascending line of the worker and his spouse.
2. Member States shall facilitate the admission of any member of the  family
not coming within the provisions of paragraph 1 if dependent on  the  worker
referred to above or living under his roof in the country whence he comes.


Council Directive 64/221/EEC

Article 1
1.  The provisions of this Directive  shall  apply  to  any  National  of  a
Member State who resides in or  travels  to  another  Member  State  of  the
Community, either in order to pursue an activity as  an  employed  or  self-
employed person, or as a recipient of services.

2. These provisions shall apply also to the spouse and the  members  of  the
family who come within the provisions  of  the  regulations  and  directives
adopted in this field in pursuance of the Treaty.

Article 5
1.  A decision to grant or to refuse  a  first  residence  permit  shall  be
taken as soon as possible and in any event not later than  six  months  from
the date of application.  The person concerned shall be  allowed  to  remain
temporarily in the territory pending  a  decision  either  to  grant  or  to
refuse a residence permit.

Council Directive 68/360/EEC

Article 1
Member  States  shall,  acting  as  provided  in  this  Directive,   abolish
restrictions on the movement and residence of nationals of the  said  States
and of members of  their  families  to  whom  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68
applies.

Article 4
1.   Member States shall grant the right of residence in their territory  to
the persons referred to in Article 1 who are able to produce  the  documents
listed in paragraph 3.
2. As proof of the  right  of  residence,  a  document  entitled  'Residence
Permit for a National of a Member State of the EEC' shall be  issued.   This
document must include a statement  that  it  has  been  issued  pursuant  to
Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and to the measures taken by the  Member  States
for the implementation of the present Directive. ...
3. For the issue of a Residence Permit for a National of a Member  State  of
the EEC, Member States may require only  the  production  of  the  following
documents;
-- by the worker:
(a) the document with which he entered their territory;
(b) a confirmation of engagement from  the  employer  or  a  certificate  of
employment;
-- by the members of the worker's family:
(c) the document with which they entered the territory;
(d) a document issued by the competent authority of the State of  origin  or
the State whence they came, proving their relationship;
(e) in the cases referred to in Article 10 (1) and (2) of  Regulation  (EEC)
No 1612/68, a document issued by the competent authority  of  the  State  of
origin or the State whence they came, testifying that they are dependent  on
the worker or that they live under his roof in such country.
4. A member of the family who is not a national of a Member State shall be
issued with a residence document which shall have the same validity as that
issued to the worker on whom he is dependent.
Council Directive 73/148/EEC

Article 1
1.  The Member States shall, acting as provided in this  Directive,  abolish
restrictions on the movement and residence of:
(a) nationals of  a  Member  State  who  are  established  or  who  wish  to
establish themselves in another Member State in order to  pursue  activities
as self-employed persons, or who wish to provide services in that State;
(b) nationals of Member States wishing to go  to  another  Member  State  as
recipients of services;
(c) the spouse and the children under 21 years of  age  of  such  nationals,
irrespective of their nationality;
(d) the relatives in the ascending and descending lines of  such  nationals,
which relatives are dependent on them, irrespective of their nationality.
2.  Member States shall favour the admission of  any  other  member  of  the
family of a national referred to in paragraph 1 (a) or (b) or of the  spouse
of that national, which member is dependent on that national  or  spouse  of
that national or who in the country of origin  was  living  under  the  same
roof.

Article 4
...
2.  The right of residence for  persons  providing  and  receiving  services
shall be of equal duration with the period during  which  the  services  are
provided.  Where such period exceeds three months, the Member State  in  the
territory of which the services are performed shall issue a right  of  abode
as proof of the right of residence.  Where the period does not exceed  three
months, the identity card  or  passport  with  which  the  person  concerned
entered the territory shall be sufficient to cover  his  stay.   The  Member
State may, however, require the person concerned to report his  presence  in
the territory.
3.  A member of the family who is not a national of a Member State shall  be
issued with a residence document which shall  have  the  same  validity  has
that issued to the national to whom he is dependent.

Article 6
An applicant for a residence permit or right of abode shall not be  required
by a Member State to produce anything other than the following, namely:
(a) the identity  card  or  passport  with  which  he  or  she  entered  its
territory;
(b) proof that he or she comes within one other classes of  person  referred
to in Articles 1 and 4.
Council Resolution 12337/97

...
Noting that marriages of convenience constitute  a  means  of  circumventing
the rules on entry and residence of third-country nationals,
...
Whereas this resolution is without prejudice to Community law,
...
3.  Where there are factors which support suspicions for believing that  the
marriage is one of  convenience,  Member  States  shall  issue  a  residence
permit or an authority to reside to the third-country national on the  basis
of the marriage only after the  authorities  competent  under  national  law
have checked that the marriage is not  one  of  convenience,  and  that  the
other conditions relating to entry and residence have been fulfilled.   Such
checking may involve a separate interview with each of the two spouses.
4.  Should the authorities competent under national law  find  the  marriage
to be one of convenience,  the  residence  permit  or  authority  to  reside
granted on the basis of the third-country national's  marriage  shall  as  a
general rule be withdrawn, revoked or not renewed.

11.   We begin with Directive 64/221/EEC.  Mr Brion argues that  the  effect
of the rule that decisions must be made within six  months  is  that,  if  a
decision is not made within six  months,  there  must  be  deemed  to  be  a
decision in favour of the applicant.  We do not accept  that  argument.   No
principle of construction or  judicial  authority  to  which  we  have  been
referred  would  suggest  it.   The  Directive  clearly  provides  that   an
applicant is entitled to remain in the territory  in  question  pending  the
resolution of the application.  That may  well  be  seen  as  sufficient  to
cause the Member State to make  its  decision  as  soon  as  possible.   But
although the requirement is that the decision be  made  within  six  months,
the Directive itself provides no sanction for  failure  to  meet  that  time
limit.  That was what the Tribunal held in  Cheow,  Yuen  (12960)  and  Yuen
(18283), in all of which Mr Brion appeared.  Cheow was not cited to  us:  in
that case Mr Brion seems to have argued that  failure  to  make  a  decision
within six months amounted to a refusal,  whereas  in  the  other  cases  he
argued, as he did before us, that the failure  amounted  to  a  grant  of  a
permit.  We see no basis for  differing  from  the  Tribunals  that  decided
those cases.  The effect for which Mr Brion argues is not  implicit  in  the
Directive and there is no reason or requirement to import it.  We  therefore
decline to find that the Appellant became entitled to a residence permit  by
operation of law on 16 June 1995 (six  months  after  his  application),  or
that the subsequent refusal by the Respondent was for that reason illegal.

12.   Mr Brion does, however, argue that the process of  investigation  used
by the Respondent in this case must have been illegal, because it  goes,  in
his submission, further  than  is  allowed  by  European  legislation.  That
legislation, he submits, promotes both rights of free  movement  and  rights
of residence and deals with  the  two  in  similar  terms;  the  rights  are
extended to members of the principal's family, including in  particular  his
or her spouse; and the process  of  investigating  the  entitlement  of  the
family member is specifically restricted by  the  legislation.   We  readily
accept that, in terms, the relevant  legislation  enables  those  exercising
substantive rights of free movement  and  residence  to  be  accompanied  by
close family members: otherwise, the rights would not be of 'free'  movement
and residence.  The other two limbs of  Mr  Brion's  argument  require  more
detailed consideration.

13.   Only two of the legislative provisions to which we have been  referred
specify the mode of proof of relationship to a national of  a  Member  State
exercising Treaty rights.   They  are  Article  4(3)  of  Council  Directive
68/360/EEC and Article 6 of  Council  Directive  73/148/EEC.   We  take  the
latter first. Its provisions, which (in a case such as the  present)  merely
require proof that the family member comes  within  the  category  'spouse',
are somewhat different from those in Council Directive 68/360/EEC.

14.   Council Directive 73/148/EEC is avowedly  concerned  only  with  those
nationals of Member States who 'are established or  who  wish  to  establish
themselves in another Member State in order to pursue  activities  as  self-
employed persons, or who  wish  to  provide  services  in  that  State'  and
members of the family of such persons.  It may be that the Appellant's  wife
could have become such a person; but there is no  evidence  before  us  that
she did.  If she had  done  (in  particular  no  doubt  as  a  recipient  of
services), then (if intending to remain in the United Kingdom for more  than
three months) she could have taken steps  to  acquire  a  'right  of  abode'
document, recognising her right of residence  of  equal  duration  with  the
period during which any services were or were to be  provided,  but  limited
to that period.  The Appellant would then have been entitled, on  production
of his passport or identity card  and  proof  of  his  relationship,  to  be
issued with a residence document having the same period of validity as  that
issued to his spouse.

15.   Those are not the facts of this case.  The Appellant's spouse has  not
sought or been granted any document recognising her limited rights of  abode
under Council Directive 73/148.  There is no residence document  that  could
form the basis of  a  claim  by  the  Appellant  to  another  'of  the  same
validity'.  It is the clear intention of the Directive  that  the  residence
entitlement of dependants under it be coextensive with  the  rights  of  the
national of the Member  State  under  it.   Until  the  entitlement  of  the
principal is established, the dependant can have no enforceable right  under
this  Directive.   We  do  not  accept  that  this  Directive  assists  this
Appellant.

16.   We turn then to Council Directive 68/360/EEC.  This Directive  appears
to set out the manner in which  Member  States  may  require  nationals  and
members of their families to prove  their  status.   For  the  avoidance  of
doubt, we should emphasise  that  the  phrase  'a  Residence  Permit  for  a
National of a Member State of the EEC' at the beginning of Article  4(3)  is
the name of a document prescribed in Article 4(2).  That document is  issued
to some who are nationals of Member States, and some family members who  are
not nationals of Member States:  see  Articles  3(1)  and  1.   Despite  the
apparent dichotomy between Articles 4(3) and  4(4),  the  non-national  does
not claim purely under Article 4(4): the latter paragraph merely  prescribes
the 'validity' (ie period of  validity)  of  the  non-national's  'Residence
Permit for a National of a Member State of the EEC'.   On  the  question  of
the period of validity, the Appellant's problem  is  the  same  as  that  to
which we have referred in paragraphs 13-14.

17.   There is no doubt that the Appellant's wife is a national of a  Member
State and that the Appellant himself claims as her spouse.   It  would  then
appear to follow, as Mr Brion submits, that the Appellant is entitled  to  a
residence  permit  on  production  of  proof  of  his  relationship.    That
argument, however, raises a number of issues in reading the Directive.

18.   The Directive is of direct  effect,  in  that  it  grants  enforceable
rights to those affected by it.  In its terms, however, it is  addressed  to
the Member State, and it  is  those  terms  that  we  must  interpret.   The
Directive does not provide that a residence permit shall only be  issued  if
the documents in question are produced:  it  provides  merely  that  if  the
documents are produced, a residence permit shall be issued.   That  position
was accepted (subject to any question of fraud)  by  the  Tribunal  in  Yuen
(12960).  There remains the possibility  of  a  permit  being  issued  to  a
person who cannot, or perhaps will not,  produce  the  documents.   But  the
obligation on the State applies only when the documents are produced.

19.   What then are these documents?  So far as concerns a case such as  the
present, where a non-national husband  claims  the  right  to  reside  in  a
Member State with his wife who is a national exercising rights  of  movement
and/or residence, they are those set out in Article 4(3)(c) and (d)  of  the
Directive.  They are not, as in Council Directive 73/148/EEC,  merely  proof
of coming within one of the classes of those entitled to  reside.  They  are
much more closely specified.  They are,  first,  'the  document  with  which
[he] entered the territory',  and,  secondly,  'a  document  issued  by  the
competent authority of the State of origin or the State  whence  [he]  came,
proving [the]  relationship'.  Each  of  those  specifications  offers  some
difficulties for the Appellant.

20.   Of course the first requirement is not a reference simply  to  all  or
any of the documents that the claimant had in his possession at the time  of
his entry.  'With  which'  must  mean  'by  producing  which',  or  'by  the
authority of  which'.   This  element  of  the  Directive  would,  in  usual
circumstances, be a requirement to produce the passport or identity card  by
which the individual passed through, and was entitled to pass  through,  any
immigration controls at the border of the Member State.  The requirement  of
production of this document serves two  purposes:  it  establishes  identity
and it prevents a document evidencing a right  of  residence  being  granted
automatically  (remembering  always  the  possibility,  as  pointed  out  in
paragraph 17, of a grant of a  residence  permit  to  a  person  who  cannot
produce the documents) to a spouse who enters illegally.

21.   The Appellant in this case, as we have indicated,  was  refused  leave
to enter.  He was granted temporary admission for 48 hours nearly ten  years
ago.  In English law he has not yet  entered  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
purposes of the Immigration Act 1971.  That is the effect of  section  11(1)
of that Act, which provides, so far as relevant for present  purposes,  that
a person arriving in the United Kingdom, and who has not otherwise  entered,
shall be deemed not  to  have  entered  as  long  as  he  has  been  granted
temporary admission or has been released while  liable  to  detention.   The
Appellant's short period of temporary admission has been  followed  by  many
years of remaining without leave.  For the  whole  of  that  period  he  has
been, so far as we can see,  liable  to  detention  under  paragraph  16  of
Schedule 2 to the Act.  He is, for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Act,
deemed not to have entered the United Kingdom and there can  therefore,  for
the purposes of that Act,  be  no  document  'with  which'  he  entered  the
territory.

22.   It is possible (although not certain, particularly given the  decision
of the European Court of Justice in R v SSHD ex parte Yiadom  C-357/98,  The
Times, 16 November 2000, which came to hand after we had heard  argument  in
this appeal) that a different view would be taken outside the 1971  Act,  in
particular under Community law, on the question whether the Appellant is  to
be treated as having entered the United Kingdom.  But we do not  think  that
anyone would regard the Appellant's passport as a document 'with  which'  he
was enabled to find himself physically within the United  Kingdom.   On  the
contrary: for his application for leave to  enter,  supported  no  doubt  by
that document, was specifically refused.  He was able to enter the  physical
territory only because he was granted temporary  admission.   The  authority
behind a grant of temporary admission has to be in writing (as  required  by
paragraph 21 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act), and a person granted  temporary
admission is usually, perhaps always, given a written  notice,  because  his
admission will have been made subject to  conditions  that  do  have  to  be
notified in writing (paragraph 21(2)).  We think it would be  stretching  it
somewhat to regard the written notice of the terms  of  temporary  admission
as 'the document with which [he] entered the territory'.  But we cannot  see
that there is any other document that,  even  arguably,  might  fulfil  that
description; and, so far as  we  are  aware,  even  this  document  was  not
produced to the Respondent in support of the Appellant's application.

23.   The other document that must be produced before the  Member  State  is
obliged to issue a residence permit is the  one  proving  the  relationship.
It has to have been issued by  the  competent  authority  of  the  state  of
origin or the state from which the applicant came.   The  Appellant's  state
of origin is Malaysia, and there is nothing to suggest that 'the state  from
which he came' has any meaning other that Malaysia in his case.  He  married
in the United Kingdom and it is not suggested that  since  his  marriage  he
has left the United Kingdom.  There is  simply  no  document  in  existence,
issued by the Malaysian authorities, proving  that  he  is  married  to  his
wife, nor could there be.   His  English  marriage  certificate  would  seem
clearly not to come within the description: if the  Directive  had  intended
that, it would surely not have specified the origin of the document.

24.   The documents mentioned in subparagraphs (c) and (d) of  Article  4(3)
are appropriate in the case of  what  might  be  loosely  called  a  'moving
family': that is to say, a family including  at  least  one  national  of  a
Member State exercising Treaty rights of free movement, who arrive  together
at the border of a Member State and seek admission, or where members of  the
family seek to join  the  principal.   This  part  of  the  Article  clearly
envisages that the relationship is one which  already  existed  outside  the
Member State in which the right of residence is to be exercised.   That  was
the situation in Surinder Singh.  Although the marriage had taken  place  in
the United Kingdom, the rights in issue were those accruing to the  claimant
on his return, with his wife,  to the  United  Kingdom  from  Germany.   (No
doubt on entry to Germany he produced his passport and his English  marriage
certificate, and on return to the United Kingdom he  produced  his  passport
and  his  residence  permit  issued  in  Germany:  in  each  case  therefore
producing a document issued by the competent authority of the  state  whence
he came, proving the relationship.)

25.   A person will not be able to claim a right to the automatic  grant  of
a right of residence document under Article 4(1) if  he  entered  illegally,
or if, for example, he has lost the passport or identity card with which  he
entered; nor if he has come within the class of 'relatives'  only  since  he
entered.  That is not to say that he will not be granted the  right:  it  is
merely to say that he may have to do more to establish it;  and  the  Member
State is not in such a case prohibited by the Directive from requiring  more
of him.

26.   We thus conclude that Directive 68/360/EEC does not deal  with  rights
of free movement and rights of free residence  in  precisely  similar  terms
throughout.  We do not regard that as particularly surprising.   The  rights
themselves are granted by  Regulation  (EEC)  1612/68  of  the  Council  and
Article 1 of the Directive: Article 4  is  merely  procedural.   That  there
should be a swift automatic procedure for the grant or  recognition  of  the
rights of family members whose  relationship  has  already  been  recognised
elsewhere is an obvious feature of a  right  of  free  movement  around  the
Union.  A national exercising Treaty rights of movement may be unwilling  to
do so if family members may be subject to unexpected enquiries  or  requests
for unusual documents at the border or shortly after  admission.   But  such
considerations do not apply to rights of (continued) free residence.   Those
rights do not have the same need  for  fast  routine  determination.   Where
movement  of  a  family  is  in  issue,  it  may  be  said  that  a   fuller
investigation might bring movement to a halt.  Where,  on  the  other  hand,
the preservation of the status quo of one  party,  and  the  acquisition  of
family rights by the other party is in issue, there is  no  reason  to  rule
out fuller and individual investigation.

27.   Although it does not form part of our reasoning  in  this  appeal,  we
attempt not to lose sight of  one  particular  factor.   That  is  that  the
purpose of the legislation we are examining is  not  to  give  free-standing
rights to the family members.  It is rather to enlarge and  consolidate  the
rights of nationals of Member States.  Although  it  is  open  to  a  family
member, such as the present Appellant, to seek to enforce the rights  he  is
given by the legislation., the legislation  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the
light of its purpose.  The  Appellant's  spouse  is  not  a  party  to  this
appeal, but it is her rights that the legislation promotes: she  is  at  the
centre of the question of interpretation.

28.   In our judgement the provisions of Article 4(3) do not apply to  those
claiming family membership on the basis of a  relationship  that  came  into
existence after their last entry to the Member State  in  which  they  claim
the right of residence.  That view is, we consider, in accordance with  both
the language of the  Article  and  the  purposes  of  the  legislation.   It
follows that the Appellant is not entitled to  claim  that  he  should  have
been issued with a grant of the right of residence simply on  the  basis  of
having produced the documents he did produce.  On  the  contrary:  there  is
nothing   preventing   the   Respondent   from   investigating   his   claim
substantively.   It  further  follows   (although   this   point   was   not
specifically argued before us) that Article 5(2)(b)-(c) of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Order  1994  is  a  proper  implementation  of  the
Directive, not a breach of it.

29.   That is not the end of the matter.  It leaves open questions  relating
to what it is that the Respondent is  to  concern  himself  with,  and  what
methods of investigation he may use.

30.   In the first place we must decide whether the Respondent is  bound  by
the form  of  a  spousal  relationship,  or  whether  he  may  consider  its
substance.  Nothing to which we have been referred suggests that  rights  of
free movement and residence are intended to arise  from  relationships  that
exist in form only; and, other than the procedural provisions  to  which  we
have made reference above, there appears to  be  no  relevant  provision  of
European law that would have that effect.  Diatta is of no  real  assistance
to either side.  That was a case where a residence permit  had  been  issued
to the wife in a relationship which was at that  time  subsisting  in  every
relevant sense.  After the marriage broke up (but before  any  divorce)  the
authorities refused to renew the wife's residence permit, citing solely  the
ground that she no longer lived with her husband.  The Court ruled that non-
renewal  could  not  be  justified  on  that  sole  ground.   The  judgement
specifically states that cohabitation is not to be made  a  requirement  for
persons to be considered 'spouses' for the purposes  of  free  movement  and
residence (page 583).

31.   As the Adjudicator, Professor Grubb, wrote in Chu:

      This is a far cry from saying, as Mr Brion does, that any  marriage  -
      providing it is legally valid - will do.  Secondly, it also  seems  to
      me that what the ECJ was saying was that once the Community  right  is
      established then it will only be lost when the status  of  the  person
      seeking the residence permit as a  'spouse'  ceases.   This  can  only
      occur when under the relevant national law the marriage is  dissolved.
      By contrast, the Diatta case does not assist in determining  when  the
      Community right comes into existence, i.e. when a person is a 'spouse'
      so as to engage the  provisions  of  Council  Regulation  1612/68  and
      Directive 68/360.

31.   We agree.  Further, as the Court remarked in Surinder Singh (at p 569-
70), 'the Court has consistently held ...  the  facilities  created  by  the
Treaty cannot have the effect of allowing the persons who benefit from  them
to evade the application of national legislation and of  prohibiting  Member
States from taking the measures necessary to prevent  such  abuse'.   It  is
indeed well-established in general that that Community law cannot be  relied
on for abusive or fraudulent ends or for purposes intended to  evade  lawful
provisions  of  national  legislation:  see  Kefalas  paras  20-21,   citing
authority.  In such a case, however, the abuse must be established  and  the
state's response must be proportionate, as is illustrated by  the  judgement
against the Danish State in Centros.

32.   That principle is in our view sufficient to show  that  it  cannot  be
right to say that investigation of  a  claimant's  substantive  position  is
prohibited where he establishes his formal position.  Investigation  may  be
appropriate if it is thought that the documents produced do  not  reflect  a
relevant factual reality (such as the sick notes  in  Brennet  v  Palletta).
It may also be appropriate where it is thought that the documents reflect  a
legal reality not based on underlying  substance,  as  shown  by  the  cases
cited in the preceding paragraph.  Mr Brion emphasised that in  the  present
case the Respondent has not demonstrated any fraud or abuse.  Even  if  that
be accepted, it is clear that the state is entitled to investigate.

33.   There is a further consideration.  In Bouchoucha the claimant  was  an
osteopath.  The question was whether France was entitled to convict  him  of
an offence of practicing 'medicine' without the qualifications  required  by
French law, or obliged, as he claimed, to recognise  him  as  an  authorised
medical practitioned because  of  his  United  Kingdom  qualifications.   In
giving its judgement against the claimant, the Court said this at p I-3567:

      [I]t must be observed  that  in  so  far  as  there  is  no  Community
      definition of medical acts, the definition of acts restricted  to  the
      medical profession is, in principle, a matter for the  Member  States.
      It follows that  in  the  absence  of  Community  legislation  on  the
      professional practice of osteopathy  each  Member  State  is  free  to
      regulate the exercise of that activity within its  territory,  without
      discriminating between its own nationals and those of the other Member
      States.

34.   As with osteopathy, so with marriage.  Indeed, it is a major  part  of
the reasoning in Diatta that

      The Community  legislature  did  not  intend  to  deal  with  specific
      problems of family law  within  the  context  of  the  right  to  free
      movement.  There is no common concept, shared by all member states and
      all individuals, as regards the substance of  marital  relations.   To
      attempt to commit the Community legislature to the image of the family
      living 'under the same roof' or in the same dwelling goes  far  beyond
      the objectives pursued in the matter of free movement.

35.   In these circumstances a Member State such as the  United  Kingdom  is
entitled, within the limits imposed by relevant  Community  legislation,  to
regulate the matter by  its  own  law.   Article  2(2)  of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Order 1994 cannot exempt the  United  Kingdom  from
its obligations to issue a residence permit as required  by  the  provisions
of Article 4(3) of Council  Directive  68/360/EEC.   Those  provisions  are,
however, as we have indicated in paragraph 25, procedural.  They  limit  the
ways in which a Member State may in  certain  circumstances  investigate  an
applicant's entitlement.  They do not of  themselves  create  a  substantive
entitlement. Subject to them, and to any similar provisions, such  as  those
in Council Directive 73/148/EEC, it appears to us that  the  United  Kingdom
is not prevented from regulating what it considers to be  a  'marriage'  for
the purposes of  matters  related  to  immigration  (or,  for  that  matter,
anything else).

36.   We accept that (as the Adjudicator held in Chu) the  phrase  'marriage
of convenience' is not to be given the meaning it  had  acquired  in  United
Kingdom immigration law many years ago,  before  even  the  (now  abolished)
'primary purpose' rule was developed.  Subject to that, however, we are  not
persuaded that the Order's provision that 'spouse' does not include a  party
to a marriage of convenience, is of itself contrary to Community law  either
generally or on the facts of this appeal.

37.   We are supported in that view  by  Council  Resolution  12337/97.   Of
course a Resolution similarly cannot  override  any  legislative  provision:
indeed this one is specifically subject to Community law.  We are,  however,
entirely unable to accept Mr Brion's submission that it 'has nothing  to  do
with European law'.  It is a statement by one  of  the  legislative  bodies,
and as such is entitled to respect.  It relates  to  a  subject  covered  by
Council Directives, which are themselves not entirely clear.   In  addition,
it would be surprising if  (as  Mr  Brion  essentially  has  to  claim)  the
Council was so ignorant of its  own  legislation  that  it  was  capable  of
passing a Resolution the whole contents of which were contrary to  Community
law.  We  decline  to  accept  that  thesis.   The  Member  States  have  no
obligation  to  allow  Community  rights  to  arise  out  of  marriages   of
convenience save where legislation specifically has that  effect.   To  this
extent Community law is identical to English law.

38.   Nevertheless, in assessing the nature of the relationship  between  an
applicant and his spouse, the Respondent  is  no  doubt  restricted  by  the
principle of proportionality.  That is to say, the  actions  the  Respondent
takes in order to satisfy himself as  to  the  nature  of  the  relationship
should not be disproportionate either to their particular purpose or to  the
general need to ensure that the route to rights of residence is not  abused.
 Mr Brion's submissions on this issue were  founded  on  Article  8  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights.  This is  not  in  fact  an  appeal  to
which that Article has any direct relevance, for the  decision  about  which
the Appellant complains was made well before 2 October 2000, and  in  making
it the Respondent does not assert that he  had  regard  to  the  Appellant's
rights under the Convention (which distinguishes this appeal from R  v  SSHD
ex parte Arman Ali [2000] Imm AR 134).  Nevertheless, the  rights  protected
by the Convention lie at the heart of Community law.  In  B  v  SSHD  [2000]
Imm  AR  478,  482,  the  Court  of  Appeal  accepted  that  the  tests   of
proportionality in matters of Community law did  not  differ  from  that  in
matters of Human Rights.  The Court of Appeal  heard  no  argument  on  this
issue and nor did we: but we see no reason to take a different view.

39.    Mr  Brion's  submission  is  that   the   Respondent's   process   of
investigation in this case was disproportionate.  He  points  in  particular
to the fact that the Respondent did not use a non-intrusive  technique  that
he used and used in other similar cases: that is, to write  to  the  parties
to the marriage inviting them  to  submit  various  documents,  for  example
utility bills and bank statements, to show that they live  together  at  the
address named.  Instead he offered only what Mr  Brion  characterised  as  a
potentially intrusive and embarrassing personal interview,  and,  when  that
invitation was declined, resorted  to  surveillance  and  to  approaches  of
perhaps doubtful legality.

40.   We consider that there is merit in this  submission.   The  Respondent
deals with many applications for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
the basis of marriage.  To our knowledge there is a  process  in  which  the
preliminary investigations and invitations to  the  applicant  to  establish
his claim are in writing on both sides.  This case (and apparently a  number
of others sharing some similarities with it) were  treated  in  a  different
way from the beginning. We are told that the  Respondent  has  now  modified
his procedure in cases such as this.  That, of course,  certainly  does  not
amount to a confession of past wrongdoing.  On the  other  hand,  there  has
been no explanation or justification for omitting  the  written  stage.   We
should not want to say that all interviews  are  intrusive  or  embarassing,
but when a request for an interview  is  used  as  the  first  stage  of  an
investigation the potential  is  clearly  there.   The  Respondent  has  not
sought to persuade us that there was  any  reason  for  adopting  a  process
other than what was apparently found  adequate  in  many  other  cases.   In
these  circumstances  we  find   that   the   process   adopted   here   was
disproportionate.

41.   The effect of  that  finding  on  our  decision  in  this  appeal  is,
however, minimal.  The Adjudicator was faced  with  the  evidence  that  was
before him, and this is not an appeal under the Human Rights Act  1998.   If
it is said that the evidence should not have been  before  the  Adjudicator,
the remedy, if any be available, must lie elsewhere.

42.   In any event, given the manner in  which  this  matter  comes  to  the
Authority, it is indeed very doubtful whether it can be said that there  was
'an appeal to' an Adjudicator under Part II of the  1971  Act,  governed  by
section 19 of that Act.  It  is  that  section  alone  which  could  empower
(indeed oblige) an Adjudicator to allow the appeal  if  persuaded  that  the
decision was not in accordance with the law. Here the  only  possible  right
of appeal is under section 14(1), which is within Part II.   But  the  right
to appeal under section 14  is  granted  by  Article  18  of  the  (European
Economic Area) Order 1994, which also limits it to 'an EEA national  or  the
family member  of  such  a  person'.   The  question  at  issue  before  the
Adjudicator was whether the Appellant was a family member and,  accordingly,
whether there was 'an appeal to  him'  under  Part  II.   It  is  more  than
arguable, in our view, that there has in this case never been an  appeal  to
an Adjudicator within the meaning of section 19 and that the power to  allow
the appeal (and hence set aside the  decision)  for  want  of  legality  has
never become exercisable by the Appellate Authority.

43.   Before the Adjudicator it was common ground that  the  Respondent  had
the burden of proving that the  Appellant's  marriage  was  a  'sham'.   The
position before us was the same.  For the purposes of this determination  we
accept it, but it appears to us that that position (as to  both  burden  and
standard) might properly  be reconsidered in some other  case.   So  far  as
concerns burden, the burden of proof is, as a matter  of  the  general  law,
usually on the party who asserts.  We should, if we were required to make  a
decision on the matter, have been inclined rather to  say  that  it  is  the
Appellant who asserts that he is a spouse who has a right of residence  than
that he merely asserts that he is a spouse, leaving the Respondent  to  deny
that he has a right of residence.  We are fortified  in  that  view  by  the
provisions of Rule 31 of the  1984  Rules  (which  applied  to  this  appeal
before the Adjudicator).  So far as concerns standard, a  high  standard  is
appropriate in cases  where  misconduct  is  alleged:  but,  as  at  present
advised, we are not persuaded that there is  anything  inherently  wrong  in
marrying for convenience and  taking  any  advantages  that  flow  from  the
relationship - provided, of course, that no deception is involved.

44.   The Adjudicator had before him evidence derived from  the  Immigration
Officers who had investigated the  Appellant's  claim.   He  summarised  the
evidence as follows:

      Attempts  to  persuade  the  couple  to  attend  an  interview  proved
      fruitless.  As the Tribunal has  made  plain,  failure  to  attend  an
      interview on its own cannot be relied on in these cases.  Accordingly,
      the Home Office arranged visits.  They visited both addresses given on
      the marriage certificate.  They found no trace  of  the  Appellant  at
      either address.  No one had heard of the Appellant at the  Appellant's
      address.  I have set out in detail the result  of  the  visit  to  the
      Appellant's wife's address.  As [the Home Office  Presenting  Officer]
      points out, there is the question of the  wife's  behaviour,  and  her
      claim to Income Support and Severe Disability Allowance  as  a  single
      person living alone.  There is also  the  equivocal  behaviour  of  Mr
      Endersby.

45.   The Adjudicator went on to conclude that 'the Appellant's marriage  is
a sham, a marriage without  substance,  contracted  solely  for  immigration
purposes' and that it thus gave rise to no community rights.

46.   We take the view that the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  reach  that
conclusion on the  evidence  before  him  and  we  see  no  real  basis  for
interfering.  If we were minded to make (or  rather  re-make)  the  decision
ourselves, we should reach the same conclusion, for the  following  reasons.


47.   The Respondent has undertaken to prove a negative: that is to say,  to
prove that the marriage has no substance or  purpose  other  than  that  for
which it has avowedly been used -  as  a  vehicle  for  an  application  for
immigration status.  The proof of a negative is notoriously  difficult,  but
it is not normally impossible.  In  the  present  case  the  Respondent  has
undertaken investigations in various places where, if  there  were  anything
other than mere form in the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
spouse, traces of it might be expected to  show.   At  the  Appellant's  old
flat there was no recollection of  him  or  his  wife,  and  at  his  wife's
present flat there was no evidence of the Appellant.  It  is  right  to  say
that there may be many reasons why there might be  no  recollection  of  the
Appellant at his old flat; but in proving a  negative  it  is  advisable  to
leave no  stone  unturned.   The  Social  Security  records  show  that  the
Appellant's spouse claims as single and living alone.  It may be that  there
could be no claim by the Appellant: but the spouse's description of  herself
is unambiguous and it is not suggested that she  ever  inquired  whether  it
was properly  applicable  to  her.   We  see  no  reason  to  interpret  her
description of herself other than literally.  A friend  of  the  Appellant's
spouse knew nothing of the Appellant.

48.   Wherever  one  looks,  there  is  no  trace  of  the  incidents  of  a
relationship: on  the  contrary,  all  the  evidence  points  in  the  other
direction.  Other than what is on the Marriage Certificate, the  only  thing
known abaout the marriage is that it has been used by the Appellant  as  the
basis for this claim.  Taken as a whole, the evidence is sufficient  for  us
to find that the marriage was entered into solely for  immigration  purposes
and were we to make the decision on the facts it would be to that effect.

49.   It follows that,  as  a  party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience,  the
Appellant he is excluded from the definition of a spouse by Article 2(2)  of
the Immigration (European Economic Area) Order  1994.   It  further  follows
that he is not the family member of a national of a Member State and has  no
claim to a residence permit.  For the reason  alleged  in  the  Respondent's
explanatory Statement, he has no right  of  appeal  exercisable  within  the
United Kingdom.  We affirm the determination of the Adjudicator and  dismiss
this appeal to the Tribunal.


C. M. G. Ockelton
Deputy President
