
Slimani (Content of Adjudicator Determination) Algeria * [2001] UKIAT 00009

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:              |21 December 2000 |
|Date Determination notified:  |12 February 2001 |



                                   Before



                      The Honourable Mr Justice Collins

                              Mr. P. R. Moulden
                                 Mr. G. Warr


|                     Omar SLIMANI                        |               |
|                                                         |APPELLANT      |
|                                                         |               |
|and                                                      |               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT               |               |
|                                                         |RESPONDENT     |


                 For the appellant:             Mr. Jacobs, counsel
                 For the respondent:          Mrs Giltrow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of Algeria, born on 21  June  1970,  left  his
  native country in November 1991.  He had  obtained  a  passport  without
  difficulty in 1990.  He went to France where he stayed for 4 months.  He
  did not claim asylum there  because,  he  said,  he  had  been  told  by
  Algerian friends that any such claim would not succeed.  He then decided
  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   He   obtained   a   false   French
  identification card and used it to gain entry.  On 7 May 1994, following
  a denunciatory letter, he  was  detained  on  suspicion  of  immigration
  offences whereupon he claimed asylum.

2. His claim was refused by letter dated  2  August  1996  which  was  not
  served until 2 November 1996.  The reason he gave  for  leaving  Algeria
  was that the situation there was very bad, there were  killings  and  it
  was hard to survive; he did not feel safe.  He had not himself  suffered
  any persecution.  He had attended a rally in 1988 and had been  detained
  for three days after failing to stop at  a  road  block.   He  had  been
  beaten, but had been released without charge.  He  was  due  to  undergo
  military service and would, if returned, be prosecuted for  evading  the
  draft and would be compelled to join in the killings perpetrated by  the
  army and would also become a target of the Muslim Fundamentalists.

3. He appealed to an adjudicator.  The appeal was not heard until 15 April
  1999.  It was dismissed.  The adjudicator decided that the appellant was
  not a true  conscientious  objector.   He  had  no  religious  or  moral
  objections to military service as such.  His reasons for not wanting  to
  undergo military service were described by the adjudicator as vague  and
  amounting to no more than a wish not to be involved in  killings  and  a
  fear of reprisals.  His stay in  France  coupled  with  his  clandestine
  entry into  the  United  Kingdom  and  failure  to  claim  asylum  until
  apprehended in no way assisted the credibility of his account.  For good
  reason, the adjudicator rejected the appellant's claim.  He was entitled
  to decide that he had no valid convention reason for leaving  Algeria  -
  indeed, any other decision would  have  been  surprising.   The  Refugee
  Legal Service, who represented him  before  the  adjudicator,  presented
  lengthy and  detailed  arguments  based  on  the  proposition  that  the
  appellant was a genuine conscientious objector and that the conflict  in
  Algeria was one which was internationally condemned so that  refusal  to
  serve in the army was justified and the  punishment  for  draft  evasion
  would amount to persecution for a convention reason.   In  addition,  it
  was contended that the appellant would as a failed asylum seeker  be  at
  risk of persecution if returned.

4. All the arguments were rejected  by  the  adjudicator.   The  appellant
  applied for leave to appeal to the tribunal.  The grounds related in the
  main to a contention that the adjudicator had erred in deciding that the
  conflict was not internationally condemned and so had erred in rejecting
  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  a  conscientious  objection   to
  performing military service.   In  addition,  it  was  argued  that  the
  adjudicator had failed to consider the evidence of risk on return.

5. On 2 July 1999 the tribunal (His Honour Jeremy Fordham)  refused  leave
  to appeal.  The refusal did not follow any formula and gave  substantial
  reasons.  Unfortunately, it did not in  terms  refer  to  the  'risk  on
  return' argument, no doubt because the  chairman  was  well  aware  that
  there was no material which established that in July 1999  there  was  a
  real risk of persecution of failed asylum seekers.  The adjudicator  had
  said:-

       "Nothing before me suggests that this [i.e. return as a failed asylum
       seeker] would cause the appellant a problem within  the  meaning  of
       the Convention".

 As we shall see, that observation was correct and the  situation  has  not
  since changed.

6. The appellant sought judicial review  of  the  refusal  and  managed  to
  persuade a judge that it was arguable that the adjudicator's 'failure  to
  give reasons' in relation to risk on return was an  error  of  law.   The
  result has been a further 12 months delay and  an  unfortunate  waste  of
  time and money when there was no real prospect of success in any  appeal.
  In the end, to save yet further cost and delay, the tribunal  decided  to
  accept that the refusal of leave should be quashed and that was done by a
  consent order dated 9 August 2000.  The appeal was listed to be heard  by
  the tribunal on 26  October  2000  but  was  then  adjourned  because  of
  difficulties encountered by the appellant's solicitors.  It was heard  on
  21 December 2000.

7. We are concerned at the number of cases such as this in which permission
  is granted for judicial review but which have no real prospect of success
  on the merits.  It is of course essential that proper reasons  are  given
  by adjudicators and (albeit now only in summary form)  by  the  tribunal.
  But it is not necessary to deal in detail with every matter; the  reasons
  need only deal with the substantial points which have been raised: see Re
  Poyser & Mills Arbitration [1964] 2 Q.B. 467.  They must tell the  losing
  party why he has lost and enable him to appreciate whether there has been
  any appealable error.  In Save Britain's Heritage v  Secretary  of  State
  for the Environment [1991] 1 WLR 153, Lord Bridge said this:-


       "The three criteria suggested in the dictum of Megaw J [in Re  Poyser
       &  Mills  Arbitration]  are  that  the  reasons  should  be  proper,
       intelligible and adequate.  If the reasons given are  improper  they
       will reveal some flaw in the decision-making process which  will  be
       open to challenge on some ground other  than  the  failure  to  give
       reasons.  If the reasons given  are  unintelligible,  this  will  be
       equivalent to giving no reasons at all.  The  difficulty  arises  in
       determining whether the reasons given  are  adequate,  whether  they
       deal with the substantial points that have been raised or enable the
       reader to know what conclusion the decision-maker has reached on the
       principal controversial issues.  What  degree  of  particularity  is
       required?  I do not think one can safely say more in  general  terms
       than that the degree of particularity required will depend  entirely
       on the nature of the issues falling for decision".

8. In deciding whether or not to grant leave to appeal, the  tribunal  will
  consider the adjudicator's determination and the reasons given by him  or
  her.  It will recognise the need for the most  careful  scrutiny  of  any
  asylum claim but will also, as an expert tribunal,  have  regard  to  the
  evidence put before the adjudicator  (and  before  it  if  there  is  any
  additional evidence which can properly be considered within  the  Rules).
  If it decides that, whatever shortcomings there  may  have  been  in  the
  adjudicator's determination, there is no real  prospect  of  success,  it
  will refuse leave.  All too often, when applications for judicial  review
  are made, the claimant and the judge  concentrate  on  the  adjudicator's
  reasons.  Where the tribunal has not assisted  by  adopting  a  formulaic
  approach to its reasons for refusing leave, such a concentration  is  not
  only understandable but inevitable and the tribunal has  only  itself  to
  blame.  But where the tribunal has obviously considered the  grounds  and
  the appeal, such an  approach  is  with  respect  less  appropriate.   In
  particular, the tribunal expresses the hope that in every case the  judge
  should ask himself whether any arguable error of law  may  have  vitiated
  the tribunal's conclusion that there was no real prospect of  success  in
  any particular appeal and only grant permission if that is the position.

9. We have dwelt on the issue of judicial review because there has  in  the
  past - and the tribunal must take some of the blame for this -  been  too
  great a concern to see that every matter is dealt with by an  adjudicator
  however unimportant or peripheral.  The observations of Schiemann, J in R
  v I.A.T. ex p. Amin [1992] Imm AR 367 at 374 are all too often  cited  as
  if they were a statutory requirement  and  are  regularly  misunderstood.
  What Schiemann J said was this:-

"But it is not clear to  me  on  reading  the  adjudicator's  decision  what
       precisely  it  is  that  she  is  describing   as   'an   incredible
       arrangement'.   .......[P]arts of the story the adjudicator  appears
       to accept.  In my judgment adjudicators should  indicate  with  some
       clarity in their decisions
      (1) What evidence they accept;
      (2) What evidence they reject;
      (3) Whether there is any evidence as to  which  they  cannot  make  up
       their mind whether or not they accept it;
      (4) What, if any, evidence they regard as irrelevant".



Those observations were in the context of a failure by the  adjudicator  to
  give adequate reasons for her findings on primary purpose in relation  to
  a marriage application and the headnote in the report correctly refers to
  the observations under that heading: see [1992] Imm A.R. 367  Heading  3.
  They do not mean nor could the learned  judge  have  intended  that  they
  should mean that an adjudicator must carry out the exercise specified  in
  them in relation to all the evidence given before him.

10. But even in relation to specific issues which are  material  and  which
  have to be properly reasoned, they go too far.  The reality is that it is
  quite impossible to set out a detailed check list of what must be done in
  all cases.  It will in  many  cases  be  quite  unnecessary  to  set  out
  evidence regarded as irrelevant; indeed, very few judges would  recognise
  that as an exercise they carry out in giving judgment following a  trial.
  Equally, the circumstances will  dictate  whether  there  is  a  need  to
  identify the evidence  upon  which  they  cannot  make  up  their  minds,
  although in deciding on credibility it may be necessary to deal with such
  evidence.  The only guidance needed is that the conclusions reached  must
  be justified and it must be clear that any adverse findings in particular
  are based on evidence put before the adjudicator or the  tribunal  and  a
  proper explanation must be given to  show  why  the  conclusions  on  the
  issues of substance have been reached.  We  have  no  wish  to  encourage
  lengthy decisions.  Succinctness is a virtue provided that  the  guidance
  given by Lord Bridge which we have already  cited  is  followed  and  the
  decision does show why the findings of material fact have been  made  and
  the important conclusions have been reached.

11. The tribunal did not limit Mr. Jacobs to  the  returnability  argument.
  He sought to argue that the appellant did genuinely find  the  activities
  of the military to be morally repugnant.  The conflict was conducted with
  considerable brutality. The appellant pointed out there was evidence that
  the army had itself been responsible for killings  and  abductions  which
  were allegedly perpetrated by the terrorists whom the army  was  fighting
  and that the conflict  originally  arose  because  those  then  in  power
  refused to accept the result  of  an  election.   Mr.  Jacobs  relied  in
  particular on a tribunal decision Tallah v Secretary  of  State  for  the
  Home Department [1998] INLR 258.   That  case  involved  Algeria  and  an
  appellant who faced military  service.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  the
  adjudicator had decided that Mr.  Tallah  held  "views   quite  genuinely
  which precluded him  from  supporting  police  and  military  brutality".
  Furthermore, the tribunal was persuaded on the  material  put  before  it
  that as at November 1997 the Algerian military behaved with extraordinary
  brutality and seems to have accepted that there was no effective  control
  or attempt at control by the central  authority  over  the  methods  used
  which violated  basic  human  rights  and  breached  international  legal
  standards.  Whatever the position in November 1997, this picture is  not,
  on the material before us, true of the situation today.

12. In the course of its determination, the tribunal  in  Tallah  made  the
  following observations (at p.262E):-

       "We have frequently  encountered  in  this  type  of  appeal  emotive
       approaches manifested by the use of such  terms  as  'draft-evader',
       'deserter' - notions which  are  founded  in  patriotic  notions  of
       fighting for one's country.  Such  notions  are  laudable  in  their
       proper context but not where those seeking to evade draft are  doing
       so because they do not want to fight for some vicious group of power-
       hungry tyrants seeking  to  retain  power  or  megalomaniac  leaders
       following some sort of racial, tribal or religious jihad in a manner
       condemned by all decent-minded people".

   Mr. Jacobs has relied on this passage.  However valid  they  may  be  as
  general observations, it is, with  respect,  difficult  to  discern  what
  relevance they have (or perhaps had) to military service in Algeria.


13. The tribunal has recently considered the issues arising in relation  to
  military service in Algeria in depth in Foughali v Secretary of State for
  the Home Department (00/TH/01513: 2 June 2000).  Although  not  itself  a
  'starred' decision, it  together  with  another  roughly  contemporaneous
  decision of a different composition of the tribunal in Sepet and Bulbul v
  Secretary of State for the Home Department (00/TH/01266) was intended  to
  give general guidance and, by starring this decision, we  underline  that
  that guidance should be followed.  Mr. Jacob has introduced some  further
  material which shows that the conflict continues and that atrocities  are
  still being perpetrated.  But there is nothing which  in  any  way  casts
  doubt on the conclusions reached in Foughali's case.   Those  conclusions
  are fatal to the appellant's case on any aspect of objection to  military
  service.   Further, a recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal,  Fadli  v
  Secretary of State for the Home Department (The Times December 12  2000),
  another Algerian case, establishes that fear of reprisals from terrorists
  does not justify an asylum claim.

14. It is unnecessary to set  out  the  reasoning  in  Foughali.   We  draw
  particular attention to paragraphs 38 to 42, 45 and 46 of  the  decision.
  In addition, we adopt that tribunal's conclusions in paragraphs 47 to  50
  since this appellant like Mr. Foughali has not been able to show that  he
  had strong feelings against participation in the  conflict  because  such
  participation  was  likely  to  involve  actions   repugnant   to   basic
  international humanitarian law norms.

15. We turn therefore to the issue of risk by virtue of return as a  failed
  asylum seeker.  Reliance has been placed on the  evidence  of  Mr.  Emile
  Joffe, an expert on North Africa in general and  Algeria  in  particular.
  Evidence from him is frequently presented.  We have no doubt that he  has
  considerable expertise in Algerian affairs and  has  contacts  there  who
  provide him with information.  The report before us from Mr. Joffe is  in
  the form of a statement dated  18  May  1998.   It  was  prepared  for  a
  specific appellant whose name has been deleted.  It suggests  that  there
  is a general risk that those returned will face  detention  and  torture.
  In Foughali, there were similar opinions.  In a report of April 2000, Mr.
  Joffe had said that those returned would face the same dangers.   Nothing
  had really changed as a result of what  he  regarded  as  the  fraudulent
  election of a new president in December 1999 and the unsuccessful amnesty
  which followed it. We have been shown an Amnesty report of November 2000.
   While recognising that abuses continue and not enough is being  done  to
  'address  past  atrocities  (in  particular  the   involvement   of   the
  authorities in torture and disappearances), the report  does  not  reject
  the expressed concern to improve matters as a sham.  It  is  also  to  be
  noted that it is there said that reports of torture and ill-treatment  by
  the security forces have substantially decreased in the last two years.

16. The tribunal in Foughali explained in paragraphs 43 to 45  why  it  was
  not prepared to accept Mr. Joffe's  opinions.   We  entirely  agree.   We
  would add that with the exception of a report from the Medical Foundation
  dated 19 May 1998 in relation to an  individual  who  had  been  tortured
  before leaving Algeria and who had been allegedly tortured on return,  no
  material has been produced which supports Mr. Joffe's  views.   While  we
  appreciate that it is not easy to find such material, we are  aware  that
  there have been a number of returns, in particular from the  Netherlands,
  France, Germany and Switzerland.  If there was routine  torture  of  such
  returnees, we would have expected at least some anecdotal material  which
  suggested that such torture was occurring.

17. We would add a few words about expert evidence such as  that  given  by
  Mr. Joffe.  Adjudicators and the tribunal regularly  have  placed  before
  them opinions of individuals about the  situation  in  the  country  from
  which the appellant has come and, more importantly, about what is  likely
  to happen to the appellant should he or she  be  returned.   Often  those
  opinions are in letters or statements and the writer  is  not  called  to
  give evidence or cross-examined.  Some such experts are highly  respected
  (and we are happy to place Mr. Joffe in this category) and  at  the  very
  least their evidence can be said to have been given in good faith and  to
  be based on reliable sources.  Others range from the generally reasonable
  to the unacceptable and even venal.  But all suffer from  the  difficulty
  that very rarely are they entirely objective in their  approach  and  the
  sources relied on are  frequently  (and  no  doubt  sometimes  with  good
  reason) unidentified.  Many have fixed opinions about  the  regime  in  a
  particular country and will be  inclined  to  accept  anything  which  is
  detrimental to that regime.  This means that  more  often  than  not  the
  expert in question, even if he has the credentials which qualify  him  in
  that role, will be acting more as an advocate  than  an  expert  witness.
  While the principles which apply to expert witnesses called in High Court
  actions are not directly applicable, they give guidance when  the  weight
  to be attached to such evidence is considered.  The  most  important  are
  the need for independent assistance to the adjudicator or tribunal,   the
  prohibition against assuming the role of an  advocate  and  the  need  to
  specify the facts upon which an opinion is based:  see  National  Justice
  Compania Naviera S.A.  v  Prudential  Assurance  Co.  Ltd  ('The  Ikarian
  Reefer') [1993] 2 Lloyds Rep. 68 at 81 - 82 per Cresswell, J.

18. The tribunal and adjudicators have sometimes  been  criticised  by  the
  Court of Appeal for apparently failing to take proper account of experts'
  opinions.  Thus  in  Karanakaran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department [2000] 3 All ER  449  at  p.472  Brooke  LJ  referred  to  the
  tribunal's dismissal of considerations 'put forward  by  experts  of  the
  quality  who  wrote  opinions  in  this  case'  as  'completely   wrong'.
  Certainly the tribunal was wrong to fail to explain why it did not  place
  any weight upon the opinions, but, as the subsequent  analysis  when  the
  case  was  reconsidered  by  the  tribunal  showed,  the  opinions   were
  contradictory and unsatisfactory.  The reality is that  the  tribunal  is
  frequently aware from  experience  of  the  reliability  of  the  various
  experts whose reports are produced.  But the situation in any country has
  to be assessed upon a consideration of all relevant material  which  will
  include any reports of experts.  The adjudicator or  tribunal  must  then
  decide what weight to attach to those opinions.

19. What we have said is not an attempt at self-justification or an  attack
  upon the Court of Appeal.  The tribunal was clearly in error  in  failing
  to explain why it rejected the experts' views and in  all  cases  reasons
  should be given for so doing.  So here the adjudicator and  the  tribunal
  should have given reasons for rejecting Mr. Joffe's opinion and could not
  assume that it would be appreciated that the absence  of  any  supporting
  material in the Country reports was without spelling it out a  sufficient
  reason.  It is important that in an appropriate case adjudicators and the
  tribunal should not spare an expert's feelings and should  state  clearly
  that his evidence is for whatever reason unacceptable.


20. We would add that all too often reports prepared for  a  specific  case
  are relied on in other cases in which appellants from  the  same  country
  are represented by the same advisers.  This should not happen unless  the
  report is stated to be general and to be  valid  for  all  cases  or  the
  author is asked to confirm that he is content for it  to  be  relied  on.
  Apart from anything else, conditions change and views which may have been
  valid when the report was written might not be 12 months later.


21. The observations of Moses J in ex parte Z [1998] Imm. A.R. 516 that:-

       "That material paints a depressing picture of the security regime  in
       Algeria and certainly provides a substantial  body  of  material  on
       which a view might well be taken that if  the  authorities  discover
       that the person being returned is a failed asylum-seeker, he may  be
       subject to torture or even worse, death".

were no doubt based on the material put before him.  Whether they were  even
at that time valid is open to doubt but it is clear that now they cannot  be
relied on.

22. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.







Sir Andrew Collins
President
