
jls
                                                Appeal No: HX/64238-2000 | |
                                         AP (Return) Estonia CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       02544



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 25th April 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                11 July 2002


                                   Before:

                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                               Mr M W Rapinet
                               Mr P Rogers JP



Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                ANDREI PAVLOV


                                                                  RESPONDENT



Representation:  Mr J Jones, Home Office Presenting Office for the
Appellant
                 Mr S Symonds, representative for Refugee Legal Centre
                 (London) for the Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Respondent was born on 18th August 1969 at Bryansk in  the  former
      Union of Soviet Socialist Republic and is of  Russian  ethnicity.   In
      1975 when he was five or six years of age, his parents moved  to  that
      part of the former USSR which  subsequently  became  the  Republic  of
      Estonia on the break up of the USSR.  His last place of residence  was
      in Tallinn in Estonia, where he was the holder of an Estonian  Alien's
      passport and a limited residence permit, both of which expired on  2nd
      June 2000.  The Respondent had obtained entry clearance to come to the
      United Kingdom as a visitor and he arrived here on 17th October  1999.
      There was formally some issue as to whether  or  not  he  had  entered
      illegally,    but    that    matter    was     resolved     in     the
      Respondent's favour by the  Adjudicator  and  it  is,  in  any  event,
      accepted that he formally applied for  asylum  here  on  18th  October
      1999.

   2. Following submission of a completed self evidence  form  and  a  later
      interview, the Appellant, the Secretary of State, refused  his  asylum
      application for the reasons set out in a  letter  dated  26th  October
      2000, and on 31st October 2000 issued directions for  his  removal  to
      Estonia  as  an  illegal  entrant  following  refusal  of  the  asylum
      application.

   3. The Respondent appealed against that decision on both asylum and human
      rights grounds.  His appeal was heard on  12th  February  2001  by  an
      Adjudicator, Mr P V Ievins, who  found  that  the  Respondent  had  no
      current well-founded fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason  in
      Estonia, but then went on to consider the question of returnability to
      Estonia and to allow the appeal for the reasons set out at  paragraphs
      24 and 25 of his determination, which read as follows:

           "24.  But there is a separate  question,  his  returnability  to
                 Estonia.  It is agreed by both  sides  that  the  Appellant
                 holds an Estonian Alien's passport which has  now  expired.
                 The fax from the Estonian Embassy of 5th February 2001 with
                 the  Appellant's  papers,   and   the   Respondent's   CIPU
                 assessment at paragraph  6.13  agree  that  Estonians  with
                 Alien passports, who remain abroad for more than 183  days,
                 will lose their residence permits.  According to  the  CIPU
                 assessment, such persons would be accepted back quietly and
                 informally into Estonia as long as they  could  prove  they
                 had always lived  in  Estonia  before  departure  from  the
                 United Kingdom.  This Appellant has lived in Estonia  since
                 childhood and it is likely he could establish that  Estonia
                 was his country of habitual residence.   But  according  to
                 the Estonian Embassy, that is not  the  official  position.
                 "Not all the temporary residence permit applications meet a
                 positive reply.  There is an immigration quota in  Estonia,
                 a number that is set by the government in the beginning  of
                 each year".  A proof of family ties is said to be  helpful.
                 The Respondent says that the Appellant would be quietly and
                 informally  allowed  back  to  Estonia  if  returned.   The
                 Appellant  says  he  has  no  right  of  return   and   his
                 application for a residence permit would not necessarily be
                 successful.


           25.   Would the Appellant be allowed back into Estonia if he was
                 returned there?  Estonian law  says  he  has  no  right  to
                 return.  He would have to apply for a residence permit  and
                 his application would not necessarily be granted.  The Home
                 Office say that he would be quietly and informally let back
                 in.  I prefer the legal position to what is thought  to  be
                 the informal position.  The Respondent has failed  to  show
                 that, on the balance of probabilities, the Appellant  would
                 be allowed back into Estonia if  he  were  to  be  returned
                 there.  Although if he were to return to Estonia  he  would
                 not  face  a  serious  possibility  of  persecution  for  a
                 Convention reason, this appeal is allowed."


      The Adjudicator then said that as he had allowed the appeal, under the
      Refugee Convention it was not necessary  to  consider  whether  return
      would also lead to a breach of United Kingdom's obligation's under the
      Human Rights Convention.


  4. The Appellant sought leave to appeal  against  that  decision  on  the
     following grounds:

           "(i)  Adjudicator found that Appellant  did  not  have  a  well-
                 founded fear of being persecuted when returned to  Estonia,
                 but he nevertheless granted him refugee status due  to  him
                 being stateless.


             ii) Notwithstanding some conditions attached  to  the  Estonian
                 Alien's passport, there is evidence that once the Appellant
                 can show that he has lived in  Estonia  all  his  life,  he
                 would be accepted back into  the  country.   Appellant  has
                 both his parents living in Estonia and has been  living  in
                 Estonia since he was five years old.


            iii)  Adjudicator  also  erred  in  law  by  not  following  the
                 principles laid down in Ivanov  (R12583),  Tikhnonov  G0052
                 [1998] INLR 737 and Smith (02130).

  5. Leave to appeal was granted by a Vice President, who  added  that  the
     Tribunal  might  also  wish  to  consider  whether  the  claimed  non-
     returnability of the Respondent to Estonia would be any basis, if  the
     finding on that were upheld, for a conclusion that  his  return  there
     would be contrary either to the Refugee  Convention  or  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights.

  6. This appeal first came before us on 21st  June  2001,  when  with  all
     respect to the Adjudicator, we indicated that it was  our  preliminary
     appeal, subject to argument, that the Adjudicator had erred in law  in
     his approach and that the real  issue  was  whether,  as  a  stateless
     person, the Respondent's treatment if returned to Estonia would amount
     to persecution either by  reason  of  his  Russian  racial  or  ethnic
     origin, or to a breach of his human rights.  A similar  issue  was  at
     that time being dealt with by another division of the  Tribunal  where
     the appeal had been heard a few days previously  and  promulgation  of
     that determination was awaited.  Both parties sought an adjournment in
     those circumstances, pending its promulgation and we agreed that  this
     was the sensible  course,  during  that  both  parties  should  submit
     written skeleton  submissions  to  be  dealt  with  at  the  adjourned
     hearing.  For administrative reasons, this appeal  was  not  re-listed
     before us until today but we have, in the meantime, had the benefit of
     the written  skeleton  submissions  referred  to,  for  which  we  are
     indebted to both parties.

  7. It was accepted by both parties that the  Adjudicator's  decision  was
     fundamentally flawed and could not stand since, absent any problems as
     to his status in Estonia were he to be re-admitted,  it  was  accepted
     that there was otherwise  no  factual  basis  on  which  he  would  be
     reasonably be likely to be persecuted or to suffer treatment in breach
     of the absolute terms of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
     Rights.

  8. The Tribunal decision to which we have  referred  above  was  that  in
     Sensitev v SSHD  (01/TH/1351)  where  a  similar  situation  had  been
     considered.  Mr Sensitev had been born in Latvia but had lived  for  a
     considerable period in Estonia before seeking  asylum  in  the  United
     Kingdom, and there was no evidence to suggest that he was currently  a
     citizen of any other country.  The appeal proceeded on the basis  that
     he was a stateless person, whose country of former habitual  residence
     was Estonia, and that the appeal could not  succeed  unless  he  could
     show that he faced a well-founded fear of persecution in Estonia.   Mr
     Sensitev  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  an  Estonian  Alien's
     passport, which expired in August 1998, just over  four  months  after
     his arrival, and also had a temporary residence permit  which  expired
     at the same time as his Alien's passport.   It  had  been  found  that
     there was no well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason,
     subject to the issues then  being  considered,  on  the  basis  of  Mr
     Sensitev's personal history and the only essential difference  between
     his position and that of the present Respondent was that  the  removal
     directions predated the coming  into  force  of  the  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 1999 on 2nd October 2000 so that the issue of any potential
     breach of his human rights did not arise in that case.   The  Tribunal
     noted that under the  1993  Estonian  Alien's  Act  at  paragraph  14,
     provided that a residence permit or work permit expired,  irrespective
     of any specific date of expiry expressed in it, where an alien  stayed
     outside Estonia for more than a total of 183 days in a  year  and  had
     failed to register his absence under the conditions  and  pursuant  to
     the   procedures   established    by    the    Estonian    government.
     Unsurprisingly, as in the present appeal, Mr Sensitev  had  failed  to
     register his absence since, like the present Respondent,  his  purpose
     in being in the United Kingdom was to acquire refugee status.

  9. The Tribunal then proceeded at paragraph 21 of  the  determination  to
     make certain findings which, since they are equally applicable to  the
     present appeal, we adopt and now set out:

           "1)   That by virtue of having remained outside Estonia for more
                 than 183 days without having registered  his  absence  with
                 the Estonian Embassy in London, this Appellant's  temporary
                 residence permit has expired and cannot be extended;


           2)    That even if his expired Estonian  Alien's  passport  were
                 current, such a passport does  not  guarantee  a  right  to
                 right [we assume this is an error  for  a  reference  to  a
                 right to a residence permit] in the absence of  a  specific
                 authorisation placed in the passport;


           3)    That in order to obtain here a new  or  renewed  temporary
                 residence permit, the Appellant would need to apply to  the
                 Estonian Embassy in London;


           4)    That despite not having needed a work  permit  during  his
                 previous years in Estonia he may, in order to  be  able  to
                 work legally, need to apply for one now in compliance  with
                 the requisite requirements;


           5)    There would be no question of the  Appellant  obtaining  a
                 permanent residence permit until he had  first  obtained  a
                 temporary residence permit;


           6)    There would be no  question  of  the  Appellant  obtaining
                 Estonian citizenship until he had first obtained  permanent
                 residence."


      The  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  whether  "these  manifest
      obstacles to the Appellant re-acquiring status as a legal resident  in
      Estonia would make any return ... contrary to the Refugee Convention".
       The Tribunal went on to conclude that this would  not  be  the  case.
      They considered the following three possibilities  of  return,  namely
      that he might be excluded, might be allowed in but  then  required  to
      leave, or that his presence might be tolerated.


 10. The Tribunal then went on to deal with these issues in  the  following
     terms:

           "27.  Turning to the first possibility, under  paragraph  16  of
                 the 1993 Act there is clearly legal authority for the entry
                 of such a person to be prohibited.  However, as  Mr  Wilkie
                 has pointed out, if the  Estonian  authorities  refused  to
                 admit the Appellant, he would be  returned  to  the  United
                 Kingdom.  We are prepared  to  accept  that  as  a  correct
                 description  of  the  United  Kingdom's  practice  in   the
                 performance of its obligations under international  law  in
                 respect of persons it seeks to return to other states.   We
                 find ourselves in  further  agreement  with  Mr  Wilkie  in
                 discerning no evidence of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
                 Convention at any stage of  this  process.   Leaving  aside
                 repeated attempts at return, the only situation in which an
                 element of persecution might arise would be when the act of
                 return would expose a person  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
                 persecution in the destination country ie  a  violation  of
                 Article 3 of the Refugee Convention.  But  for  reasons  we
                 shall clarify in a moment, no such situation arises in this
                 case.


           28.   As to the second possibility, namely that of the  Estonian
                 authorities requiring him to leave  Estonia,  there  is  no
                 evidence that they take  such  steps  in  respect  of  non-
                 citizens who have no other nationality or country  prepared
                 to accept  them.   Nor  is  there  any  evidence  that,  in
                 operating their deportation rules, the Estonian authorities
                 would seek to remove anyone in breach  of  their  own  non-
                 refoulement  obligations  under  the  Refugee   Convention.
                 Given the emphasis in the background country  materials  on
                 the current government's  considerable  efforts  to  ensure
                 compliance with European  and  international  human  rights
                 Conventions, we think that any such possibility  is  purely
                 speculative.


           29.   As to the third possibility, that he would be  re-admitted
                 and his stay tolerated, the Tribunal would accept that  the
                 Appellant would lack a secure legal basis of stay and would
                 apparently be prevented from legally working at  least  for
                 some period of time.  However, it is equally clear that his
                 lack of a legal basis for stay would not exclude  him  from
                 civil and political rights.  As set out at paragraph  5  of
                 the 1993 Act:


                       "Aliens staying in Estonia are guaranteed rights  and
                       freedoms equal to those of Estonian  citizens  unless
                       the   Constitution,   this   Act,   other   Acts   of
                       international   agreements   of    Estonia    provide
                       otherwise".


             30. It is further provided that:

                       "Aliens  are  guaranteed  the  rights  and   freedoms
                       arising  from  the  generally  recognised  rules   of
                       international law and international custom".


             31. Estonia has also ratified the European Convention on  Human
                 Rights  almost  all  of  whose  rights  are  guaranteed  to
                 citizens and aliens alike.

             32. Complementing these legal  safeguards  to  the  Appellant's
                 situation if he was re-admitted to Estonia, we consider  it
                 highly material that, despite the very close monitoring  by
                 international and European analysts and  observers  of  the
                 situation of non-citizens in Estonia over the past  decade,
                 there is virtually no evidence  that  persons  who  lack  a
                 legal right to stay in Estonia face any serious  denial  of
                 their civil or political or for that matter their economic,
                 social or cultural rights.  The March  2000  CIPU  Bulletin
                 records at paragraph 2.2 that  "[t]he  Estonian  government
                 generally respects the rights of  its  citizens".   And  at
                 paragraph 8.32 it adds that "[t]he rights of  the  Russian-
                 speaking minority, with or  without  Estonian  nationality,
                 continue to be largely observed and safeguarded".  The same
                 report notes that both the OSCE Mission and the  OSCE  High
                 Commissioner on National Minorities have declared that they
                 could not find a pattern  of  human  rights  violations  or
                 abuses against ethnic Russians in Estonia.

             33. We think it reasonable to assume  also  that  the  Estonian
                 authorities, in any  dealings  with  the  Appellant,  would
                 accord some weight to evidence  of  his  considerable  ties
                 with Estonia.  [The Tribunal then dealt with these  on  the
                 basis of the specific circumstances of Mr Sensitev.]  These
                 include: the fact that he had lived there  for  almost  his
                 entire life between 1965 and his departure in 1998 (over 20
                 years); the fact that he had worked there; the fact that he
                 was the son of an Olympic champion and had  won  medals  in
                 his own right in  clay-shooting;  and  the  fact  that  his
                 mother lived in Estonia.  In addition,  and  of  particular
                 importance,  the  Appellant  is  a  person  who  had   been
                 considered suitable  to  be  granted  an  Estonian  Alien's
                 passport and a residence permit in  the  past.   Under  the
                 1993 Alien's Act paragraph 8(2) it is made  clear  that  an
                 Alien's passport is only issued  to  an  alien  staying  in
                 Estonia with regard to whom a decision to issue a residence
                 permit has been made.

 11. On the  basis  of  those  matters,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  Mr
     Sensitev's removal, if he were admitted to Estonia and not required to
     leave,  would  not  lead  to  any  breach  of  the  United   Kingdom's
     international obligations under the Refugee Convention as:

           "He would not face any  serious  discriminatory  denial  of  his
           civil or political or economic, social and cultural rights  such
           as would give rise to persecution.  Going by the March 2000 CIPU
           Bulletin it is not even certain  that  the  Appellant  would  be
           denied the  social  benefits  or  pension  rights  available  to
           Estonian citizens."


 12. In the present appeal, it was accepted that it was proper to  approach
     the Respondent's situation on the basis that he was to be regarded  as
     a stateless person in a similar  position  to  Mr  Sensitev.   On  the
     facts, the Respondent had been habitually resident in Estonia for some
     24 years prior to his departure and had for some time  prior  to  that
     departure been in partnership in Tallinn as a furniture  manufacturer.
     His wife has subsequently joined him in the United Kingdom with  their
     two children.  His parents and sister remained in Estonia.

 13. Mr Symonds accepted that removal to  Estonia  was  within  the  lawful
     powers of removal of the Secretary of State but sought to raise, as  a
     preliminary matter, whether the exercise of such powers could properly
     be described as lawful (as opposed to arbitrary) where  it  was  known
     that the Respondent would not be  admitted  to  Estonia  so  that  the
     purpose of removal cannot be achieved.  As we have pointed  out,  that
     is to put the matter far too high.  The most that could be said on the
     evidence before us was that the Secretary of State might not  be  able
     to effect practical removal but Mr Jones made clear to us that if  the
     Respondent were not admitted by the Estonian authorities, then it  was
     the policy of the Secretary of State that the Respondent would be  re-
     admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  so  that  his  position  could  be
     reassessed on the basis that he was a stateless person.   There  would
     be no question of any  repeated  attempt  to  remove  him  to  Estonia
     without such reconsideration.  There is, in  our  judgement,  a  clear
     distinction between the question of lawfulness of intended removal, in
     respect of which there  is  specific  provision  for  challenge  under
     Section  66  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,   and   the
     practicability of removal to a country to which the person in question
     may be lawfully removed under the powers given by  Parliament  to  the
     Secretary  of  State.   If  the  proposed  removal  is   lawful,   the
     Immigration Appellate Authorities are not concerned with the  question
     of its current  practicability.   Were  it  otherwise,  the  obviously
     absurd situation that a failure by somebody unlawfully  here  to  take
     steps open to him or her to procure  the  necessary  travel  documents
     readily available to them on application would  prevent  their  lawful
     removal.  Whilst we accept that that  is  not  the  position  here  by
     reason of Estonian citizenship and residence law, it is  the  position
     of the Secretary of State that he believes removal to be  practicable,
     and that is an issue for him and not for us.

 14. Mr Symonds then submits  that  removal  would  be  in  breach  of  the
     Respondent's human rights under either Article 3 or Article 8  of  the
     European Convention on Human Rights.

 15. So far as the Article 3 claim is concerned, it was his submission that
     the decision to refuse to grant  the  Respondent  leave  to  enter  or
     remain in the United Kingdom and to give directions  for  his  removal
     prevented him from establishing and placed a real restriction upon his
     fundamental rights and freedoms with no prospect of that  circumstance
     being altered.  He submitted that, pending any attempt at removal, the
     Respondent would have no access to the usual support  systems  in  the
     United Kingdom and that both here, and if re-admitted to Estonia,  his
     dignity as an individual would be denied him  in  such  a  way  as  to
     amount to degrading treatment.  In this connection, he sought to  rely
     on the views on the European Commission of Human Rights  in  the  East
     African Asians the United Kingdom Application (1981) 3  EHRR  76.   He
     pointed out that, at paragraph 189 of the decision, the Commission had
     found that degrading treatment would  follow  from  treatment  "if  it
     lowers him in rank, position, reputation or character, whether in  his
     own eyes or in the eyes of other people" provided that  it  reached  a
     sufficient level of severity to engage Article 3.  At  paragraph  196,
     the  Commission   further   considered   the   question   of   whether
     discrimination based on  race  could  "in  certain  circumstances,  of
     itself amount to degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 3".
      It must, however, in our view, be appreciated that what  is  said  in
     the East Africans case must be looked at very much in the  context  of
     the facts of that case.  The applicants were citizens  of  the  United
     Kingdom who, following the independence of the areas  in  East  Africa
     where they had lived for many years, were in most  cases  deprived  of
     their livelihood and rendered destitute, their continued residence  in
     East Africa had become illegal and they had been refused entry by  the
     only state of which they were citizens, namely the United Kingdom,  so
     that they had nowhere else to go.  The situation of the Respondent  is
     entirely different.  He is not a citizen of this country and there  is
     no evidence that aliens in Estonia who are permitted to  reside  there
     suffer such severe discrimination  as  applied  in  the  East  African
     Asians case where the deliberate policy of the relevant government was
     to make their continued stay in the countries of their former habitual
     residence intolerable.   Given  the  Home  Office  policy  should  the
     applicant not be re-admitted to Estonia,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
     saying that there is, in our view, no merit  at  all  in  Mr  Symonds'
     submissions that removal would be  in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the
     Convention.  The Respondent would either be accepted  back  into  this
     country if the Estonian authorities  refuse  to  readmit  him  or,  if
     allowed to return, would not, for the reasons so clearly expressed  in
     Senitev be reasonably likely to be subjected to treatment contrary  to
     Article 3 by the Estonian authorities.

 16. The only other basis of claim advanced by Mr Symonds was that  removal
     would amount to a breach of the Respondent's rights under Article 8 of
     the Convention.  This is an issue which, in our view, does require  to
     be separately considered.

 17. The terms of Article 8 are as follows:

        "(1)     Everyone has the right to respect his private  and  family
              life, his home and his correspondence.

        (2)      There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
              the exercise of this right, except such as in accordance with
              the law and is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
              interest of national security, public safety or the  economic
              well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder  or
              crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or  for  the
              protection and the rights and freedoms of others."

 18. It seems to us that if there is a potential breach of the Respondent's
     human rights under Article 8  by  removal,  then  the  issue  for  our
     decision is whether such removal would be proportionate to the  public
     interest under Article 8(2).  In those circumstances, it may be argued
     that the practicability of removal does have a direct  impact  on  the
     issue  of  proportionality  in  the  case  of  interference  with  the
     Respondent's human rights under Article 8(1).

 19. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom in October 1999  and  was
     followed shortly thereafter by his  wife  and  children.   It  is  not
     disputed that they live together as a family unit, in accommodation in
     London.  The Respondent's wife sought asylum in her own right  and  it
     was not clear whether her application had been the subject of refusal,
     appeal and dismissal but, since  the  practice  of  the  Secretary  of
     State, as confirmed to us by Mr Jones, is that the removal  directions
     relating to the Respondent would not be effective unless he, his  wife
     and children could all be removed as one family unit, it is clear that
     implementation of the removal  directions  would  not  result  in  the
     splitting of the family unit.  It was accepted by Mr  Jones  that  the
     Respondent and his wife would have established a family life  in  this
     country,  albeit  subject  to  potential  removal,  but  it  was   his
     submission to us that removal as a family unit would not lead  to  any
     breach of the Respondent's Article 8(1) rights to family life.

 20. It was, however, Mr Symonds submission that if such removal  would  be
     ineffective because  the  Respondent  and  his  family  would  not  be
     admitted to  Estonia,  any  disruption  of  family  life  by  such  an
     attempted  removal  would  not  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
     interests of the state in exercising firm  immigration  control  under
     paragraph 8(2).  This is in contrast to the position under the Refugee
     Convention and Article 3 rights where, for the reasons which  we  have
     already explained, we take the view that we  are  not  concerned  with
     issues of the practicability of removal in circumstances where removal
     will not give rise to any breach of the United Kingdom's international
     obligations.

 21. Similarly, the voluntary re-admission of the Respondent and his family
     to Estonia would not give rise to any  breach  of  Article  8  rights,
     because the family unity would not be disrupted and, for  the  reasons
     found applicable in Sensitev, resettlement in Estonia would  not  lead
     to a breach of human rights because of the  country  conditions  which
     will be applicable there in the former country of  habitual  residence
     of the Respondent and his family, who would indeed  then  be  reunited
     with their wider family who still live there.

 22. It seems to us that a successful argument on proportionality could  be
     raised, if at all, only on the basis  that  there  was  no  reasonable
     likelihood  of  re-admission  to  the  country  of   former   habitual
     residence.

 23. In this respect, Mr Jones relied on the CIPU Bulletin 1 -  2001  which
     recorded the provision as to revocation of a residence permit or  work
     permit for an alien by reason of unregistered  absence  in  the  terms
     which we have already set out but then went on at paragraph 14(10)  of
     the Bulletin to say that on the information available to the Secretary
     of State it was most unlikely that in practice  that  an  individual's
     failure to register absence would result in revocation of a  residence
     permit and that "failure to comply with Article 14  would  not  be  an
     obstacle to an individual re-entering Estonia".

 24. We had before us three letters from the Estonian  Embassy  in  London,
     all of which were signed by Mr Kart Juhasoo-Lawrence, the Consul.  The
     first two letters to the Respondent's representatives  and  dated  5th
     February and 23rd May 2001 respectively.  The latest letter was to the
     Appellant's Country Information and Policy Unit  and  was  dated  27th
     July 2001.

 25. The earliest letter summarised the position as follows:

           "Those Estonian Alien's passport  holders,  whose  passport  and
           residence permit have expired while they  have  been  away  from
           Estonia, and who have not, prior leaving Estonia, applied for  a
           new residence permit, have to obtain some kind of valid passport
           for themselves before they can start applying  for  a  temporary
           residence  permit  at  the  Embassy.   Not  all  the   temporary
           residence permit applications meet a positive reply.   There  is
           an immigration quota in Estonia, a number that  is  set  by  the
           government in the beginning of  each  year,  calculated  on  the
           basis of a number of population (0.05%).  A proof of family ties
           will here be helpful."


 26. The second letter was more specific.  It said that if a person  had  a
     temporary residence permit which expired on 1st June  2000,  the  last
     date for applying for a permanent residence permit would have been 1st
     May 2000.  The last date for applying for the renewal of his temporary
     residence would have been 1st December 2000.   After  that  date,  the
     person concerned could apply for a new temporary residence  permit  in
     accordance with the Estonian Alien's Act 1993 on an equal basis as any
     other foreigner applying for the first time.  The application could be
     made to any Embassy and the time for processing was one year from  the
     day the documents had been accepted by the Board, taking into  account
     the  annual  immigration  quota.   Unless  the  applicant   considered
     applying for a temporary residence permit, he had to apply for a  work
     permit at the same time which would require an invitation issued by an
     employer in Estonia to him.  It concluded:

           "He would, most likely, not be admitted in Estonia if  he  tries
           to enter the country without valid documents."


 27. The third letter, addressed to the Appellant, says:

           "I understand that Article 14(2) of the  Estonian  Alien's  Act,
           which lists the conditions when residence permits  are  revoked,
           has left you the impression that the revocation  is  a  somewhat
           automatic course of  action.   In  fact,  the  revocation  is  a
           process that has to be  initiated,  deliberated  and  completed.
           .... Each case is considered on its own merits while the  person
           concerned has the right to be present  and  participate  in  the
           discussion.  In  other  words,  there  is  never  any  automatic
           invalidation of a residence permit.


           It should be kept in mind that revocation of a residence  permit
           is regarded as an extreme measure which is  always  carried  out
           against the background of  a  wider  legal  framework  of  human
           rights.  It means in practice that  only  very  few  revocations
           have been carried out over the past few  years  and  the  number
           will stay very low.  I personally think it is most unlikely that
           failure to comply with Article 14(2)(3) of the Alien's Act would
           be considered a serious enough  transgression  to  lead  to  the
           revocation of a residence  permit,  least  of  all  a  permanent
           residence permit.


           There has not been a single case of a revocation of a  permanent
           residence permit.  The Estonian Citizenship and Migration  Board
           is not at all inclined to initiate  processes,  the  results  of
           which are likely to be overthrown by a court."


      The letter then goes on to say that the lack of the registration stamp
      (that is relating to intended absence in excess of  183  days)  in  an
      individual's passport would not be an obstacle to him/her  re-entering
      Estonia.  Estonian border guard is under the obligation to permit  re-
      entry to everyone who holds a valid  passport  and  a  valid  Estonian
      residence permit, temporary or permanent.  The holder of  a  permanent
      residence permit would not have  a  problem  renewing  their  Estonian
      Alien's passport if that has expired.


 28. We note also that there had, in the past, been substantial  grants  of
     permanent residence permits to many of Russian ethnicity,  an  Alien's
     passport may, under the Act, be issued to an alien who does not have a
     passport or equivalent document and that there is an exceptional power
     granted to any official authorised by the Minister of Internal Affairs
     who grant an  entry  visa  to  aliens  whose  arrival  in  Estonia  is
     necessary due to  hurtant  and  unforeseeable  circumstances.   It  is
     clear, therefore, that there are wide  discretions  available  to  the
     Estonian authorities as  to  permitting  entry.   The  1993  Act  also
     specifically provides that any  alien  lawfully  admitted  to  Estonia
     shall be guaranteed the rights and freedoms equal to those of Estonian
     citizens  or  arising  from  the   generally   recognised   rules   of
     international law and international custom.

 29. Finally, we bear in mind  that  it  is  the  stated  position  of  the
     Secretary of State in the CIPU Bulletins that he has reason to believe
     that, in practice, the re-entry of former lawful alien residents  will
     be permitted.

 30. Looking at the totality of the evidence produced  to  us,  we  do  not
     think it can be said  that  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
     Respondent will be re-admitted with his family if now removed.   Since
     the position is regulated by the Aliens Act of 1993 in  Estonia,  that
     would also have been the situation at the date  of  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision.

 31. The Respondent has no right to remain in this country and, on the face
     of it, removal, provided it is with his remaining family members here,
     would be proportionate  to  the  regular  enforcement  of  immigration
     policy, a matter within the scope of the provisions of Article 8(2) of
     the Convention.  As we have already noted, should it be  that  he  and
     his family would not be re-admitted to Estonia, the Secretary of State
     accepts that they would have to be re-admitted  to  this  country  for
     their position to be reconsidered in the light of those circumstances.

 32. Taking into account all those factors, we are of the view that removal
     pursuant to the present directions, whether  ultimately  effective  or
     not, does not give rise to any breach of the  Respondent's  Article  8
     rights.

 33. For the above reasons, we therefore allow the appeal of the  Secretary
     of State.









                                                                 MR J BARNES


                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

                                                     -----------------------
      1


