
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |AA (Article3 - HIV/AIDS)    |
|                           |        |Chad CG [2002] UKIAT 08004  |
|On 5 February 2003         |        |CC 08120-02                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|01/04/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr P Rogers, JP                                                   |
|Mr R Baines, JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
| AHMET TIDJANI ADOUM                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, a citizen of Chad, appeals the determination  of  an
        Adjudicator (Miss J E Perrett) who dismissed the appellant's asylum
        and human rights appeals.  The appellant was HIV  positive  and  is
        said now to have developed AIDS.  Leave to appeal on asylum grounds
        was refused.  Leave to appeal was granted on Article 3 points only.


     2. The appellant was represented by Miss G Oliso of the Refugee  Legal
        Centre while Miss A Green appeared for the Secretary of State.

     3. The appellant was born in Chad on 30  August  1981.   He  said  his
        family had gone to Nigeria when he was 7.  Following the  death  of
        his father in 1988 the appellant went to Benin while  the  rest  of
        his family returned to Chad as did the appellant when  he  was  17.
        An unusual feature of the case before the Adjudicator was  that  it
        was admitted by his representatives that 50% of his original  claim
        was false for reasons which are set out in the determination  (from
        which it is apparent that the Adjudicator rejected  the  other  50%
        also).   As we have observed, there is no appeal before us  on  the
        factual issues in relation to the asylum claim.

     4. The Adjudicator summarised the evidence and gave her conclusions in
        the following extract from her determination:

             13. The respondent was unaware at the time of his  decision  as
                 to the appellant's  state  of  health.   I  have  read  the
                 reports of Dr Fairley with care.  The letter  of  10  April
                 2002 sets out background and treatment of  the  appellant's
                 condition.  He has a moderately impaired immune system  and
                 is receiving antiretroviral combination  therapy.   Without
                 this treatment Dr Fairley considers that  the  virus  would
                 reactivate and continue to  cause  further  damage  to  the
                 immune system.  Dr Fairley in his report of  11  June  2002
                 give slightly more detail in this regard.  He explains that
                 without treatment, the appellant would be  at  risk  of  an
                 opportunistic infection or tumour within the following  few
                 months  or  years.   He  indicates  that  some   of   these
                 infections may be fully treatable whereas other  infections
                 have a prognosis of  weeks  to  months.   On  average  most
                 patients would have died within 2 to 3  years  of  an  AIDS
                 related illness.  Dr Fairley also addresses  the  issue  of
                 life expectancy when a patient has the  assistance  of  the
                 present combination therapy.  Dr Fairley cautious given the
                 treatment is of relatively recent origin.  He  states  that
                 some patients have lived longer than  7  years  and  it  is
                 expected that they will live for many decades if not  their
                 normal life expectancy.   He  also  points  out  that  some
                 patients may develop resistance to the  medication  and  so
                 succumb to the HIV infection.


             14. It is against this background that I assess what  treatment
                 is available in Chad.  The CIPU report  is  brief  in  this
                 regard and is set out at paragraph 4.18.  The RLC lodged  a
                 bundle  of  documents  relating  to  the   strategies   and
                 treatment of AIDS/HIV in Africa, all of which I  have  read
                 and not just to join the portions highlighted .  On page  4
                 of the bundle it appears that Chad is likely  to  join  the
                 UNAIDS programme known as Accelerated Access for  procuring
                 the anti-viral therapy (ARV).   In  other  countries  which
                 have adopted this agreement it  appears  that  a  patient's
                 socio-economic status is taken into account  is  considered
                 before a decision is taken on whether they are eligible for
                 treatment.  The final paragraph on page  4  considers  that
                 while the UN's global fund has yet  to  make  a  difference
                 2002 is likely to see more donations to governments through
                 this.  On page 5 it is suggested that the African countries
                 may start production of the drugs themselves in 2002.   The
                 conclusion is however, that most governments would find  it
                 impossible  to  treat  a  great  proportion  of  their  HIV
                 population.

             15. In  1999  2.69%  of  the  adult  population  in  Chad  were
                 estimated to have an HIV infection.  The National Strategic
                 Plan Against Aids for Chad is at page 19 of the bundle.  18
                 priorities are set out.  ARV is not shown as a priority  in
                 the table but on page 25, one of the targets is to "Improve
                 the management of HIV/AIDS using essential drugs  at  lower
                 cost.  It  is  also  hoped  to  supply  hospitals  for  the
                 managements of HIV/AIDS hospitals.  There is a target  that
                 by 2003, 100% of health structures will be able  to  manage
                 HIV/AIDS.  This policy document appears  to  bear  out  the
                 report at page 4 that the government is looking  to  obtain
                 essential drugs under the UNAIDS  programme.   On  age  29,
                 there is a press release that the World Bank  had  approved
                 the second population and AIDS project which bears out  the
                 report  at  page  5  about  further   contributions   being
                 received.  The report at page 31 is dated 1999  and  refers
                 to a programme due to close in 2001.  It is clear that this
                 has  been  continued  or  replaced.   Having  read  al  the
                 material, it is clear the Government of Chad in conjunction
                 with a number of organisations  are  taking  the  HIV  aids
                 situation most seriously and is  not  only  addressing  the
                 issue of  those  already  with  HIV  but  also  looking  at
                 preventing it in the first place by targeting those  groups
                 most at risk.  Interestingly, in the year  the  report  was
                 written, HIV  contracted  through  blood  transfusions  was
                 given as nil.  The appellant's case seems to be very much a
                 "one off" according to health records.   I  do  not  accept
                 that there is no funding in place or any will on  the  part
                 of the government to assist those with AIDS.   The  picture
                 is far more upbeat than the situation as  presented  by  Mr
                 Marshall on behalf of the appellant.   I  accept  that  the
                 abrupt withdrawal of treatment could result in  illness  or
                 death.  It is not a case however,  of  no  treatment  being
                 available but  of  treatment  being  one  of  a  number  of
                 measures taken by the government.  I accept that it may  be
                 the case that treatment  in  the  UK  may  be  considerably
                 better in the UK in Chad but it does not follow  from  this
                 that to return the appellant would be to put him at risk of
                 treatment that fell within Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Convention.  The appellant's doctor had diagnosed  HIV  but
                 the appellant refused to believe him.   The  appellant  did
                 not therefore put himself in a position of knowing  whether
                 any treatment would  have  been  offered.   Certainly,  the
                 appellant does not now say, "The Doctor told me I  was  HIV
                 positive but refused or  was  unable  to  treat  me".   The
                 appellant has not yet developed AIDS, he has family in Chad
                 who would be able to provide support.  I  had  no  evidence
                 that he would be shunned.  I am not satisfied the appellant
                 can show substantial grounds for believing that there would
                 be a real risk  of  his  suffering  inhuman  and  degrading
                 treatment if now returned to Chad.

     5. The application for leave to appeal to the Tribunal was received on
        25 September 2002 and the parties were notified that leave had been
        granted on 13 December 2002.  They were also notified of  the  date
        of hearing on that date.


     6. The appellant's bundle to the Tribunal was  lodged  on  22  January
        2003.   Among the documents relied on was fresh  medical  evidence.
        There is a letter dated 31 October 2002 from Dr  Apaya  apologising
        for the delay in submitting information.  His report is also  dated
        31 October 2002.  The appellant's bundle had not reached  the  Home
        Office.


     7. There had been no application to the Tribunal  in  advance  of  the
        hearing to lodge fresh evidence.  It was said that the new evidence
        was significant because the appellant was now diagnosed  as  having
        aids rather than simply being HIV positive

     8. Miss Oliso invited us to rely on this new material.  She  submitted
        that the appellant had now got AIDS and would not be able to access
        medical care  in  Chad.   Without  treatment  his  condition  would
        deteriorate.  She also referred us to a letter from Dr Apaya  dated
        24 January 2003 which reads simply as follows:

        "I write to give my support to the above appeal  and  confirm  that
        stopping HIV antiretroviral therapy will be detrimental to  Ahmet's
        health."


     9. Dr Apaya is a  consultant  physician  in  Genito-Urinary  medicine.
        Miss Oliso relied on her skeleton  argument  and  on  the  evidence
        concerning available treatment in Chad.  She acknowledged that  the
        appellant had family in  Chad  -  a  mother,  four  sisters  and  a
        brother.   Miss Green objected to the reception of the report which
        had been submitted late and in breach  of  the  rules  on  practice
        directions.  It had been available long before it was submitted.


    10. The  treatment  being  received  by  the  appellant  was  the  same
        treatment as he had been receiving when the hearing had been before
        the Adjudicator.  The report was more  of  a  letter  than  a  full
        medical report.  In most reported cases far fuller medical evidence
        had been provided.   A full CD4 count was provided.   There was not
        nearly enough information in the letter to enable the  Tribunal  to
        consider the appellant's claim to have full blown  AIDS.    If  the
        evidence was admitted at all not much weight should be attached  to
        it.

    11. Miss Green was asked what the Home Office policy was in relation to
        AIDS sufferers.  Miss Green, having taken instructions, informed us
        that there was a serious  deceases  policy  rather  than  a  policy
        confined to AIDS.  If someone had a serious  decease  and  had  not
        very  long  to  live  then  the  Home  Office  would  give  careful
        consideration whether they should be allowed to stay.

    12. Miss Green submitted that the facts should  be  distinguished  from
        the case of D v United Kingdom  [1997]  24  EHRR  423.    She  also
        referred us to K v Secretary of State [2001] Imm AR  11  where  the
        Court of Appeal had to consider the question of whether it would be
        inhuman or degrading treatment to send the appellant back to Uganda
        on the grounds that he may or may not be able  to  afford  all  the
        treatment  that  he  required.    Miss  Green  submitted  that  the
        appellant did not meet the high threshold set down in the case  law
        and the Adjudicator had not erred.

    13. Miss Oliso accepted that she had been wrong not to submit  the  new
        material earlier.   She submitted that  the  CD4  count  not  being
        stated was not a significant matter.   What was significant was the
        AIDS diagnosis.  The Chad  government  was  only  making  progress.
        Only  a  very  small  number  of  people  in  Chad  were  receiving
        appropriate treatment.   The general healthcare was very poor.

    14. We reserved our determination and have given careful  consideration
        to the arguments and the material placed before us.

    15. Paragraph 22 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
        Rules 2000 sets down the requirements to  be  observed  when  fresh
        evidence is relied on.  Where further evidence that was not  before
        the Adjudicator is to be placed before the Tribunal written  notice
        must be given.  That notice "shall be given as soon as  practicable
        after the parties have been notified that leave to appeal has  been
        granted".

    16. Miss Oliso accepts that was  not  done.    It  is  clearly  of  the
        highest  importance  in  cases  like  this  that  the  evidence  is
        submitted at the earliest possible opportunity.   The  Home  Office
        may well wish to give  consideration  to  it  and,  possibly,  call
        evidence of its own.   Apart from the fresh evidence, the  skeleton
        argument was not lodged until the  hearing  itself.   The  skeleton
        argument refers to the authorities without giving their references.



    17. The second paragraph of the skeleton argument reads as follows:

        "It is not disputed that the appellant is HIV positive and that  he
        is receiving anti-retroviral treatment in the  UK.   The  appellant
        contends that he suffers from AIDS.   He argues that if returned to
        Chad, he would not  be  able  to  obtain  the  medication  that  he
        currently receives.   Consequently he argues that as  someone  with
        an impaired immune system, he would become subject to opportunistic
        infections which would hasten his death."


    18. It is further submitted that there were  150,000  persons  infected
        with HIV in Chad  and  that  only  36  were  receiving  appropriate
        therapy.   If returned to Chad, the appellant would not have access
        to medication that  he  needed  to  stop  his  immune  system  from
        deteriorating.   Given  the  almost  total  absence  of  access  to
        treatment and the huge cost  of  medication  even  at  preferential
        rates, the appellant  would  not  be  able  to  continue  with  his
        treatment.   Reliance is placed on the cases  of  D  and  K  (cited
        above).   It is pointed out, correctly, that  the  case  of  K  was
        considered on judicial review rather than  on  appeal.    The  case
        dealt with an applicant  from  Uganda  where  there  were,  it  was
        submitted, appropriate medical facilities.   Chad was  one  of  the
        world's  poorest  countries.    The  abrupt   withdrawal   of   the
        appellant's treatment would hasten his death.   The  facts  of  the
        case was similar to those in D.


    19. The Tribunal firstly would wish to observe that the facts  are  not
        similar to the case of D.   In  St  Kitts  there  were  no  medical
        facilities and the appellant had spent some time in a  hospice  and
        was close to death - see paragraph 21 of the Court's judgment.   It
        is also not without significance that the appellant  in  D  had  no
        family effectively to turn to in St Kitts.   The  position  of  the
        appellant is very different.  He attended the  hearing  before  us.
        He has many family members in Chad.  The most recent evidence  that
        we have from his consultant is that cessation of therapy  "will  be
        detrimental to Ahmet's health".  In D  the  appellant  had  "become
        reliant on the medical and palliative care which he is  at  present
        receiving and is no doubt psychologically prepared for death in  an
        environment which is both familiar and compassionate.   Although it
        cannot be said that the conditions which would confront him in  the
        receiving country are themselves  a  breach  of  the  standards  of
        Article 3, his removal would expose him to a  real  risk  of  dying
        under most distressing  circumstances  and  would  thus  amount  to
        inhuman treatment."  The Court emphasised in paragraph  54  of  the
        judgment the "very exceptional circumstances" of the  case.   In  K
        the Court of Appeal noted the argument that it would be inhuman  or
        degrading treatment to return someone to a country where medication
        might be beyond their financial recourses and concluded that if the
        argument were accepted "we would be in effect adopting a rule  that
        any country which did not have a health service which was available
        free to all people within its bounds would be a place to  which  it
        would be inhuman and degrading to send someone."    The  Court  did
        not consider that the European Court of Human  Rights  would  reach
        that conclusion.  It stated  that  one  should  weigh  up  all  the
        circumstances of the case as was done in the case of D.  Counsel is
        right to point out that the Court was concerned  with  whether  the
        Secretary of State's decision  was  irrational  or  not.   For  our
        purposes, we must consider all the evidence in the  round  and  all
        the circumstances of the case reminding ourselves that  this  is  a
        question of appeal and not review.


    20. Included in the bundle prepared by  Miss  Oliso  is  a  world  bank
        project appraisal document on a proposed credit of  $24.56  million
        to the Republic of Chad for a second population and  AIDS  project.
        The report is dated 13 June 2001.  The language  and  acronyms  are
        occasionally opaque but the general thrust of  the  report  can  be
        ascertained. Under  the  heading  "Strategic  Context"  the  report
        states as follows:

        "With regard to  HIV/AIDS,  Chad  has  demonstrated  its  political
        commitment and ownership in the efforts to reverse  the  spread  of
        the epidemic.   The  government  urged  IDA  to  make  it  the  key
        development objective in the banks country assistance strategy."


        The report refers to an analysis  of  the  health  system  in  Chad
        carried out recently between the  Ministry  of  Public  Health  and
        others.   The analysis identified the  weaknesses  of  the  current
        health system  and  areas  where  improvements  were  needed.   The
        Ministry had started to address the weaknesses as urgent priorities
        "because they will in effect block progress in the sector, will  be
        a constant source of frustration for development efforts, and  will
        jeopardise future efforts on the front of population and  HIV/AIDS.
        As for the areas where improvement is still needed,  the  Ministry,
        which had taken steps for action and reform in  certain  areas,  is
        starting a sustained action to develop health sector and put  these
        improvements  on  a  sustainable  footing  with  the  help  of  its
        partners..."  Under the heading on  page  6  of  the  report  "AIDS
        Prevention and Mitigation" it is stated that the approach had  been
        successful in increasing knowledge about HIV/AIDS  and  that  today
        most Chadians know about the subject and  the  majority  are  aware
        about how HIV is transmitted.  Many  sectors  and  communities  are
        presently  involved  in  the  HIV/AIDS  Prevention  and  Mitigation
        activities.  The report  notes  that  the  approach  needed  to  be
        reinforced and be more focused in order to stop the progression  of
        the epidemic.   While there  had  been  a  notable  improvement  in
        recent years in terms of co-ordination more periodic and systematic
        mechanisms were  required  to  involve  all  private  sector  stake
        holders and partners.


21.   The AIDS epidemic had been spreading rapidly in Chad  since  1986  but
        Chad's response to AIDS "has been rapid and determined  even  at  a
        time [when] HIV prevalence was very low."   The report states  that
        as  early  as  1988  the  National  AIDS  Control  Commission   was
        established, a body presided over by the Prime Minister.   In  1994
        seven Ministries participated in  a  national  consensus  workshop.
        The report goes on that the response in Chad to HIV/AIDS  has  been
        characterised by a  broad  partnership  involving  the  government,
        NGOs, religious groups, civil society  organisations,  communities,
        people living with HIV/AIDS and  local  and  international  donors.
        Chad strengthened  existing  government  entities  responsible  for
        implementing the mid-term plan and established  a  social  fund  to
        finance HIV/AIDS prevention and population activities.   There  was
        a national   AIDS  control  strategic  plan  in  1999  building  on
        previous AIDS programmes.

22.   Miss Oliso acknowledges these matters but states  that  the  appellant
        will not benefit as he has already got the illness.   However,  the
        report does indicate how very different the situation  is  from  St
        Kitts.   Quite apart from the fact that the appellant has family in
        Chad to support him,  there  are  a  number  of  other  groups  and
        organisations, governmental and non-governmental, who can no  doubt
        provide some support. GlaxoSmithKline had introduced not for profit
        preferential prices for its HIV/AIDS medicines by up to 33%.   Miss
        Olisso points out that the availability of the  treatment  is  very
        low given the scale of the problem.

23.   The Terence Higgins Trust points out that it is  not  always  possible
        to predict the specific effects of  withdrawing  anti  HIV  therapy
        from a person with HIV.  We have the  letter  from  Dr  Apaya  that
        stopping HIV therapy  "will  be  detrimental"  to  the  appellant's
        health.  We are invited to find that the appellant has AIDS on  the
        strength of the document submitted in breach of the rules and  late
        in the day.   It is said that the appellant had responded very well
        to the treatment so far and that on his last testing his viral load
        was undetectable and that his CD4 count  was  rising.    The  drugs
        given to the appellant worked  for  approximately  2  years  before
        resistance was  developed.   The  doctor  states  that  he  had  no
        evidence that the drugs were available in Chad  (although  he  does
        not say that they were not available). It is the  doctor's  opinion
        that the immune system would further deteriorate if  treatment  was
        withdrawn  "and  he  will  no  doubt  be  liable  to  opportunistic
        infections".  The doctor believed  this  would  make  him  ill  and
        unlikely to live long.

24.   We do share the concerns expressed by Miss Green about  the  shortness
        of this report quite apart from its late  introduction  into  these
        proceedings.     The  appellant's  position  and  circumstances  do
        appear to us to be vastly different from those in D.

    25. The Adjudicator went carefully through the evidence before her  and
        reached conclusions which appear to us to be entirely correct.   We
        have also reviewed the objective material  and  the  fresh  medical
        material.  The Adjudicator commented that the appellant had not yet
        developed AIDS but we are far  from  confident  that  her  decision
        would have been any different if the letter  available  to  us  had
        been placed before her.


    26. It is right to stress that the threshold in these  cases  is  high.
        D was an exceptional case.  It is  important  that  representatives
        should not encourage false hopes in the minds  of  appellants  with
        HIV or even AIDS.   The  Court  will  and  can  only  intervene  in
        exceptional  circumstances.    It  is  not  right  or   fair   that
        appellants  should  have  their  expectations  raised  where  their
        circumstances do not meet the demanding criteria that must  be  met
        for a successful outcome.

    27. We consider that the Adjudicator correctly addressed herself on the
        issues in this case and correctly concluded as she did.

    28. For the reasons we have given this appeal is dismissed.




                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President

