
ar                                                       Appeal No. HX32698-
2001                                                PR (Medical Facilities)
Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 04269


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing: 3 September 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                            ....18-9-2002...................

                                   Before:


                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                                 Mrs R Faux
                              Mrs J Harris, JP




                     PERANANTHASIVAM  RATNAM  RHANCHITHA

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals  the  determination  of
      an adjudicator (Mr S. Qureshi) who dismissed his  appeal  against  the
      refusal of the Secretary of State to grant his application for asylum.
       The appeal is pursued solely on human rights grounds.

2.    The appellant was represented before us by Miss Rhiannon Crimmins,  of
      counsel, instructed by Nag & Co.  Miss C.  Paddick  appeared  for  the
      Secretary of State.



3.    The appellant applied for asylum on his arrival in this country on  26
      December 1997. He was interviewed in connection with his  claim  on  2
      January 1998. The reasons for refusing the appellant's claim  are  set
      out in a refusal letter dated 12 February 2001.

4.    After the appellant's interview the appellant  apparently  suffered  a
      deterioration in his health. He had been all right  for  a  period  of
      about six months after his arrival.  Because  of  the   state  of  his
      health, he was not called to give evidence before the Adjudicator  who
      had to determine the matter on the documents before him.  The  hearing
      was on 12 April 2002.

   5. There are two medical reports in respect of the appellant.  The  first
      is dated 4  October  2001  and  was  compiled  by  Dr  P.  Partovi,  a
      consultant psychiatrist. The  report  opens  with  a  summary  of  the
      appellant's history in Sri Lanka.  He had left Jaffna after  the  army
      captured the Jaffna Peninsula and arrested his older  sister  who  was
      still missing. He had joined the LTTE as a volunteer and had witnessed
      many deaths during the period he served with the LTTE.  When asked  to
      start combat training, he had escaped and gone into  hiding.   He  had
      then fled to Colombo with a forged identity card and  had  managed  to
      flee the country.  Immediately after his arrival he had  been  feeling
      upset but had then settled down for a  period  of  about  six  months.
      After this period his health had  started  deteriorating  and  he  had
      become exceedingly confused. He had developed a  sleep disorder, overt
      anxiety, depression and headaches together with pericardial pains.  He
      was being looked after on a continuous basis by a friend  and  he  was
      not able to survive without continuous and  high  level  support.  The
      report notes that the appellant was one of nine siblings. He had never
      worked in Sri Lanka or the UK.  He had twenty-four  hour  support  and
      supervision from  a friend.  He could not go out alone, shop  or  cook
      for himself.  His friend helped him with  personal  hygiene.   He  had
      some distant relatives in the UK  but was not in contact with them nor
      was he in  contact with his family in Sri Lanka. The doctor  diagnosed
      acute  and  very  severe  depressive  illness  giving  rise  to  overt
      psychomotor  retardation  and  a  state  of  mental   confusion.   The
      consultant added:

             'This illness is severe and  enduring  and  has  caused  total
             incapacity. He has a very poor level of functioning and  fatal
             disability. He is not able to live  in  independently  in  the
             community without continuous and ongoing support.


             He is in need of  urgent  medical  treatment.  He  also  shows
             symptoms of a moderate post-traumatic stress disorder  and  is
             in need  of  psychological  intervention.  Due  to  his  gross
             impairment of cogitative function  and  the  state  of  mental
             confusion, he is not able to  provide  accurate  and  reliable
             testimony.'

6.    The other piece of medical evidence available to the  Adjudicator  was
      a letter dated 3 April 2002 from the appellant's GP,  Dr  K.  Sugumar.
      The GP confirmed that the  appellant  had  been  registered  with  the
      practice since February 2000.  The doctor states as follows:

             'I understand he came to this country a few  years  ago  as  a
             refugee and doesn't have any close family or friends.  He  was
             seen by a Sri Lankan family who are known to  his parents back
             in Sri Lanka in the refugee camps and found to  be  depressed.
             He was brought to me in November  with  all  the  features  of
             depression.


             He has been living alone for the past few  years  without  any
             contact with anybody in this country. He is found to  have  no
             mood, insomnia and poor personal hygiene.


             I have started him on antidepressant medication and he has now
             started to show a slow improvement.


             In my opinion he needs close follow-up and regular  review  at
             present. If you need any further information,  please  do  not
             hesitate to contact us at the above address.'

7.    The Adjudicator  gave  his  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal in the following extract from his   determination :

             '13.      I remind myself of the  decision of the  Immigration
                 Appeal Tribunal in Berisha (01/TH/2623)  where  the   court
                 stated,  "the  level  of  forensic  psychiatric   expertise
                 expended on the  subject bears very little relation to  the
                 therapeutic  effort  put  in  since".   In  that  case  the
                 appellant had been given some pills and been  referred  for
                 some unspecified counselling. In this appeal,  despite  the
                 observation of the consultant  psychiatrist  the  appellant
                 needs   urgent   medical   treatment   and    psychological
                 intervention, all that has been done is to prescribe  anti-
                 depressants. No one has involved the social services or any
                 other counselling agency to assist  26  year  old  man  who
                 cannot even go to the toilet by himself. The words  of  the
                 Tribunal are most apt here. I am not sure why the appellant
                 had not seen a doctor over the last three years. I  do  not
                 have any evidence  at all from  the friend, who looks after
                 him, to explain the problems suffered by the  appellant  at
                 home.


             14. The country report shows that there is an extensive  range
                 of specialist available in Sri Lanka,  which  includes  its
                 national Health  Service, which is sailable to everyone. On
                 the whole, medical  care  is  affordable  for  the  average
                 person. I have considered the  decision  in  Bensaid  which
                 dealt with a similar situation, but the fact of the current
                 appeal, as placed before me, do not even begin to reach the
                 low level of proof that lies upon the  appellant   to  show
                 that there is a real risk of the breach of his rights under
                 Articles 3 and 8.1.


             15. I am not satisfied that the appellant  has  any  cause  to
                 fear the government or the LTTE  if he is returned today. I
                 have considered  the comments in the report of  the  United
                 Kingdom delegation to Sri Lanka in March 2002 and the  news
                 reports. I am not satisfied that the police would  have any
                 reason to suspect that he is a  terrorist,  as  he  is  not
                 wanted for any  offences,  nor  is  he  in  breach  of  any
                 reporting conditions. I also note that a ceasefire has been
                 signed between the government  and  the  LTTE  in  February
                 2002, which is holding up. The LTTE has recently opened  an
                 official office in Vavuniya at which  government  officials
                 attended at the opening ceremony. If there is any  fear  of
                 the appellant being questioned, no doubt he can be provided
                 with an edited medical report from his doctor so  that  the
                 police  can  be  aware  of  why  he  does  not  respond  to
                 questioning.

                 Given these findings, I find that  the  appellant  has  not
                 discharged the burden of proof  of  having  a  well-founded
                 fear of persecution for a Convention reason. I come to  the
                 conclusion that the appellant's removal would not cause the
                 United Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations under the
                  1950 Convention or under Articles 2  and  3  of  the  1950
                 Convention.'

8.    Miss Crimmins acknowledged that Dr Partovi's  report  was  rather  old
      and that it appeared that the appellant had exhibited some improvement
      following treatment administered by his  GP.   However  she  submitted
      that the appellant was totally incapacitated  and  needed  twenty-four
      hour care and support. He was  always accompanied by a  friend.   Miss
      Crimmins confirmed that the appeal was brought solely on human  rights
      grounds.  She relied on Bensaid v United Kingdom [2001] 33 EHRR 10 and
      D v United Kingdom 24 EHRR 423.

   9. She submitted that the Home Office Country Assessment did not  contain
      any reference to psychiatric care being available in Sri  Lanka.   The
      appellant had a very severe depressive illness. The appellant not only
      required there to be medical assistance but he needed to  be  able  to
      avail himself of that assistance.


  10. In Bensaid the appellant had family in Algeria whereas  there  was  no
      evidence that the appellant had any support in Sri Lanka at  all.   He
      had lost contact with his parents in 1996.  The  case  of  D  was  not
      solely concerned with terminally  ill  persons.   The  court  had  not
      relied on assumptions about there being carers available in St  Kitts.
      The court noted that the appellant in D  had  formed  bonds  with  his
      carers in the United Kingdom.

11.   Miss Paddick submitted that the appellant was only  being  treated  in
      the United Kingdom for a depressive illness and there was no  evidence
      of social service support.  In D the appellant  had been  at  an  AIDS
      hospice and had a special carer  appointed  for  him.   There  was  no
      evidence that the appellant  in  this  case  had  applied  for  social
      services assistance.

12.   The evidence about medical treatment in Sri  Lanka  was  contained  in
      the assessment at  paragraphs  4.23  to  4.26.   There  were  adequate
      facilities and it was a completely different situation than  the   one
      in St Kitts.  As the court had made clear in Bensaid, the  case  of  D
      was a wholly exceptional one.  The  Adjudicator  had  dealt  with  the
      matter properly  in his determination. He had noted that the appellant
      had claimed that he had had problems since 1998 but had not registered
      with his GP until 2000.  In April 2002 the appellant  appeared  to  be
      responding to medication. Miss Paddick also referred to a letter  from
      the British High Commission in Colombo dated 9 July 2002 where it  was
      stated that there were two hospitals which had had  counselling  level
      treatment at least for posttraumatic stress disorder.  These hospitals
      might lack the most modern methods but it was not correct to say  that
      there was a complete lack of treatment for mental health in Sri Lanka.



13.   The peace process was well under way in Sri Lanka and  it  might  very
      well be that the appellant  would be able to  make  contact  with  his
      family in current circumstances, particularly given that he was one of
      nine children. He had spent time in Colombo previously  and  would  be
      returned there.  The appeal should be dismissed.

14.   Miss Crimmins submitted  that  it  was  not  clear  from  the  country
      assessment that the appellant would get  medical treatment as he would
      not be able to pay for it. He was still severely incapacitated.  There
      was a negative attitude to people with  disabilities.   The  situation
      was  very  similar  to  D.   The  appellant's  condition  might   well
      deteriorate.

15.   At the conclusion of the submissions  we reserved  our  determination.
      We have very carefully considered the points made by  both  sides  and
      the authorities relied upon.

16.   The evidence as to the availability of medical treatment in Sri  Lanka
      is contained in the Home Office  Country  Assessment  and  the  recent
      letter from the High Commission.  It  is  said  that  the  traditional
      medical structure of GPs, specialists  and  hospitals  co-exists  with
      traditional medicine.  Sri Lanka had its own national health  service,
      available to everyone.  In the Colombo area and in one or two  of  the
      larger centres such as Kandy, there were many well  reputed  hospitals
      staffed  by  physicians,  most  of  whom  were  very  experienced  and
      internationally trained.  There was an extensive range  of  specialist
      care found in Colombo, both in the  private  and  government  sectors.
      The  report  notes  that  specialist  care  included   treating   such
      conditions as  cardiac, gastro-intestinal, dermatological, urological,
      orthopaedic and general surgery -  see paragraph 4.24 of  the  report.
      Most medications were available in Colombo and  while  the  price  for
      medications ranged widely most drugs would  be  cheaper  than  in  the
      United Kingdom for prescription and dispensing charges.  On the  whole
      medical  care was affordable for the  average  person  and  government
      hospitals generally charged a lesser fee than private hospitals. 7% of
      the population of Sri Lanka had  disabilities  and  most  people  with
      disabilities who were unable to work were cared for by their families.
      The Department of Social Services  operated  eight  vocation  training
      schools for people with physical and mental disabilities and sponsored
      a  programme  of  job  training  and  placement  for  graduates.   The
      government also provides some financial support to NGOs  who  assisted
      persons with  disabilities.  As  counsel  reminded  us,  in  spite  of
      governmental  efforts,  there  were  still  negative   attitudes   and
      discrimination for people with disabilities.  In 1996  Parliament  had
      passed legislation forbidding discrimination  against  any  person  on
      the grounds of disability.

17.   Dr Partovi thought  the  appellant  was  in  need  of  urgent  medical
      treatment. He came to this view in October 2001.   The  appellant  saw
      the GP in November 'with all  the  features  of  depression'.  The  GP
      started the appellant on  antidepressants  and  he  records  that  the
      appellant had started to show a slow improvement.

18.   There has been no updated medical evidence placed before the  Tribunal
      since the GP's letter of April 2002.   We  do  not  know  whether  the
      appellant is currently on medication and  we  do  not  know  what  the
      medication is. There is  no  evidence  that  this  medication  is  not
      available  in  Sri  Lanka  if,  indeed,  the  appellant  is  still  on
      medication.  We  have  no  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's  current
      condition.  We only know that in April 2002 the appellant had  started
      to show a slow improvement.

19.   We find that the situation in this case is  very  different  from  the
      case of D.  In that case there was an absence of medical facilities in
      St Kitts and the appellant's condition  was  very  grave  indeed.  His
      condition was terminal. There was a  wealth  of  evidence  before  the
      court.  The limited quality of the life enjoyed by D resulted from the
      availability of sophisticated treatment and medication in  the  United
      Kingdom and the abrupt withdrawal of these facilities would entail the
      most dramatic consequents for the appellant. It was not disputed  that
      his removal would hasten his death - see paragraph 52.  The  court  in
      Bensaid made it clear that D was an exceptional case -  see  paragraph
      40.

20.   In our view, it has  not  been  demonstrated,  and  it  has  not  been
      demonstrated by a large margin, that the appellant's  removal  to  Sri
      Lanka will breach his human rights.  There is no  evidence  of  social
      services' involvement in the United Kingdom - there  is  a  dearth  of
      evidence of every kind.  There is a dearth in  particular  of  current
      evidence. We do not find that there is sufficiently real risk that the
      appellant's removal to Sri Lanka will be contrary to the  standard  of
      Article  3.  We  find  that  there  are  adequate  medical  facilities
      available in Sri Lanka, particularly in Colombo and in other  centres.
      There is  no  evidence  that  such  medication  as  the  appellant  is
      currently taking is not available to him  in  Sri  Lanka.  So  far  as
      Article 8 is concerned, we note the analysis of the court in  Bensaid.
      Even assuming that the dislocation caused to the appellant by  removal
      from the United Kingdom constituted  an  interference,  we  would  not
      consider such interference to be disproportionate - see in  particular
      paragraph 48 of Bensaid.


21.   For the reasons we have given, the Adjudicator's decision is  affirmed
      and this appeal is dismissed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


