
Abdillahi (Appeal - Sections 69(3) 1999 Act - Notice of Decision) Somalia *
[2002] UKIAT 00266

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:        |20/12/2001         |
|Date Determination      |05/02/2002         |
|notified:               |                   |



                                   Before


                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                              Mr C M G Ockelton
                              Mr P. R. Moulden


|Kaltun Harun ABDILLAHI                        |               |
|                                              |APPELLANT      |
|and                                           |               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT    |               |
|                                              |RESPONDENT     |

|For the Appellant:|Ms. C. Gordon, Counsel           |
|For the           |Mr. P. Deller , HOPO             |
|Respondent:       |                                 |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Somalia.   She  entered  the  United
Kingdom illegally, probably on 23 May 2000, and claimed asylum  on  25  May.
That at least is what is said in the Reasons for Refusal letter, but  it  is
to be noted that in the Form ICD 1045 it  is  recorded  that  the  appellant
"entered the United Kingdom clandestinely ... and claimed asylum on  23  May
2000 at the Home Office."  The discrepancy has no material  consequences  in
the circumstances of this case, since it is clear  on  either  account  that
the appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and so the  question  was
whether she should be granted leave to remain rather than  leave  to  enter.
All  too  often  the  Appellate  Authority  is  faced  with  this  sort   of
carelessness by Home Office officials and it should not occur.

2.    On 8 May 2001 she was sent a Notice of  Decision  which  purported  to
comply with the Immigration and Asylum Appeals  (Notices)  Regulations  2000
(the 'Notices Regulations).  This informed  her  that  her  application  for
asylum in the United Kingdom had been refused for the reasons given  in  the
Reasons for Refusal letter attached.  The notice did not state that she  had
been refused leave to remain on the basis of her claim for asylum.  But  the
Notice continued: -

         "It has been decided,  however,  that  because  of  the  particular
         circumstances of your case, you should be granted exceptional leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom.


         The Secretary of State  therefore grants you leave to remain  until
         05 March 2005".




There was then set out a Right of Appeal in these terms: -

         You are entitled to appeal to an adjudicator against this  decision
         under Section 69(3) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999".


The Notice then set out, in accordance with the requirement of  the  Notices
Regulations, information about how and within what time an appeal should  be
lodged.

3.    The appellant did appeal and on 29 August 2001 her appeal came  before
an adjudicator (Professor D.B. Casson).  He decided that the  Notice  served
by the respondent did not fall within the terms of s.69 (3) of the 1999  Act
and so there was no appealable  decision.   Accordingly,  he  dismissed  the
appeal, which he described as a 'purported appeal', without considering  the
merits.  We too have not considered the merits since, if we  are  to  decide
that Professor Casson was wrong and that there was an  appealable  decision,
we should remit the case to be heard by an adjudicator.

4.    S.69 (3) is a singularly ill-drafted provision  and  the  Home  Office
has not assisted itself or the Appellate Authority in choosing  to  issue  a
Notice of Decision which fails to follow its wording.  It reads: -


         "A person who -



           (a) has been refused leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom on the basis of a claim for asylum made by him, but


           (b) has been granted (whether before or after  the  decision  to
           refuse leave) limited leave to enter or remain


         may, if that limited leave will not expire within 28  days  of  his
         being notified of the decision, appeal to  an  adjudicator  against
         the refusal on the ground that requiring him to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom after the time limited by that leave would be  contrary  to
         the Convention".


Professor Casson took the view that the Notice of Decision  refused  neither
leave to enter nor to remain and so no right of appeal  existed  under  s.69
(3).

5.    While it would not, it seems, have made any difference to the  result,
Professor Casson made the point that the Notice was not a Notice of  Refusal
to remain "since  leave  to  remain  is  applicable  to  a  person  who  has
previously been granted limited leave".  That is not correct.  A person  who
has entered the United Kingdom unlawfully may be refused  leave  to  remain;
he  has  already  entered,  albeit  unlawfully.   Section   33(1)   of   the
Immigration Act 1971 as amended defines illegal entrant to mean a person: -

         "(a) unlawfully entering  or  seeking  to  enter  in  breach  of  a
         deportation     order or of the immigration laws, or


         (b)  entering or seeking to enter by means which include  deception
         by another person, and include also a person  who  has  entered  as
         mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) above."


Thus an illegal  entrant  encompasses  a  person  who  is  trying  to  enter
unlawfully and one who has succeeded in so doing.  The former  will,  if  he
tries to regularise his position, seek leave to enter, the latter  leave  to
remain.  Hence Paragraph 9(1) of  Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act  reads  as
follows:-

         "where an illegal entrant is not given leave to enter or remain  in
         the United Kingdom ...."


6.    The distinction can be important since Section 4(1) of  the  1971  Act
provides that immigration officers shall  exercise  the  power  to  give  or
refuse leave to enter whereas the Secretary of  State   shall  exercise  the
power to give leave to remain.  Although Rule 328 of the  Immigration  Rules
(HC 395)  requires  that  all  asylum  applications  be  determined  by  the
Secretary of State , leave to enter (if  in  issue)  is  to  be  granted  or
refused by an immigration officer - see Rules 330 and  331.   And  Rule  335
makes clear the  distinction  between  the  situation  where  a  person  has
entered (whether lawfully or not) and where he has not.  It reads:-

         "If the Secretary of State  decides to grant asylum to a person who
         has been given leave  to  enter  (whether  or  not  the  leave  has
         expired) or a person who has entered without leave,  the  Secretary
         of State  will vary the existing leave or grant  limited  leave  to
         remain".


7.    The Notice of Decision in this case was signed not by  an  immigration
officer but by a person on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   Accordingly,
it could not have been a valid  refusal  of  leave  to  enter,  nor  did  it
purport to be such  a  refusal.   We  should,  however,  draw  attention  to
difficulties which might arise where an illegal entrant  (for  example,  one
who comes hidden in the back of a lorry) is apprehended at a  port.   It  is
then necessary to consider section 11 of the 1971 Act to  determine  whether
he has or has not entered the  United  Kingdom.   The  answer  to  that  may
depend on whether he is apprehended before he has left "such area  (if  any)
at the port as may be approved for this purpose by an immigration  officer":
see s.11(1).  If he has not entered, only an immigration officer  can  grant
or refuse leave to enter.  If he has,  only  the  Secretary  of  State   can
grant leave to remain.  If, of course,  leave  to  remain  is  refused,  the
Secretary of State  will normally give  removal  directions  and  these  are
appealable under s.66 and 69(3) of the 1999 Act.

8.    Refusal of leave to enter gives rise to  a  general  right  of  appeal
under s.59 of the 1999 Act, but that right  is  considerably  circumscribed.
For asylum seekers, the relevant right is that conferred by s.69(1).   There
is no right of appeal for  an  illegal  entrant  who  is  refused  leave  to
remain.  He can only appeal under s.69(5) if removal is directed.  There  is
in addition the existence of a human  rights  appeal  under  s.65,  but,  if
there is to be no removal, it is difficult to  imagine  that  a  refusal  of
leave to remain to an illegal entrant could breach any of his human  rights.
 In any event, Paragraph 4(4) of the Notices Regulations provides  that  the
fact that a decision can be appealed under s.65 does not of itself  make  it
an  appealable  decision  of  which  written  notice  must  be  given  under
Paragraph 4.

9.    It follows that there was in this case no  appealable  decision  other
than any which might arise under s.69(3).  The position would  be  the  same
if leave to enter rather than to remain had been in  issue.   Both  sections
59(1) and 69(1) refer to a refusal of leave to enter  under  the  1971  Act.
If leave to enter is in fact given on any ground, there is no refusal  under
the 1971 Act and so no right of appeal.  In any event, any right  of  appeal
which might otherwise have existed would be removed by virtue of s.58(9)  of
the 1999 Act, which reads:-

         "A pending appeal under any  provision  of  this  Part  other  than
         section 69(3) is to be treated as abandoned  if  the  appellant  is
         granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom."


While the drafting may again be less than perfect, since there must exist  a
leave to enter or remain to enable an appeal under s.69(3) to be  made,  the
intention is clear.  A grant of leave to enter or  to  remain  will  prevent
any appeal being pursued except under s.69(3).  It  is  incidentally  to  be
noted that the existence of s.58(9), which was not, it seems, drawn  to  the
attention of the Court of Appeal,  may  limit  the  general  application  of
Saad, Diriye and Osorio v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (a
decision in which judgment was given on 19 December 2001) to  cases  arising
under s.8 of the Act of 1993.

10.   Saad's case does, however, encourage us to adopt a purposive  approach
to the construction of s.69(3) so as to try to  ensure  that  the  right  of
appeal given by it is not rendered worthless.  Thus it is submitted by  both
Ms Gordon and Mr Deller that it is implicit in the Notice of  Decision  that
leave to remain was refused on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
asylum.  The Notice states that the appellant had applied for asylum in  the
United Kingdom.  That application was  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
whether or not spelt out in those precise  terms.   The  refusal  inevitably
meant that leave to remain had been refused on the basis of asylum.  At  the
same time, leave to remain had been granted.  Thus the only right of  appeal
was that arising under s.69(3) and the Notice of  Decision  identified  that
right.   The  Secretary  of  State   intended  that  that  right  should  be
identified and that the appellant should be entitled to appeal  against  the
refusal of refugee status.  However poor the drafting, it  is  plain  beyond
any doubt that in enacting s.69(3) Parliament intended that a person  should
be entitled to establish refugee  status  even  though  he  was  not  to  be
removed from the United Kingdom for what could be a  substantial  period  in
excess of 28 days.  To deny an appeal in  such  circumstances  would  be  to
make the appellant suffer for an error in the  Notice  of  Decision  by  the
respondent.  That should not happen unless the wording of s.69(3)  precludes
any alternative construction.  In our judgment, particularly as there is  no
appealable decision  and  so  no  need  for  any  Notice  under  the  Notice
Regulations other than that under s.69(3), it is not  only  permissible  but
inevitable to infer that leave to remain has been refused.

11.              It would, perhaps, have made clearer what was  intended  if
s.69(3) had read:-


         "A person -



         (a) whose claim for asylum in the United Kingdom has been  refused,
         but


         (b) who ...."



Equally, the Home Office Notice of Decision could have read something like:-



         "You have applied  for  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  your
         application for leave to remain on the basis of your  asylum  claim
         has been refused ...."


If it had, no problem would have arisen.  We  suggest  that  in  future  the
Notice follows the wording of s.69(3) and  makes  it  clear  that  leave  to
enter or remain has been refused on the basis of  the  asylum  claim.   But,
since bitter experience leads us to doubt whether this  suggestion  will  be
acted on within a reasonable time or at all,  adjudicators  should  normally
infer that leave has been refused.

12.      It follows that this appeal must be allowed and the  case  remitted
to an adjudicator to consider it on its merits.

13.     We have before now referred to problems  in  s.69(3).   The  wording
seemed and still seems to us to have required the adjudicator  and  tribunal
to try to forecast what would be  the  situation  in  a  particular  country
months  or  perhaps  years  ahead.   This  would  be  a  difficult  but  not
necessarily impossible task.  Since it is dealing in questions of risk,  the
time when removal is to take place and the history of the situation  in  the
country to which return is to take  place  would  have  been  relevant.   If
there has  been  a  history  of  repression,  its  continuance  may  perhaps
reasonably be inferred.  If, on the other hand, the  situation  is  changing
by the week (as, for example, in Afghanistan) or is likely to change (as  in
Kosovo once the UN was to be involved and the  Serbs  removed),  it  may  be
impossible to say what the position might be.

14.     However, we now have guidance from the Court of Appeal in  Saad  and
others.  Saad and Diriye concerned s.8(2) of the 1993  Act.   The  Court  of
Appeal decided that Parliament, in enacting s.8,  must be  assumed  to  have
intended to grant a status appeal.  Thus the words in s.8(2)  "it  would  be
contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under the  Convention  for  him
to be required to leave the United Kingdom after the  time  limited  by  the
leave" must be read as requiring the appellate authorities  to  assume  that
the situation at the time of the appeal will remain the same when the  leave
comes to an end so that, if he is a refugee, his status can be  established.
 There are real difficulties in  this  approach  when  the  situation  in  a
particular country is changing if not daily  at  least  weekly  or  monthly.
Afghanistan and Somalia provide obvious examples.  While  therefore  we  are
far from persuaded by the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal,  this  approach
does at least achieve the  purpose  behind  s.69(3)  more  simply  than  any
other.  What therefore must be done is to assess the situation at  the  time
of the hearing and to decide on the facts as they then appear.  No doubt  if
following a hearing before the adjudicator there are significant changes  an
appeal can be brought on the basis of those changes. But changes  after  the
tribunal hearing will not be taken into account.

15.     This should, we suppose, create no difficulties for the Home  Office
if the Secretary of State abides by the Rules and  ceases  automatically  to
grant indefinite leave to enter or to remain to  refugees.   Rules  330  and
335 require the grant of limited leave to enter or to remain and  it  is  to
be noted that Paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act provides:-

         "In the exercise of their  functions  under  this  Act  immigration
         officers shall  act  in  accordance  with  such  instructions  (not
         inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be  given  them  by
         the Secretary of State  ..."


An instruction to grant indefinite leave to enter would appear to fall  foul
of this provision and to give rise to  concerns  that  in  following  it  an
immigration officer would not be acting in accordance with his duties  under
the Act.  However, we do not need to reach any conclusion on this.   We  do,
however, urge the Secretary of State to reconsider his present policy  since
the decision in Saad means that he may find himself having to award  refugee
status to many who are likely to be able to return to their own  country  in
safety when the situation there changes and when such a change is likely  to
occur.








                                                               MR    JUSTICE
COLLINS

PRESIDENT
