

                                                     Appeal No. CC04291-2002
                MN (Returns-Policy-War Veterans) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT
                                    05806


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                         Date heard:  11 November       2002
                 Date notified:....19 December 2002.........................
                                   Before:-

                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                                MRS W JORDAN





                                                               Between


                                                MS MILLINAH NCUBE


                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Zimbabwe, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr N P Dickson,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision by the respondent refusing  to  grant  leave
to enter on asylum grounds. Mr A Durance of Counsel  instructed  by  Musa  A
Patel & Co Solicitors represented the appellant.  Mr   Ekasha  appeared  for
the respondent.  At the outset the Tribunal refused to admit  further  items
of evidence submitted by the appellant's representatives because  they  were
not filed in accordance with directions.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The basis of the appellant's claim was that as a result of being  an  MDC
member her husband had been badly beaten on  three  occasions  before  going
into hiding for several months and fleeing  the  country  in  February/March
2001. She had then been targeted by the war veterans who came  to  her  home
in April 2001 in search of her husband. Prompted by  the  death  of  one  of
their colleagues on 5 November 2001, five war veterans visited her  home  on
1 December 2001 and threatened her life because she would not tell them  the
whereabouts of her  husband.  She  then  fled  to  her  sister's  where  she
arranged to depart from the UK.

4. Although prepared to accept that the appellant had been visited in  April
2001, the adjudicator did not accept her account of a  follow-up  visit.  He
did not think that if the war veterans had really  been  interested  in  the
appellant's husband, they would have allowed some 7 or 8  months  to  elapse
before paying a return visit. He did not  find  it  credible  that  the  war
veterans would have obtained  her  husband's  information  from  stolen  MDC
records. Finding that on the evidence the appellant had been  able  to  live
in Zimbabwe without difficulty between April 2001  and  December  2001,  the
adjudicator noted further that it appeared the appellant  had  travelled  to
South Africa, seemingly without problems.

5. Leave  was  granted  confined  to  ground  4.  This  contended  that  the
adjudicator  had  wrongly  taken  account  of  the   findings   of   another
adjudicator in another case,  made  findings  which  ignored  the  objective
materials relating to war veterans, failed to acknowledge that  on  his  own
findings there had been a war veteran interest in her and her family in  the
past on account of their membership of the MDC and failed to recognise  that
Home Office suspension of removals was proof of refugee status.

6. As regards the  first  contention,  this  related  to  the  adjudicator`s
observation that the appellant's husband's asylum appeal had been  dismissed
by an adjudicator. Since that is all that the  adjudicator  says  about  the
appellant's husband's  asylum  claim,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  that
translates into the adjudicator  wrongly  relying  on  the  decision  of  an
adjudicator in another case. But in any case the  fact  of  the  matter  was
that the appellant had not established that her husband's asylum  claim  had
been accepted. Nor had her husband chosen to give evidence  in  her  appeal.
In such circumstances the adjudicator was perfectly entitled to  assess  the
appellant's case on the basis that her husband's case had not succeeded.

7. As regards the second contention, that the adjudicator assessed the  case
in ignorance of objective materials relating to  war  veterans,  we  see  no
merit  in  that  whatsoever.  The  adjudicator  made  express  reference  to
objective  country  materials  whose  contents  documented  abuses  by   war
veterans.

8. The third contention  essentially  takes  issue  with  the  adjudicator's
conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  of  persecution  because
she had been able to remain in Zimbabwe without difficulty for some 7 and  8
months after the visit from the war veterans in April 2001.

9. In part this contention amounts  to  a  challenge  to  the  adjudicator`s
finding that the appellant was not visited further by the  war  veterans  as
claimed. Although it is doubtful this point was covered by the narrow  grant
of leave, we shall address it.


10. We consider the adjudicator's finding that the appellant had  failed  to
show she in fact had trouble with the war  veterans  after  April  2001  was
entirely  sustainable.  If  the  appellant  had  really  believed  the   war
veterans` threats to kill her, it is difficult to understand why she  should
have stayed living in the same house for a further 7-8 months.  If  the  war
veterans had any ongoing interest in her husband after establishing  he  was
not there in April 2001, it was not credible that they would then wait 7  or
8 months before  seeking  to  pursue  him  afresh.  We  recognise  that  the
appellant sought to explain this period of delay. The explanation  she  gave
was that they had come in December 2001 as a result of the  killing  of  one
of their comrades on November 5 2001, very  shortly  after  which  they  had
discovered information about her husband in stolen MDC records.

11. The adjudicator did not find this explanation credible. He did not  give
reasons. He should have. However, considering the matter for  ourselves,  we
think the adjudicator was justified in rejecting this  explanation.  On  the
one hand it left unexplained why they had done nothing prior to the  alleged
discovery of further information about her husband. For another, if  it  was
the discovery of information about her husband following the  death  of  one
of their colleagues, it was not reasonably likely  the  war  veterans  would
have waited a further two weeks before visiting her  home.  The  only  point
made in the grounds is that the adjudicator was wrong  to  assume  that  MDC
records were not sometimes stolen.  We  do  not  see  that  the  adjudicator
anywhere made such an assumption.


12. In addition to the unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  evidence  concerning
further interest in her by he war veterans, there was a  further  aspect  of
the appellant's evidence which indicated that she was  no  longer  concerned
about any adverse attention fro the war veterans or ZANU-PF. On her  account
she spent much of this period sorting out her property  affairs.  There  was
no satisfactory evidence that she kept a low profile during this time.

13.  The  grounds  are  correct  to  point  out   that   the   adjudicator's
conclusions, albeit rejecting the appellant's claim to have  a  well-founded
fear of persecution,  accepted  that  the  war  veterans  had  targeted  the
appellant in the past. However, we cannot see on the evidence in  this  case
that this  fact  takes  the  appellant's  case  very  far  at  all.  On  the
adjudicator's  findings  about  what  happened  to  the  appellant  in   the
subsequent period before she left Zimbabwe, the  war  veterans  had  plainly
ceased to have any interest in her or her husband. If they had  interest  in
either they would have visited her again sometime shortly after their  April
2001 visit. The appellant's subsequent behaviour in  taking  steps  to  sell
her property did not bear out that she herself continued  to  feel  at  risk
either.


14. Thus in our view this appeal comes down to  the  issue  of  whether  the
appellant would be at risk upon  return  as  someone  who,  along  with  her
husband, was a member of the MDC.  The  adjudicator  plainly  accepted  that
both the appellant and her husband were MDC members and we see no reason  to
take a different view. There was no satisfactory evidence  that  either  she
or her husband were prominent MDC members or activists.


15. Mr Durance contended that these  bare  facts  were  enough  to  put  the
appellant at risk. In support he pointed to the fact that  the  Home  Office
continued to operate a policy of not  returning  failed  asylum  seekers  to
Zimbabwe.


16. Before proceeding further, we should deal briefly with two matters.  One
concerned Mr Durance`s argument that the Tribunal in Hassan  (HX/23318/2001)
had  endorsed  the  view  that  a  Home  Office  policy  of  non-return  was
tantamount to an acceptance that a  person  qualified  for  refugee  status.
This argument is devoid  of  merit.   The  Tribunal  in  Hassan  was  solely
concerned with the policy in that case. That policy set  out  evidence  that
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office had advised that any  Libyans  returning
to that country after an absence of six months or more were  subject  to  an
interrogation by the Libyan security  authorities  and  that  failed  asylum
seekers  were  routinely  imprisoned  by  administrative  (as   opposed   to
judicial) order for 'having shown disloyalty to  the  state'.  Plainly  what
the Tribunal meant in Hassan was that the terms of  this  particular  policy
themselves established that the appellant  was  a  refugee.  Mr  Durance  is
quite wrong to try and eke out of Hassan  a  general  view  that  the  Senga
point means that all Home  Office  policies  suspending  removal  of  failed
asylum seekers establish their status as refugees.

17. The other matter  concerned  the  adjudicator's  approach  to  the  Home
Office  policy  suspending  removals  to  Zimbabwe.  At  paragraph  15   the
adjudicator wrote:

      "If the respondent was returning failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe  at
      the present time, then I would be concerned  that  there  could  be  a
      persecution for a Convention reason in that discrimination  of  failed
      asylum seekers could be  evidence  of  an  imputed  political  opinion
      (Senga 12842). In these circumstances it could be envisaged  that  the
      simple act of claiming asylum abroad was contrary to the interests  of
      the Zimbabwean government. However Bulletin 1 of 2002 states  that  on
      15 January 2002 the Home Secretary announced that removals to Zimbabwe
      from the United Kingdom of failed asylum seekers  would  be  suspended
      until after the presidential  elections  in  March  2002  and  in  the
      meantime the situation would continue to be closely monitored  by  the
      Home Office with a view  to  reappraising  the  situation  immediately
      after the elections had been held. In my  view  this  means  that  the
      Respondent will not be returning failed asylum  seekers  until  he  is
      satisfied that it is safe for the asylum seekers  to  be  returned.  I
      accept this view. Accordingly I do not consider that the Appellant has
      established a well  founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason..."


18. The adjudicator doubly erred here. Firstly he erred in  forgetting  that
it is a well-established principle of refuge law in this country  that  risk
has to be assessed as at the date of  hearing.  It  does  not  stand  to  be
assessed according to some time in the future when the  Secretary  of  State
decides to change a policy he has  on  returns.  Secondly,  the  adjudicator
erred in concluding that the existence of a Home  Office  policy  suspending
removal entailed a conclusion that the appellant would face persecution  for
a Convention reason. What has to be decided in an appeal under s. 69 of  the
1999 Act  is  solely  whether  the  decision  is  contrary  to  the  Refugee
Convention. A Home Office policy concerning non-return is at  best  relevant
evidence that return would place a person at a real risk of  persecution  or
treatment contrary to their human rights.  How  relevant  will  depend  very
much on the particular contents of that policy.

19. Insofar as Mr Durance  purported  to  argue  that  the  particular  Home
Office policy  on  Zimbabwe  entailed  acceptance  that  all  failed  asylum
seekers  from  Zimbabwe  qualified  as  refugees,  nothing  we  have   heard
persuades us to take a different view from that expressed  by  the  Tribunal
in the case of Chiremba [2002] UKIAT 03761 in which it was said:


      "The background  documentation  clearly  establishes  that  there  are
      continuing breaches of human rights in Zimbabwe, but we  find  nothing
      to suggest that it would be  unsafe  for  all  asylum  seekers  to  be
      returned. Each case must be  judged  on  its  merits.  We  regard  the
      Respondent's current policy as part of  the  picture  and  in  no  way
      determinative of an individual appeal one way or the other".

20. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




