
H-MA-V2
                                               Appeal Number :  HX12646-2002
                DA (Risk-Return-Reporting Restrictions) Sri Lanka CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT 04279
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  15th August 2002                        |                             |
|                                              |18-9-2002                    |
|Dictated : 15th August 2002                   |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                           Mr D K Allen - Chairman
                                Mr N Kumar JP


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              David ANTONYTHAS

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The Appellant has  been  granted  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
    against the determination of an Adjudicator, Dr R Kekic, in  which  she
    allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Appellant's  decision
    refusing to grant him asylum.

2.    The hearing before took place on 15th August 2002.  Miss A  Holmes  of
    the Home Office Presenting Officers Unit  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, and Ms N Mallick for Rasiah and Co. appeared  on  behalf  of
    the Respondent.

3.    Miss Holmes relied on the grounds of  appeal.   She  argued  that  the
    Adjudicator had not taken proper account of the March 2002 Home  Office
    Fact-Finding Report  on  Sri  Lanka.   In  the  light  of  the  current
    objective evidence,  on  the  facts  of  this  case  as  found  by  the
    Adjudicator the Respondent did not face a real risk on  return.   There
    was no evidence produced to show that strip searches  occurred.   There
    had been no roundups of Tamils for some nine  to  ten  months  and  the
    ceasefire was holding.  If a bribe had been paid then whoever  took  it
    would have safeguarded their position so it was unlikely there would be
    risk to the Respondent as a consequence.  Failure to observe  reporting
    conditions did not arouse interest.  The Tribunal was also referred  to
    paragraph 5.2.23 of the recent CIPU Report.

4.    In her submissions Ms Mallick argued that the Adjudicator had in  fact
    paid proper attention to the most recent objective evidence,  as  could
    be seen from paragraph 6 of her determination.   She  was  entitled  to
    conclude as she did at paragraph 44 that the authorities would still be
    interested in the Appellant in the light of  his  failure  to  continue
    reporting  as  required.   The  Tribunal  should  not  go  behind   the
    Adjudicators findings of fact.  Reference was also made to  the  recent
    determination in Jeyachandran [2002] UK IAT 01869, where  it  was  said
    that the Tribunal would only interfere in findings of fact if persuaded
    they were clearly wrong  or  if  there  was  no  evidence  which  could
    properly found such a finding of fact.  From that case the  significant
    findings made by the Chief Adjudicator were that the Appellant was on a
    wanted list that was confirmed  by  the  prohibition  upon  his  mother
    leaving the area until the Appellant was produced  to  the  army.   The
    Adjudicator had heard and made findings on the Appellant's claim.

5.    As regards the decision in Brinston [2002] UK IAT  01547,  there  were
    clear factual differences between that case and the instant case.   The
    Respondent in the appeal before the Tribunal was much more  exceptional
    and  the  scars  in  Brinston  were  much  less  significant  and  also
    credibility was in issue there.   At  paragraph  11  reservations  were
    expressed about the objective situation.  The Tribunal was  also  asked
    to bear in mind the references in Brinston to the  Fact-Finding  Report
    and the UNHCR letter.  Scarring could  be  a  factor.   Strip  searches
    could occur.  Paragraph 5.2.22 of the CIPU Report should  be  borne  in
    mind.  The Tribunal was  also  referred  to  the  earlier  Fact-Finding
    Report of the Home Office of July 2001, for example  paragraphs  4.1.3,
    6.2.2, 6.2.3, 6.3.8 and  6.3.10.   The  Adjudicator  had  assessed  the
    evidence correctly and had come  to  proper  conclusions.   The  appeal
    should be dismissed.

6.    By  way  of  reply  Miss  Holmes  reiterated  her  argument  that  the
    Adjudicator was not entitled to conclude as she did  at  paragraph  44.
    There was nothing to show any interest in the Respondent on the part of
    the authorities.  The March 2002 Fact-Finding Report was made  in  good
    faith and was not self-serving.  Unlike the situation in Brinston there
    was no warrant and no letter of the kind referred  to  therefore.   The
    July 2001 report was very worthy but was significantly  out-of-date  of
    now and could not properly be relied upon.

7.    We reserved our determination.

8.    The Adjudicator found the Appellant to be credible.  It was  wrong  to
    say at paragraph 43 that no  credibility  issues  were  raised  in  the
    refusal letter, given the direct contradiction of that view to be found
    in paragraph 6 of the refusal letter, but the Appellant did not  appeal
    on the basis of error in that regard, and accordingly we proceed on the
    basis that the Adjudicator's positive credibility findings are sound.

9.    The Appellant's claim is that he had assisted  the  LTTE  from  around
    1997.  He had no problems with the army before  May  2001,  though  his
    family, in particular his brother, brother-in-law  and  uncle  had  all
    been killed, his brother because he  had  been  an  EPDF  member.   The
    Appellant said that he was held at two army camps for  two  months  and
    beaten four or five times and his head submerged in water  and  he  was
    kicked and burned with an iron rod which had been heated on a fire.  He
    also sustained a head injury as a result of being pushed  into  bunker.
    No charges were brought against him but he was told to sign on  at  the
    army camp once a week.  He did this on the day of his  release  and  on
    one other occasion before fleeing.  It seemed  that  a  bribe  of  some
    50,000 rupees had been paid for his release.

10.   The Adjudicator saw some of his scars and also  heard  evidence  about
    the burn on the left side  of  his  chest.   She  did  not  accept  the
    Secretary of State's contention that the  authorities  would  not  have
    released the Appellant (as he was before her) if he was of interest  to
    them.  She came to this view on the basis of  the  reporting  condition
    imposed and the fact that the release occurred on payment of  a  bribe.
    She did not consider this  indicated   that  the  authorities  were  no
    longer interested in him and she considered in the light of his failure
    to continue reporting that the authorities would still be interested in
    him, perhaps even more on that account.  She considered  the  scars  on
    the side of his chest  and  back  to  be  severe  and  very  noticeable
    although she did not consider the scarring to his legs and hands to  be
    such as would attract the adverse attention of  the  authorities.   She
    considered that given his failure to abide by the reporting  conditions
    there was a real likelihood that there would be a record  of  him,  and
    that he would be known  to  the  authorities  which  would  lead  to  a
    thorough investigation and the real risk of a strip  search.   As  such
    she considered that he was at significant risk on  return.   She  noted
    the ceasefire and the encouraging signs of a peace but considered  that
    in the Appellant's particular circumstances this would not  necessarily
    assist him and nor was there an internal flight option.

11.   It is  clear  that  in  recent  months  there  have  been  significant
    improvements in the human rights situation in Sri Lanka.  The situation
    has been considered recently by the Tribunal in its  determinations  in
    Brinston and in Jeyachandran.  The Appellant in Brinston was considered
    by the Tribunal, as was noted at paragraph 8 in the  determination,  on
    the basis of accepting what he said as being true.  On  that  basis  he
    was a person who some five  years  previously  had  been  arrested  and
    released and was the subject of  a  warrant  under  the  Prevention  of
    Terrorism Act for purposes yet unknown and was also the  subject  of  a
    letter of 19th April 1998 which noted his failure to appear at a police
    station in spite of earlier notices and that that failure would  entail
    a warrant being taken out for his arrest and detention until completion
    of enquiries and thereafter if necessary.  He also bore  some  scarring
    on his arms and legs.  The Adjudicator concluded the scarring  was  not
    so significant as to cause the authorities to believe that he had  been
    involved in violence or conflict.  The Tribunal noted  the  matter  set
    out at paragraph 6 of the Fact-Finding Mission conducted on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State in Sri Lanka between 14th and 23rd  March  2002.
    Among other things it was said by  the  senior  superintendent  of  the
    Criminal Investigation Department in Sri Lanka on 21st March 2002  that
    if a returnee were not wanted they would not be stopped at the airport.
     Where the CID was certain that the individual had  committed  or  been
    convicted of an offence then they would be stopped.  A  computer  holds
    the name, address and age of a wanted person.  It  was  said  that  the
    police purely go on records and scars would not make a  difference  and
    the authorities would not make a decision on  this  basis.   There  had
    been no roundups of Tamils in Colombo in the previous six months.   The
    Prevention of Terrorism Act is still in force  but  the  government  is
    seriously considering repealing it and there has been an order  not  to
    make any arrests under the Act but only under Common Law.  It was  also
    said that failure to  comply  with  reporting  restrictions  would  not
    warrant reporting or recording.

12.   The UNHCR's senior protection officer, Mr Lindenbauer told  the  Fact-
    Finding Mission that checks on returnees at Colombo airport  have  been
    eased with many returned rejected asylum  seekers  simply  being  waved
    through since December 2001 by contrast  to  what  happened  previously
    where basically every returnee was referred to the CID  and  thereafter
    referred to a magistrate.  Scarring was not seen to  be  a  significant
    issue although obvious scarring could  draw  attention  and  result  in
    further enquiries and  detention  by  the  authorities.   A  subsequent
    letter from the deputy representative of UNHCR  in  London  dated  15th
    April  2002  specifically  indicated  that  it  did  not  seek  to   be
    inconsistent with what was  said  by  Mr  Lindenbauer.   It  noted  the
    relevance of torture related scars  on  the  body  of  a  returnee  and
    relevant factors that could trigger interest in a returnee.

13.   The Tribunal in Jeyachandran noted at paragraph 8 that in the  present
    situation and having regard to  the  present  trends  it  is  only  the
    exceptional cases that will not be  able  to  return  in  safety.   The
    Appellant in that case was regarded as an  exception,  given  the  fact
    that it had been found by the Chief Adjudicator, who heard the  initial
    appeal, that the Appellant in that case was on a wanted list  and  that
    that was confirmed by a prohibition upon his mother  leaving  the  area
    until the Appellant was produced to the army.   In  our  view  that  is
    significantly different from the situation of the Appellant before  us.
    We agree with Miss Holmes' submission that he  is  not  an  exceptional
    case and not a person with a  particular  profile.   The  fact  of  his
    release, albeit on conditions and as a consequence,  he  claims,  of  a
    bribe does not in our view make him in any sense an  exceptional  case.
    We note the comment to which we have referred to above from the  senior
    superintendent of the CID in Sri Lanka that failure to comply with  the
    reporting restrictions would not warrant reporting  or  recording.   We
    also consider that there is merit in Miss  Holmes'  suggestion  that  a
    person who had released the Appellant on a payment of a bribe would, as
    a matter of commonsense, be likely to protect their position and  cover
    their tracks rather than reveal the fact that release  had  only  taken
    place as a consequence of a bribe being paid.  The Appellant's  history
    as found by the Adjudicator does not indicate  a  person  with  a  high
    profile and as not  being  a  person  of  continuing  interest  to  the
    authorities.  Unlike the Appellant in Jeyachandran he is not  a  person
    who has been found to be on a wanted list.  In our view the Adjudicator
    did not take adequate account of the Fact-Finding Report.  If  she  had
    done then we do not consider that she could reasonably  have  concluded
    in the light of that that a failure to observe the reporting  condition
    or release on payment of a  bribe  or  both  together  would  entail  a
    continuing interest by the authorities in the Appellant.  Her  findings
    are not consistent with that up-to-date objective evidence.   We  agree
    with Miss Holmes that the earlier report from 2001 and the earlier Fact-
    Finding Mission is of largely historical interest now in the  light  of
    the fact of particular significance that  the  ceasefire  has  occurred
    since then and the significant improvement in human rights in Sri Lanka
    to which we have referred above has developed apace subsequently.   The
    point that Ms Mallick made with regard to paragraph 5.2.22  relates  to
    evidence provided by the UNHCR in a  letter  dated  4th  January  2000,
    which again very significantly predates  the  more  recent  significant
    improvement in human rights in  Sri  Lanka.   We  do  not  accept  Miss
    Malick's contention that we are bound to agree with  the  Adjudicator's
    conclusions.  For the reasons we have stated above,  we  consider  that
    her conclusions about risk on return cannot be sustained in  the  light
    of the fact that she did not in our view take proper account of the up-
    to-date objective evidence.

14.   Nor do we find  anything  in  the  evidence  to  indicate  that  strip
    searches  take  place.   The  Adjudicator's  views  on  the  degree  of
    likelihood of this, expressed at paragraph  48  of  her  determination,
    essentially followed from her views about  the  real  likelihood  of  a
    record existing of the Appellant given his  failure  to  abide  by  the
    reporting conditions.  As we have stated above, we do not consider that
    there is a real risk that there will be a record of him for this reason
    or for any other reason.  Accordingly we do not consider that there  is
    a real risk that he will be strip searched, and accordingly we  do  not
    consider there is a real risk that the significant scars on  his  chest
    and back would  be  revealed  to  the  authorities  on  return.   As  a
    consequence we consider that the Adjudicator's conclusions in this case
    can not be sustained, and in the  light  of  the  up-to-date  objective
    evidence and in the light of this Appellant's history, we consider that
    his appeal should  not  have  been  allowed  by  the  Adjudicator,  and
    accordingly we allow the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that
    decision.






                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                                    CHAIRMAN
