

|Heard at Field House       |        |VG (Operational Guidance    |
|                           |        |Note 2001) Angola CG [2002] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 04045                 |
|On 22 August 2002          |        |HX10756-2002                |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|29TH AUGUST 2002                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Chairman)                                         |
|Mr N. Kumar JP                                                    |
|Mrs S. I. Hewitt                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|VALDIR CLAUDIO RITA GREGORIO                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Angola who has  been  granted  leave  to
      appeal the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Miss  A.  L.  Sawetz)
      dismissing his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  give
      directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse
      asylum.


   2. Miss H. Owen of Counsel instructed by Perera  &  Co  appears  for  the
      Appellant.  Mr M. Davidson a Home Office Presenting Officer represents
      the Respondent.

   3. The Appellant arrived in United  Kingdom  on  28  September  2001  and
      claimed asylum on 1 October 2001.  The notice containing the  decision
      against which he appeals is dated 19 November 2001.   The  Adjudicator
      heard the appeal on 29 April 2002 and leave to appeal was  granted  on
      17 June 2002.


   4. The Appellant claimed to fear persecution from the MPLA authorities in
      Angola because he and his father were suspected of helping  the  UNITA
      rebels.  He said  that  he  had  been  arrested  and  detained  before
      escaping when he was released to go  to  his  father's  funeral.   The
      Adjudicator found that he was not a credible  witness.   She  did  not
      believe his account of events.  He had not established a  well-founded
      fear of persecution for a Convention reason or that his  human  rights
      would be infringed.  In the light of the  Home  Office  guidelines  he
      came within the category of those who could be returned to Luanda.


   5. The grounds of appeal submit that the adverse credibility  finding  is
      unsafe.  Leave was not granted in respect of this ground and Miss Owen
      did not seek to reopen it.  We consider that the  adverse  credibility
      finding is safe and supported by the  evidence.   The  only  remaining
      ground of appeal relates to the  risks  on  return  in  the  light  of
      current country circumstances and in particular the Home Office policy
      set out in the last paragraph of the August 2001 Operational  Guidance
      Note.  This states,


               "Removal are only possible to Luanda, and it has been agreed
               on humanitarian grounds, following consultation with  UNHCR,
               that nobody  should  be  returned  to  Angola  who  has  not
               previously lived in  Luanda  or  who  does  not  have  close
               current connections there.  In addition, due to the risk  of
               press-ganging into military service  by  the  government  or
               UNITA, no males between the ages of  15  and  25  should  be
               returned.  Vulnerable young women who  live  outside  Luanda
               should not be returned because of fears of  their  abduction
               for service as sex slaves.  Such cases  should  normally  be
               considered for exceptional leave to remain."


   6. We have the Appellant's bundle containing 29 pages,  the  Home  Office
      Angola Country Assessment of April 2002 and the  Operational  Guidance
      Note to which we have already referred.

   7. Miss Owen submitted that the Operational Guidance Note  was  still  in
      force.  The Appellant spent between two and four months with a  friend
      in Luanda.  This was his only connection with that  area.   Since  his
      arrival in United Kingdom his only contact  in  Angola  was  with  his
      cousin, who did not live anywhere near Luanda.  He  had  not  been  in
      touch with his friend in Luanda.  The current country  reports  showed
      that the humanitarian situation in Angola was  very  serious.   If  he
      returned the Appellant would be a displaced person with minimal  links
      to Luanda.  If he had to go into a camp, which was likely, this  would
      infringe  his  Article  3  human  rights  and  imperil   his   health,
      particularly in the light of the trauma  he  suffered  in  Angola.  In
      reply to our question Miss Owen conceded that  there  was  no  medical
      evidence.  She accepted that it would be difficult for  the  Appellant
      to make out a claim under  the  Refugee  Convention,  for  lack  of  a
      Convention reason.  She rested her case on Article 3.  We  were  asked
      to allow the appeal.

   8. Mr Davidson submitted that now the war in Angola had come  to  an  end
      the Appellant was not at risk of forced recruitment.  The  Operational
      Guidance was given for humanitarian reasons and did not imply that the
      Respondent accepted that even those who  came  within  the  guidelines
      would necessarily be at risk of infringement of  their  human  rights.
      The Appellant had lived with a friend in Luanda for approximately four
      months.  If  his  evidence  on  the  point  was  accepted  the  friend
      harboured the Appellant in circumstances  where  it  could  have  been
      dangerous for him to do so.  This indicated that he was a close friend
      and connection in Luanda.  Most of the country reports dealt with  the
      question of returnees from adjoining countries who came from and  were
      likely to have to go to camps.  The Appellant  would  be  returned  to
      Luanda.  Mr Davidson submitted that the evidence did not  justify  the
      submission that what would happen to him on return was likely to cross
      the high Article 3 threshold. We were asked to dismiss the appeal.

   9. The different elements of the  relevant  passage  in  the  Operational
      Guidance Note need to be addressed separately.  The Appellant is not a
      young woman.  He is not a male between the age of 15 and 25.  His date
      of birth is 28 November 1972 and he is now 29 years of age.   He  does
      not come within the age band of those said to be  at  risk  of  forced
      military  service  with  one  side  or  the  other.  However,  changed
      circumstances since the Guidance Note was produced in August 2001 make
      it even less likely that a man of his age would be at risk  of  forced
      military service.  The first document in the Appellant's bundle  is  a
      report from  the  UN  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian
      Affairs.  This confirms what is widely known, that  the  decades  long
      civil war came to an end with the March 2002 ceasefire, which  appears
      to be holding. Many thousands of refugees have returned to Angola from
      adjoining countries.  Paragraph 6.44 of the Country Assessment  Refers
      to the formal end of the UNITA military campaign.  We  find  that  the
      Appellant is not at risk of  forced  military  service  on  return  to
      Luanda.  This begs the question of how he may  be  at  risk  and  from
      whom.

  10. In circumstances where the Adjudicator found that  the  Appellant  was
      not a credible witness and there is no medical evidence, the Appellant
      has not established that he suffers from any physical  or  mental  ill
      health, which would be exacerbated by his return  to  Angola.   If  he
      returns he will do so as a healthy 29 year-old man. Miss Owen did  not
      suggest that he would be at risk from any particular individual, group
      or faction, in the MPLA, UNITA or anyone else.   She  argued  that  he
      would have to go to a refugee camp from which we understood her to say
      that he would suffer destitution and starvation.  The country  reports
      indicate serious difficulties for many returnees,  particularly  those
      from adjoining countries, but not  that  their  circumstances  or  the
      circumstances of the Appellant would be so serious  as  to  cross  the
      high Article 3 threshold.  We find that, even if  the  Appellant  were
      unable to obtain any help from friends or relatives and in  particular
      from  the  friend  in  Luanda  who  helped  him  in  the   past,   the
      circumstances of his return would not infringe  his  Article  3  human
      rights.

  11. However we find it is reasonably likely that, even  though  they  have
      not been in touch recently, the Appellant's friend who allowed him  to
      stay for approximately four months before he left  the  country  would
      once again provide the Appellant  with  the  necessary  close  current
      connections, support and accommodation.  Whilst  the  Adjudicator  did
      not accept the Appellant's credibility it should not be forgotten that
      the Appellant claimed that this friend was prepared  to  help  him  at
      considerable risk to himself at a  time  when  the  Appellant  was  in
      hiding and on the run.

  12. The Appellant has not established well founded fear of persecution for
      a Convention reason  or  that  his  human  rights  are  likely  to  be
      infringed.  We agree with the Adjudicator's  conclusions  and  dismiss
      the appeal.







   ...........................................

   P. R. Moulden - Vice President


