
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX28775-2001      |
|On 30 August 2002          |        |NL (Mental Illness-Support  |
|                           |        |for Family) Pakistan CG     |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 04408          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|26-9-2002.............................                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|NEELOFUR LIAQUAT                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, who has been granted leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
      L V Waumsley,  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision refusing to vary leave to remain and refusing asylum.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 30  August  2002.  Ms  J  Okoh,  a
      solicitor of Austin Collar Fitzpatrick, instructed  by  Bajwa  &  Co.,
      appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr M Pichamuthu, of the  Home
      Office Presenting Officer's Unit appeared on behalf of the respondent.

   3. Ms Okoh  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She  argued  that  the
      appellant's husband was likely to track her  down  and  possibly  kill
      her. She took us to the CIPU Report  of  October  2001,  at  paragraph
      5.3.95. There was greater risk now from her husband,  given  that  she
      had left him, together with two of his children. With  regard  to  the
      possibility of internal relocation, it was rare to be a  single  woman
      in Pakistan with children and it would easily draw  attention  to  her
      and it would be easy for her husband to track her down. Also, she  was
      mentally ill and not stable enough to take care of herself and  needed
      adequate protection from the State, but it was not willing to provide.
      Her illness was  a  result  of  her  fear  of  her  husband.  She  had
      previously attempted to commit suicide. Even if she were able to  hide
      from her husband, she would not have liberty to move around  and  this
      was contrary to her  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.

   4. Mr Pichamuthu argued that there was not a real risk of  serious  harm.
      The fact that the appellant  had  left  two  of  her  children  alone,
      indicated that the violence might not be as bad as was made  out.  The
      appellant would be returned to a major city. She  had  last  lived  in
      Rawalpindi. And unlike Shah and Islam she was not likely to be accused
      of adultery on return. The Adjudicator had  accepted  that  she  would
      have difficulties, but they did not amount to persecution. Also, there
      was some evidence of improvement in  the  attitude  of  the  Pakistani
      Government to women. He referred us to a document that had been put in
      concerning the National Commission on the Status of Women, which among
      other things involved a review of  all  laws,  rules  and  regulations
      affecting the status and rights of women and monitoring the  mechanism
      and institutional procedures to address violation of  women's  rights.
      He referred us to the CIPU Report which, among other things,  referred
      to a Crisis Centre for women in distress which was opened in  1997  in
      Islamabad and also the fact that, as  was  pointed  out  in  paragraph
      5.3.88 of a Report, Pakistani  women  can  obtain  legal  and  medical
      assistance as well as consultation services from  various  centres  in
      Islamabad,  Karachi,  Rawalpindi  and  Lahore.  There   were   medical
      facilities within Pakistan where she could be treated for  her  mental
      illnesses.


   5. By in way of reply, Ms Okoh argued that the fact that the two children
      were left behind, did not mean the husband was not violent. As regards
      return to a  city,  she  was  not  in  a  mental  state  to  know  her
      whereabouts. The Crisis Centre referred to at paragraph 5.3.97 of  the
      CIPU Report, had only served 75 women in the year 2000, which was  not
      sufficient for the appellant on return. It  would  not  give  her  the
      safety she deserved. Even if she were returned to Islamabad, she would
      have not just the problems of settling in a new  city,  but  also  the
      need for medical care, because of her mental state and had  the  three
      children to look after.

   6. We reserved our determination.

   7. The Adjudicator found the  appellant  to  be  credible.  He  therefore
      accepted the history that she had claimed of domestic violence on  the
      part of her husband who, from about  1984  onwards  beat  slapped  and
      kicked her, threatened her with a knife, cut her on her arms and feet,
      burnt her with cigarettes and hit her  with  a  chair  fracturing  her
      collarbone. She claimed that  the  children  had  also  been  frequent
      victims of his brutality. There is some medical evidence  to  indicate
      scars on two of the children which were consistent  with  claims  that
      they had been beaten by their father. The  Adjudicator  also  accepted
      that, if the appellant returned to her husband's house, the abuse that
      she had experienced would resume and it would be  likely  to  continue
      for the foreseeable  future.  He  took  account  of  medical  evidence
      concerning the  appellant  which,  among  other  things,  contained  a
      diagnosis in the following terms:

           "Mild cognitive with schizophrene due to poor  glycemic  control
           (Left 06.20F06.7)"

   8. The Adjudicator accepted that there was a Refugee Convention reason in
      this case, following the decision in the House of Lords  in  Shah  and
      Islam, but distinguished that case on  the  basis  that  an  essential
      element missing was the threat of violence  or  false  accusations  of
      adultery from  the  appellant's  husband  and/or  his  associates.  He
      considered the human rights issues  and  concluded  that,  though  the
      appellant would be returned as a woman with mental health problems and
      with three  children,  that  her  return  would  not  cross  the  high
      threshold that is applicable in Article 3 cases.


   9. We consider first the Refugee Convention issues in this case. It  must
      be accepted that there is a Refugee Convention reason, in the light of
      the conclusions of the House of Lords  in  Shah  and  Islam.  In  this
      context though we note the document put in by Mr Pichamuthu concerning
      the National Commission on the status of women, which is indicative of
      some improvement in the attitude of the Pakistani  Government  towards
      the position of women. Among other  things,  the  Commission  has  the
      function of reviewing all laws, rules and  regulations  affecting  the
      status and rights of women and to  suggest  repeal  amendment  or  new
      legislation essential to eliminate discrimination, and also to monitor
      the mechanism and institutional procedures for redress of violation of
      womens rights, individual grievances and facilities for  social  care.
      Although this is a welcome development, we consider that the  position
      remains that women are discriminated against by the society  in  which
      they live as a group and are unprotected by the state in Pakistan.  We
      agree that if the appellant were to return to her husband's home,  she
      would be at clear risk of treatment amounting to persecution. We  note
      from paragraph 5.4.38 of the CIPU Report for October 2001, that  among
      groups with a limited internal flight alternative  are  women.  It  is
      said that many fled from rural areas to the cities if  their  economic
      circumstances permit, but even there, they may not be  safe  from  the
      families or religious extremists. Clearly, it would  be  inappropriate
      for the appellant to be returned to Rawalpindi.  We  do  not  consider
      that there is a real  risk  that  she  would  come  to  her  husband's
      attention if she did not return to Rawalpindi. We consider that it  is
      unduly speculative to suggest that in some way he  would  be  able  to
      track her down, or news of her location would come to him. As had been
      pointed  out,  Pakistan  is  a  large  country  with  a  very  sizable
      population, and we consider that if the  appellant  were  returned  to
      Islamabad or Lahore for example, that there is no real risk  that  she
      would come to her husband's attention. As such, and  bearing  in  mind
      that the basis of her fear is her husband's persecutory behaviour,  we
      consider that the Refugee Convention claim is not made out.


  10. We turn to the Human Rights  Convention  claim.  The  appellant  would
      return to Pakistan a  women  with  some  mental  health  problems  and
      accompanied by three children, aged as of now, respectively, 17, 7 and
      5. Unfortunately, the appellant's representative did not  see  fit  to
      provide us with a bundle of any kind, and in particular, we  have  not
      been provided with any up to date medical evidence. All we have is the
      various  references  to  the  medical   reports   contained   in   the
      Adjudicator's determination. It seems that the main report of Dr Behre
      is dated 30 October 2001, and we consider it to be lamentable that  we
      are hearing this appeal nearly ten months later and no more up to date
      evidence of the appellant's mental state has been  provided.  We  note
      that there is also a small bundle of letters from  the  GP  concerning
      the appellant and her children. We  have  described  above  the  final
      diagnosis given by Dr Behre. There is reference which we gleaned  from
      the Adjudicator's determination, to her behaviour having been observed
      when she had become paranoid with auditory and visual  hallucinations.
      There was an impression of a psychotic episode. There was an  incident
      when she was seen to be trying to strangle herself with  a  scarf  and
      she said that she was being strangled by people whom her  husband  had
      sent to kill her.  There  is  some  concern  as  to  whether  she  was
      intentionally taking too much insulin as  she  was  having  hypos.  It
      seems that by 29 October 2000, a measure of recovery had taken  place,
      as is described in paragraph 23 of the Adjudicator's determination.


  11. We have been provided with no evidence as to the extent to  which  the
      appellant could be treated on return to Pakistan for her ailments. The
      Adjudicator, at paragraph 41, made it clear that he had not been shown
      evidence of the medical treatment which the appellant  required  would
      not be available for her in Pakistan and that therefore, he  proceeded
      on the basis that the medical  facilities  which  she  required,  were
      available to patients in her condition. It remains the case that there
      is a lack of evidence in this regard.

  12. We note from the CIPU Report that domestic violence  is  a  widespread
      and serious problem in Pakistan. There is a Crisis Centre for women in
      distress which was opened in 1997 in Islamabad and during  2000,  that
      Centre served for 75 women. There is no indication as to whether  this
      caused significant problems with regard to people (if any)  unable  to
      be served by the centre during that period. We  note  that  a  further
      Centre in southern Punjab  opened  during  2000.  We  note  also  that
      Pakistani women can obtain legal and medical  assistance  as  well  as
      consultation  services  from  various  centres,  including   ones   in
      Islamabad, Karachi and Lahore.

  13. We accept, as did the Adjudicator, that the appellant would experience
      difficulties on return as a single woman accompanied  by  one,  fairly
      young and two young children. She clearly has mental health  problems,
      although as we have noted above, there is a significant lack of up  to
      date medical  evidence.  There  is  some  indication  from  the  final
      diagnosis that her problems may, at least in part, be connected to her
      diabetes. We bear in mind also the high threshold in Article  3  cases
      as it was said to be the case by the European Court of Human Rights in
      Bensaid. In our view, the appellant's case on the evidence  as  it  is
      before us, does not cross that threshold. There is evidence as we have
      described above of support for a person in the  appellant's  condition
      on return to a city such as Islamabad, and we do not consider that the
      medical evidence such as it is shows that she is in a state where,  as
      it was suggested by Ms Okoh, that she  cannot  care  for  herself  and
      therefore would not be able to care for her children.  As  such  there
      would be no breach of her Article 3 or Article 8 rights on return.

  14. We conclude that on  the  evidence  as  it  is  before  us,  that  the
      appellant has not made out her case and as a consequence  this  appeal
      is dismissed, on  human  rights  as  well  as  on  Refugee  Convention
      grounds.





                                                                   D K Allen


                                                                    Chairman

