

                      Zeqaj (Removal Directions to Wrong Country) Albanian *
                                                          [2002] UKIAT 00232







                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                   Date of  Hearing:
18/12/2001
                                                         Date Determination
notified: 04/02/2002



                                   Before:


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)

                              Mr C M G Ockelton

                               Mr P R Moulden


                                BLEDAR ZEQAJ
                                                    APPELLANT

                                     And



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                  RESPONDENT


Miss C Record, Instructed by Waterfords Solicitors, for the Appellant

Mr P Deller, HOPO, for the Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal has a most  unfortunate  history.   The  appellant  is  an
      ethnic Albanian from Kosovo.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  12
      November 1999 and claimed asylum.  He was  an  illegal  entrant.   His
      application  was  refused  on  23  October  2000  on  the  basis  that
      circumstances in Kosovo had changed and  that  the  appellant  had  no
      reason to fear persecution by Serbs nor had he  established  any  real
      risk of persecution or ill treatment by any  ethnic  Albanian  groups.
      While  his   appeal   to   an   adjudicator   was   pending,   further
      representations were made on his behalf, in particular that to  return
      him would be to breach Articles 3 and 14 of the European Convention on
      Human Rights.  These further representations were rejected on 12  July
      2001.

   2. Unfortunately, due to lack of care on  the  part  of  the  responsible
      immigration officer, the removal directions which were served  on  the
      appellant following the refusal of his asylum claim specified  Albania
      as the place to which the appellant  was  to  be  removed.   This  was
      clearly an error.  The right of appeal under s69(5) of the Immigration
      and Asylum Act 1999 ('the 1999 Act') is in these terms:

           "If directions are given as mentioned in s66(1) for the  removal
           of a person from  the  United  Kingdom,  he  may  appeal  to  an
           adjudicator on the ground that his removal in pursuance  of  the
           directions would be contrary to the [Refugee] Convention."

      Paragraph 1 of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act empowers  the  Secretary  of
      State to provide by      regulations that written notice of appealable
      decisions be given to those affected and  for  the  contents  of  such
      notices.  This has been done in the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
      (Notices) Regulations 2000 (2000 No 2246) ('the Notices Regulations').
       Regulation 5(1)(b) provides:

           "A notice .. is to ... if it relates to the giving of directions
           for the removal of the person from the United Kingdom, include a
           statement of the country to which he is to be removed."


   3. Since the appeal lies  against the removal directions, it  is  clearly
      of fundamental importance that the correct country  should  be  named.
      The appeal will be against the removal to that country.   Furthermore,
      the power to direct removal to particular destinations is  limited  by
      Paragraphs 8(1)(c), 9(1) and 10(2) of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
      Act 1971.  Paragraph 8 deals with the powers of  immigration  officers
      on refusing leave to enter, but those powers are extended  to  embrace
      illegal entrants (paragraph 9) and those whose removal is directed  by
      the Secretary of State because too great a time has elapsed to  enable
      the immigration officers to use their powers or it is  impractical  to
      direct an immediate  removal  (paragraph  10(2)).   Paragraph  8(1)(c)
      specifies the following 'countries or territories' as those to which a
      person's removal can be directed, namely:

           "(i)  a country of which he is a national or citizen;  or

           (ii)  a country or territory in which he has obtained a passport
           or other document of identity;

           (iii)  a country or territory  in  which  he  embarked  for  the
           United Kingdom, or

           (iv) a country or territory to which there is reason to  believe
           that he will be admitted."

      Prima facie, Albania did not qualify under any of  sub-paragraphs  (i)
      to (iv).  However, the notice of  appeal  served  by  the  appellant's
      solicitors merely raised general grounds that to return the  appellant
      would be a breach of the Refugee and  the  Human  Rights  Conventions.
      The Statement of Additional Grounds in  pursuance of  the  'one  stop'
      notice did not add to the grounds and did not raise any  other  ground
      of appeal.


   4. At the hearing of the appeal before the Adjudicator  (N  Renton  Esq),
      the HOPO then appearing acknowledged that the removal directions  were
      wrong but, as the Adjudicator records in his determination,  "declined
      to withdraw the Secretary of State's decision".  There is in the  file
      a somewhat cryptic note in the Adjudicator's handwriting (it seems  to
      be the record of proceedings) which records the HOPO saying:

           "Removal directions are wrong.  I do not withdraw decision but I
           withdraw R. M. (sic) new RDs will be issued."

         Although he had been represented by his present Solicitors, at  the
       hearing the appellant appeared in person.  The  significance  of  the
       error in identifying Albania  instead  of  the  Federal  Republic  of
       Yugoslavia in the removal directions does not seem to have been fully
       appreciated by anyone and seems to have wholly escaped the notice  of
       the appellant's Solicitors who appear to have done nothing to  assist
       the appellant in pursuing his appeal, beyond filling in the forms and
       settling grounds which do not deal with the points at issue


      5. If the correct country is specified, but either the wrong  part  of
       that country is identified (for example, a  direction  to  remove  to
       Belgrade instead of Pristina in relation to an ethnic  Albanian  from
       Kosovo) or removal cannot for the time being be achieved  to  a  safe
       part of the country (see, for example, Gardi v SSHD), an amendment is
       possible.  But where the directions specify the  wrong  country,  the
       position is different.  The combination of s.69(5) of  the  1999  Act
       and Regulation 5(1)(b) of the Notices Regulations means that the only
       appeal before the Adjudicator is that  against  removal  to  a  named
       country. Recognition of the error should lead to a withdrawal of  the
       directions and so to the disappearance of  the  appeal.   It  is,  of
       course, open to the Secretary of State to issue fresh  directions  to
       the correct country  which will  trigger a fresh s.69(5) appeal.   If
       this is done before the hearing,  it  will  usually  be  possible  to
       proceed on the proper basis, particularly if the  appellant  has  not
       been prejudiced by the error.  It can be done at the hearing provided
       that the appellant agrees to waive all procedural requirements.

    6. In this case, the Adjudicator dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   He
       concluded, no doubt correctly,  that  the  directions  to  remove  to
       Albania were not permitted by paragraph 8(2)(c) of Schedule 2 to  the
       Immigration Act 1971.  He decided as follows:

           "6.  Therefore, these removal directions are not  in  accordance
           with the powers of the Immigration Officer who gave them and are
           consequently invalid.

           7. This appeal was made under the provisions of Section 69(5) of
           the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  which  only  applies  when
           directions have been given for an Appellant's removal as,  inter
           alia, an illegal entrant. In this case, there are no such  valid
           removal directions,  and  therefore  there  cannot  be  a  valid
           appeal.

           8.The appeal is dismissed."

    7. The Adjudicator was correct to decide that he  could  not  allow  the
       appeal under s69(5) since there was no material before him to suggest
       that to remove the applicant to Albania  would  be  contrary  to  the
       Refugee Convention.  But the effect of dismissing it was to leave the
       admittedly  erroneous  directions  in  being  and  so  to  leave  the
       appellant (at least in theory) at risk of removal to Albania.

    8. Since what  happened  in  this  case  is  regrettably  not  a  unique
       occurrence, we have had to consider (without, we are  bound  to  say,
       any real assistance from the appellant's representatives) what is the
       correct  solution.   Our  attention   was   drawn   to   a   tribunal
       determination, Pepaj v SSHD (01/TH/02655).  A similar error had  been
       made in that case. The tribunal allowed  the  appeal  on  the  ground
       that, since Albania was not a country permitted by paragraph  8(1)(c)
       of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  the
       immigration rules".  However, since the appeal was under s.69(5), and
       there was no evidence that to return  to  Albania  would  breach  the
       Refugee Convention, that course should not have been adopted.   Since
       the Chairman presiding in Pepaj is a member of this tribunal, we  can
       say more easily that Pepaj should not be followed.

    9. What has been overlooked is s.66 of the 1999 Act.  S.66 applies inter
       alia if directions are given for a person's removal from  the  United
       Kingdom on the  ground  that  he  is  an  illegal  entrant.   S.66(2)
       provides:

           "That person may appeal to an adjudicator against the directions
            on the ground that on the facts of his case there was in law no
            power to give them on the ground on which they were given."

       This appeal can only be pursued once the  appellant  is  out  of  the
       United Kingdom "unless he is appealing  under  s.65  or  69(5)".   Mr
       Deller submitted that s.66(2) could not apply  here  because  of  the
       last eight  words  of  the  subsection.   The  ground  on  which  the
       directions were given was that the appellant was an illegal  entrant.
       Thus, he submits, the only relevant  issue  under  s.66(2)  would  be
       whether he was a illegal entrant since, if he was not, there  was  in
       law no power  to  direct  his  removal.   Errors  in  the  directions
       themselves are not covered by s.66(2).

   10. In our judgment, that is too restrictive a construction  of  s.66(2).
       It enables an appeal to be brought on any ground which is appropriate
       to an individual case that there was on the facts in law no power  to
       give the directions.  So here, the appropriate ground is  that  there
       is on the facts of this case no power to direct removal  to  Albania.
       It does no violence to the language to s.66(2) to construe it in this
       way, particularly as any appeal, as the use  of  the  words  "on  the
       facts of the case" recognises, will depend on  its  particular  facts
       and those facts may disclose a particular  legal  impediment  to  the
       directions which have been given.  Albania was specified because  the
       appellant was an illegal entrant and it was lawful to remove  him  to
       Albania.  If either of those matters was shown  to  be  wrong,  there
       would be in law no power to give the directions  on  the  grounds  on
       which they were given.  We accordingly suggested to Miss Record  that
       she might seek leave to amend  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  rely  on
       s.66(2).  Mr Deller very properly  did  not  seek  to  say  that  the
       Secretary of State was prejudiced by this amendment - it  was,  after
       all, his officials' incompetence which had created the  difficulty  -
       and so did not resist the application made by Miss  Record,  prompted
       by our suggestion.  We gave leave accordingly.

   11. It is clear that there is in law no power to remove this appellant to
       Albania since it is accepted that an error was made and the Secretary
       of State cannot establish that on the  facts  of  this  case  Albania
       falls within paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act
       1971.  That being so, the appeal under s.66(2) must be allowed.  That
       means that the directions are quashed and so the appeal under s.69(5)
       disappears.  If fresh removal directions  are made, fresh  rights  of
       appeal will arise.

   12.  We recognise, as Mr Deller pointed out,  that  our  construction  of
       s.66(2) will open the door to argument in cases  where  a  particular
       country which is not the country of nationality has been deliberately
       chosen.  We see no reason to be concerned.  An appellant will have to
       establish his case under s.66(2) on the balance of probabilities.  If
       he is able to show that  the  country  named  does  not  fall  within
       paragraph 8(1)(c), he will succeed in his appeal.   If  there  is  no
       error, we doubt whether such an  appeal  will,  save  in  exceptional
       circumstances, stand any real chance of success.




   13.  We have starred this appeal because, as we have said, this situation
       is far from unique and the practice of Adjudicators  has  varied.  If
       removal directions are to a country other than that of an appellant's
       nationality the question should be raised at  a  preliminary  hearing
       whether they are correct.  If it is accepted that an error  has  been
       made, the HOPO should be required  to  cause  the  directions  to  be
       withdrawn and fresh directions  to  the  correct  country  should  be
       issued.  If necessary, there can be service of  those  directions,  a
       fresh appeal and a fresh hearing  or  the  procedural  steps  can  be
       waived.  Any appellant who cannot show any prejudice arising from the
       error will, if he refuses to waive the procedural  requirements,  run
       the risk that his attitude will be taken to show a  desire  to  delay
       his appeal and to be inconsistent with a genuine  claim  for  asylum.
       If the HOPO is unwilling  to  commit  himself,  or  if  there  is  no
       representation on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  the  appellant
       should be encouraged to raise a s.66(2) appeal if he has not  already
       done  so.   This  will  enable  the  Adjudicator  to  deal  with  all
       eventualities at the hearing of the appeal.














                                                   MR JUSTICE COLLINS

