
Baig (Immigration - Validity of Pakistani Divorce) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT
04229

                                                                      [2002]
                                                   *STARRED*



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 29th May 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                             ...13th September 2002.........

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Dr H H Storey
                                Mr D J Parkes

Between:




                              MIRZA WAHEED BAIG


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad

                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction


  1. In this starred determination, we give the views of  the  Tribunal  on
     the effect, in English law, of a Pakistani  Muslim  divorce  in  which
     there has been no notification to the Chairman of the  Union  Council.
     This is not only a difficult issue:  it is a current one,  because  of
     the perceived trend towards  Islamicisation  of  the  law  in  certain
     Muslim  countries,  including  Pakistan,  which  has  led  courts  and
     commentators in those countries to prefer to move away from a  secular
     gloss on the rules of Islamic law.  To  our  personal  knowledge,  the
     present case is one of a number raising similar issues.

  2. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appeals, with leave, against the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T R Jones, dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 17th July 2000 refusing  him
     entry clearance to the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the
     husband of  Nigat  Parveen  Batti,  the  Sponsor.   Before  us  he  is
     represented by Miss Weston, instructed  by  Thornhill  Ince,  and  the
     Respondent is represented by Mr Sheik.

  3. Leave to appeal was granted as long ago as July 2001.  The hearing  of
     the  appeal  was  unfortunately  initially  delayed  by   difficulties
     relating to the Tribunal's move to new premises in October  2001.   It
     was considered necessary to have this appeal heard by a Tribunal  with
     particular experience.  On 30th November 2001, the parties were  given
     notice that this appeal would be heard on Thursday 7th March 2002.  On
     the latter date, the Tribunal convened and it rapidly became  apparent
     that, unfortunately, the parties were not yet in a  position  to  deal
     with the difficulties of this appeal and, in particular, were not  yet
     aware of the leading English judgments on the subject.  The appeal was
     accordingly adjourned then, and re-listed to  be  heard  on  29th  May
     2002.  We now have the benefit of a brief skeleton argument on  behalf
     of the Appellant, but unfortunately it does not deal with the decision
     of the House of Lords in Quazi v Quazi [1980]  AC  744,  nor  does  it
     contain any argument on the detailed provisions of the Islamic law, on
     which, perhaps understandably,  it  simply  refers  generally  to  the
     expert evidence.  We heard the appeal on 29th May.   We  reserved  our
     determination, but we are certain that  the  representatives  of  both
     parties were clearly aware both that we had in mind materials of which
     they were not yet entirely familiar, and  also  that  we  proposed  to
     dismiss this appeal for reasons which, essentially, were put  to  Miss
     Weston in the course of the hearing.  We have  deferred  writing  this
     determination in case, in that context, either party  wished  to  make
     further submissions to us or to ask for the  hearing  to  be  resumed.
     There have been no such submissions.


The Facts


  4. The Appellant claims that he is entitled to entry clearance because he
     is the husband of the sponsor.  The  relevant  immigration  rules  are
     those in paragraph 281 of HC 395:  we are concerned with nothing other
     than the validity of the marriage.  The Appellant has  not  previously
     married anybody other than the sponsor.  The sponsor,  however,  is  a
     party to an earlier marriage.  On  14th  December  1992,  she  married
     Arshad Mahmood in Pakistan.  There appears to have been  no  rukhsati.
     The sponsor returned to England after the marriage and  continued  her
     education.  Ashad Mahmood instituted  divorce  proceedings,  which  we
     shall have to consider in some detail.

  5. The Appellant, Mirza Baig, came to the United Kingdom  as  a  student.
     As he told the Entry Clearance Officer at his interview in  connection
     with the present application,  although  he  used  his  student  entry
     clearance, he "didn't study  at  all".   He  did,  however,  meet  the
     sponsor, in December 1998. They went through ceremonies of marriage in
     August 1999.  There was an Islamic ceremony on 8th  August,  evidenced
     by a Nikah Nama of that date, in the usual form, save that  it  is  in
     English.  It describes the  bride  as  a  divorced  teacher,  and  the
     "bridge groom" as a bachelor  student.   There  was  also  a  Registry
     Office marriage.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  unaware  of  this
     because, in his interview (Q9), the Appellant denied having  undergone
     a civil marriage ceremony.  We have not seen an original  certificate,
     but a photocopy is in the papers before us.  It records a marriage  on
     25th August 1999 at Manchester Register Office between  the  Appellant
     and the sponsor.  The details are the same as those on the Nikah Nama,
     except that on this occasion the sponsor is described as a spinster.

  6. The Appellant returned to Pakistan immediately  after  that  ceremony,
     arriving on 27th August.  He then applied for  entry  clearance  as  a
     husband. The application was refused for two reasons set  out  in  the
     explanatory statement.  The first was based on the  lack  of  a  civil
     marriage ceremony.  The Entry Clearance Officer can hardly  be  blamed
     for basing his reasoning on  this  matter  on  the  Appellant's  clear
     denial that there had been a civil  marriage.   It  is  now,  however,
     clear that there had been such a ceremony.  The second reason for  the
     refusal was that the sponsor was not divorced from her  first  husband
     and was therefore incapable of marrying the Appellant.

  7. Following the Adjudicator's decision, the  sponsor  commenced  divorce
     proceedings in England in an attempt to settle her marital status  for
     the future.  A letter from Platt Halpern,  her  solicitors  for  those
     purposes, is before us.  It states that "On 7th November 2001 we heard
     from the Court stating that the District Judge was satisfied that  the
     Talaq divorce would be recognised in this country".  We also have  the
     letter from the  Court.   No  reasons  are  given.   In  view  of  the
     remaining contents of this determination, we are  surprised  that  the
     District Judge was so readily able to reach the conclusion  attributed
     to him.

  8. We will deal at this stage also with an argument put as an alternative
     by Miss Weston.  This is that, whatever be our view  of  the  divorce,
     the Appellant and the sponsor are validly married according to the law
     of Pakistan, and that we should accordingly regard them as husband and
     wife for the purposes of English immigration law.  We are quite unable
     to accept that argument.  The marriage upon  which  the  parties  rely
     took place in England.  If, at the time it was celebrated, the sponsor
     was not divorced from her husband by a divorce recognised  by  English
     law, her marriage was, by  English  law  actually  (as  distinct  from
     merely potentially)  polyandrous.   The  marriage  must  be  void  for
     polygamy unless the divorce is recognised.  Given, further,  that  the
     sponsor is a Muslim domiciled (as far as we are aware) in England,  it
     is difficult to see that she could ever have capacity  to  contract  a
     polyandrous marriage.

  9. It follows that it is indeed the divorce that concerns us.   We  begin
     by  setting  out  the  basis  of  the  law  in  the   three   relevant
     jurisdictions.

Islamic Law


 10. The basic incidents of the principal forms of Muslim  divorce  (talaq)
     are not properly open to dispute.  We take judicial  notice  of  them,
     and we note that neither party objected to our doing so.  All of  them
     are based on formal pronouncements by the husband.  In talaq al-ahsan,
     the most approved form of divorce, there is a single pronouncement  of
     divorce, followed by a three-month abstention  from  intercourse,  the
     'idda.  During the 'idda the divorce can be revoked by the husband  by
     words or by conduct (eg co-habitation)  but,  otherwise,  the  divorce
     takes effect at the end of  the  'idda.   Talaq  al-hasan,  or  proper
     divorce, follows a  more  complex  procedure.   Here  the  divorce  is
     pronounced three times, in three  of  the  wife's  successive  monthly
     cycles.   There  may  be  co-habitation  between  the  pronouncements,
     provided that, at the time of each pronouncement, there  has  been  no
     intercourse during the period of purity in that  cycle.   The  divorce
     becomes effective on the third pronouncement, but a period of 'idda is
     still necessary before the wife can remarry, so that the paternity  of
     any subsequently-born child will not be in doubt.

 11. These two forms are regarded by most Islamic jurists as  a  talaq  as-
     sunnat, that is to  say  divorce  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of
     tradition:  only a  minority  of  jurists  regard  talaq  al-hasan  as
     "innovative".  The talaq al-hasan is traced to a view of  the  Prophet
     that wives should not be treated  as  chattels,  subject  to  constant
     divorce and re-acceptance;  so a husband who divorces his  wife  three
     times loses her.

 12. Hardly any jurists, however, doubt that the third form of divorce, the
     so called triple talaq, is talaq al-bid'at or innovative divorce.   In
     this form, the husband  pronounces  talaq  three  times  on  the  same
     occasion, or at least during the same month.  This form  is  the  most
     prevalent in India and Pakistan.  It is  regarded  as  lawful,  though
     sinful, by the Hanafis, but some other schools do not recognise it  as
     effective at all.  Where it is effective, it is (because of its triple
     nature, based on the talaq al-hasan) effective immediately, but  again
     the wife cannot remarry until the end of the 'idda.


The Law of Pakistan


 13. In the previous paragraphs we have set out the major forms of  divorce
     in Islamic law and their effect in  Islamic  law.   Pakistan,  like  a
     number of other states with substantial Muslim populations, introduced
     during the second half of the twentieth century legislation which  had
     the intention or social purpose of ameliorating some of the provisions
     of Islamic law as it applied to its citizens (see,  generally,  Norman
     Anderson, Law Reform in the  Muslim  World,  London  1976).   Pakistan
     enacted the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance in 1961.  By Section  2,  the
     Ordinance extends to "the whole of Pakistan and applies to all  Muslim
     citizens of Pakistan, wherever  they  may  be".   That  expression  of
     validity needs to be read subject to two considerations.  The first is
     that, because of its date, the Ordinance applies also  in  Bangladesh.
     The second is that it  appears  to  be  generally  accepted  that  the
     provisions of the Ordinance have no effect  in  the  part  of  Kashmir
     which is in Pakistan (sometimes called "Azad Kashmir", that  is  "Free
     Kashmir",  by  those  who  hold  certain  views   about   its   proper
     governance).  Neither of those factors, however, are germane  to  this
     appeal, for the Appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  and  not  from
     Kashmir.

 14. Section 7 of the Ordinance is as follows:

           "Talaq.
           (1)   Any man who wishes to divorce his wife shall, as  soon  as
                 may be  after  the  pronouncement  of  talaq  in  any  form
                 whatsoever, give the Chairman  notice  in  writing  of  his
                 having done so, and shall supply  a  copy  thereof  to  the
                 wife.
           (2)   Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section(1) shall
                 be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may
                 extend to one year or with fine which may  extend  to  five
                 thousand rupees or with both.
           (3)   Save as  provided  in  sub-section  (5),  a  talaq  unless
                 revoked earlier,  expressly  or  otherwise,  shall  not  be
                 effective until the expiration of ninety days from the  day
                 on which notice under sub-section (1) is delivered  to  the
                 Chairman.
           (4)   Within thirty days of the receipt  of  notice  under  sub-
                 section (1), the Chairman shall constitute  an  Arbitration
                 Council for the purpose of bringing about a  reconciliation
                 between the parties, and the Arbitration Council shall take
                 all steps necessary to bring about such reconciliation.
           (5)   If the wife be pregnant at the time talaq  is  pronounced,
                 talaq shall not be effective until the period mentioned  in
                 sub-section (3) or the pregnancy, whichever be later, ends.
           (6)   Nothing  shall  debar  a  wife  whose  marriage  has  been
                 terminated by talaq effective under this section  from  re-
                 marrying the same husband, without an intervening  marriage
                 with a third person, unless such  termination  is  for  the
                 third time so effective."


 15. It can readily be seen that, as well as imposing  requirements  as  to
     notice, the Ordinance attempts to make even an irrevocable  talaq  al-
     bid'at revocable by, essentially, taking the period of 'idda into  the
     talaq.  As well as the reference to "talaq in any form whatsoever"  in
     s 7(1), it is to be noted that s 3 of the Ordinance provides that  the
     provisions of the Ordinance  have  effect  "notwithstanding  any  law,
     custom or usage".


English Law


 16. The recognition of foreign divorces is governed in English law by s 46
     of the Family Law Act 1986, which came into force on 4th  April  1988.
     Sections 45 and 46 are as follows:

           "45.  Subject to sections 51 and 52 of this Act, the validity of
                 a divorce, annulment or  legal  separation  obtained  in  a
                 country outside the British Islands (in this Part  referred
                 to as an overseas divorce, annulment or  legal  separation)
                 shall be recognised in the United Kingdom if, and only  if,
                 it is entitled to recognition
                 (a)   by virtue of sections 46 to 49 of this Act, or
                 (b)   by virtue of any enactment other than this Part.


           46.   (1)   The validity of an overseas  divorce,  annulment  or
           legal                                                 separation
           obtained  by  means   of   proceedings   shall   be   recognised
                            if
                       (a)   the divorce, annulment or legal  separation  is
                            effective under the law of the country in which
                            it was obtained;  and
                       (b)   at  the  relevant  date  either  party  to  the
                       marriage
                            (i)   was habitually resident in the country in
                                  which  the  divorce,  annulment  or  legal
                                  separation was obtained;  or
                            (ii)  was domiciled in that country;  or
                            (iii) was a national of that country.
                 (2)   The validity of an  overseas  divorce,  annulment  or
                       legal separation obtained otherwise than by means  of
                       proceedings shall be recognised if
                       (a)   the divorce, annulment or legal  separation  is
                            effective under the law of the country in which
                            it was obtained;
                       (b)  at the relevant date
                            (i)   each party to the marriage was  domiciled
                                  in that country;
                                  or
                            (ii)   either  party  to   the   marriage   was
                                  domiciled in that country  and  the  other
                                  party was domiciled  in  a  country  under
                                  whose law the divorce, annulment or  legal
                                  separation is recognised as valid;  and
                            (iii)  neither  party  to  the   marriage   was
                                  habitually resident in the United  Kingdom
                                  throughout  the   period   of   one   year
                                  immediately preceding that date.
                 (3)   In this section "the relevant date" means
                       (a)   in the case of an overseas  divorce,  annulment
                            or  legal  separation  obtained  by  means   of
                            proceedings, the date of  the  commencement  of
                            the proceedings;
                       (b)   in the case of an overseas  divorce,  annulment
                            or legal separation obtained otherwise than  by
                            means of proceedings, the date on which it  was
                            obtained. ...
                 (5)   For the purpose  of  this  section,  a  party  to  a
                       marriage shall be treated as domiciled in  a  country
                       if he was domiciled in that country either  according
                       to the law of  that  country  in  family  matters  or
                       according to the  law  of  the  part  of  the  United
                       Kingdom in which the question of recognition arises."


 17. Before 1988, the position was governed by the Recognition of  Divorces
     and Legal Separations Act 1971, under which one crucial  question  was
     whether a divorce had been "obtained by means  of  judicial  or  other
     proceedings" abroad.  It is that phrase which had to be interpreted in
     some of the cases to which we shall in due course make reference.  The
     authority of those cases is preserved by s 54(1), which provides that,
     in this Part of the 1986 Act:

           "'Proceedings' means judicial or other proceedings."


     So far as concerns s 45, it is common ground that there  is  no  other
     enactment that might give validity to the sponsor's divorce.

 18. We are concerned, therefore, with s 46:   and  it  is  right  to  draw
     attention first to s 46(2)(c).  Section 46 draws a distinction between
     a divorce "obtained by means of proceedings" and a  divorce  "obtained
     otherwise  than  by  means  of  proceedings".   A  divorce   "obtained
     otherwise than by means of proceedings"  cannot  be  valid  if  either
     party to the marriage was habitually resident in  the  United  Kingdom
     during the period of one  year  immediately  preceding  the  date  the
     divorce  was  obtained.   This  particular  provision  is   of   great
     importance in immigration cases, because, in an  immigration  context,
     it very frequently happens that one of  the  parties  to  the  claimed
     divorce was so resident.  That is clearly the position in the  present
     case, where the sponsor has at  all  material  times  been  habitually
     resident in the United Kingdom.   In  the  present  case,  as  in  the
     majority of immigration cases,  the  divorce  can  therefore  only  be
     entitled to recognition in English law if it was "obtained by means of
     proceedings".

 19. Before looking in detail at  the  meaning  of  that  phrase,  we  must
     emphasise that the status of the  parties  to  a  claimed  divorce  in
     English law does not depend on their own views  as  to  their  status:
     nor, indeed, are their views  relevant  to  their  status.   In  case,
     however, it be suggested that the sponsor was,  at  the  time  of  her
     marriage to the Appellant, misled as to the efficacy  of  the  divorce
     from her previous  husband,  we  must  set  out  a  passage  from  the
     determination of the Adjudicator (who heard  oral  evidence  from  the
     sponsor) relating to her description of herself as a  "spinster"  when
     she took part in the civil ceremony of marriage in August 1999.

           "21.  The  sponsor,  during  an  address  to  me  that  she  was
                 determined personally to give, let slip matters which  lead
                 me to find that she did not believe that  she  was  legally
                 free from an encumbrance that would render the  marriage  a
                 nullity.  She  had  told  the  registrar  that  she  was  a
                 spinster.  I am satisfied that the sponsor is  an  educated
                 and intelligent woman.  She knew well that she was  telling
                 a lie.  Furthermore, I find that it had a purpose - she did
                 not want to reveal her previous marriage  because  she  did
                 not believe that she was legally free of it."


 20. As we have said, the parties' opinion as  to  their  status,  even  if
     those opinions have been honestly held, are  not  relevant.   What  is
     relevant is the question whether the claimed divorce was "obtained  by
     means of proceedings".

 21. It appears to us that there are three clear elements to  that  phrase.
     The first is that the divorce must have  been  obtained.   That  is  a
     reference to the provisions of paragraph (a) of  each  the  first  two
     subsections of s 46:  the divorce must have been effective  under  the
     law of the country in which it was obtained.  That is question of  the
     effect of the foreign law, in this case the law of Pakistan;   and  in
     an English court it is a matter of  fact,  not  of  law.   The  second
     requirement is that there have been "proceedings".  "Proceedings" is a
     term of art in English law, and the interpretation of it is  a  matter
     of English law.  We are bound by any relevant  judicial  authority  on
     the meaning of this word in the statute.   The  third  requirement  is
     that the divorce be "obtained by means of" the proceedings.  It is not
     sufficient that there be both an effective divorce and some associated
     proceedings.  The proceedings must have been the way by means of which
     the divorce was obtained.  In other words, one must  be  able  to  say
     that if the proceedings had not taken place,  the  divorce  would  not
     have been obtained.


The Divorce


 22. In the present case, it is said that the divorce was a talaq al-hasan,
     obtained by pronouncement on 1st September 1993, 23rd October 1993 and
     1st January 1994.  We are content to take the details from  Dr  Werner
     Menski's expert report, dated 15th December 2000.

           "8.   In the present case, Mr Mahmood divorced Ms Nighat Parveen
                 (Mirza) by a certain form of talaq,  as  evidenced  in  his
                 three deeds of  divorce  dated  1st  September  1993,  23rd
                 October 1993, and finally 1st  January  1994  respectively,
                 which are part of the case file.  All these three Deeds  of
                 Divorce are executed on  Pakistani  stamped  paper  to  the
                 value of Rs 10 each.  It is  not  immediately  obvious  why
                 this legal action should have been taken three times, so it
                 will be helpful if I analyse these three documents in  some
                 more detail.


           9.    The Divorce Deed of 1st September 1993 states and confirms
                 that the Muslim  marriage  between  the  spouses  had  been
                 contracted in Rawalpindi on 14th December 1992.  Mr Mahmood
                 also declares that a dower (mahr) of 500  Rupees  had  been
                 fixed and paid to  Ms  Nighat  Parveen.   This  would  have
                 become her absolute property and we are not concerned  with
                 this aspect of the matter here.  Mr Mahmood  then  proceeds
                 to state that 'all efforts to normalise  the  relation  had
                 completely failed', which is probably a coded reference  to
                 the fact that this  marriage  had  remained  unconsummated.
                 Hence,  as  the  document  proves,  a  single   talaq   was
                 pronounced in front of two adult Muslim witnesses, who duly
                 signed the document,  and  it  is  stated  that  after  the
                 waiting period fixed under law, the  iddat  period,  Nighat
                 Parveen would be free to marry any other person.   This  is
                 not yet  a  final  Muslim  divorce,  it  is  only  a  first
                 pronouncement, a  warning,  so  to  say,  and  the  divorce
                 remains revocable at this stage.


           10.   The second Divorce Deed, dated 23rd  October  1993,  still
                 falls within the iddat period of approximately three months
                 and also still documents  a  state  of  affairs  where  the
                 divorce remains revocable.  Indeed,  it  is  the  husband's
                 second pronouncement of talaq, as clearly indicated in  the
                 document itself, which contains otherwise the same  wording
                 as the first document and is made before the same two adult
                 Muslim male witnesses, who have again  duly  signed.   This
                 document  shows  that  the  Entry  Clearance   Officer   in
                 Islamabad was totally misguided and  simply  wrong  in  law
                 when concluding that Mr  Mahmood  had  pronounced  a  'bare
                 talaq', since that would have to be done in the form of the
                 'triple talaq', with instant effect and no further need for
                 additional documentary evidence.  What we find here is  not
                 three identical forms of  divorce  document,  but  a  clear
                 progression from the first to the second, and  finally  the
                 third pronouncement of talaq, which alone seals the fate of
                 the marriage.


           11.   The third Divorce Deed,  dated  1st  January  1994,  is  a
                 textbook example of the third and final Muslim talaq, given
                 by a husband at the expiry of the  iddat  period,  in  fact
                 four months after the first pronouncement.   This  document
                 reiterates that the first talaq was given on 1st  September
                 1993, the second on 23rd October 1993, and that  the  third
                 and final divorce pronouncement is now  made  through  this
                 document.  As of that date, Ms Nighat Parveen was therefore
                 irrevocably and legally divorced under the  Muslim  law  of
                 Pakistan.


           12.   This document mentions specifically that Mr Mahmood  would
                 henceforth have no further concern or connection whatsoever
                 with his former wife and also  restates  the  final  phrase
                 that appeared in the earlier two notices, namely  that  she
                 'is free to marry any other person at the expiry of  period
                 fixed under the law and completion of legal formalities and
                 service of notice to the Councilor [sic] concerned'."


     There was no notification to the Chairman of the Union  Council  under
     the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance.


 23. Miss Weston submits first, that the divorce was  effective  under  the
     law of Pakistan, and secondly that the  process  used  to  obtain  the
     divorce amounts to "proceedings".  This is, as we pointed out  at  the
     hearing,  a  somewhat  dangerous  strategy.   If   she   succeeds   in
     demonstrating that a talaq is effective in Pakistan without compliance
     with the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, but fails to persuade  us  that
     the talaq amounts to  "proceedings",  the  result  would  be  that  no
     Pakistani talaq could be accepted  as  effective  in  English  law  if
     either party was habitually resident in the United Kingdom during  the
     period of one year before the divorce.  The reason  is  that,  if  the
     talaq were effective under Pakistani  law  without  "proceedings",  no
     additional proceedings (for example, notification to the  Chairman  of
     the Union Council) could be the "means" by which  the  divorce  became
     effective.  A Pakistani talaq would  therefore  not  be  "obtained  by
     means of proceedings", and could be effective, if at all, only under s
     46(2), which has the residence requirement to which we have  referred.
     It follows  that  the  arguments  raised  in  this  case  may  have  a
     considerable impact on a very large number of Pakistani divorces in an
     immigration context.

 24. We have before us expert evidence in the form of a number  of  written
     reports.  We were referred to four cases:  Quazi  v  Quazi  [1980]  AC
     744;  Chaudhary v Chaudhary [1984] 3 All ER 1017;  El Fadl v  El  Fadl
     [2000] 1 FCR 685;  and Rab (12345), a  Tribunal  decision,  which  was
     provided to us only in an  unauthorised  "summary"  of  the  decision,
     apparently derived from the Electronic Immigration Network (EIN).   We
     have read the whole of the Tribunal determination.

Authorities


 25. In Quazi v Quazi the parties were at all material times  nationals  of
     Pakistan, and it appears to have been accepted (see the speech of Lord
     Diplock at page 805 F) that  if  the  procedure  requirements  of  the
     Muslim Family Laws Ordinance were complied with the divorce  would  be
     effective under the law of Pakistan.  The question was  whether  those
     procedural requirements amounted to "proceedings" by  means  of  which
     the divorce was obtained.  The Court of Appeal had taken a restrictive
     view of the  phrase  "judicial  or  other  proceedings",  ruling  that
     "other" proceedings, to be effective in this context, must  be  quasi-
     judicial.  The House of Lords rejected that interpretation.  There was
     nothing in the phrase suggesting that  proceedings  should  be  quasi-
     judicial.  All the speeches indicate  that  the  husband's  compliance
     with the requirements of the Ordinance amounted to  "proceedings"  for
     these purposes.  Lord Diplock said this (at 808-9):

           "The pronouncement of the  talaq  was  required  by  law  to  be
           notified to a  public  authority,  the  Chairman  of  the  Union
           Council;  he in turn  was  required  by  law  to  constitute  an
           arbitration council for the  purposes  of  conciliation  and  to
           invite each spouse to  nominate  a  representative.   These  are
           'proceedings';  none the less so because in  the  event  neither
           spouse  elects  to  take  advantage  of  the   opportunity   for
           conciliation which the arbitration council presents.   They  are
           proceedings that are not merely officially  recognised  but  are
           also enforced by penal sanctions under the  Muslim  Family  Laws
           Ordinance 1961.  Without such proceedings the divorce  by  talaq
           never  becomes  effective.   The  proceedings  come  first,  the
           divorce follows them 90 days after they have been commenced."


      Lord Fraser of Tullybelton said (at 814):


           "If they are to be proceedings at all, they must of course  have
           some regular definite form, but anything that  can  properly  be
           regarded as proceedings will qualify so long as  it  is  legally
           effective";


      and at 817:


           "I am of the opinion that the talaq and the notice to the  civil
           judge, a copy of which has to be sent to the  respondent,  taken
           together are 'proceedings'."


      Lord Fraser specifically reserved the question whether "a  bare  talaq
      pronounced in  some  country  where,  unlike  Pakistan,  it  would  be
      effective without any further procedure, should be recognised".


 27. Lord Scarman stated at 823 that:

           "The only requirement is a proceeding, or proceedings (for there
           is  no  magic  in  the  singular  or  the  plural),   officially
           recognised resulting in a divorce which is effective  under  the
           country's law."


      In indicating what would amount to "proceedings", Lord Scarman appears
      to have taken a view somewhat wider than his brethren.   He  indicated
      (at 824B and 825F) that the process adopted, including notification to
      the Chairman of the Union Council, amounted to "proceedings",  because
      they were "acts officially  recognised  by  the  law  of  Pakistan  as
      leading to an effective divorce".


 28. Quazi v  Quazi  is  binding  on  us  insofar  as  it  assists  in  the
     interpretation of the term "proceedings".  It holds that the procedure
     of notification to  the  Chairman  of  the  Union  Council  under  the
     Ordinance is "proceedings" for our purposes.  It is not binding on the
     question whether the divorce in such a case is "obtained by means  of"
     those proceedings.  This is for two reasons.  First, the  question  of
     the effectiveness in Pakistan of the talaq without notification  is  a
     matter of fact, not of law;  and, secondly, the need for  notification
     to make the divorce effective was apparently conceded.

 29. We turn now to Chaudhary v Chaudhary.  That is a decision of the Court
     of Appeal.  A talaq al-bid'at was pronounced in Kashmir.  As  we  have
     indicated, and as the Court of Appeal also held,  the  1961  Ordinance
     does not run in Kashmir.  The evidence was that the divorce was  valid
     and effective in Kashmir to  dissolve  the  marriage.   The  principal
     question for the Court of Appeal was whether the talaq had,  in  these
     circumstances, been obtained by "proceedings".  (There  was  a  second
     issue relating to whether recognition should be denied on  grounds  of
     public policy, which we do not need to mention further.)

 30. The Court of Appeal held, as a matter of statutory construction,  that
     the phrase "obtained by means of [judicial or other] proceedings" must
     be intended to separate two classes of divorces,  both  of  which  are
     effective in the overseas country.  If it had not been so, there would
     have been no purpose in the requirement at all:  the Act would  simply
     have provided that a divorce  effective  abroad  was  effective  here.
     This consideration is stated  most  clearly  by  Cumming-Bruce  LJ  at
     1028f:

           "The criterion 'judicial or other proceedings' must be  given  a
           construction which restricts recognition to a narrower  category
           of divorces than all divorces obtained by any  means  whatsoever
           which are effective by the law  of  the  country  in  which  the
           divorce was obtained."


      He went on to say, in commenting on the apparently wider dicta by Lord
      Scarman in Quazi v Quazi:


           "There is nothing to be found in the speeches of  the  House  of
           Lords which  is  inconsistent  with  this  conclusion.   On  the
           contrary, all their Lordships  focused  their  analysis  on  the
           question  whether  the  procedure  required  by   the   Pakistan
           Ordinance of 1961 impressed the characteristic of  'proceedings'
           on the means by which the divorce in that case was obtained.  If
           a bare talaq had been enough, the ratio  decidendi  of  all  the
           speeches was quite unnecessary.  The  answer  may  be  that  the
           House confined itself to the legal effect of the  facts  in  the
           case  before  it.   Talaq  followed  by  compliance   with   the
           requirements was enough to constitute  'other  proceedings',  so
           that it was  unnecessary  to  look  for  a  wider  criterion  by
           considering the effect of a bare talaq.  There is force  in  the
           point, and it gains strength from  the  express  words  of  Lord
           Fraser.  Nonetheless, if divorce obtained by any means effective
           by the law of the country where it was obtained was  sufficient,
           the reasoning in all the speeches was quite unnecessary.  And  I
           do not understand the dictum of Lord Scarman in  Quazi  v  Quazi
           ... which led Bush J in Zaal v Zaal (1983) 4 FLR 284 at 288 to a
           contrary view, as an expression of the view that any act or acts
           legally effective in the country where the divorce was  obtained
           constitute proceedings.  Lord Scarman was considering  the  acts
           done by way of compliance with the 1961 Pakistan Ordinance."


 31. What, then, are "proceedings"?  Cumming-Bruce LJ said (at 1028j)  that
     the pronouncement of a talaq that is  "bare"  (that  is  to  say,  not
     accompanied by the procedure under the Ordinance) is not  obtaining  a
     divorce by means of "any proceeding".

           "It is pronounced.  Pronouncement of talaq three  times  finally
           terminates the marriage in Kashmir, Dubai, and probably in other
           unsophisticated peasant,  desert  or  jungle  communities  which
           respect classical Muslim religious tradition.  Certainly by that
           tradition the pronouncement is a solemn religious act.  It might
           doubtfully be described as a ceremony, though the absence of any
           formality  of  any  kind   renders   the   ceremony   singularly
           unceremonious.  It can fairly be described as a 'procedure' laid
           down by divine authority in the inspired text of the Koran.  But
           neither respect for the  divine  origin  of  the  procedure  nor
           respect for the long enduring tradition which over the centuries
           had rendered the bare talaq effective as terminating a  marriage
           by the law of Muslim countries necessarily  or  sensibly  should
           convert the procedure into a proceeding  within  the  intent  of
           [the Act]."


 32. Oliver LJ said (at 1030-1031):

           "'Proceedings' must, in my  judgement,  at  least  bear  in  the
           statute a meaning which the word would  have  in  normal  speech
           where, as it seems to me, no-one would  ordinarily  refer  to  a
           private act conducted entirely by parties inter  se  or  by  one
           party alone, as a proceeding, even though the  party  performing
           it may give it an additional solemnity or even  an  efficacy  by
           performing it in  the  presence  of  other  persons  whose  only
           involvement is that they  witness  its  performance.   The  word
           would  not,  in  my  judgement,  ordinarily  be  used  as  being
           synonymous with 'procedure' or 'ritual'.   Thus,  for  instance,
           the formalities which are required by law to be observed in  the
           execution by a testator of a valid will under the provisions  of
           the Wills Act 1837 would not, I should have thought, be normally
           referred to as 'proceedings'  although  the  testator  would  be
           properly described as having gone through the correct procedure.
            On the other hand, the word  does  not,  I  think,  necessarily
           connote publicity;   for  instance,  business  transacted  at  a
           meeting of a board of directors of a company is universally  and
           properly described as 'proceedings of the  directors'.   In  the
           context, however, of a solemn change of status, it does seem  to
           me that the word must import a degree of formality and at  least
           the involvement of some agency, of or recognised  by  the  state
           having a function that is more than simply  probative,  although
           Quazi v Quazi clearly shows that it need have no power of  veto.
           [That is a reference to the recognition in Quazi v Quazi of  the
           fact  that  the  parties  have  no  obligation  to   submit   to
           conciliation, nor can  the  state  prevent  the  divorce  taking
           effect 90 days after notification to the Chairman of  the  Union
           Council.]


           ... The essentials of the bare talaq are, as  I  understand  it,
           merely the private recital of  a  verbal  formula  in  front  of
           witnesses who may or may not have been  specially  assembled  by
           the husband for the purpose  and  whose  only  qualification  is
           that, presumably, they can see and hear.  It may be, as  it  was
           in this case, pronounced in the temple.  It may be,  as  it  was
           here,  reinforced  by  a  written   document   containing   such
           information, accurate or inaccurate, as  the  husband  cares  to
           insert in  it.   But  what  brings  about  the  divorce  is  the
           pronouncement before witnesses and  that  alone.   Thus  in  its
           essential elements it lacks  any  formality  other  than  ritual
           performance;  it lacks any necessary element of  publicity;   it
           lacks the invocation of the assistance  or  involvement  of  any
           organ of, or recognised by, the state in any  capacity  at  all,
           even if merely that of registering or recording  what  has  been
           done.  Thus, though the public consequences are very  different,
           the essential procedure  differs  very  little  from  any  other
           private act such as the execution of a will and is akin  to  the
           purely consensual type of divorce recognised in some  states  of
           the Far East.


           In my judgement, ... such an act cannot properly be described as
           a 'proceeding' in any ordinary sense of the word, still  less  a
           'proceeding' in what must, for the reasons given above,  be  the
           restrictive sense of the word as used in the Act."


 33. We should say that all the members of the Court held that the  meaning
     of the words in question in what was then the 1971 Act  had  not  been
     affected by the passing of the Domicile  and  Matrimonial  Proceedings
     Act 1973.  As we have indicated, the  phrase  under  consideration  is
     effectively preserved by the definitions section of the 1986 Act.

 34. El Fadl v El Fadl is a decision  of  Hughes  J.   In  this  case,  the
     claimed divorce was in Lebanon.  Hughes J recognised (at 700d-f) that:

           "The test is therefore  whether  the  divorce  depends  for  its
           validity, at least in part,  on  what  can  properly  be  termed
           'proceedings'.  In this case, not one but both sides submit that
           the proper conclusion  is  that  it  does  so  depend.   On  the
           evidence that I have I accept  that  submission.   Although  the
           Sharia Court has no judicial decision to make whether  there  is
           to be divorce or no, what occurred before it with  the  assembly
           of the court, judge and clerk, and the duty to record  into  the
           register,  having  taken  formal   declarations,   is   properly
           described as 'proceedings' and the local law explicitly requires
           such proceedings as an integral part  of  the  divorce  process.
           Since both spouses were at the material time domiciled in,  and,
           indeed,  nationals  of  the  Lebanon,  it  follows   that   this
           proceedings divorce qualifies for recognition under s 46(1)."


 35. That, as it appears to us, is a clear application of the principles of
     Chaudhary v Chaudhary in determining whether the divorce  in  question
     was "obtained by means of proceedings".  There is a later  passage  in
     Hughes J's judgment which, with the greatest of respect, is  difficult
     to understand.  At 701f, the Judge indicated that it was a "plain  and
     indisputable fact" that the divorce in the case before  him  would  be
     effective even if it were not obtained by means of  proceedings.   But
     at 696h, having considered the relevant evidence,  the  learned  Judge
     had said that it was not necessary to make  a  formal  finding  as  to
     where the wife was habitually resident at the relevant  times.   These
     two elements of the judgment are inconsistent.  We refer  again  to  s
     46(2)(c).  The place of habitual  residence  of  the  parties  at  the
     relevant time is  crucial.   It  was  not  essential  for  Hughes  J's
     decision of the instant case, because he reached  the  view  that  the
     divorce in question was obtained by  means  of  proceedings.   But  it
     cannot be right to say that the answer would necessarily have been the
     same if the divorce had not been obtained by means of proceedings.

 36. The final authority upon which Miss Weston relied was  Rab.   That  is
     not a case that gives us any great assistance.  The  summary  obtained
     from EIN is headed "Recognition of Foreign Marriage and Divorce",  and
     then, on the next line, "Recognition of Talak  Divorce",  and  on  the
     next again "Recognition of Talak divorce - the effect  of  the  Muslim
     Family Law Ordinance  1961  -  whether  a  failure  to  constitute  an
     Arbitration Council  or  a  failure  to  bring  about  recognition  is
     inconsequential for the purpose of the Ordinance - whether the  Family
     Law Act 1986 is retrospective."  The decision is  stated  as  "As  the
     parties were domiciled in Bangladesh at the relevant date of the Talak
     divorce in 1975, the divorce would be recognised as  valid  under  the
     Family Law Act 1986, s 46(1) since it was effective  under  Bangladesh
     law."

 37. That is a simple misstatement of the effect of the determination.  The
     summary provided by EIN is misleading.  In  Rab,  not  only  were  the
     parties to the original marriage domiciled in Bangladesh;   they  were
     resident there;  and, further,  the  husband  had  complied  with  the
     provisions of the Ordinance (which, as  we  have  explained,  runs  in
     Bangladesh too).  The summary that the  divorce  would  be  recognised
     "since it was effective under Bangladesh law" does, to say the  least,
     little justice to the Chairman of  the  Tribunal  in  Rab.   What  the
     decision in fact says is:

           "This divorce is governed by s 46(1) of the Family Law Act  1986
           (a divorce obtained by means  of  proceedings:   Quazi  v  Quazi
           [1980] AC 744) and is therefore recognised in this country if it
           is effective in Bangladesh (which it is)  and  at  the  relevant
           date either  party  was  habitually  resident,  domiciled  or  a
           national of Bangladesh."


      That is a perfectly correct statement of the applicable law.  The  EIN
      summary which is not a summary, is also not correct.


"Proceedings"


 38. We return now to the facts of this case and to the  questions  we  are
     asked to decide.  We begin with the  one  which  is  clearly  governed
     solely by English law which is whether the acts which are said to have
     effected the divorce in this case amount to "proceedings"  within  the
     meaning of the Act.  On this we are bound by  Chaudhary  v  Chaudhary.
     Miss Weston's submission was that  the  talaq  al-hasan  used  in  the
     present case was distinguishable from the "bare" talaq, or  talaq  al-
     bid'at,  used  in  Chaudhary  v  Chaudhary.   We  do  not  reject  her
     submission that it may be possible to distinguish  the  two  types  of
     divorce.  We must, however, apply to the acts used in  this  case  the
     test laid down in Chaudhary v Chaudhary in order to determine  whether
     there were "proceedings".  As  in  Chaudhary  v  Chaudhary,  there  is
     written documentation,  but  unlike  in  Chaudhary  v  Chaudhary,  the
     proceedings do not appear to have taken place in the mosque.   Neither
     the place of pronouncement, nor the  written  document,  however,  are
     essential requirements of the talaq al-hasan.

 39. Dr Menski, in a letter  dated  8th  February  2001,  is  at  pains  to
     indicate that the sponsor was "a party to the divorce proceedings", in
     that the terms of the  documentation  evidencing  the  talaq  give  an
     indication that the husband  took  into  account  the  possibility  of
     reconciliation with the sponsor.  That too is not, as we understand Dr
     Menski's letters, an essential part of the talaq  al-hasan.   What  is
     essential  to  the  talaq  al-hasan  is  the  pronouncement  in  three
     successive months, and the consequence that the  talaq  (even  without
     the intervention of secular legislation such as the Ordinance)  cannot
     take effect as a divorce (disregarding the 'idda) until a considerable
     period after the first pronouncement of talaq.  But the talaq is still
     an entirely personal act.  It  lacks  any  formality  other  than  the
     ritual performance.  It lacks the  invocation  or  assistance  of  any
     organ of the state.  It does not even require an organ of the state to
     act as a registrar or recorder of what has happened (in contrast  with
     the situation in El Fadl v El Fadl).

 40. Our decision is that the talaq al-hasan pronounced  by  the  sponsor's
     husband in Pakistan did not itself amount to "proceedings".


Other issues


 41. As we have already said, even if the Appellant  had  established  that
     the talaq al-hasan was, or included,  "proceedings",  he  would  still
     have needed to establish that the divorce was  effective  in  Pakistan
     and that it was obtained by the proceedings.   On  the  issue  of  the
     divorce's effect in Pakistan, there are a number of  reports  from  Dr
     Menski and there is certain other material before us.  The  burden  of
     that material is, we  apprehend,  intended  to  demonstrate  that  the
     notification to the Chairman of the Union Council under the  Ordinance
     is not required in order to make a divorce effective in Pakistan.   If
     that is right, no Pakistani divorce, as  it  seems  to  us,  could  be
     "obtained by proceedings", and therein lies the danger not only to the
     Appellant and the sponsor, but to  many  other  individuals  similarly
     placed.

 42. But  in  view  of  the  decision  we  have  made  about  the  lack  of
     "proceedings", the effectiveness or otherwise  of  the  divorce  under
     Pakistani law cannot assist the Appellant in this  case,  because  the
     sponsor (one of the parties to the  claimed  divorce)  was  habitually
     resident in the United Kingdom at  all  material  times,  and  so  the
     divorce cannot be  effective  unless  it  was  obtained  by  means  of
     "proceedings".  We therefore do not need to decide whether the divorce
     was effective under Pakistani law and, if so, precisely by what  means
     it  became  effective.   In  the  circumstances,   bearing   in   mind
     particularly the limited assistance we  have  had  from  the  parties'
     representatives before us, we prefer not to decide these issues.


Conclusions


 43. The talaq al-hasan by which the sponsor's husband purported to divorce
     her in 1993 is not recognised in the United Kingdom.  In English  law,
     the sponsor  is  still  married  to  Arshad  Mahmood.   Her  purported
     marriage to the Appellant in the mosque in Manchester  on  8th  August
     1999 is void for lack of the formalities necessary for a  marriage  in
     England.  Her purported marriage  to  him  at  the  Manchester  Record
     Office on  25th  August  1999  is  void  for  bigamy  (or,  precisely,
     polyandry).  The Appellant is not the sponsor's  husband  and  has  no
     claim under the Immigration Rules to be admitted as such.

 44. It is no doubt open to the sponsor  to  seek  a  divorce  from  Arshad
     Mahmood  in  this  country.   A  District  Judge  who  is  shown  this
     determination may be persuaded to take  a  view  different  from  that
     taken by the District  Judge  in  Manchester  whose  opinion  we  have
     already mentioned.

 45. For the foregoing reasons, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

