
      Appeal no. CC13640-2002
                       FK (Kabul) Afghanistan cg [2002] UKIAT 06054



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 14 November 2002
Determination promulgated:
Sent: 15.01.2003

                                   Before:
                               Mr M W Rapinet
                                 Ms S M Ward
                                Mr R Hamilton




                                 Faraz Khan

                                  Appellant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                 Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, was given leave on 24  September
2002 , to appeal against the decision of an Adjudicator,  Mr  C  J  Yelloly,
promulgated on 29 July 2002,  dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision
of the Respondent refusing asylum and human rights claims.

2.  At the hearing before us the Appellant was represented by Ms Marks,  and
the Respondent  was represented  by  Mr  Blundell,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.

3. At the start  of  the  hearing  Mr  Blundell  sought  leave  to  argue  a
preliminary point regarding the jurisdiction of the Tribunal  to  hear  this
particular appeal.   Mr  Blundell  referred  us  the  determination  of  the
Tribunal in  Maria Mendes [2002] UKIAT 03922. In that appeal the  respondent
had certified  the  claim  as  being  one  to  which  paragraph  9(3)(b)  of
Schedule 4 to the 1998 Act applied. The respondent, in his  refusal  letter,
made  reference  to  both  asylum  and  human  rights  issues.  Neither  the
respondent nor the adjudicator on appeal, in dealing with  the  certificate,
divided the "claim" into a claim under the Refugee Convention  and  a  claim
under the Human Rights Convention. The Adjudicator  upheld  the  certificate
without making reference to any particular claim. On appeal to the  Tribunal
it was contended that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction  as  the  Adjudicator
had upheld the certificate.  The Tribunal concluded   that, since  paragraph
9(3) is expressed to apply to "a claim" (  in  contrast  to  paragraph  9(4)
which is expressed to apply to "a claim under the  Refugee  Convention"  and
paragraph 9(5) which is expressed to refer  to  "a  claim  under  the  Human
Rights  Convention"),  it  was  intended  to  apply  to  claims  under  both
Conventions. The Tribunal took the view that  because  the  adjudicator,  in
her determination,  had  dealt  with  the  certificate  in  the  penultimate
paragraph of her determination, after having set out her conclusions on  the
substantive issues with regard to each Convention in turn, she  was  dealing
with both claims, and that she intended her conclusion  on  the  certificate
to apply to both claims. The Tribunal concluded in that case that it had  no
jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal.  Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  the  same
reasoning applied in this appeal and the Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
hear Mr Khan's appeal. It was clear, he submitted, from the  Refusal  Letter
and the  Adjudicator's  determination  that  both  the  Respondent  and  the
Adjudicator had in mind  that  the  whole  of  the  Appellant's  application
(including both the claim under the Refugee Convention and  that  under  the
Human Rights Convention) was covered by the certificate.

4.  Miss  Marks   submitted  that  the   Respondent's  certificate  and  the
Adjudicator's view in  respect  of  the  certificate  applied  only  to  the
Appellant's claim under the Refugee Convention. The Refusal  Letter  itself,
she submitted, only referred to a  "claim"  instead  of  "claims".  Had  the
Respondent intended to certify both claims the  letter  would  have  applied
the certificate to the Appellant's "claims". It had not done so.   Ms  Marks
further submitted that paragraph 3(b) can be applicable  to  a  claim  under
the Human Rights Convention and to a claim under the Refugee  Convention   -
unlike other parts of paragraph 9 which  are  applicable  only  to  a  claim
under one Convention or the other.  However, it was still necessary for  the
Respondent to make clear which claim he was referring  to  when   certifying
that claim.  The case of  Aleksejs  Zenovics  [2002]EWCA  Civ  273,  in  the
Court of Appeal, made it clear that   an  applicant  can  make  two  claims,
albeit in one appeal, and an adjudicator must address his  or  her  mind  to
the matter of whether or not a certificate given under paragraph 9(b) is  to
be upheld in respect of either or both  those  claims.  In  this  case,  she
argued, there was no certificate issued  in  respect  of  the  Human  Rights
claim.

5. Clearly we must follow the conclusion of the Court of Appeal in  Zenovics
that an appeal may consist  of  two  different  "claims"  -  one  under  the
Refugee Convention and another under the Human Rights convention - and  that
either or both  may  be  the  subject  of  a  certificate.  The  wording  of
paragraph 9 makes it clear that the certificate of the  Secretary  of  State
relates to a claim and not to an appeal. The Secretary of State must in  his
certificate  identify  which   sub-paragraph   applies   to   his   opinion.
Thereafter, if the applicant lodges an appeal, that person  must    identify
in his grounds of appeal  the  Convention  or  Conventions  under  which  he
claims. He may claim under  both  even  if  the  original  decision  by  the
Secretary of State was primarily concerned with the Refugee convention.   In
order that his right of appeal to  the  Tribunal   be  wholly  curtailed  in
respect of claims  under  both  Conventions   it  must  be  clear  that  the
certificate  was  given  in  respect  of  both  claims  and  upheld  by  the
adjudicator in respect of both.

6.  Each  refusal letter is different and  it is  necessary  to  go  to  the
wording of the letter in this appeal in order to determine what was  covered
by  the  Respondent's  certificate.  Unfortunately  there  is  a   lack   of
consistency with regard to the use of the word "claim" in  this  letter.  It
is clear from paragraph 1 of the  letter  that  the  Appellant  applied  for
asylum under the Refugee Convention.  Thereafter,  the   word   "claim"   in
paragraphs 2, 4, 6,  and 9   is  used  ,  in  our  view,  to  refer  to  the
Appellant's claim to asylum under the Refugee Convention.

7. However in paragraph 12 the word "claim" is used to mean something  else.
It is stated:
  ".....took into account your claim that you  have  been  forced  to  leave
Afghanistan".

It is clear that the word "claim" was  being used in this  context  to  mean
"assertion"  and not a claim under either Convention.

 8.  In paragraph 14, the word "claim" is used again - this  time  to  refer
to something else.  Confusingly,  paragraph 14 commences as follows:-

" In support of your claim you have sought to rely on Articles 3  and  5  of
the ECHR...".

In light of  the  subject  matter  and  content  of  the  previous  thirteen
paragraphs of the letter ( all centred on the asylum claim),   one might  be
forgiven for assuming that the reference to "your Claim"  should   be  taken
as referring  to  the  Appellant's  claim   under  the  Refugee  Convention.
However this interpretation would make no sense,  as  Articles 3  and  5  of
the Human Rights Convention could not  in  themselves  support  a  claim  to
refugee  status  under   the   Refugee   Convention.    The   common   sense
interpretation is  that  in  paragraph  14  the  reference  to  "claim"  was
intended to be a reference to the Appellant's "claim to stay in  the  United
Kingdom". Thus the word "Claim" is used here to  mean  something  different.
Nevertheless,  we believe that the letter writer  was  noting  in  paragraph
14  that the Appellant had also made  a  claim  that  to  remove  him  would
result in  a breach of Articles 3 and 5  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention,
and setting out the Secretary of State's  conclusions  in  respect  thereof.
That "claim" ( a claim distinct from that under the Refugee Convention)  was
 considered and refused  - as is stated in the remainder of that  paragraph.


9. The certificate  itself appears in  the paragraph  immediately  following
this - namely  paragraph  15.  That  paragraph  starts  with  the  following
statement:

" In the light of all the evidence available to him, the Secretary of  State
has  concluded  that  you  have  not  established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution and that you do not qualify for asylum".

This is clearly a reference to  the  Appellant's  claim  under  the  Refugee
Convention. The letter writer then goes on, in the next sentence, to  refuse
"the application" under paragraph 336 of HC 395. The very next  sentence  is
as follows:

" In addition, the Secretary of State certifies your claim as one  to  which
paragraph 993)(b) of Schedule 4 to  the  1999  Act  applies  owing  to  your
failure to declare to the Immigration Officer on arrival  that  your  travel
documents were not valid."

The letter then makes the usual  reference to  paragraph 9(7).
The grammatical  interpretation of paragraph 15 is  that  the  reference  to
"your claim" in the context of the certificate, was  a  reference  to  "your
claim" under the Refugee Convention - this having been the "claim" that  was
rejected immediately prior to the certificate.

10. Notwithstanding this,  paragraphs 13 and 14 of  the  letter  demonstrate
that the Secretary of State did however, actually  consider  two  claims  by
the Appellant -  one under the Refugee Convention and the  other  under  the
Human Rights Convention,   and  rejected  both.  It  is  strongly  arguable,
therefore, (as Ms Marks submitted)  that   had he intended  the  certificate
to apply to both of those claims, the letter  would  have  stated  that  the
"Secretary of State certifies that your "claims", and   not  simply  "claim"
in the singular. Ms Marks also argued that her view was   supported  by  the
use of the word "application" in the second  sentence  of  paragraph  15  to
refer to the Appellant's application to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
letter writer had used  the  word   "application"   in  order  to  refer  to
something different from the asylum  claim  to  which  the  certificate  was
attached.  The  certificate expressly referred only to "  your  claim"   and
it must be inferred, Ms Marks submitted, that this was a  reference  to  the
claim  mentioned  in  that  paragraph,  namely  that  under    the   Refugee
Convention.

11. We agree with Ms Marks's analysis of the wording of the  Refusal  Letter
with the result that   the critical paragraph  (paragraph  15)  sets  out  a
certificate applicable only to  the  claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention.
Whether this is the result of poor use of language and lack of attention  to
detail on the part of the letter writer we do not know.   In  the  light  of
the differing meanings of the word "claim" as identified above,    a  reader
of the letter might be forgiven for thinking  that  the  letter  writer  had
been somewhat relaxed about  usage of this  word.   However,  given  that  a
certificate, if upheld by an adjudicator, can result  in  the  denial  of  a
right of appeal to the Tribunal,  it is  important  that  a  claim  only  be
regarded as the subject of a certificate when it is  clearly so stated.   We
feel compelled to comment that a  consistent usage of the word "claim" in  a
refusal letter, and  a clear indication of which claim or claims are   being
certified would avoid any potential misunderstandings.

12. It is, nevertheless,  our conclusion therefore  that  the  Secretary  of
State's certificate applied only to the asylum claim and not  to  the  Human
Rights claim. The Adjudicator agreed with the opinion of  the  Secretary  of
State - this is set out in paragraph 121 of the determination.  However,  in
stating as she did in paragraph 130  that "the certification is  upheld  and
the appellant has no right of appeal to the Tribunal", the  Adjudicator  had
assumed that the certificate had been given in respect  of  both  claims  of
the Appellant.  In making this assumption, she fell into error.

13. We indicated to both representatives at the hearing  that  we  were  not
prepared to  come to the  same  conclusion  as  the  Tribunal  had  done  in
Mendes.    Each case depends upon its own facts.  Clearly the  intention  of
the Secretary of State  and the extent of the certificate in each case  must
be decided on the basis of the wording  of the particular refusal letter  in
that case, and any other relevant evidence.  Our conclusion in  this  appeal
is based upon a detailed assessment of the refusal  letter  in   this  case.
Our interpretation of the certificate in this appeal is  based  on  what  is
set out in the paragraphs leading up to  the  certificate   in  the  Refusal
letter,  and  the context in which the certificate  appears.   We  therefore
conclude that we have jurisdiction to hear and determine  the  Human  Rights
appeal.

14. Following from  our  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  certificate,  we
invited Ms Marks to address us on the substantive matters in issue  in  this
appeal.  The Tribunal noted that her  bundle  of  supporting  documents  had
been filed and served out of time. Ms Marks explained that  her  instructing
solicitor had intended that the bundle be filed in time,  some  three  weeks
before the hearing. However that  lady had  gone  on  holiday,  and  another
member of the firm, who was  taking care of the file in  her  absence,   did
not  file the bundle in accordance with instructions left by her.  Initially
we  determined that this did not  constitute  an  adequate  reason  for  non
compliance with the usual timetable for filing evidence,  particularly  when
there was clearly at least one other  person  at  the  firm  who  could  and
should have ensured that the evidence was filed in time. However,  Ms  Marks
then indicated to us  that  the  lack  of  this  bundle  left  her  in  some
difficulty in arguing her appeal,  as the bundle contained all the  evidence
on which she had intended to rely. In the circumstances we decided  to  give
leave to Ms Marks  to  tender  the  bundle  in  order  to  ensure  that  the
Appellant's case could be properly and fully presented.

15. Ms Marks submitted that  the security situation in Afghanistan  remained
volatile. Ethnic tension in northern  Afghanistan  was  still  a  matter  of
fact. That tension particularly affected  Pashtuns,  the  ethnic   group  to
which this Appellant belonged. We were referred to several documents in  the
bundle, particularly an Amnesty International  report  at  page  17  of  the
bundle, a Human Rights Watch paper at page 25  ,  and  other  references  at
pages 5 and 9 thereof.  As a result of the general level of  ethnic  tension
and the general state of lawlessness and lack of  security,  the  return  of
the Appellant would, she submitted,  result in a real risk of  a  breach  of
Articles 3  of the Human Rights Convention. Ms  Marks  also  submitted  that
the Appellant could  neither return to his home village nor to Kabul.  There
was no internal flight option available to him as it would be  unduly  harsh
to expect him to return to live in Kabul.  He  would  be  going  back  to  a
country where there was no industry,  was  war  ravaged  and  without  basic
services.  He  had  never  lived  in  Kabul  and  was  a   stranger   there.
Humanitarian resources there were greatly strained.

16. Mr Blundell addressed us  most succinctly.  He acknowledged  that  there
was still ethnic tension and concomitant risks for Pashtuns  in  the  north.
However, this Appellant, he submitted, could be safely  returned  to  Kabul.
He was a fit young man who could re-locate there without undue hardship.

Conclusions
17. The Appellant claims that his Article 3 rights would be violated by  his
removal. Article 3 of the European Convention provides that   no  one  shall
be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment.
It  imposes an absolute bar on torture and inhuman  or  degrading  treatment
or punishment. It  permits  no  exceptions.  The  relevant   time  for  risk
assessment is the time of this appeal  (Chahal v. UK  (1997)  23  EHRR  413,
Ahmed v. Austria (1996) 24 EHRR 278.).  Ill treatment must  reach a  minimum
level of severity in order to fall within  Article  3.  That  level  is  not
fixed, however. It is relative and depends on all the circumstances  of  the
case including the  duration  of  the  treatment,  its  physical  or  mental
effects and in some cases the sex, age and state of health of the victim.

18. We have taken into consideration the meaning of "torture"  as  described
by the Commission  in the Greek case (12 Y B 1) as  an  aggravated  form  of
inhuman treatment which has a  purpose  such  as  obtaining  information  or
confessions,  or  the  infliction  of  punishment.   We  conclude  that  the
Appellant has not  shown a real risk of torture on his return.

19. We note  that  "degrading  treatment  or  punishment"  is  conduct  that
grossly humiliates although causing less  suffering  than  torture.  Inhuman
treatment or punishment likewise may cause less suffering than  torture  and
it need not be deliberate.

20. We have reviewed the evidence available to us.  Following  the  fall  of
Kabul and the flight of the Taliban in November 2001, the deployment of  the
International  Security  Assistance  Force  (ISAF)  (pursuant  to  the  Bonn
Agreement)  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  return  and  maintenance  of
security in and around Kabul. According to the CIPU Report of October  2002,
, a Danish fact-finding mission in  May  2002  reported  that  the  security
situation in Kabul  was  generally  good,   although  in  certain  districts
civilian safety was poor. Crime in these areas was mainly  directed  against
the wealthy. The Director of the Danish Committee for Aid  to  Refugees  did
not believe that there was any politically ethnically motivated violence  in
Kabul. The ISAF monthly report to the end of July  2002  reported  that  the
security situation in Kabul and the surrounding  area  was  generally  calm.
The UMAMA report for the end of September also reported on  stable  or  calm
security situations in most of Afghanistan.  However,  we  accept  that  the
situation remains volatile away from the capital.   Outside  Kabul  and  its
immediate area the various warlords and their  forces  continue  to  control
the provinces and there have been continued reports of tension and  fighting
between rival warlords, particularly in the north.   We  note  the  evidence
provided on behalf of the Appellant that coalition forces have continued  to
hunt for Taliban and Al Qaeda  remnants  in  the  eastern  provinces.  Kunar
province  was only  recently  considered  to  be   a  high  risk  zone.  The
Adjudicator found as a fact that the Appellant comes from that area.

21. We note the conclusion  of  Amnesty  International  in  June  2002  that
Afghanistan  was  far  from  stable  with  continuing  fighting,  crime  and
banditry and we accept that fighting continues   in  the  eastern  provinces
from which the Appellant comes.  The Human Rights
Watch  documentation  before  us  (September  2002)  indicates  that  ethnic
Pastuns ( the ethnic group of this Appellant),  a  minority  in  the  north,
continued to flee targeted violence at the hands of certain commanders.   It
is not clear from the wording of this report whether that occurs  throughout
provincial  Afghanistan  or  in  certain  areas.   Nevertheless,  while   we
conclude that there may be a real risk for the  Appellant  ,  as  an  ethnic
Pashtun of being a target for such violence in certain parts of the  country
 and  that  in  Kunar  province  he  may  find  himself  caught  up  in  the
instability and fighting which continues to some extent there,  we  conclude
that there is no real risk for the Appellant if he were to  be  returned  to
Kabul.

22. Kabul and its environs are generally calm  under  the  watchful  eye  of
ISAF  (although we note reports of a recent explosion in September  when  21
civilians were killed and 150 wounded). As regards services there, the  CIPU
report shows that there were 20 to 25 hospitals functioning in  Kabul,   and
in June 2002 it was  reported  that  a  basic  level  of  medical  care  was
available there. The ITGA  Afghan  Assistance  Co-ordination  Authority  and
several other agencies and organizations working with UN agencies  and  NGOs
are finalizing a strategy to  provide  humanitarian  assistance  during  the
coming  inter.  The  strategy  will  address  both  urban  issues  affecting
recently returned refugees as well as issues affecting rural peoples.

23. We do not believe that  this  man's  ethnicity  will  cause  him  to  be
subject to harm in Kabul.   Kabul is clearly a difficult place for the  vast
majority of its citizens to live in - ravaged as it has  been  by  years  of
harsh Taliban authoritarian government  and  the  recent  war.  We  have  no
doubt that quality of life is far from good for many  of  its  citizens  and
such   services  as  are  available  are  basic.  However,   the   available
evidence regarding the current situation there does  not  persuade  us  that
there is a real risk of this  Appellant  being  subject  to  torture  or  to
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on his return there.  Ms  Marks
has urged to find that the lack of social welfare  and the circumstances  in
Kabul at present would constitute degrading treatment sufficient  to  breach
Article 3.  We  do  not  accept  her  submission.  As  we  noted  above  ill
treatment must reach a minimum level of severity in  order  to  fall  within
Article 3.  We  accept  that  social  hardship,  if  extreme,  may  in  some
circumstances  be degrading but we can find no  case   in  Strasbourg  where
the European Court has found  social  hardship  amounting  to  a  breach  of
Article 3.  We conclude that  the evidence in  this  case  falls   short  of
that required to show social hardship of such severity that to  remove   the
Appellant to a risk of suffering such hardship would constitute a breach  of
Article 3.    There is a high  threshold  to  be  crossed,  particularly  in
cases where the allegation is one of lack of  social  welfare  provision  in
the country to which a person is  to be removed.


24. This Appellant is  a young man aged 31. He is not  educated,  but  there
is no evidence that he in  bad health  or  is  unable  to  work  to  support
himself.  In his statement at C1 of the Home Office  bundle,  the  Appellant
stated that he used to help his father in his business as  a  carpenter  and
seller of building material. This experience  could be advantageous  to  him
on his return. Ms Marks submitted that it would be  unduly harsh  to  return
him to Kabul. We do not accept that  this has been  made  out.  Clearly  the
Appellant would be away from his home and family, but he has  experience  of
living away from his home, having  left his village  well over a  year  ago.
We do not presume to say that it would be easy for  this  man  to  establish
himself in Kabul, and it would no doubt involve a degree of  hardship,   and
discomfort, but it has not been shown that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
return him there. We note in this  regard  that,  before  leaving  his  home
village   he  lived  very   modestly,    without   electricity   or   modern
communications.

25. This appeal is dismissed.



      Ms S Ward










