
H-TH-28-NMB-V3
                                                 Appeal Number :CC35661-2001
       TK (Article 3- Blind Person - KAA-Prison Condition) Iraq CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT 03576

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  10 May 2002                             |                             |
|                                              |8 August 2002                |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                Professor D B Casson - Acting Vice President
                              Mrs E Hurst - JP


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                             Tafiqh Hassan KADIR

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Tribunal   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr S M Hildreth)  allowing  on  human
      rights grounds an appeal by Tafiqh Hassan Kadir (whom we  shall  refer
      to as Mr Kadir) against the decision of the Secretary of State  on  17
      August 2001 to refuse to grant leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.
      Before us the Secretary of State was represented by Mrs M Banwait.  Mr
      Kadir was represented by Mr S Revindran of Refugee Legal Centre.

2.    Mr Kadir is a Kurdish citizen of  Iraq  from  the  Kurdish  Autonomous
      Area, born on  10  May  1966.   He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      apparently via the Channel Tunnel at Dover, on  10  August  2001.   He
      claimed asylum the following day.  He was  without  documentation  and
      said he had travelled from Turkey.

3.    The asylum claim was withdrawn by Mr  Kadir's  representative  at  the
      outset of the hearing before the Adjudicator.  The appeal proceeded on
      human rights grounds only.

4.    Mr Kadir's story is set out as follows in a letter from Refugee  Legal
      Centre dated 14 August 2001:

      "Mr Kadir is from Sulaymania  in  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Region  of
           Northern Iraq.  He left his country because of the fear of  harm
           and persecution from the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), who
           controlled the area where  he  lived.   In  his  legal  and  SEF
           interviews he recounted  the  events  that  made  him  flee  his
           country.

      Our client was self-employed as a scrap metal  dealer  in  Sulaymania.
           He owned a small shop where he bought scrap metal and melted  it
           to make cooking utensils for sale.  Sometime in 1997,  officials
           of the PUK raided his shop, seized all his machines and  charged
           him for operating illegally and for not paying tax.  Our  client
           had ostensibly not sought permission from the PUK to  build  and
           operate such  machinery.   Mr  Kadir  was  not  aware  that  the
           machines he operated were illegal.  Neither was he aware that he
           was liable to pay tax.  He was fined 100,000 Iraqi dinars by the
           PUK and given four weeks to pay this.  Mr Kadir could not afford
           to pay what was to him an extortionate sum.  Besides, even if he
           could pay the amount, he had no avenue to generate income  since
           his machines had been seized by the PUK.

      Mr Kadir failed to pay the fine and a warrant was subsequently  issued
           for his arrest.  Due a (sic) fear  of  reprisals  from  the  PUK
           including  possible  imprisonment  and  execution,  our   client
           decided to leave the country.  Consequently  he  fled  Iraq  for
           Turkey where he has resided illegally since  1997.   However,  a
           recent decision by the Turkish government to deport all  illegal
           immigrants to their country of origin  compelled  him  to  leave
           Turkey."

5.    Mr Kadir gave evidence at the hearing  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
      Secretary of State was not represented and  so  there  was  no  cross-
      examination.  Mr Kadir told the Adjudicator that he and  his  business
      partner had both been  imprisoned  for  a  short  time  by  PUK.   His
      business partner had also fled the country and was now  a  refugee  in
      Denmark.  Mr Kadir had been in a Northern Iraqi jail once before for a
      month in 1983 because of a fight and the  conditions  were  then  very
      bad.  He was certain he would be arrested if he returned.  It was  not
      unusual for people to be imprisoned for failure to pay tax.

6.    The Adjudicator noted discrepancies in Mr Kadir's story  but  he  took
      the view that there was not enough to impugn the  overall  credibility
      of the core story.  He therefore found that  the  PUK  controlled  all
      aspects of life  in  Mr  Kadir's  home  town,  that  they  imposed  an
      arbitrary and extortionately high tax on his machines  ex  post  facto
      and that his inability to pay would be  treated  as  defiance.   There
      were substantial grounds for believing that there was a real risk that
      he would be consigned to jail if he were returned  to  Northern  Iraq.
      The Adjudicator considered the documentary evidence but he was  unable
      to discern anything which dealt specifically with prison conditions in
      the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Area.   He  expressed  his  conclusions   at
      paragraph 16 of his determination as follows:

      "I therefore decide that the clear weight of  evidence  before  me  in
           this case leads me inexorably to the conclusion that  there  are
           substantial grounds for believing that there is a real  risk  of
           imprisonment and that the prison conditions  in  the  KAA  would
           constitute treatment in violation of  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.
           The internal flight alternative  has  really  grown  up  in  the
           asylum context - but in any event I would make it clear that  in
           the circumstances of the KAA that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect relocation to an area controlled by the rival KDP."

7.    The Adjudicator therefore allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds
      and directed the Secretary of State  to  grant  exceptional  leave  to
      remain.   We  shall  revert  to  the  latter  point  later   in   this
      determination.

8.    The grounds of appeal claim that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  finding
      that Mr Kadir would suffer treatment in violation of Article  3.   The
      representatives addressed us on that ground.   Mrs  Banwait  submitted
      that the documentary evidence before the Adjudicator (the CIPU  Report
      dated October 2001) had no information on any prison in Northern Iraq.
       The Adjudicator had wrongly relied on  Mr  Kadir's  own  evidence  of
      conditions when he had been imprisoned  for  a  month  in  1983.   The
      Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs  official  general  report  on
      Northern Iraq dated April 2000 states:

      "Conditions in prisons in Northern  Iraq  do  not  meet  international
           requirements as laid down in 1955 in the United Nations' minimum
           standards  for  the  treatment  of  prisoners.    Human   rights
           violations  do  occur  upon   arrest   and   during   detention.
           Conditions of hygiene in the prisons leave much to be desired.

      Otherwise the situation in the prisons has improved over the last  two
           years,  owing  also  to  the  intervention  of  the  ICRC.   The
           International Red Cross (ICRC) is able to visit all  prisons  in
           both the PUK and the KDP areas.  At the beginning of  2000,  the
           ICRC was able to visit about 500 prisons  on  a  regular  basis.
           The Northern Iraqi Authorities are  co-operating  constructively
           with the Red Cross which, for example,  organises  workshops  to
           improve the quality of prison life or provides lectures on basic
           rules of conduct for Peshmergas during military actions.  At the
           request of detainees, the ICRC can issue statements of proof  of
           their detention.  Such statements contain, inter alia, dates  of
           visits by ICRC staff and of release.  The ICRC issues such cards
           only to  Peshmergas  and  other  detainees  for  whom  the  ICRC
           considers that there  are  particular  grounds  for  protection.
           'Ordinary' criminals are not included in this category.

      Visiting arrangements differ from one prison to  another  in  Northern
           Iraq.  The usual frequency of visits is once a  week.   Visitors
           may bring in food, although the prison  provides  the  necessary
           basic nutrition.  Visits are not possible as  long  as  criminal
           investigations into detainees are still in progress.

      As far as is known, there  is  no  question  of  forced  or  voluntary
           labour in the prisons.  In some prisons, the possibility is said
           to exist of carrying out manual labour, etc.  As far as we know,
           there are no arrangements for home leave.  The  western  concept
           of rehabilitation is unknown in Northern Iraq."

9.    Mr Revindran referred us to the decision  of  the  European  Court  of
      Human Rights in Dougoz v Greece, in which the European Court of  Human
      Rights held that detention conditions alone could amount to  a  breach
      of Article 3.  He  invited  us  to  dismiss  the  appeal  or,  if  the
      Adjudicator's credibility finding was  flawed,  to  remit  to  another
      Adjudicator.

  10. We have considered the submissions  of  both  representatives  in  the
      light of the documentary evidence before us.  We proceed on the  basis
      that Mr Kadir's story was accepted as credible by the Adjudicator.  On
      his own evidence he had been living in Turkey since  1997.   His  case
      rested solely on his assertion that if he returned to the KAA he would
      be imprisoned because of the matters he described and that  conditions
      of imprisonment would  breach  his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.  We are far from  persuaded  that
      there is a real risk that, after absence from the  KAA  for  so  long,
      there  is  a  real  risk  that  Mr  Kadir's  offences  would   attract
      imprisonment.  If  that  is  wrong,  he  must  show  that  the  prison
      conditions he would encounter would be such  as  to  breach  the  high
      threshold  required  to  constitute  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention.  In our judgment the
      documentary evidence,  including  the  extract  from  the  Netherlands
      Report of April 2000, extracts of which we have set out above, do  not
      in any way suggest that  imprisonment  conditions  in  the  KAA  would
      amount to inhuman or degrading treatment.  The Adjudicator  was  wrong
      to have allowed Mr Kadir's appeal on the basis of such evidence as was
      before him.  The  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore
      allowed.


  11. The Adjudicator saw fit to direct the Secretary of State to  grant  Mr
      Kadir exceptional leave to  remain.   The  direction  falls  with  our
      decision.  It should, however, be noted that  neither  an  Adjudicator
      nor the Tribunal has jurisdiction to direct the Secretary of State  to
      grant exceptional leave to remain in any circumstances.  The purported
      direction  by  the  Adjudicator  was   ultra   vires   and   unlawful.
      Exceptional leave to remain is a matter for the  Secretary  of  State,
      not for the Appellate Authority.

12.   The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                 D B Casson
                            Acting Vice President


