
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
     Appeal No: SF (Article 3- Prison Conditions) Iran CG [2002] UKIAT 00973
                                                               CC-32925-2001
                                                      Date heard: 21/03/2002
                                                   Date notified: 04/04/2002
                                   Before:
                        Mr Justice Collins, President
                               Mrs D E Taylor
                                Mr T S Culver
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant
                             SAYED MEHDI FAZILAT
                                 Respondents
                          Determination and Reasons
1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of an
Adjudicator, Mr P M Fairclough, who dismissed the appeal by Sayed Fazilat,
whom we shall call the Respondent against the refusal of asylum, but
allowed his appeal on the basis of the Human Rights Convention. The result
of that was that the removal directions were set aside.
2. The Respondent is a citizen of Iran. He said that his problems began in
that country in about November 1998 when he was working at an oil refinery.
There were foreign workers involved; he became friends with the supervisors
of an Italian company, and as a result he agreed to provide them with a
supply of alcohol. He appreciated the risks that he was running because to
act in that way was to breach the law in Iran. In due course, the vehicle
which he was driving was stopped and searched and alcohol was discovered.
As a result, the Respondent was arrested. He was ill-treated, he says, at
the police station but was eventually taken to court to be dealt with. He
was accused not only of supplying alcohol, of which he was clearly guilty,
but also of smuggling and he was not, he said, guilty of that. As a result,
when he raised this before the Judge, the order was that the police should
go and obtain evidence. In the meantime, unless the Appellant could find
bail, he would be remanded in custody. In due course, he was granted bail
although apparently he was informed, or so he says, that he faced a
sentence of 5 years imprisonment were he to be convicted.
3. He thereafter decided to enrol in university in order to obtain a degree
in chemical engineering. In 1999, he was involved in student demonstrations
at the university, which received subsequently a large degree of publicity.
They are referred to in some detail in the US State Department Report, to
which we have been referred, of February 2001. What is there said, and it
describes the situation, is this:
"On July 8th 1999, students of Tehrain University, who were protesting at
proposed legislation by the Majiles that would limit press freedoms, and
the government's closure of a prominent reform orientated newspaper, were
attacked by elements of the security forces and Ansar-e Hezbollah thugs.
Police reportedly looked on and allowed repeated attacks against the
students."
It goes on to state that some four students were killed, and some 300
wounded and 400 detained, and as a result, demonstrations continued to grow
and in the end some 1500 students were apparently arrested, 500 were
released immediately after questioning, 800 were released later and formal
investigations were undertaken against the remaining 200. In the end, four
student leaders were sentenced to death, but that was commuted to a
sentence of imprisonment.
4. The Respondent says that he was involved in these demonstrations. He was
arrested, but the police recognised, after questioning him, that he was not
in any way one of the leaders. He then describes how he managed to escape,
in circumstances where he was lined up with others, and for some reason one
of the officers in charge was called away. That left only a very few
officers to deal with a considerable number of the students, and at a
signal they all ran away, the Respondent successfully.
5. Some ten months later, he left the country having paid $10,000 to an
agent and made his way to this country, entering clandestinely in the back
of a lorry. He says that he remained in hiding.
6. The Secretary of State refused his asylum claim on 27 March 2001 and the
refusal letter sets out in some detail the reasons why the Secretary of
State was refusing the claim. Essentially, he did not believe the
Respondent's account of the reasons why he had left Tehrain and the details
that the Secretary of State gives are, on their face, relatively
persuasive.
7. When the matter came before the Adjudicator, he heard evidence from the
Respondent and he concluded that the Respondent was an honest and reliable
witness and that, although there were slight discrepancies between his oral
evidence and the interview record, nevertheless he was satisfied with the
Respondent's evidence and found that it was entirely credible. He does not
give any reasons for reaching those conclusions. Nonetheless, they are
conclusions which he was entitled to reach and we do not go behind them.
8. He referred to the two main items on which the Respondent relied in
support of the appeal. First, the charge of smuggling alcohol, and
secondly, the offence of being involved in unlawful demonstrations and
escaping from detention. He points out that so far as the alcohol offences
were concerned, the result would be prosecution rather than persecution. He
did not specifically reach any conclusions as to what might happen in
relation to the unlawful demonstrations. He stated that on return he would
be questioned and he would face probable charges, first, as a returnee
after an unsuccessful asylum claim (there is objective evidence contained
in the CIPU Report which indicates that merely to have made an unsuccessful
asylum claim is not something which normally results in prosecution in
Iran) and the Adjudicator went on that there was evidence to suggest that
for that alone he might face questioning and possible punishment. As we
say, we do not accept that there is on the objective evidence a real risk
of that happening on the ground of being a returning asylum seeker. There
is, however, the possibility that he might be questioned, and possibly
prosecuted, for having left the country unlawfully because that,
undoubtedly, is a matter which can give rise to a possibility of
prosecution. It may not, and in the case of an unsuccessful asylum seeker
there is no certainty, there may even not be a probability but there is we
accept a possibility. The Adjudicator went on to say that he would almost
certainly be charged with the alcohol smuggling. That we do not doubt may
well be the position. And finally he would face charges for escaping
detention following the attending of the demonstrations. Again, that may or
may not be the case.
9. The Adjudicator decided finally that he was not, as he put it, entirely
satisfied with the asylum claim for convention reasons, but was persuaded
that the Respondent was entitled to succeed on human rights grounds.
10. There is no appeal against the rejection of the asylum claim, and
therefore we have to approach this case on the basis that that rejection
cannot be impugned. We are bound to say that we find the Adjudicator's
decision thoroughly unsatisfactory. It amounts to an assertion and it is
difficult to see why he should be satisfied with the asylum claim, but to
have rejected it for convention reasons if he was persuaded that there
would be a real risk of action being taken against the Appellant on the
basis of his involvement in the student demonstrations, because that might,
and certainly the Adjudicator should have considered whether it would,
provide a convention reason. However, as we say, we do not and we cannot go
behind that finding.
11. The reason why he found in favour of the Respondent on the human rights
claim was because he took the view that, were he to be sent to prison, he
would face unduly harsh conditions. When we say unduly harsh, we mean
conditions which would amount to inhuman or degrading treatment. He also
referred to the objective evidence which demonstrates that ill-treatment
was commonplace in Iran and that security forces and prison personnel
continue to torture detainees and prisoners. He also suggested that the
Respondent would not receive a fair public trial and, although he does not
say so in terms, it appears that he was satisfied that there would be a
breach of Article 6 were he to be returned.
12. The Adjudicator has, in our view, taken an altogether uncritical
approach to the evidence about the likelihood of ill-treatment and torture
in detention. He has referred particularly to various passages in the
United States State Department Report, to which we have already referred.
Under the heading "Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment" we find this said:
"The Constitution forbids the use of torture. However, there are numerous
credible reports that security forces and prison personnel continue to
torture detainees and prisoners. Some prison facilities, including
Tehrain's Evin prison, are notorious for the cruel and prolonged acts of
torture inflicted upon political opponents of the government."
That may well be right, and it is perhaps not without interest that in the
quotation in his determination, the Adjudicator simply refers to the first
sentence of that passage. The reality is that, in our judgement, there is
no real risk that this Respondent would be treated as if he were a
political opponent.
13. Mr Schwenk has sought to persuade us that his involvement in the
student demonstrations might well lead to torture and particularly harsh
ill-treatment because he would be regarded as a political opponent. We find
that fanciful. We know from the report that a large number of students were
indeed arrested, but that all bar some few ringleaders were released and we
know too that this happened now in the summer of 1999, nearly three years
ago. We find it, to say the least, improbable that the Respondent would be
regarded as someone who was politically dangerous. The reality is that he
might well be arrested, might well be detained, but for the alcohol matter
rather than any involvement in the student demonstrations. Albeit he says
that he was in hiding, we cannot but note that he spent some ten months in
Iran after he says that he ran away from the demonstration.It does not
suggest that the authorities were particularly concerned to find out where
he was. Indeed, we cannot believe that now, the student demonstrations
having been long dealt with, and the time having moved on, and this
Respondent on his own account being accepted as not being involved as a
ring-leader, there is any real risk that he will be dealt with in respect
of that matter.
14. There is a reference to general prison conditions upon which the
Adjudicator relied. What is said in the report is this:
"Prison conditions are harsh. Some prisoners are held in solitary
confinement or denied adequate food or medical care in order to force
confessions. Female prisoners, reportedly, have been raped or otherwise
tortured while in detention. Prison guards reportedly intimidate family
members of detainees and torture detainees in the presence of family
members. The UN Special Representative reported receiving numerous reports
of prisoner overcrowding and unrest. He cited a reported figure of only 8.2
sq.ft. (2.52m) of space available for each prisoner."
Again, one notes that the main matter of concern there is that the ill-
treatment is to force confessions. We do not find that, in the context of
this case, that this Respondent is at all likely to face that. When we say
at all likely, we do not mean to say anything about the standard of proof,
we are fully aware of the approach that we have to adopt in the round
whether we are persuaded that there is indeed established a real risk that
this Respondent will face treatment contrary to Article 3.
15. We do not doubt that prison conditions in Iran are far from ideal. We
do not doubt that they may not measure up to what is expected in this
country, or perhaps in any country which is a signatory to the European
Convention on Human Rights. As the Court at Strasbourg has recognised, it
is not for signatories to the Convention to impose the standards of the
Convention on all the world. Recognition has to be had to the situation in
individual countries and to the standards that are accepted, and expected,
in those countries. Of course in relation to Article 3, there is a line
below which the treatment cannot sink, if we may put it that way. That is
to say that it is always possible that the sort of treatment that may be
routinely expected in prison in a particular country falls so far below the
standards that would be expected in a civilised country, that it could
properly be said to amount to inhuman or degrading treatment. But, as again
the Court in Strasbourg has indicated, the threshold has to be a high one
because, otherwise, it would be, as one recognises, quite impossible for
any country to return to a non-signatory an individual who faces
prosecution, rather than any sort of persecution. The conditions may well
be regarded as harsh. That is a value judgement and there is no sufficient
indication from the material before us that this Respondent would run the
risk of facing treatment which amounted to a breach of Article 3. As we
have said, the Adjudicator's conclusions that such treatment would be
afforded him are based on a wholly un-critical approach to the material
that was before him.
16. So far as the question of fair trial is concerned, Article 6 can be
engaged if an individual is to be removed from this country. That is made
clear by the decision of the Tribunal in Kajac following the Court of Human
Rights decision in Sering v United Kingdom. But, it is only if the breach
of Article 6 would be flagrant, that is to say that there would clearly be
a thoroughly unfair trial, that Article 6 could be engaged. Again, it is
not for the signatories to the Convention to impose their system on all the
world. One has to consider whether, looking at it again in the round, it
can be said that the Respondent will be able to receive what amounts to a
reasonably fair trial. So far as criminal charges are concerned, and the
alcohol offences are criminal charges, as would be any charges relating
from unauthorised leaving of the country or indeed from unauthorised escape
from custody, if anything were done in relation to these student offences,
there is no reason to believe that there would be any flagrant breach of
Article 6 whatever may be the shortcomings, and there are shortcomings, of
the Iran system of trial.
17. In all those circumstances, we are persuaded that the decision of the
Adjudicator cannot stand, and having rejected the asylum claim he ought
also to have rejected the human rights claim. Accordingly, we allow the
Secretary of State's appeal.
Mr Justice Collins (President)

