
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX24893-2001      |
|On 18 April 2002           |        |JW (Fear-Sufficiency of     |
|Dictated 4 June 2002       |        |Protection-Mungiki) Kenya CG|
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 03402          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|1ST AUGUST 2002                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr K Drabu (Chairman)                                             |
|Mrs R Faux                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|JOSEPH NJOROGE WAMBUI                                             |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representatives:
For the appellant:     Mr S Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Gwilym Hughes &
                 Partners, Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms M Banwait for the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a Kenyan citizen, whose date of birth is 12  December
      1972. He is married. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 24  May  2001
      and gained entry by claiming to be a "ships crew member". The same day
      he claimed asylum. On 31 May 2001 the respondent for reasons  set  out
      in his letter of that date, refused to grant  asylum  and  decided  to
      give directions for his  removal  to  Kenya.  The  appellant  appealed
      against that decision claiming that his removal would be  contrary  to
      the UK's governments obligations under the Convention on Refugees  and
      also that it would infringe  his  human  rights  as  guaranteed  under
      Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.  The
      appellant gave oral evidence before the Adjudicator (Mrs A K Simpson).
      In her written determination  promulgated  on  9  November  2001,  she
      dismissed the appeal. On 26 January 2002  the  appellant  was  granted
      leave to appeal to the Tribunal (Miss Kate Eshun, Vice President).  In
      granting leave, Miss Eshun said "the Tribunal is of the view that  the
      Adjudicator's failure to consider whether members of the Mungiki  sect
      constitute agents of persecution and whether  or  not  authorities  in
      Kenya are able and willing to offer the applicant protection from that
      sect are the only issues that merit further consideration."


   2. The  facts  of  this  case  have  been  admirably  summed  up  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination. These are as follows. "The appellant is a
      Catholic and a member of the Kikuyu Tribe. He lived with  his  parents
      in the village of Njoro, near the town of Molo  until  December  1995.
      His parents were both killed in December 1995 in ethnic  clashes  with
      the Nandi Tribe. The appellant's home was destroyed. As a result,  the
      appellant and his brother moved to the Mattiare district  of  Nairobi.
      In February 1996 the appellant obtained employment  at  a  butcher  in
      Korogocho district in Nairobi and  went  to  live  there.  He  married
      Eunice Mwangangi, a member of the Kamba tribe, in early 1996.  He  has
      two children. In January 1997 the appellant  decided  to  revisit  his
      parents farm in Njoro. While he was there he met his uncle,  a  leader
      of the religious sect called Mungiki. His uncle asked him to join  the
      sect so that he could avenge his  parents  death  and  fight  for  the
      rights of the Kikuyu. The appellant did not  wish  to  join  the  sect
      because he was Catholic and knew that the Mungiki were harassed by the
      police and government, so his uncle locked him in a room in his  house
      until the evening. At 6pm, the appellant was taken to a nearby  forest
      by five men. The appellant's uncle pierced his left arm and drank some
      of his blood: the appellant was then forced to drink some blood  taken
      from his uncle's eldest son. The appellant was informed  that  he  had
      just taken an oath and was warned not to tell the secrets  of  Mungiki
      sect - if he did, he would be tracked down and killed.  The  appellant
      remained with his uncle for two months  and  attended  meetings  every
      Sunday. However, he did not tell his uncle that he lived in  Korogocho
      and led him to believe that he lived in Nakuru. On two  occasions  the
      Mungiki meetings were disrupted by police who used teargas and battens
      to disperse the participants.  The  appellant  was  arrested  on  both
      occasions. On the first occasion the appellant was  detained  for  two
      days and on the second he was  detained  overnight.  He  was  held  in
      crowded conditions and was not allowed to speak  to  anyone,  even  to
      police officers. On both occasions he  was  released  without  charge.
      Following his second arrest in February 1997, the  appellant  returned
      to his uncle's home. In April 1997 the  appellant's  uncle  discovered
      that the appellant was married to a member of the Kamba tribe and told
      him that his wife would have to be circumcised and that he would  have
      to undergo a second circumcision in  order  to  leave  a  mark  called
      Ngwati. Upon hearing this,  the  appellant  decided  to  escape  -  he
      travelled home to Kokogocho by Matatu and informed his  wife  and  his
      employer of what had happened. He remained in Kokogocho until December
      2000 and did not attend any further meetings of the Mungiki  sect.  In
      December 2000, the  appellant  went  to  Gikomba  open-air  market  in
      Nairobi's eastern Kamukunji estate to buy  childrens  clothes.  Whilst
      there, he was  accosted  by  his  uncle,  who  grabbed  him  and  told
      onlookers that he was the appellant's  father.  He  claimed  that  the
      appellant had run away from home and had stolen money  from  him.  The
      appellant was able to escape once members of  the  public  helped  him
      after he had explained to them that he had been  forced  to  join  the
      Mungiki sect and that his uncle wanted to kill him. The appellant fled
      to Mombassa in January 2001 and obtained employment as a fruit  seller
      in Mwembe Taxari market.  In  April  2001,  whilst  at  work,  he  was
      befriended by a British man called Mr Jones,  who  wanted  an  African
      girlfriend. The appellant introduced him to someone he knew. When  the
      appellant later met someone from his uncles village  in  Mombassa  and
      feared that he would be killed by the villager or other members of the
      Mungiki sect, he sought assistance from Mr Jones.  Mr  Jones  arranged
      for him to leave Mombassa in a cargo ship on 5 May 2001. The appellant
      left his wife and children in Nairobi.  The  appellant  did  not  seek
      assistance of the Kenyan police, as he believes them to be corrupt and
      did not believe that they could offer him protection. He  stated  that
      leaders of the Mungiki sect sometimes kill people but are not arrested
      because they bribed the police  officers.  He  fears  that  if  he  is
      removed to Kenya, he would be persecuted by his uncle and  his  uncles
      associates in the Mungiki sect.


   3. After referring to the objective evidence that was  submitted  to  her
      and referring to the arguments advanced on behalf of the respondent as
      well as the appellant, the Adjudicator made  the  following  findings.
      She accepted that the appellant is a member of the Kikuyu Tribal group
      and is a Catholic. She accepted that he had become a reluctant  member
      of the Mungiki sect in January 1997 and had left that  sect  in  March
      1997. She did not accept that he had been discovered by his  uncle  in
      Nairobi in December 2000 as the appellant had  claimed.  She  regarded
      this part of the appellant's evidence as  implausible  and  devoid  of
      credibility. She accepted that the appellant was frightened and had  a
      genuine fear of retribution by the members of the  Mungiki  Sect.  The
      Adjudicator went on to say, "in essence, the  appellant  has  incurred
      the hostility of the Mungikis, a religious sect.  He  left  the  sect,
      which he claims to have joined under duress, because he insisted  that
      his wife would have to undergo female  circumcision  -  more  commonly
      called female genital mutilation - and because  of  his  own  Catholic
      faith. However, the hostility of the Mungiki did not arise because his
      race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social  group
      or political opinion - the fact  that  he  was  Kikuyu,  Catholic  and
      married was immaterial. The appellant is at risk merely because he had
      abandoned a sect notorious for its violence and chauvinism."

   4. The Adjudicator did not accept the submission made on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that the appellant is a member of a particular social group.
      The Adjudicator went  on  to  say,  "at  its  strongest,  and  on  the
      assumption that his claim is wholly credible, I take the view that the
      appellant's claim of persecution by the Mungiki does not engage any of
      the specified reasons under Article 1 of the Refugee Convention."

   5. With regard to the appellant's claim that he had been  arrested  twice
      in early 1997 the Adjudicator said that the detentions  do  not  cross
      the threshold of severity required to constitute persecution. She went
      on to say that the appellant had in fact severed  his  ties  with  the
      Mungiki Sect in March 1997 and that the objective evidence shows  that
      the Kenyan authorities took little heed of the activities  of  Mungiki
      prior to May 2000, at which time the appellant was not  involved  with
      the sect anyway.

   6. The Adjudicator also considered the human rights aspect of the  appeal
      and dismissed it on the basis that there was no  evidence  to  support
      the claim that the appellant is at risk of ill treatment by the Kenyan
      authorities contrary to  Article  3.  The  Adjudicator  concluded  her
      determination by referring to an article which had been  submitted  to
      her on behalf of the appellant. According  to  the  article  since  10
      August 2001 there had been a dramatic change in the  attitude  of  the
      authorities  towards  the  Mungiki  sect  and  a  sea  change  in  the
      activities of the Mungiki sect. Following their meeting on  10  August
      2001 the national coordinator of Mungiki had declared that the Mungiki
      was to be transformed into a political moment which would  target  150
      constituencies  in  the  2002  Presidential  elections.   The   Kenyan
      government  allowed  this  meeting  to  proceed  despite  its   strong
      political agenda. In the light of these recent developments, said  the
      Adjudicator, there are no substantial  grounds  to  believe  that  the
      appellant is at risk of ill-treatment by the Mungiki sect.

   7. When the matter came before the Tribunal the Counsel for the appellant
      did not have any papers to place before the Tribunal. He said that his
      instructing solicitors should have sent us a bundle of  documents.  We
      told him that we had received no such bundle. We adjourned  to  enable
      the Counsel to make enquiries of the solicitors.

   8.  When  we  reconvened,  the  Counsel  apologised  and  said  that  his
      solicitors had made a mistake and had not forwarded the bundle to  the
      Tribunal. He accepted that on this occasion  his  solicitors  had  let
      their client down. We decided to proceed  with  the  appeal  with  his
      consent and with the consent of Ms Banwait. However, we  decided  that
      it would be in the interests of justice to  allow  the  Counsel  seven
      days to  submit  further  evidence.  We  directed  that  such  further
      evidence should be served upon the Home Office Presenting Officer  and
      that the Home Office Presenting Officer would have seven days from the
      date of the receipt of  that  evidence  to  consider  if  the  further
      evidence merited any comments. In the event, any comments were made by
      the Home Office Presenting  Officer,  the  appellant's  representative
      would have three further days to make final observations  and  forward
      the same to the Tribunal.

   9. We heard arguments from Mr Ahmed and from Ms Banwait. Mr Ahmed  relied
      on the written grounds of appeal and we pointed out to  him  that  the
      only issues before us were sufficiency of protection for the appellant
      in Kenya according to the decision granting leave to  appeal  in  this
      case. Mr Ahmed submitted that the police were incapable  of  providing
      protection to the appellant because they were  corrupt.  He  undertook
      that to provide evidence to back-up his assertion. Ms Banwait defended
      the Adjudicator's findings and her conclusions. She  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator had taken account  of  all  the  evidence  that  had  been
      adduced before her. In her view the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the
      facts of the case did not engage the Convention was  perfectly  proper
      and in the circumstances, she said, it was  not  surprising  that  the
      Adjudicator did not go on to consider whether the appellant would have
      sufficiency of protection in Kenya. She drew the  Tribunals  attention
      to the objective evidence that had been adduced before the Adjudicator
      and to which the Adjudicator had made full reference  in  her  written
      determination. Ms Banwait asked that the appeal be dismissed.

  10. In the event we did receive a bundle of documents from the appellant's
      instructing solicitors and that bundle arrived on 26 April 2002 with a
      covering letter dated 25 April 2002.  In  their  covering  letter  the
      solicitors accept that the bundle was not submitted in time  and  that
      this was due to administrative error. We do not accept that because in
      our view it was pure and  simple  carelessness  on  the  part  of  the
      solicitors in this matter. We are not even sure that  a  copy  of  the
      bundle was served upon Ms Banwait, the Home Office Presenting  Officer
      as we had directed at the hearing on 18 April 2002.  However,  in  our
      view, no prejudice will be caused to Ms Banwait by us proceeding  with
      our determination without being satisfied as to whether the bundle had
      been served upon her as we had directed.


  11. We have given full and proper consideration to the written submissions
      made by the Counsel.

  12. The Adjudicator had taken the view that the facts of this case did not
      engage any of the Convention reasons. We can well understand the logic
      of that finding but we have looked at the case assuming that the  fear
      of persecution claimed by the appellant was for  a  Convention  reason
      i.e. his religious belief.

  13. In our view the written submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant
      have little substance. The assertion that the two arrests  neither  of
      which lasted more than two nights and both of which took place in 1997
      should be regarded as persecution for the purposes of the claim before
      us, is wholly misconceived. The appellant  lived  in  Kenya  for  four
      years after these arrests and he was  not  subjected  to  any  adverse
      treatment from the authorities since 1997. On both  occasions  he  was
      released without charge. In the  circumstances,  the  arrests  are  of
      little or no consequence in the issue that is before us - whether upon
      removal the appellant will be at risk from  the  authorities  for  his
      past association with the  Mungiki  tribe.  In  this  context,  it  is
      important to point out that he had become a member  under  duress  and
      gave up the membership of the sect only months after having agreed  to
      join it. So he has had nothing to do with this sect since 1997.  There
      is no evidence that he has been harassed or hounded by anyone for  his
      membership or non-membership of this sect. The  members  of  the  sect
      have done nothing to harm him since he escaped in April 1997. He lived
      in Korogocho until December 2000. His evidence that in  December  2000
      he was seen and grabbed by his uncle in an open-air market in  Nairobi
      has been rejected by the Adjudicator  as  implausible  and  devoid  of
      credibility. The Adjudicator heard oral evidence and the Tribunal does
      not lightly interfere with findings made by the  Adjudicator  who  has
      heard oral evidence. We find no reason to  disturb  the  Adjudicator's
      finding of disbelief in that part of the appellant's evidence.  Indeed
      we fully agree with it. In  the  circumstances,  there  is  little  if
      anything left in the claim of the appellant.  The  objective  evidence
      shows as has been pointed out by the  Adjudicator,  that  the  Mungiki
      sect has changed its ethos and  that  the  government  has  implicitly
      accepted its change of direction to peaceful political activity.

  14. The question of sufficiency of protection does not  arise  because  is
      our view there  is  no  one  in  Kenya  that  the  appellant  requires
      protection from - not the authorities and not the Mungiki sect. In our
      view, even if he did, it would be our finding, based upon the  current
      objective evidence, that he would be protected by the  authorities  in
      the event of any threat by Mungiki sect  and  that  he  would  not  be
      threatened by Mungiki tribe since there has been sea-change  in  their
      ethos and in their operations.

  15. The assertion in the written submission that his 1997 arrests would be
      on record with the authorities  and  that  therefore  the  authorities
      would not protect him and/or that it would be unreasonable  to  expect
      him to seek their protection, are lacking  in  weight  and  in  merit.
      There is no evidence before us to  establish  that  it  is  reasonably
      likely that the appellant  will  face  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason on removal from the United  Kingdom.  Similarly,  there  is  no
      evidence before us that the appellant's rights under Articles 2 and/or
      3 would be infringed  by  his  removal  to  Kenya.  Unhesitatingly  we
      endorse the Adjudicator's decision and we dismiss this appeal.





K Drabu


Vice President

