
H-ab-V1
                                                 Appeal Number: HX46690-2001
       AV (IFA-Mixed Ethnicity Relationship-Russia/Chechen) Russia CG [2002]
                                                                 UKIAT 05260

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on:  26 September 2002                        |                15 November  |
|                                              |2002                         |
|Dictated: 11 October 2002                     |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                        Mr J R A Fox - Vice President
                                 Mr A Smith


between
                               Anna VARVARINA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant a citizen of Russia, has been given leave to  appeal  to
    the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr  Nicholas
    Paul) dismissing her appeal against the refusal of  the  Respondent  to
    grant her asylum and her claim under the Human Rights Act.

2.    At the hearing the Appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Adler  and  the
    Respondent by Miss Prendergast of the Home Office.

3.    The history of the matter is  that  the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Russia born on 29 August 1950.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on or
    about 27 September 1999 and claimed asylum on 29 September 1999.  On 13
    July 2001 the Respondent decided to refuse her application the decision
    was made to give directions for her removal.

4.    The basis of the Appellant's case is that she was born an  orphan  and
    grew up in  the  city  of  Stavropol  which  borders  the  province  of
    Chechnya.  From 1990 onwards she had started her own business which was
    a small food shop.  Her boyfriend at the time was a  Chechen  national.
    The Adjudicator put it it is well known that that part of the world has
    been beset with problems for many years.  The Chechen  war  started  in
    1994 and because of her association with a Chechen national  she  began
    to be ostracised by her fellow Russians.  It became so bad that she was
    afraid to leave her home.  Her boyfriend would occasionally travel away
    on other businesses which  were  not  explained  to  her.   She  became
    increasingly isolated from the people in her local community.   In  due
    course she was compelled to move from the city and live with him  in  a
    small converted wagon from a train.  Some time in August 1999 the wagon
    which she had been sharing  with  her  boyfriend  was  burnt  down  and
    everything in it was destroyed.  She tried to explain to the police who
    attended what had happened but instead was beaten.   She  was  severely
    criticised and abused by virtue of  her  relationship  with  a  Chechen
    national.  She returned to the town of Stavropol and went to the  local
    police station but was similarly treated in the sense that she was  not
    given any help.  At or about this time her  boyfriend  disappeared  and
    she subsequently discovered from what she had been told by his  brother
    that he had been killed.  Or as the Adjudicator put it at least this is
    what she was led to believe.  She was at this time staying with an  old
    woman in a flat in town.  Her boyfriend's relatives then threatened her
    because they claimed she had betrayed him to the authorities.   It  was
    as a result of the pressure coming from  these  two  sources  that  she
    decided to flee.  She had some $3000 which she had  kept  hidden  in  a
    small flat that she had  maintained  in  the  city.   In  her  previous
    business she got to know various lorry drivers and with this money  and
    with the assistance of one of those drivers  she  was  brought  to  the
    United Kingdom.  When she arrived she was  very  ill  and  subsequently
    admitted to Northwick Park Hospital where according to her evidence she
    was given treatment and indeed operated on because  of  stones  in  her
    liver which she claimed was caused by the  beating  she  had  received.
    Again there was no place for  her  to  live  in  Russia  as  she  fears
    persecution as the Chechen nationals want her blood.

5.    The Adjudicator recorded that in evidence she  had  amplified  matters
    and gave details of the abuse which he found was clearly shocking.

6.    The Respondent did not believe that  she  was  at  risk  from  Chechen
    nationals anywhere in Russia.

7.    In  reviewing  the  objective  evidence  the  Adjudicator  found  that
    problems did exist in the part of Russia that she came from namely  the
    neighbouring Stavropol regions became magnets  for  refugees  and  also
    subsequently to the most ethnically  discriminating  provinces  of  the
    Russian federation  where  xenophobia  is  particularly  apparent.   He
    records the IND Report further indicates that the Russian ministry  has
    real problems in trying to eliminate  the  flaws  in  ethnic  policies.
    Furthermore the police and other security  forces  here  and  in  other
    parts of the  country  have  continued  to  harass  citizens  from  the
    Caucasus and  darker  skinned  persons  as  obviously  the  appellant's
    boyfriend/partner.

8.    The Adjudicator found her evidence  credible  and  compelling  and  he
    accepted the evidence that she had given at  her  screening  interview,
    she had never held a passport.

9.    She also gave evidence everything in the trailer was burnt.  She  gave
    evidence of hiding at the homes of acquaintances no one wanted  her  to
    stay for a long time.

10.   She also at her interview gave evidence that she had a lot of  friends
    in Rostov.

11.   At interview she also said that she had had  a  passport  it  was  not
    with her it probably had been burnt when the trailer was burned.

12.   The Adjudicator quite properly found that she had a well-founded  fear
    of persecution for a Convention reason in the area  in  which  she  had
    been living.

13.   He noted her lack of documentation and lack of community ties but  did
    not accept that wherever she goes in Russia she will be tracked down by
    the Chechens.  He found that it was not unrealistic for her to relocate
    to another part of Russia.  We declined to make a recommendation.

14.   In submissions Mr Adler submitted that the question  of  the  internal
    protection alternative is "can  a  refugee  claimant  genuinely  access
    domestic protection which is meaningful.  More specifically it asked is
    the proposed sight of internal protection one in which there is no real
    chance of persecution or of other particularly  serious  harms  of  the
    kind that might give rise to the risk of return to a place of origin.

15.   He pointed out that the Appellant had  no  internal  passport  and  no
    travel documents.  She would need an internal passport if  she  was  to
    relocate in Russia and he referred us to the relevant parts of the CIPU
    Report.

16.   He also pointed out that even if she was returned to Russia she  faced
    enormous difficulties in registering.  ... he claimed that there  would
    be a physical danger in travelling he also pointed out  that  the  CIPU
    revealed that the quality of protection was lacking and particularly if
    she was found to be a forced migrant.

17.   He pointed out that she was an  orphan  and  had  no  family  and  her
    partner had been killed.  She had no home and in his submission it  was
    unduly harsh to expect her to relocate.  The Russian federation had put
    laws in place to prevent relocation.

18.   Miss Prendergast  submitted  that  whilst  it  was  exactly  that  the
    Appellant did not have an internal passport there was no evidence  that
    she could not obtain one.  She pointed out  that  the  Appellant  could
    obtain an external passport  in  the  United  Kingdom  then  obtain  an
    internal passport.

19.   Paragraph 6.15 showed that  there  were  at  least  500,000  displaced
    persons in the Russian federation whom  around  100,000  mostly  ethnic
    Russians who left  the  northern  caucasus  during  the  first  Chechen
    conflict between 1994 and 1996 and currently registered by the  federal
    authorities as forced migrants which entitles  them  to  assistance  to
    facilitate their resettlement elsewhere in the Russian federation.

20.   In this appeal the relevant Rule is paragraph  336  of  HC  395.   The
    Appellant has to demonstrate a reasonable likelihood that she  will  be
    persecuted for a Convention reason if returned to Russia.

21.   In making that assessment the Tribunal has regard  to  the  guidelines
    as set out in Sivakumaran and the majority decision in Kaja.

22.   Additionally the objective evidence has to be examined as at the  date
    when the Appellant left Russia, the date of the decision and  the  date
    of the hearing.

23.   The Adjudicator who had the  benefit  of  hearing  evidence  from  the
    Appellant had no doubt that she had experienced ill-treatment from both
    sides of the fence  in  Stavropol.   He  found  the  relatives  of  her
    disappeared boyfriend may well have sought to harass her partly perhaps
    with a view to gaining money or simply by virtue of the ethnic tensions
    that arise in that area.  He comments it is plain from the attitudes of
    the local Russian community and in  particular  the  police  that  they
    would provide no solace.  He then went on to conclude  that  the  state
    was not able and indeed unwilling to provide the sort of protection  as
    envisaged in Horvath.  Furthermore the agents of the state  namely  the
    local police force have also  ill-treated  her  because  of  her  known
    relationship with a Chechen.  He found that she had a genuine and well-
    founded fear of persecution in the area of Stavropol.  He then went  on
    to find that she could internally relocate in Russia.

24.   The Tribunal has obtained a copy of  the  UNHCR  Background  Paper  on
    Refuges and Asylum Seekers from  the  Russian  Federation  prepared  in
    November  2000.   That  paper  is  referred  to  in  the  CIPU  Report.
    References in the CIPU Report reflects what is said in that paper.

25.   The Appellant has stated that she had many  friends  Rostov  which  is
    the last point where she stayed in Russia before commencing her illegal
    journey to the United Kingdom.  The question that arises is whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for her to relocate in Rostov.

26.   It has been submitted that the Appellant  has  no  documents  and  the
    Adjudicator indeed found that she did not have a passport at  the  time
    when she entered the United Kingdom because in all probability  it  was
    burnt in the fire in her trailer.

27.   The UNHCR Paper indicates that  outside  the  country  a  passport  is
    issued or renewed by the Russian Embassy or Consulate.   The  Appellant
    has not produced any evidence that she could not obtain a passport from
    the Russian Embassy in London.

28.   Additionally the paper reveals it is possible to  obtain  an  internal
    passport from the embassy, one matter that is quite clear is  that  the
    Appellant did have an internal passport prior to the fire.   The  paper
    also reveals that many of the restrictions that used to exist in nearly
    one third of the 89 subjects of the  Russian  Federation  most  of  the
    regions have in the last two years i.e. 2000 amended their  legislation
    to be in  compliance  with  the  constitution  and  the  constitutional
    court's resolutions.

29.    The  report  also  reveals  that  the  presidential   commission   on
    citizenship introduced positive changes to the  rule  applications  for
    acquisition of citizenship  need  to  be  submitted  at  the  place  of
    permanent residence.  That has been changed by a decision  of  30  June
    1998 which instructed  the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  to  accept
    applications for Russian citizenship submitted by former USSR  citizens
    at the place of temporary registration  in  Russia  in  case  they  had
    cancelled their  permanent  registration  in  one  of  the  successor's
    states.  Moreover the presidential commission  declared  that  refugees
    recognised as such under Russian refugee law  can  submit  applications
    for citizenship at their place of temporary  registration  not  at  the
    place of permanent registration.

30.   It also reveals that Moscow has not  implemented  this  provision  and
    accordingly the Tribunal is of the view that the  Appellant  cannot  be
    returned  to  Moscow  where  clearly  she   would   face   considerable
    difficulties in obtaining an internal passport.

31.   The CIPU refers to people who have a well-founded fear of  persecution
    from the local authorities  in  one  of  the  regions  of  the  Russian
    federation  without  the  involvement  or  complicity  of  the  Federal
    Authorities may in principle find  effective  protection  elsewhere  in
    Russia.  It does however record that such an alternative may be limited
    due to the cost of moving the undeveloped housing market and above  all
    by the enforcement of  strict  registration  regulations  practices  in
    parts of the  country.   Despite  constitutional  protections  for  the
    freedom of movement the government places some limits on this right and
    some regional authorities most notably  the  city  of  Moscow  restrict
    movement in particular  by  denying  local  residency  permits  to  new
    settlers from other areas of the country.  These restrictions  although
    successfully challenged in  court  remain  largely  in  force  and  are
    tolerated by the Federal Government.

32.   One city that it cited as being one which  is  particularly  difficult
    to obtain a registration permit is Stavropol from which  the  Appellant
    originates.  The other cities are  referred  to  as  Krasnodar  and  St
    Petersburg.

33.   There is no indication in the background papers  before  the  Tribunal
    that  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the  Appellant  to  obtain   a
    registration permit in Rostov where she says she has friends.

34.   The Appellant referred to her having medical treatment  following  the
    beaten that she received in Stavropol.  However  there  is  no  medical
    evidence before the Tribunal.

35.   The only issue  before  the  Tribunal  is  the  question  of  internal
    relocation and the Tribunal applying the guidelines as referred  to  in
    Robinson [1997] Imm AR 568 find that it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    the Appellant to relocate in the Rostov area.  It is for the  Appellant
    to make her case and she has not demonstrated that she cannot obtain an
    external passport from the Russian Embassy and an internal passport  to
    live in Rostov from the embassy in the United Kingdom.

36.   The Tribunal notes that the Adjudicator did not  feel  that  he  could
    make a recommendation on the facts of the case but he did comment  that
    he urged the Appellant's solicitors to make representations in relation
    to the question of her being given exceptional leave to remain.  Cleary
    her situation will change dramatically if she cannot obtain an external
    passport she may then fall in the category of being a stateless person.



37.   There is no error of law in relation to the Adjudicator's findings.

38.   The appeal is therefore dismissed.




                                                                   J R A FOX
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT






