
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX12355-2002      |
|On 9 October 2002          |        |AI (Mixed Ethnicity -       |
|                           |        |Albanian/Bosnian) Kosovo CG |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 05547          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.............2 December 2002.............................         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|A R MACKEY (Chairman)                                             |
|MRS M E MCGREGOR                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Ahmedin Isufi                                                     |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT (CLAIMANT)       |

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent
(Claimant)             Miss S Panagiottopoulou of Counsel
                       instructed by Sheikh & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Secretary of State appeals with leave against the determination  of
     an Adjudicator, Mr P D Ievins,  promulgated  5  July  2002  wherein  he
     allowed an appeal against the decision of the respondent who had issued
     removal  directions  to  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia   (FRY)
     following refusal of asylum and human rights claims.   The  Adjudicator
     allowed the appeal under both the Refugee Convention and Article 3  and
     8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

  2. The Adjudicator's Determination
     The Adjudicator found that the claimant was a 27-year old  married  man
     from Kosovo.  His father was ethnic Albanian and  his  mother  Bosnian.
     He was Muslim by religion and came from the northern part of Mitrovica.
      There was  no  Presenting  Officer  present  but  the  appellant  gave
     evidence and was represented by Miss Panagiottopoulou at  the  hearing.
     The Adjudicator decided that as the removal directions had  been  given
     only to FRY that he should consider the risk so far as  it  ascertained
     to both Kosovo and Serbia.

  3. The Adjudicator found the claimant's parents were of  mixed  ethnicity.
     He stated that:  "Because his mother  was  Bosnian,  and  spoke  Serbo-
     Croat, she would be seen as allied to the Serbs".  The appellant stated
     that his sister had been granted refugee status  in  this  country  and
     that he had stated that his wife, child and parents-in-law  were  still
     in Kosovo.  He claimed that he dare not return to Kosovo because of his
     mother's origins.  She had a Serbian surname which was  set  out  in  a
     birth certificate that he produced in support of his claim.  He  stated
     that his family had been expelled from their home area and moved to the
     town of Kqeq which was some 10 to 15 kilometres from Mitrovica  towards
     Pristina.  He said they were evicted in early 2000 in Kqeq.   He  lived
     with his parents-in-law.  While at Kqeq a KLA man named B  came  around
     every so often. The claimant feared that if he  returned  to  Kosovo  B
     would kill him because his mother was different and spoke Serb.  He did
     not consider that his wife and infant child were at risk as  they  were
     looked after by her parents.

  4. After taking into account the objective country  information  including
     the UNHCR position paper on minorities, of April 2002  the  Adjudicator
     concluded (paragraph 29) there was a serious  possibility  that  if  he
     were returned to the north of Mitravica he would be persecuted  as  the
     Serbs were suspicious of him because he was part ethnic  Albanian.   He
     did not consider that the type of protection that could be  offered  by
     KFOR or UMIK in the north of Mitravica could be  described  as  "either
     sufficient or effective".

  5. He then went on to consider the risk to the appellant in  Kqeq.   There
     he considered the fear to be more of B and went on to accept  that  the
     fear was both subjectively and objectively well founded.  He considered
     that the risk to the claimant of persecution  was  on  account  of  his
     mixed ethnicity and actual or  imputed  political  opinions.   He  then
     stated  that  there  was  a  serious  possibility  that  the  risk   of
     persecution would extend to the whole of  Kosovo.   His  reasoning  for
     this appears to be  that  the  appellant  would  have  to  produce  his
     documentation, including his birth certificate, and it would readily be
     apparent what background and ethnicity the claimant had.

  6. He further considered that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  require  the
     claimant to relocate to Serbia as he appeared to know no-one in Serbia,
     would have no home and  his  mental  state  was  precarious.   He  also
     concluded that the risks to the claimant would be a breach of Article 3
     of the ECHR and also Article 8.  He noted the medical evidence produced
     in support of the claim which stated that  the  claimant's  removal  to
     Kosovo would occasion a significant worsening  of  his  already  severe
     mental illness and that there was a diagnosis of suicide risk.
  7. The Appellant's Submissions
     Mr Blundell adopted the four grounds of appeal submitted in support  of
     the leave application.  During the course  of  the  hearing  the  first
     ground which related to the claim that the Adjudicator had applied  too
     high a standard in relation to sufficiency of protection,  Mr  Blundell
     conceded that this ground may not have force but  based  on  the  other
     grounds it was  unnecessary  to  reach  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
     sufficiency of protection as there was no prior proof of a real risk of
     persecution or maltreatment to this appellant that was  required  prior
     to consideration of whether there was sufficiency of protection or not.

  8. The most substantive ground relied on was that the Adjudicator had  not
     properly addressed the issue of an internal flight  alternative  (IFA).
     The claimant would be returned to Pristina and failed to show  that  it
     would be unduly harsh for him to be relocated there.  In  addition  the
     Adjudicator had failed to link harassment with a well-founded  fear  of
     persecution.

  9. It was also submitted that the Adjudicator had placed undue  weight  on
     the claimant's mixed ethnicity and that he  did  not  fall  within  the
     category of those having special protection needs.  He  relied  on  the
     determination of the Tribunal in Rexhepi (May  2001)  where  a  Kosovan
     Albanian applicant was married to a Bosniak and had a  Serbian  mother.
     In that determination it was concluded that if there was no  reason  to
     suppose that the applicant's ethnicity might become apparent  then  the
     applicant would not be in need of protection.  It  was  submitted  that
     the Adjudicator's finding in  respect  of  the  birth  certificate  was
     baseless.

 10. Finally it was submitted that the claimant's mental condition would not
     engage Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR and that the Adjudicator should  have
     considered European  jurisprudence  such  as  Bensiad  and  the  recent
     decision of the Tribunal in Qomile Gashi [2002] UKIAT01053 where it was
     found that medical treatment for PTSD was available in Kosovo.

 11. Mr Blundell laid particular stress on submissions that the  Adjudicator
     had reached a  flawed  decision  on  the  context  of  the  Balkans  by
     suggesting that mixed ethnicity involving Bosnian and Albanian  Muslims
     would place applicants at risk in a similar manner to those with  mixed
     ethnicity of Serb and Albanian.  Both the  Kosovan  Albanians  and  the
     Bosniaks have been  attacked  by  the  Serbs  and  although  there  was
     distrust between Bosniaks  and  Kosovan  Albanians,  it  was  wrong  to
     consider that such an ethnicity mix, would place an applicant at  risk.
     He also submitted that the appellant claimed his fear was  from  fellow
     Kosovan Albanian citizens, not from a state  authority,  and  thus  the
     likelihood of other citizens becoming aware of the details of his birth
     certificate must be seen as remote.  In relation to the IFA  issue,  he
     submitted that it was just as valid  to  conclude  that  this  claimant
     could move from an area where he may be at risk of Serbs to Pristina as
     it would be for any other Kosovan Albanian  and  would  not  be  unduly
     harsh for him to undertake such a  relocation.  The conclusions of  the
     Adjudicator at paragraph 31 were inadequate and invalid on this  issue.
     Beyond this the issue of Serbia was not relevant as the claimant  would
     be returned to Pristina.

 12. In relation to the claimant's medical conditions, he submitted that the
     proportionality assessment required under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  was
     clearly at a  high  standard  as  reflected  in  the  determination  in
     Bensiad.   The  suicidal  risk  for  this  claimant  he  submitted  was
     speculative and the symptoms shown by Mr Bensiad were far more  serious
     than was the case with this claimant and yet  Mr  Bensiad's  claim  had
     been refused as  not  reaching  the  required  level  to  overcome  the
     legitimate proportionality requirements.

 13. The Claimant's Submissions
     Miss Panagiottopoulou submitted to us that the claimant had been  found
     to be a credible  witness  and  that  the  medical  condition  and  his
     emotional state were noted by the Adjudicator.  No  Presenting  Officer
     had been before the Adjudicator and he had proceeded correctly  in  her
     submission.   The  conclusions  of  the  April  2002  UNHCR  report  on
     minorities should be seen as strongly persuasive and the  determination
     of the Adjudicator should be upheld.

 14. In relation to the submissions made by Mr Blundell as  to  whether  the
     claimant fell within one of the minority categories,  set  out  in  the
     UNHCR report, she conceded that there  was  no  specific  reference  to
     people of mixed Bosnian and Albanian origins however it had to be noted
     that this claimant came from North Mitravica, a  Serb  dominated  area,
     where he and his family had been in a minority who  had  been  harassed
     and evicted.  In her submission the Adjudicator had correctly found the
     claimant to be within an at risk group.   She  submitted  that  similar
     conclusions in relation to risks for  those  of  mixed  ethnicity  were
     found in the recent determination of  the  Tribunal  in  Sejdru  [2002]
     UKIAT04383. At paragraph 8 the Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  in
     that  claim  was  a  Kosovan  Albanian  who  had  been  involved  in  a
     relationship with a Serbian girl and this became known to the KLA.  The
     Tribunal referred to  the  UNHCR  position  paper  of  April  2002  and
     comments relating to ethnically mixed marriages and  then  went  on  to
     state:

           "The Tribunal are satisfied that in general terms UMIK and  KFOR
           does provide adequate protection but each case must be looked at
           on its own circumstances.  The distinguishing  feature  of  this
           present appeal is that the  appellant  faces  general  hostility
           from his fellow  Albanians  because  of  his  relationship  with
           Violeta and may be at risk of reprisals from the  KLA.   In  the
           light of the evidence in the US Office  Pristina,  Kosovo,  2001
           report and the UNHCR  OSCE  report  October  2000-February  2001
           there is a likelihood that the appellant would find  himself  at
           the risk of persecution and be unable to look to UNMIK  or  KFOR
           for protection.  The Tribunal are satisfied that there is a risk
           which can properly be described as a real  risk  rather  than  a
           speculative risk that the appellant would  face  persecution  on
           return to Kosovo."

 15. In relation to the IFA issue, he submitted that it was incorrect to say
     that it had been improperly addressed by  the  Adjudicator  as  he  had
     referred to possible relocation options in paragraph  9  (when  dealing
     with the removal directions) and at paragraph  29,  when  referring  to
     northern Mitrovica as being the home area  where  this  claimant  would
     have a well-founded fear of persecution on return.  In  addition  there
     was reference at paragraph 30 to the risk to the appellant in the  Kqeq
     area and again in paragraph 31 where the Adjudicator  referred  to  the
     entire Kosovan province in relation to conclusions on mixed  ethnicity.
     She submitted therefore that the IFA issue was covered  at  length  and
     appropriately, including a finding that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
     the claimant to relocate to Serbia.

 16. She conceded that there was no specific reference to  Pristina  however
     the reference to the whole of Kosovo obviously included Pristina.

 17. With regard to the  grounds  relating  to  Article  3  and  8  and  the
     claimant's medical evidence, she submitted that  the  medical  evidence
     provided in the psychiatric and general practitioner's reports  in  the
     bundle that was before the Adjudicator set out that  the  claimant  was
     suffering from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  depression  with
     suicidal intent.  The claimant was also stated to be highly  emotional.



 18. She submitted that the determination in Bensiad  did  not  need  to  be
     specifically addressed and that the conclusions in  paragraphs  33,  34
     and 35 were properly reached.  In respect of Bensiad she submitted that
     the claimant's position could be distinguished from that of Mr  Bensiad
     in that the psychiatric problems this claimant had a direct causal link
     to Kosovo which was not the case of Mr Bensiad in respect of  his  home
     country of Algeria.   While  noting  the  determination  in  Gashi  she
     submitted  that  the  position  of  this  claimant  was  still  one  of
     vulnerability and that the Adjudicator  had  carried  out  the  correct
     proportionality exercise balancing the risk and the  suicidal  ideation
     of this claimant.

 19. On the grounds put forward by the Secretary of State,  in  relation  to
     mixed ethnicity, she again referred us to the  UNHCR  report  of  April
     2002 and that it had to be noted that this  claimant  was  not  a  pure
     Albanian and would be seen because of his mixed Bosnian background,  as
     a collaborator with the Serbs.  His mother's name would identify him as
     it was clearly Slavic and not Albanian.

 20. In relation to the risks and needs of  the  claimant  to  disclose  his
     ethnic background, she submitted that the Rexhepi conclusions were  not
     applicable to this claimant as his evidence had been accepted  that  he
     would be required to disclose evidence of his  identity  including  the
     birth certificate, but beyond this the birth certificate had  not  been
     challenged as being a bogus one.   She  therefore  submitted  that  the
     appeal should be upheld.

 21. We reserved our determination.

 22. The Issues
     We found the key issue before us to be whether an IFA was available  to
     this claimant to Pristina or other parts  of  Kosovo  away  from  north
     Mitravica?  If the claimant was able to relocate  to  Pristina  and  it
     would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to do so, then,
     clearly, the issue of whether he had a well-founded fear of persecution
     or otherwise in his home  district  of  northern  Mitravica  is  not  a
     relevant consideration.

 23. Assessment
     The claimant submitted that his risk of persecution  would  arise  from
     Kosovan Albanians, in particular B, this persecution he considered  was
     for reasons of his mixed  ethnicity  and  in  particular  his  mother's
     Bosnian ethnic background.

 24. The Adjudicator has clearly relied  on  the  April  2002  paper  (UNHCR
     position on continued protection needs of individuals from Kosovo), and
     the references to risks to minorities.  We note  from  that  report  at
     paragraph 5 that it states:

           "While  most  Kosovan  Albanians  are  able  to  return  without
           protection difficulties, there are certain categories of Kosovan
           Albanians who may  face  serious  problems,  including  physical
           danger, were they to return home at this time.  These include:
           Kosovan Albanians in ethnically mixed marriages and  persons  of
           mixed ethnicity;
           Kosovan Albanians perceived to have  been  associated  with  the
           Serbian regime after 1990."

 25. Paragraph 6 states that  persons  who  fear  persecution  because  they
     belong to one of these categories should be carefully  considered  and,
     at paragraph 7, it states that the claims  of  traumatised  individuals
     such as victims of torture  and  egregious  violence  or  witnesses  to
     crimes of humanity will require special attention.

 26. At paragraph 9 of the same report it states that the term of "minority"
     is used to describes persons who are in a numerical minority  situation
     in a particular location regardless of their status elsewhere in Kosovo
     or the rest of FRY.

 27. Further on at paragraph 11 it states that there have been  improvements
     to the general situation in Kosovo and that these  are  having  gradual
     impact on some minority communities  in  specific  locations.   However
     "this does not imply that the risk of serious human  rights  violations
     has disappeared".

 28. At paragraph 14 of the report it states:

           "UNHCR stresses that minority returns should  take  place  on  a
           strictly voluntary basis and based on fully  informed  decisions
           of the members of this community.   Any  such  voluntary  return
           movements  should  be  properly  coordinated  and  reintegration
           should be supported through assistance to ensure sustainability.
            Minorities should not be forced, compelled or induced to return
           to Kosovo."

 29. The  same  report  then  covers  various  minority  groups  of  concern
     including, Kosovo Serbs, Kosovo Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptians,  then
     Kosovo Bosniaks.  The two paragraphs concerned state:


           "20  When compared to the situation of  other  minority  groups,
           the security situation for Kosovo Bosniaks is relatively stable.
            Nonetheless this community faces various forms of mistreatment,
           including intimidation, harassment and discrimination,  as  well
           as isolated  incidents  of  violence.   Like  other  minorities,
           Bosniaks live in concentrated communities or enclaves, and  have
           limited freedom of movement  outside  their  places  of  origin,
           especially into the main urban centres due to  fear  of  attack.
           As a result, a KFOR  security  escort  is  required  for  travel
           beyond  certain  perimeters.   Their  inability  to  use   their
           language  without  risking  being  considered  as  ethnic  Serbs
           outside the enclaves and areas contiguous to them, is  a  source
           of continuous hardship.  All of these limitations restrict their
           equal access to social services and  effectively  undermine  the
           means  for  the  community  to  remain  self-supporting  in  the
           province.  This situation is a major cause of  displacement  for
           Bosniaks.
       21. The  apparent  advancement  of  inter-ethnic  relations  between
           Bosniaks and ethnic Albanians that has taken place in  the  last
           year should  not  be  interpreted  as  having  reached  a  level
           indicating a fundamental  change  in  their  general  situation.
           Kosovo Bosniaks do not yet have full freedom of  movement  under
           secure conditions.  It is therefore  not  possible  to  conclude
           that returns to  this  environment  could  be  considered  safe,
           dignified or sustainable in the longer term.  Moreover,  further
           concentration of Bosniaks into enclave-like locations would only
           increase the pressure on the coping mechanisms of the  community
           and perpetuate the causes of displacement.  Voluntary returns of
           individuals of Bosniak ethnicity based on  an  informed  choice,
           which  properly  coordinated  and  supported  by   reintegration
           systems, might result in sustainable results.  But hasty  return
           movements which are not based on real  choice  could  put  those
           returned at real risk on the  ground,  as  well  as  potentially
           destabilising  the  whole  return  process  for  minorities   in
           Kosovo."

 30. This appellant however is not a Kosovan  Bosniak.   His  father  was  a
     Kosovan Albanian, he speaks Albanian himself and he  has  a  family  in
     Kosovo who are not encountering problems.  While it may be correct that
     he suffered some problems while living in north Mitravica the level  of
     risk to him in Kqeq appears to us to be  below  that  of  a  reasonable
     likelihood.  The only risk noted by the Adjudicator was that from B.  A
     risk from one person we do not consider has significant reality  to  it
     to invoke  the  requirement  for  surrogate  international  protection.
     Beyond this the claimant has the ability to move, with his  family,  or
     on his own, to Pristina.  The objective country  information  does  not
     indicate that this is a person who would be  readily  identified  as  a
     Serbian sympathiser or even a Kosovan Bosniak.   His  whole  background
     indicates that he is a Kosovan Albanian.  Risks to him  of  persecution
     or that there would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR on  return  to
     Pristina or Kqeq must be seen as extremely remote or speculative.   The
     appellant is not one of the minority groups noted in the UNHCR  report.
     His only area of potential risk is that he had a Bosnian Muslim  mother
     who evidently spoke Serbo-Croat.  The appellant does not appear to  use
     that language and indeed spoke Albanian before the Adjudicator and  set
     it out as his preferred language in his SEF questionnaire.

 31. We are satisfied therefore that the submission of the appellant that an
     IFA is available to this claimant is a  valid  one.   We  consider  the
     claimant could relocate to Pristina in Kosovo and that it would not  be
     unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to do so.   In  Pristina  he
     could seek protection from the KFOR and UNMIK security forces  and  the
     risks of persecution to him are below that of a reasonable likelihood.

 32. Similarly, following the guidance  of  the  Tribunal  determination  in
     Kacaj, we do not  consider  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
     considering this appellant would be  at  a  real  risk  of  torture  or
     inhumane or degrading treatment if sent to Pristina.  We  also  do  not
     consider that there would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR in  this
     regard and follow the determination  of  Qomile  Gashi  and  note  that
     adequate medical treatment is available in Pristina.  In  addition  the
     predicament of this appellant in Pristina would not be unduly harsh  to
     the extent that it is beyond the high level required  in  the  European
     jurisprudence.  The appellant's predicament is by comparison below that
     of Mr Bensiad, who himself was not found to reach  the  required  level
     for  it  to  be  disproportionate  to  the  valid  immigration  control
     objectives.









 33. Decision
     The appeal is allowed.  The  claimant  is  not  a  refugee  within  the
     meaning of Article 1(2) of the Refugee  Convention  1951.   We  do  not
     consider there would be a breach of either Article 3 or 8 of  the  ECHR
     should this claimant be removed to Pristina, Kosovo, FRY.
























                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President
