
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX24766-2001      |
|On 7 May 2002              |        |DS (Risk - ODP) Turkey CG   |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 02563          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                         Date     |
|Determination notified: 11 July 2002                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|DURAN SARIKECILI                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant a citizen of Turkey, appeals the determination of  an
        Adjudicator (Mr M  P  Keane)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
        refusal of the Secretary of State  to  grant  his  application  for
        asylum.

     2. The appellant was represented before us by Mr R M Ramdas-Harsia, of
        Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co.  Mr M Pichamuthu appeared for the
        Secretary of State.

     3. Howe & Co had lodged a bundle of 293 pages which arrived on the day
        of the hearing.  Mr Pichamuthu did not have the bundle at all.   It
        must be clearly understood that the late production of material  in
        such a case is of no service to anyone.  The reason  given  by  the
        solicitors for the delay (fundamental restructuring of our  office)
        is wholly unacceptable.  In the event Counsel did not refer to  the
        bundle and we sincerely hope the cost of generating it will not  be
        met by the appellant or by public funds.

     4. The background to this case is as follows.  The appellant was  born
        on 3 January 1964.  He arrived in this country and  claimed  asylum
        on 14 January 2001.  He claimed he had become a member of  the  ODP
        in 1996 and that he had been arrested and ill-treated by the police
        on several occasions.  His final arrest had  been  on  21  November
        2000 during a demonstration in Ankara.  He had been  held  for  one
        week and then released because of a lack of evidence.

     5. The Secretary of State did not consider that  the  appellant's  low
        level of political activism with the ODP would  get  the  appellant
        into trouble on his return and there  were  doubts  concerning  the
        appellant's general credibility.

     6. The Adjudicator, in a long and careful determination, in  which  he
        took fully into account the objective  and  other  material  before
        him, concluded that the appellant's account was, as the  respondent
        had asserted, not a truthful one.  The most  that  the  Adjudicator
        was prepared to accept was that the appellant was a member  of  the
        ODP and that he had undertaken activities on behalf of that  party.
        He expressly did not accept that the family had  a  high  political
        profile or that either the  appellant  or  his  father  was  deeply
        involved with DEV-YOL.  He did not accept that  the  appellant  had
        been arrested, detained or ill-treated by the  Turkish  authorities
        on  a  number  of  occasions  in  connection  with  his   political
        involvement, either with DEV-YOL or with the ODP.  The  Adjudicator
        was not impressed by the documentary material before  him  and  did
        not accept that the appellant had written two  articles  which  had
        been published in a newspaper.  The Adjudicator concluded from  his
        analysis of the objective material that the appellant would not  be
        of interest on return to  Turkey  because  of  his  membership  and
        activities with the ODP.

     7. Counsel acknowledged that the Adjudicator had found  the  appellant
        not to be credible and that the question was whether the  appellant
        would be at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker.  He submitted
        that the appellant would have to undergo lengthy enquiries and  his
        previous history, including his detentions  and  political  profile
        would come to light.

     8. Mr Pichamuthu submitted that the Adjudicator's credibility findings
        were clear and  well  reasoned.   It  was  not  disputed  that  the
        appellant might be questioned on return.   The  objective  evidence
        demonstrated  that  if  there  were  no  link  to  any   separatist
        organisation the appellant  would  be  released.   The  ODP  was  a
        legitimate party and had contested parliamentary elections.   There
        was no reasonable degree of likelihood of  any  risk  upon  return.
        The appeal should be dismissed.  Counsel  made  no  reply  to  this
        submission.

     9. Counsel realistically did not press  any  argument  concerning  the
        Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings,   and   indeed   his
        submissions were  very  short.   In  our  view,  the  Adjudicator's
        determination was a full, thorough and well set  out  document  and
        there is really no cause to quarrel with any of his  findings.   He
        went into all the issues before him  meticulously  and  we  do  not
        differ from him in any aspect of his assessment.

    10. The sole question before us is whether the  appellant,  as  an  ODP
        member, would be at risk on return.  Although it has been  said  in
        the grounds that the Adjudicator did not consider the  question  of
        the risks on return, we are not confident that that  is  the  case.
        In paragraph 26 the Adjudicator said that  the  objective  evidence
        did not support a claim that the Turkish authorities  would  harass
        and persecute members and activists of the ODP Party.  It is  true,
        however, that the Adjudicator did not give express consideration to
        what would happen to the appellant on return to Istanbul airport.

    11. Mr Pichamuthu acknowledged that the appellant would  be  questioned
        at the airport.  The question of the treatment of  returned  asylum
        seekers is dealt with in paragraphs 7.3.7  to  7.4.6  of  the  Home
        Office Country Assessment dated October 2001.  It is there  pointed
        out that there was no organisation that  consistently  or  formally
        monitored the treatment of returnees to Turkey.  With that  caviat,
        we find that the country assessment attempts to give  a  considered
        and balanced view of what a  returnee  can  expect.   The  returned
        individual will face questioning and,  in  general,  there  was  no
        follow-up unless the person was the subject of  legal  proceedings.
        If the returnee was, however, known to the police for  any  reason,
        he would possibly  be  taken  into  custody  for  more  interviews.
        Paragraph 7.38 deals with returnees without  documents.   The  Home
        Office, in fact, provide  documentation  for  returnees.   However,
        even undocumented  returnees  are,  according  to  the  assessment,
        "generally not being maltreated while being kept in custody."   The
        report adds the qualification that ill-treatment  cannot  be  ruled
        out in cases where returnees are suspected separatists.   Being  of
        Kurdish origin did not  in  itself  constitute  a  higher  risk  of
        inhuman treatment (see paragraph 7.40).  Everything depended on the
        individual and  his  activities  in  Turkey  and  abroad.   Counsel
        submits that when the appellant faced interrogation,  his  previous
        record would come to light.   However,  the  Adjudicator  expressly
        disbelieved that the appellant had such a record.  The most that he
        was prepared to accept was his membership  of  the  ODP.   The  ODP
        features in Annex B to the Country  Assessment,  along  with  other
        parties which contested  parliamentary  elections.   Mr  Pichamuthu
        submits that the appellant's low level political profile  with  the
        ODP would be unlikely to cause him difficulties on  return  and  we
        are not satisfied with the way it is put in the grounds  of  appeal
        that the appellant's membership of the  ODP  would  expose  him  to
        problems because it would be perceived that he would be linked with
        DEV-YOL.  Our attention was not directed  by  Counsel  to  material
        demonstrating that the appellant would be at risk  because  of  his
        ODP membership.
    12. While there are serious problems in Turkey,  since  December  1999,
        the country have been given official  status  as  a  candidate  for
        European Union Membership and this appears to have given  an  added
        impetus for reform.  In March 2001  the  government  published  its
        "national programme for the adoption of the Acquis" which  set  out
        the steps which were planned  to  enable  to  Turkey  to  meet  the
        criteria for EU membership - see paragraph 3.36 of the Home  Office
        Country Assessment.  On 3 October 2001 a large legislative overhaul
        was undertaken and 34 amendments to the constitution were affected.
         Restrictions on using the Kurdish  language  were  eased  and  the
        maximum  detention  periods  for  suspects  prior  to  charge  were
        reduced.   There  were  other  initiatives.   Implementation  would
        require legislative changes to the Penal  Code  or  other  enabling
        legislation.  However, these are encouraging developments.

    13. While the Adjudicator did not expressly consider  the  question  of
        risks on return, we are not satisfied having looked at  the  matter
        ourselves, that the appellant would be subject to more than routine
        questioning on his arrival.  On the material to which our attention
        has been drawn, it is not established to the required standard that
        any fears the appellant entertains about what will happen to him on
        his return are well-founded.

    14. For the reasons we have given, this appeal is dismissed.




                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President


