
H-DS-V1
                                                Appeal Number: HX/15918/2001
                                       BZ DR (Risk - Political Journalist)
                                  Iran CG [2002] UKIAT 06452
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House (with Video Link to    |Determination Promulgated    |
|Birmingham)                                   |                             |
|on :  4 December 2002                         |                11th February|
|                                              |2003                         |
|Dictated : 4 December 2002                    |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                         MR. A. R. MACKEY - Chairman
                              MR. R. BAINES JP


between
                             BEHROUZ ZARANDI and
                         MRS. DETA RAHMANTOUR (WIFE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For  the  Appellant:            Mr  S.   Vokes   of   Counsel   representing
Tyndallwoods Solicitors,                     Birmingham.
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant and his wife are  from  Iran.   He  appeals  with  leave
    against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  Mrs  C.   J.   Lloyd,
    promulgated 9 July 2002 wherein she dismissed  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent who had issued removal directions  following
    refusal of asylum and human rights claims.

The Adjudicator's Determination

2.    The Adjudicator accepted the Appellant as credible.   She  found  that
    he had worked as part-time journalist in Iran.   In  carrying  out  his
    employment he had become involved in three incidents.  The first was in
    July 1999 when he attended one of the student  demonstrations  and  was
    taking photographs.  At that time he was detained and whipped until  he
    lost consciousness.  Medical evidence was provided which supported  his
    claim that he had been whipped.  He was released after the whipping  on
    the second day of his detention.

3.    The second incident took  place  on  11  February  2000  when  he  was
    interviewing an election candidate  in  Karaj  as  a  journalist.   His
    report was accepted to be printed in a  newspaper.   However  it  never
    went  to  circulation  because  the  prosecutor's  office  raided   the
    newspaper premises and confiscated all copies of the publication.

4.    The next event followed four days later when the Appellant attended  a
    public meeting, again in his role of journalist, where  questions  were
    being asked to parliamentary candidates.  That meeting  was  broken  up
    the Ansa Hezbollah.  The following day the Appellant found out that his
    house had been searched by  security  personnel  .Apparently  they  had
    removed  books  and  letters  which  could  have  been  viewed  by  the
    authorities as being of a  political  nature  and  anti-regime.   As  a
    result of this he considered he was in danger and he and his wife spent
    a month in hiding before leaving the country.

5.    After he left his home he was able to ascertain that  the  authorities
    had called some three months later and had issued  "summonses".   These
    documents were from the Islamic Revolutionary Courts and copies of them
    were  provided  in  support  of  the  Appellant's  claim   along   with
    translations.

6.    The Adjudicator accepted the credibility  and  account  of  the  three
    incidents.

7.    She then went on to find the July 1999 incident not  to  have  adverse
    consequences for the appellant and also there was no risk arising  from
    the article in the newspaper, copies of which had been  seized  by  the
    prosecutor's office.  He considered that the court  documents  "do  not
    take matters much further because they do not identify whether  or  not
    there is a case against the Appellant".  She referred to  the  Tribunal
    decision  in  Hemmati  [2002]  UKIAT  01256  which   acknowledges   the
    limitations of non-specific summonses or court documents.

8.    She  then  considered  that  although  the  Appellant  held  generally
    liberal views he could not be described as  a  dissident  or  political
    activist.  She considered that there were no lasting consequences  from
    his brief detention in July 1999 and in spite having been identified as
    a writer of an article in February 2000, which the  authorities  wished
    to suppress, the Appellant was not detained or penalised in respect  of
    that article.  He also considered that there  was  nothing  to  suggest
    there was any charge or adverse circumstances from the removal  of  the
    publication.

9.    She noted that the Appellant relied on  the  discovery  of  prohibited
    books in his home and two letters  from  the  author  of  some  of  the
    prohibited books.  Whilst she considered it was curious  the  Appellant
    would keep such material at his home she stated that she did  not  know
    whether it was particularly inflammatory and did not consider,  on  the
    present  evidence,  the  Appellant  would  be  viewed  as  a  political
    dissident and so merit persecution from the government.

10.   She then proceeded to dismiss the appeal both  on  refugee  and  human
    rights grounds.

The Appellant's Submissions

11.   Mr Vokes adopted the grounds of appeal submitted with the  application
    for leave.  At the outset he noted that the  Adjudicator  had  accepted
    credibility and the  Appellant  had  been  whipped  in  the  past.   He
    submitted this was clearly a situation of past persecution and that the
    findings  in  the  Demirkaya  supported  this.   Given   this   finding
    Adjudicator appears to have overlooked the past persecution when taking
    into account the other two occasions when the  Appellant  came  to  the
    attention of the authorities.   He submitted therefore that  this  case
    must be looked at cumulatively with the  incidents in February  2000  .
    He noted these were only four days apart and indicated a  follow-up  by
    the authorities between them.

12.   In relation to the  "summonses"  he  submitted  the  findings  of  the
    Adjudicator were incorrect and that they should have been considered in
    the round as he has indicated in the starred decision of  the  Tribunal
    in Tanvir Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 4039.  The positive credible  findings  of
    the Adjudicator, in his submission, meant that the summonses should  be
    treated as valid documents and  that  it  was  a  misdirection  by  the
    Adjudicator not to place weight on them.  In  the  light  of  the  past
    experience of  this  Appellant  and  his  past  persecution  there  was
    evidence of a continuing and real  risk  to  this  Appellant  from  the
    authorities in Iran, on the basis of his  past  experience  and  record
    together with the obvious interest in him from the litigation noted  in
    the summons.

13.   He stressed that the summons were from the  Revolutionary  Court  and,
    given the country information on Iran  plus  the  acceptance  that  the
    Appellant was a journalist from a country  where  there  is  continuing
    oppression  against  the  media,  all  added  up  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution to this Appellant on return . He would be perceived as anti-
    regime.  This conclusion could be readily supported by the detention in
    1999 and the article he wrote in February 2000 both having a  political
    overtone to them.  The findings of the Adjudicator that he was a  young
    man with liberal views also appeared to support the Appellant's case.

The Respondent's Submissions

14.   Mr Deller took realistic approach to this matter.  He  noted  that  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 the short time scale of events in February 2000 were
    recorded.  It was thus not logical to suggest that it was  no  risk  to
    this Appellant on return because of a significant delay or  failure  by
    the authorities in Iran to take any action against him.  Indeed the two
    events in February 2000 were closely followed by the raid on  his  home
    and it appeared shortly thereafter there were four  attempts  to  serve
    the summonses upon him.  He submitted that the Demirkaya  point  should
    not automatically be taken and it is more important, on the totality of
    the evidence, to assess the risk at this point. He considered that  the
    fact finding did tend to fall away in paragraph 22 of the determination
    and this could not be escaped.  He also agreed that Tanvir Ahmed  could
    be used as an argument in either a  positive  or  negative  credibility
    assessment and it was valid that it be considered in either way as  the
    facts presented themselves.  He also noted  that  it  was  the  Islamic
    Revolutionary  Court   which  had  issued  the  summonses   Given   the
    information  in  the  CIPU  report   this  was  a  court  run  by   the
    conservative  Mullahs  the  risks  to  the  Appellant  were   therefore
    heightened.

15.   Finally he agreed that when the past whipping was looked  at  together
    with the events in 2000 the risks to the Appellant were  elevated.   He
    therefore submitted that we should look at the totality of the evidence
    and only if it indicated a real risk should we allow the appeal.

The Issue

16.   We found the only issue before us to be whether the  findings  of  the
    Adjudicator were sustainable in the light of the accepted evidence that
    was before him.  If so was the Appellant at a real risk of  persecution
    for a Refugee Convention reason(s) and/or  would there be a risk  of  a
    breach of either Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR should he be  returned  to
    Iran.

Decision

17.    We  are  satisfied,  after  careful  consideration  of  the   grounds
    submitted and the evidence that was before the Adjudicator,  that  this
    appeal must be allowed.  Taken cumulatively  this  Appellant  has  been
    detained and whipped in  July  1999  for  taking  part  in  anti-regime
    activities.  That incident in itself might not have been  sustained  or
    systemic but could indicate past persecution.

18.   In  February  2000  the  Appellant  firstly  wrote  an  article  of  a
    political  nature  which  was  confiscated   and   withdrawn   by   the
    prosecutor's office.  A few days later he attended the  public  meeting
    as a journalist  where parliamentary  candidates  were  in  attendance.
    This meeting was broken up by the Hezbollah.   The  following  day  his
    house was searched by security personnel.  Following his  departure  he
    has ascertained and provided copies  of  four  summonses.   These  when
    closely examined indicate that some litigation was taking place between
    the Revolutionary Court and the  Appellant  .  They  appear  to  be  an
    attempt to obtain sequestration of some items from the Appellant.  They
    clearly reflect an interest in  him  or  material  held  by  him.   The
    findings of the  Adjudicator  therefore  that  they  not  take  matters
    further not correct on closer examination ,particularly when taken with
    the totality of the Appellant's story.

19.   We are  satisfied  therefore  that  on  return  there  is  a  real  or
    significant risk that this Appellant will  be  either  stopped  at  the
    airport or soon after his return to his home district  in  relation  to
    his  past  activities  and  in  particular  in  relation  to  the  four
    summonses.  This must be coupled with  the  previous  persecutory  acts
    carried out for the reasons of his political views.  In this  situation
    we consider that there is  a  nexus  to  one  of  the  five  Convention
    grounds, namely his political opinions.  The Appellant is  therefore  a
    refugee within the meaning of Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention
    1951.  Beyond this  we  consider  there  are  substantial  reasons  for
    concluding that there is a real risk of a breach of Article  3  of  the
    ECHR should he be returned to Iran.

20.   The appeal is therefore allowed.









A. R. Mackey
Vice President

