
jls
            Appeal Nos: HX52471-2000(30)
Heard at Field House
                                 HX52468-2000(27)
on 21st & 25th June 2002
                                HX52469-2000(28) | |
|30 27 28 (Risk - PDPA Member)  Afghanistan cg [2002] UKIAT 06500      |
|                                                                      |







                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  13/02/2003

                                   Before:

                          Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)
                                 HH D Holden
                             Ms S S Ramsumair JP


Between:


                         "AFGHANI CASE 30, 27 & 28"


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



         Representation


For the Appellants:    Mr N Oakeshott, Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



           Index to this Determination

      Paragraphs
a.    Introduction and brief background 1-2
b.           The   evidence   and   cross-examination   of   Appellant    30
       3-10
c.           The   evidence   and    cross-examination    of    Mr    Sapand
       11
d.    The evidence and cross-examination of Appellant 27
            (the wife of  Appellant  30)        12-15        e.          The
evidence and cross-examination of Appellant 28                      16-19
      Paragraphs
f.          The evidence and cross-examination of the expert witness,
            Mr Peter Marsden            20-44
g.         Relevant country of origin information presented to us by
                                      the                            parties
                                     45-50
h.      The   submissions   on    behalf    of    the    three    Appellants
     51-57
i.          The submissions on behalf of  the  Respondent              58-70
        j.          The issues before us     71-73
k.         Assessment  74-88
l.          The decision     89

a.    Introduction and Brief Background

  1. The Appellant are all citizens of Afghanistan who had  the  misfortune
     of being on the Ariana Airline plane which  was  notoriously  hijacked
     whilst on a flight between  Kabul  and  Mazar-i-Sharif,   (Mazar)  and
     eventually ended up in the United Kingdom.  They  appeal  with  leave,
     against the decision of a panel of Adjudicators (His Honour Judge Dunn
     QC, Professor D B Casson,  and  Miss  K  Eshun).   Those  Adjudicators
     dismissed an appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  who  had
     refused  leave  to  enter  and  asylum  claims.   The  decisions  were
     promulgated in September 2000.  The Respondent had  refused  to  grant
     leave to enter and asylum on 6th April  2000.   Leave  to  appeal  was
     granted in  October  2000.   The  grounds  presented  are  largely  of
     historical interest only at this time because of the  massive  changes
     that have taken place in Afghanistan since the applications  by  these
     Appellants were lodged.   The  decision  in  Pardeepan  [00/TH/02414*]
     makes it clear that the provisions of the European Convention on Human
     Rights can have no direct application  because  of  the  date  of  the
     original decision under appeal.

  2. The Appellants are a family group who happened  to  be  on  the  plane
     travelling to Mazar for family and medical reasons.  Appellant 30  was
     a ticketing clerk with Ariana Airlines, Appellant 27 is his wife,  who
     he married in 1996. Appellant 28 is the sister-in-law of this  couple,
     she is married to the brother of Appellant 30, her husband was not  on
     the plane and  remains  in  Afghanistan.   All  three  Appellants  are
     Pashtun of the Saif sub-tribe and they all previously lived in  Kabul.
     The names of the Appellants have been  dropped  from  the  proceedings
     some time back in an apparent,  if  minor,  effort  to  preserve  some
     confidentiality.  However, given the  notoriety  of  the  events  that
     these  Appellants  were  involved  in   logically  it  would  be  very
     difficult toprepare a meaningful decision and at the same  time  fully
     retain confidentiality.  Unfortunately, these  three  cases  were  set
     down for hearing in a somewhat random manner with Appellant  28  being
     the first case set down and Appellant 30  the  last.   On  discovering
     this situation on 17th  June  2002,  and  noting  at  that  time  that
     Appellant 27's case was largely derivative on  that  of  her  husband;
     Appellant 30, and there was also  a  clear  linkage  to  the  case  of
     Appellant 28, we set down all three matters for hearing which included
     four witnesses, on 21st June 2002.  The taking of evidence took a full
     day and a further half day was required on 25th June  2002  when  full
     submissions were presented.  We allowed the time for  some  additional
     country of origin material to be presented.  We thank Mr Oakeshott for
     presenting this promptly to us a few days after the hearing.

b.    The Evidence and Cross-Examination of Appellant 30

  3. Mr Oakeshott submitted to us that the evidence  of  Appellant  30  was
     presented in the light of the significant changes in Afghanistan since
     his arrival in the United Kingdom and would establish  a  well-founded
     fear of persecution for him on return to Kabul for a mix of  political
     (past membership and roles  within  the  former  Communist  regime  of
     President Najibullah), religious (now seen as being anti-Islamic for a
     combination of past secular beliefs and a desire to obtain asylum in a
     western country), and race or ethnic (as a Pashtun) reasons.

  4. We were presented with a witness statement dated 23rd May 2002  and  a
     full Appellant's bundle  in  respect  of  Appellant  30.   The  bundle
     contained the statement, a witness statement  from  Dr  Saleh  Mohamed
     Zeary (dated 6th June 2000 and presented  in  support  of  the  appeal
     before the Adjudicators), country of origin information presented from
     a number  of  sources  including:   UNHCR,  CIPU  Report  April  2002,
     International Crisis Group Briefing 16th May 2002  "The  Loya  Girga",
     Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, the Guardian Newspaper, BBC
     News, Afghan Press, and various other newspaper reports.

  5. Appellant 30 stated that he was scared of returning to Afghanistan for
     several reasons.  The first was that he  had  been  a  member  of  the
     People's Democratic  Party  of  Afghanistan  (PDPA),  a  Soviet-backed
     Communist party, between 1968 and 1990.  In that role  he  had  worked
     for the Najibullah Government both as a party member and in the  Civil
     Service of the Najibullah Government.  He had been in the Ministry  of
     Education until about 1976.  During that period, he  claimed  that  he
     had been an officer for the PDPA in "a medium  level  position"  which
     involved him in speaking in support of the PDPA and encouraging people
     to join the party.  He was one of approximately 100  people  in  Kabul
     carrying out that political activity.  In approximately 1976, he moved
     to  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  became  responsible  for  the
     implementation of Government agricultural policy in the Kana Province.
      He was Assistant Administrator for the Province working  directly  to
     Dr Zeary, who was then the Minister of Agriculture  for  approximately
     14 months in the late 1970s.  Appellant 30 then  worked  as  Assistant
     Administrator to the Minister of Agriculture and after that  his  most
     senior post, in the 1980s, was as Manager of  Administration  for  the
     Ministry.  In 1989, he was called up for additional  military  service
     in the defence  of  Kabul,  fighting  for  the  Najibullah  Government
     against the Mujahadeen.  He  was  then  appointed  to  a  position  as
     Political  Assistant  to  the  General  Manager  of  the  Farmers  Co-
     operative.  His role was to co-ordinate political activities of the Co-
     operative and issue  propaganda  and  generally  encourage  people  to
     support the Government's agricultural policies.  He explained that his
     role in Kana had been as the person  in  charge  of  the  whole  area,
     ensuring the delivery of food and water supplies to the local  people.
     It was not overtly political but  governmental.   Later,  however,  he
     stated that he was involved in both administrative and political roles
     and that in Afghanistan they were closely linked.

  6. With the Farmers Co-op, between 1989 and 1992, he  confirmed  that  he
     had reported to Mr Sapand, who was in a position that was like that of
     a Minister.  His role was to help Mr Sapand politically.  He  was  one
     of four assistants to Mr Sapand, and he  was  the  most  senior.   The
     other three roles were in planning, information and business.

  7. In 1992, he was able to move, for a better salary, to Ariana Airlines.
       Unfortunately,  at  this  time,  the  Mujahadeen  took  control   of
     Afghanistan and his  role  within  Ariana  became  a  very  small  one
     because, due to the fighting, there were hardly any flights.

  8. During the seven years he was with Ariana he explained that there were
     some difficulties and there had been  attempts  to  remove  him.   The
     attempts to remove him, he claimed, were because  of  his  connections
     with the previous PDPA regime.  However, he  managed  to  keep  a  low
     profile and did not get too involved in  any  confrontation  with  the
     Mujahadeen.  On one occasion, during an attack by the  Mujahadeen,  he
     was shot in the leg.  To avoid coming into contact with the Mujahadeen
     he that he moved about in  Kabul  from  time  to  time  to  stay  with
     friends.  He claimed the Mujahadeen knew of his home and so  he  moved
     around to confuse them.  Ultimately, his home in Kabul  was  destroyed
     about one month before he left.  He spent the last month with his wife
     in rented accommodation.

  9. In his statement he claimed that the  Mujahadeen  group  who  had  now
     taken control of Kabul in the American/Northern Alliance defeat of the
     Taliban were a group dominated by Tajiks (the 'Jamiat-i-Islami').   He
     claimed that this group still pursued Islamic fundamentalism and would
     still wish to target him as a former member of the  PDPA  regime.   In
     addition, he claimed he was currently a member of a London-based group
     'Shorh Tofahom'.  This group made up of Afghan exiles,  many  of  whom
     were involved with the Najibullah Government, were  actively  involved
     in making representations to the recent Loya Girga.

 10. Appellant 30 claimed that various family members had been arrested and
     tortured by the Taliban as a result of he, his wife and  sister-in-law
     being caught up in the hijack.  He  stated  that  his  wife  also  had
     similar fears which  resulted  from  her  family  being  targeted  for
     similar reasons.  The four relatives who had been  targeted  were  his
     sister's husband, his second sister's husband, his wife's brother, and
     another relative.

c.    The Evidence of Mr Sapand

 11. Mr Sapand explained that he had been granted refugee  status  in  this
     country on 26th April 2002.  He was an ex-senior member  of  the  PDPA
     Kahalquan Section.  He confirmed that Appellant 30  had  also  been  a
     member and held a rank at the second level, which he termed 'activist,
     Qadar' or 'Cadre'.  There were  three  levels  of  members.   Leaders,
     activists, and  then  workers.   Mr  Sapand  explained  the  political
     activities of Appellant 30, stating that he had been in charge of  the
     political section of the organisation and  that  it  was  the  highest
     position reporting directly  to  him.   His  own  role,  had  been  at
     Ministerial level.  As President of the  Farmers  Co-op  he  had  been
     responsible at the political level to the PDPA and at the  operational
     level to the Prime Minister.  He was also  a  member  of  the  Central
     Committee of the PDPA, which was the ultimate decision-making body  in
     Afghanistan.

d.    The Evidence of Appellant 27

 12. Appellant 27, the wife of Appellant 30, confirmed a witness  statement
     presented along with an Appellant's bundle in  her  regard.   In  that
     statement she claimed that she was scared she would be  persecuted  by
     Mujahadeen groups  now  in  control  of  Kabul  as  a  result  of  the
     association of her husband, her own past and her family's  association
     with the former Communist regime.  Her father  had  been  one  of  the
     leaders in the Unity and Peacekeeping Police Force.  After the fall of
     the Najibullah Government, her father had had to  hide  and  at  other
     times go to Pakistan.  On two occasions the Mujahadeen had come to the
     house to arrest him.  On one occasion he had  been  arrested  for  two
     weeks and at another time a grenade had been thrown  at  their  house,
     but her father was not there.  The grenade killed her grandmother.  In
     addition, two of her brothers had held senior ranks,  one  of  them  a
     general, in the Najibullah Government.  Most of her family had gone to
     Pakistan when the Najibullah Government fell.  She herself did not  go
     because her sister and mother were ill.

 13. She also explained that she was a qualified teacher in Afghanistan and
     had studied at high school and then had joined a group of young people
     involved with the Government 'Young Afghans Union' who were  spreading
     Communist  ideas.   She  took  a  teachers  training  course  at   the
     University of Kabul in 1989/1990 and then began teaching children aged
     6 to 13.

 14. She married Appellant 30 in 1996, knowing that he was an ex-member  of
     the PDPA but not much else about his political background  because  it
     was five years after the fall of the Najibullah Government.  She  also
     claimed that the ruling groups  in  Kabul  at  this  time  would  have
     interest in her because of her background and because she had been  on
     the hijacked plane.  In addition, because  of  the  treatment  of  her
     family members after the hijacking, she perceived there would still be
     a risk to her from fundamentalist groups.   All  these  things,  along
     with her having been a teacher, a Pashtun and her association with her
     husband contributed to the fears that she held.

 15. She also explained that her brother, who had been  detained  for  some
     eight months by the Taliban because the  Appellant  had  been  on  the
     plane, was very angry with her and may seek  revenge  because  of  the
     problems he had suffered as a result of her being  on  the  plane  and
     subsequent actions by her.  She  therefore  had  fears  from  her  own
     family.




e.    The Evidence of Appellant 28

 16. Similarly, Appellant 28 presented a witness statement dated  23rd  May
     2002, which she confirmed as true and correct.  She  stated  that  she
     had had no contact with her husband M since the day  she  boarded  the
     plane.  She  was  scared  that  she  would  be  considered  as  having
     dishonoured him as a result of having been in Europe where  she  would
     be presumed to have acted in an anti-Islamic manner.   She  is  scared
     she would not be forgiven as a result of this dishonour.  She does not
     consider that the present Government would be able to protect her from
     actions that her husband may take to protect his honour.

 17. She also advised that she had been a teacher in Kabul, working for the
     PDPA Government.  Her family had been  involved  with  the  Najibullah
     Administration both on her own side and the  family  of  her  husband.
     One of her brothers had been a member of the Army and another had been
     in the Intelligence Service 'Khad'.  He left Afghanistan at  the  fall
     of the Najibullah Government and went to Pakistan.  She is unaware  of
     his current whereabouts and has had no contact with him.

 18. After the Najibullah Government lost power, the Mujahadeen came to her
     father-in-law's home and stole many possessions  from  them,  claiming
     this was done because they were supporters  of  the  former  Communist
     Government.  On another occasion, her father-in-law was  arrested  and
     detained for two nights.

 19. She also claimed a fear from of remnants of the Taliban who would take
     revenge on them for involvement in the hijacking as, in her view, they
     consider Appellant 30 was one of  the  main  people  involved  in  the
     organising of the hijack.

f.    The Evidence of Mr Peter Marsden

 20. Mr Marsden presented three  separate  expert  reports,  one  for  each
     Appellant.  Much of the material in the reports is  similar  for  each
     Appellant but there are specific references to the plight of women  in
     Kabul and comments on the individualised fears of each Appellant.

 21. The reports set out Mr Marsden's expertise.  He  states  that  he  has
     been a full-time information co-ordinator since 1989 for  the  British
     Agencies  Afghanistan  Group  (BAAG).   The  BAAG  group  provides   a
     secretariat  for  British  aid  agencies   operating   programmes   in
     Afghanistan and allows sharing of information and discussion of issues
     on programmes.  They  produce  a  monthly  review  which  provides  an
     analysis of political, economic, humanitarian and cultural environment
     in Afghanistan for humanitarian agencies and  for  governments  across
     Europe and to the European Commission.  Mr Marsden is the sole  author
     of this.  Also his group produces detailed  information  on  operating
     conditions in Afghanistan.  To carry out his job  he  states  that  he
     needs to be in daily contact with developments in Afghanistan  through
     internet, e-mail and direct communication.  He has written extensively
     on Afghanistan, including  a  book  entitled  'The  Taliban:  War  and
     Religion in Afghanistan' (Zed Books 1998) as well as numerous  studies
     and articles.  Mr Marsden told us that his role had been to assist aid
     workers and agencies  in  their  operations  in  Afghanistan  and  his
     expertise was built around that.  He said that he did not claim to  be
     an expert on human rights issues in Afghanistan but his work  required
     him to be fully abreast of all the relevant issues in Afghanistan on a
     daily basis.  He advised that he had last been in Afghanistan in 1997,
     primarily because of a ban by the British Government  on  aid  workers
     travelling to Afghanistan during the  Taliban  regime.   He  confirmed
     that he had read the statements of all three Appellants and  those  of
     Dr Zeary and Mr Sapand.

 22. In respect of Appellant 30, he states at the outset:

           "It is reasonable for [Appellant 30] to fear that  he  might  be
           targeted because of his and his family's  connections  with  the
           former  Soviet-backed   Government   of   Muhammed   Najibullah.
           Although the new Afghan interim administration has been in power
           since 22nd December 2001, on the basis of the Bonn Agreement  of
           6th December 2001, it is not in a position to provide protection
           to the population beyond the confines  of  Kabul  and,  even  in
           Kabul, it has not been able to provide  sufficient  security  to
           protect  the  population  from  arbitrary  action.   The  regime
           includes former Mujahadeen who were engaged  in  armed  conflict
           with  the  Soviet  occupying  forces   and   the   Soviet-backed
           Government from 1978 to 1992.  One particular group of these,  a
           party known  as  Jamiat-i-Islami,  which  represents  the  Tajik
           ethnic group, now  has  control  of  the  defence  and  interior
           ministries and interior services.  Although  efforts  have  been
           made  to  establish  a  national  army,  most  of   the   forces
           maintaining order  in  Kabul  are  from  this  group  of  former
           Mujahadeen and there have  been  a  number  of  incidents  which
           indicate that the regime does  not  have  effective  control  of
           these forces.  Those with scores to settle would therefore  feel
           free to act with impunity.  There is, therefore,  a  significant
           risk that those  linked  to  Jamiat-i-Islami,  other  Mujahadeen
           groups or Taliban will target [Appellant 30] and such  targeting
           will result in the use of violence."


 23. He goes on to state that the UNHCR has  identified  those  with  links
     with the Communist regime as being at risk.  The fact that  he  fought
     against  the  Mujahadeen  and  his  role  in  co-ordinating  political
     activities with the Farmers Co-operative would indicate  that  he  was
     regarded by that Government as committed to  its  ideology.   He  then
     notes that Appellant 30 kept a low profile  during  the  time  of  the
     Mujahadeen and Taliban but, in spite  of  this  was  targeted  on  two
     occasions. The political activities of the  Appellant  in  the  United
     Kingdom would also label him as a moderate and intellectual and  while
     this may be acceptable to some elements of the  transition  authority,
     there is a history going back many years  of  Mujahadeen  and  Taliban
     targeting  moderate  intellectuals  because  they  are  perceived   as
     secular, anti-Islamic and a threat  to  their  power  base.   He  also
     considered it reasonable to conclude intelligence services would  have
     records of his previous affiliations.

 24. He noted that the  International  Security  Assistance  Force  led  by
     Britain and now Turkey can do little more than provide protection  for
     members of the Administration and for Government buildings.   This  is
     operating solely in Kabul.   Thus,  control  of  the  local  level  is
     largely reverted to those who had power prior to the  Taliban  capture
     of various parts of the country between  October  1995  and  September
     2000.  The security situation has deteriorated in some areas since the
     fall  of  the  Taliban  with  various  outbreaks  of   hostility   and
     criminality.

 25. He then refers to the Loya Girga (11/17  June  2002)  and  significant
     levels of intimidation and a  climate  of  fear  in  relation  to  the
     electoral process.  He surmises that if the  Pashtun  population  feel
     the outcome of the  Loya  Girga  process  leaves  them  insufficiently
     represented, they  may  again  turn  to  the  Taliban  to  take  on  a
     leadership role, thus facilitating a come-back.

 26. He also considered it important to note the presence of  Appellant  30
     on the plane hijacked to the United Kingdom and that  this  will  very
     much elevate his profile and increase the possibility that he would be
     targeted  because  of  his  past  associations.   In  this  area,   he
     considered that the remnants of the Taliban would take a negative view
     towards him and that this would be heightened by his  past  employment
     with the Airline and being of  the  same  ethnic  sub-group  as  those
     charged with the hijacking offences.

 27. He then goes on to set out the difficulties for the Afghan economy and
     the difficult task of the new transitional  authority.   He  considers
     that it would  almost  be  impossible  for  the  Appellant  to  obtain
     employment because of his past association  with  the  former  Soviet-
     backed Government.  This would leave him in a very  exposed  position,
     making it impossible to maintain  a  low  profile  so  that  he  could
     maximise personal security.  He states that "the rumour-mill  is  very
     powerful in Afghanistan and it would be almost impossible for him  and
     his wife to hide their previous presence on the  hijacked  plane.   It
     would be clear from his accent and mannerisms that he had lived in the
     West and this would provoke questions."

 28. Finally, he sets out some details of risks to Pashtuns from  resentful
     non-Pashtun minorities including Tajiks and the de facto occupation of
     Kabul from November 2001 by the Tajik forces.

 29. His written evidence in respect of Appellant 27 and 28 is  on  similar
     lines, but adds the additional risks to Appellant 27 that could  arise
     from her having spent a period of time in the United Kingdom and being
     seen as abandoning Islam.  "A woman who is known to have  lived  in  a
     Western country will be perceived  as  having  abandoned  her  Islamic
     values".  This, plus the higher profile through her  presence  on  the
     hijacked plane, would give rise to public speculation as to her  moral
     character and those who might feel inclined to take action against her
     because of the perceptions of her character.  He also  considers  that
     her other family associations would heighten  her  risks.   He  states
     that it would be  almost  impossible  for  her  to  secure  employment
     because  of  her  close  association  with  the  former  Soviet-backed
     Government and that as a teacher who has lived in Kabul, she would  be
     regarded as an intellectual woman.  These factors would  lead  to  the
     likelihood of her being targeted by the Mujahadeen and remnants of the
     Taliban.

 30. In respect of Appellant 28, a similar report was  presented.   In  her
     case, the additional factors relating to her brother, who was  in  the
     Intelligence Department, and her similar background as a  teacher  and
     intellectual could heighten her risk.

 31. In his evidence to us, Mr Marsden expanded on  the  reports  submitted
     explaining the background  to  the  Mujahadeen  and  particularly  the
     fundamentalist attitudes of the Jamiat-i-Islami who now have effective
     control of much of Kabul.

 32. In respect of the results of the Loya Girga, he  considered  that  the
     appointments that were flowing from this were still largely  dominated
     by the 'power-holders'.  Thus while the new President was a  moderate,
     he would be largely powerless against the so-called 'war-lords' at the
     local level.  The Government  therefore  is  one  that  still  pursues
     radical Islamic ideas, and indeed the new Justice Minister had already
     announced that an Islamic  justice  and  punishment  system  would  be
     introduced.  In this situation, the risks to high level associates  of
     the former Soviet-backed Government, particularly  those  with  higher
     profiles, would be that there was a very high chance that  they  would
     be subjected to violence  from  groups  such  as  Jamiat-i-Islami  and
     possibly ex-Taliban supporters.  There was also the  fact  that  there
     was no national Army or Police Force available, and it  appeared  that
     it would be more than two years before any sort of  Army  was  put  in
     place.  The role of the International Security Force  (ISAF)  was  one
     largely confined to  protecting  the  Administration  in  the  western
     suburbs of Kabul.  He noted that, even in this  situation,  a  Cabinet
     Minister  in  the  interim  Government  had  been   assassinated.   He
     considered that there would be no-one for these Appellants to turn  to
     for protection and support  and  that  they  could  be  targeted  with
     impunity and then there would be  no  follow-up,  even  if  they  were
     attacked.  The mandate of  the  ISAF  did  not  extend  to  individual
     citizens.  Quoting the example of Dr Zeary, he considered  that  while
     nothing may happen for a period of time there is a high risk  that  at
     some stage suddenly there will be an attack on persons such  as  these
     Appellants.   They  are  thus  under  constant  threat  and  would  be
     constrained in their activities because of the risks of 'incidents' to
     them.

 33. In respect of Appellant 28, he noted particularly that if she returned
     without Appellants 27 and 30, she would be in a position of having  no
     male protector on her return and it would be  very  likely  she  would
     have to live alone if her husband rejected her.  A person such as  her
     could just disappear as there was no  protection  mechanism  available
     for her.

 34. In response to cross-examination by Mr  Blundell,  Mr  Marsden  stated
     that he had  not  been  to  Afghanistan  since  1997  because  British
     nationals funded by the  International  Development  Agency  had  been
     banned by the UK Government from travelling there because of the risks
     involved.  He submitted that he was better informed in London than  he
     would be in Kabul because of the communications available  to  him  in
     this country, together with the wide range of  contacts  he  had  with
     humanitarian agencies on a daily basis that he would not  be  able  to
     access in Afghanistan.

 35. He was referred to a recent article in  The  Times,  dated  14th  June
     2002, headed 'Letter from Kabul - Afghan Capital Embraces Hope and  Mr
     Bean'.  This article contains statements such as:

           "By the time the Taliban had fled the Afghan city  in  November,
           this ancient city, slumped in a once fertile  valley  surrounded
           by mountains, was  a  bombed-out  corpse.   Now  that  wreck  is
           teeming with energy and hope.  In six  months,  Kabul  has  come
           alive, rushing headlong to embrace the 21st century.


           Since January, more than  1  million  Afghans,  buoyed  with  an
           optimism denied them since the Soviet  invasion  23  years  ago,
           have returned to reclaim  their  birthright.   More  than  1,500
           families arrive in Kabul each day.


           With them, come the aid agencies, the NGOs, the  United  Nations
           teams and their gleaming while four wheeled drives, hundreds  of
           journalists,  and  foreign  businessmen  bullish  enough   about
           Afghanistan's future to set up shop here,  trading  in  anything
           from tea to bathrooms ...


           Thousands of men have shed their traditional dress, the  Shalwar
           Kamiz, for Western  slacks,  open-necked  shirts  and  imitation
           Italian loafers:  thousands of women are out in  pretty  dresses
           and headscarves, mingling with the sheep, new Indian Tata  buses
           and bicycles."


      It goes on to state that restaurant,s shut  for  years,  are  now  re-
      opening, with one even selling beer.   A  decent  bottle  of  wine  or
      Russian vodka can be obtained from under the counters, along with many
      Western foods.


 36. Students  are  stated  to  be  teeming  back  to  the  University  and
     polytechnics, convinced that their studies will mean something and the
     Loya Girga is being broadcast live.

 37. The article concludes that outside Kabul much of  Afghanistan  remains
     'medieval'.  The journalist then poses the question as to  whether  it
     too will be dragged into the modern era.

 38. In response to this article, it was put to him that did he feel  after
     not being in Kabul for some years that he was now missing the  flavour
     of what was going on there.  He replied that he did not  feel  out  of
     touch as he was constantly asking, from many sources, what  was  going
     on.  He agreed that some women may have  abandoned  their  Burqas  and
     that luxury goods were available for foreign visitors.   However,  the
     masses, he claimed, were still living in poverty and the Western goods
     and lifestyle, in his view, was available to the  elite  only  and  to
     foreigners.

 39. Mr Blundell also referred him to passages in  the  CIPU  Report  which
     stated that voices were being raised to challenge traditional  Islamic
     values and that there was open criticism of 'war-lordism'.   He  asked
     whether this was a move away from the Afghanistan of the recent  past.
     Mr Marsden considered that there was certainly evidence of some  scent
     in Afghanistan now and this was positive.  If the result is  a  broad-
     based Government, he considered this would be a  good  thing  but  the
     Loya Girga, in his view, did not change the situation in that way  and
     he considered that the transitional Government may  be  in  fact  less
     flexible than the interim Government.

 40. He referred to the new Cabinet that was just being announced  ('Afghan
     News Report').  He considered that while it appeared there  were  some
     three moderates in the Cabinet, it  showed  that  the  Jamiat-i-Islami
     held key posts of defence, intelligence and security  and  that  other
     posts were held by long-term power holders in Afghanistan.

 41.  Mr  Blundell  also  noted  that  there  were  no  references  in  the
     Appellants' bundle to ex-PDPA supporters being targeted.  The  comment
     of Mr Marsden was that nothing definite in this regard was  known  but
     he was giving his advice on the  totality  of  the  evidence  and  the
     targeting of those who had been  involved  with  the  ex-Soviet-backed
     Government.  As an example, he stated that the Minister who  had  been
     killed in February 2002 had been a PDPA member.

 42. He considered that while his experience in Afghanistan related to  the
     period 1992 to 1997, the current Administration  and  reality  of  the
     situation  in  Afghanistan  was  that  Islamic  values   would   still
     predominate and that those seen as abandoning those values  and  going
     outside the Islamic framework would still be at  risk.   In  his  view
     Appellant 30 could  be  seen  as  a  fairly  senior  official  of  the
     Najibullah Government who had managed to keep a low profile during the
     Mujahadeen and Taliban regime.  However, given his heightened  profile
     on return, a risk of arbitrary action against him was real in his view
     particularly  given  the  lack  of  protection  available.   He   also
     considered that those who had remained in the United Kingdom after the
     hijack would be seen in a more  negative  light  than  those  who  had
     returned.   Thus,  on  the  totality  of  the  background   of   these
     Appellants, their risk was a higher one  than  what  he  termed  'non-
     professionals'.

 43. In relation to the possible targeting of the Appellants as Pashtun, Mr
     Marsden stated that he had no direct evidence of targeting of  Pashtun
     in Kabul but had noted the reports of Human Rights Watch  in  Northern
     Afghanistan where this had taken place.

 44. In summary, he stated that his role in advising on Afghanistan was one
     of looking at trends, incidents and all the  detailed  information  he
     could so that he had an in-depth awareness.  He was  consulted  widely
     by Government sources in the United Kingdom, including the Foreign and
     Commonwealth Office, Ministry of Defence, the European Commission  and
     the World Bank.

g.    Relevant Country of Origin Information

 45. In addition to the objective country information presented to us by Mr
     Oakeshott, set out above, we were also provided  with  copies  of  two
     letters from the UNHCR addressed to Mr Oakeshott dated 14th June  2002
     and 24th June 2002.  The letter of 14th June 2002 responds to a letter
     from Mr Oakeshott asking for views of the UNHCR regarding  persons  or
     groups who currently face  protection-related  risks  in  Afghanistan.
     The relevant parts of the letter state:

           "As UNHCR does not yet have a public domain paper on  the  above
           issue, the following advice is drawn from our internal document,
           namely Preliminary Position Paper,  considerations  relating  to
           the return of Afghan nationals, who are currently outside  their
           country of origin, in countries of asylum not in  the  immediate
           region, February 2002.


           We take the view that, notwithstanding the positive changes  and
           the  efforts  of  the  international  community,  there   remain
           individuals  or  groups  of  Afghans,  who  could  face  serious
           problems, including physical danger, were they to return at this
           time.  Current information indicates that those who might be  at
           risk of serious violence, harassment or  discrimination  include
           persons at risk of persecution on political  grounds  by  groups
           now in control of their area or origin  of  persons  originating
           and returning to areas where they constitute an ethnic minority.
            Similarly, those who have sympathised with, or are perceived to
           have been associated with, the  Taliban  regime  which  came  to
           power in Kabul in 1996, may  be  also  at  risk.   Another  risk
           category may be persons associated with,  or  are  perceived  to
           have been associated with, the Communist  pre-Mujahadeen  regime
           which was overthrown in 1992 and  those  who  campaigned  for  a
           secular state.


           The  above  mentioned  categories  are  not   exhaustive.    The
           situation in Afghanistan is nothing if not volatile,  the  UNHCR
           has no intention categorically to rule out any person  or  group
           of  persons  being  considered  for  refugee  status.   The  key
           principle is  that  each  case  must  be  given  full  and  fair
           consideration on its own merits.


           Please note that given the  complex,  fluid  and  still  fragile
           situation in Afghanistan, UNHCR takes the view that there should
           be no enforced returns to Afghanistan at the present  time.   It
           is our understanding that the Home Office holds the same view.


           As regards the basis of the advice offered above,  you  will  be
           aware that the UNHCR's mandate is to work with States to  ensure
           that refugees receive the international  protection  they  need.
           Under  Article  35  of  the  1951  Convention  relating  to  the
           protection of refugees,  UNHCR  is  auto-tasked,  again  in  co-
           operation with States,  to  supervise  the  implication  of  the
           provisions to  the  1951  Convention.   In  pursuance  of  these
           functions over the course of the last five decades,  UNHCR  has,
           among other things, maintained an extensive field presence  that
           gives it a first-hand  view  of  the  circumstances  that  cause
           refugees to flee.  UNHCR's positions on  Afghanistan  and  other
           situations are therefore grounded in its  familiarity  with  the
           conditions on the ground as well as its expertise and experience
           in  matters  relating  to  the   international   protection   of
           refugees."


 46. The letter of 24th June 2002 responds to an enquiry from Mr  Oakeshott
     of 21st June 2002 asking for comment on the  consistency  between  the
     letter of 14th June 2002 and the  UNHCR's  'Real  Time  Evaluation  of
     UNHCR's Response to the Afghanistan Emergency, Bulletin No 3, 31st May
     2002'.  This letter states:

           "We can confirm  that  our  comments  regarding  the  groups  of
           Afghans  referred  to  in  the  above  mentioned  bulletin   are
           compatible with the risk categories mentioned in our  14th  June
           letter.  The risk of persecution of particular groups upon their
           return to Afghanistan is not limited to high-ranking members  of
           the former Communist regime, Ismailis and Shi-ite clergymen.


           Both documents are consistent in reflecting  UNHCR's  view  that
           there continue to be individuals and groups who may be  at  risk
           if repatriated to Afghanistan.  Both documents make  mention  of
           examples of such individuals and groups.   UNHCR  maintain  that
           the examples are indicative only,  and  there  are  persons  not
           mentioned in the UNHCR documents who may be at risk."


 47. Mr Oakeshott also brought to our attention  a  letter  from  the  Home
     Office, Immigration and Nationality Directorate, dated 18th April 2002
     addressed to the Asylum Processes Stakeholder Group.  This relates  to
     a change in policy in granting exceptional  leave  to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom to unsuccessful asylum applicants from Afghanistan.  It
     states that  the  long-standing  approach  had  been  that  except  in
     exceptional circumstances the Home Office would not seek to return  to
     Afghanistan  declined  asylum  seekers.   They  note  the  fundamental
     changes in the political and security situation in Afghanistan.   They
     go on to state that the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan  remains
     fragile and humanitarian conditions poor but the expectation  is  that
     it will improve.  Thus it states that they continue to process  Afghan
     cases in the normal way and "we will not generally enforce a return to
     Afghanistan unless or until we are satisfied that it is both  safe  to
     do so and the humanitarian situation has improved  to  the  extent  to
     allow such returns".   This  is  stated  to  be  consistent  with  the
     position of the UNHCR.  The letter then concludes that in the light of
     the changed circumstances, for the future unsuccessful  Afghan  asylum
     seekers will be granted exceptional leave  to  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom for periods of 12 months at a time, instead  of  a  period  of
     four years that was previously the situation.  Mr Blundell put  before
     us a bundle of documents as well, which included the following:

           The Bonn Agreement
           "Real  Time  Evaluation  of  UNHCR's  Response  to   Afghanistan
           Emergency"
           United Nations Press Release dated 6th June 2002
           The Times Newspaper Article dated 13th  June  2002  "Afghanistan
           War-Lords Give Peace a Chance"
           The Times Newspaper Article dated 14th June 2002 "Afghan Capital
           Embraces Hope and Mr Bean"
           The Guardian Unlimited Report dated 14th  June  2002  "Democracy
           Born Again in Kabul"
           BBC News Report dated 15th June 2002 "Loya Girga Diary : Day 5"
           Afghan News Network Report dated 19th June 2002 "New Look  Kaizi
           Cabinet Wins Approval from Loya Girga"
           BBC News Report dated 20th June 2002  "Turkey  takes  on  Afghan
           Peace Keeping"


 48. On the final day of the hearing (after Mr Marsden had given  evidence)
     he provided us with a copy of the full Cabinet  for  the  transitional
     Government that had just been announced.

 49. The additional documents provided to us  by  Mr  Oakeshott  after  the
     hearing were two articles namely:

           a. A copy of the Associated Press article dated 23rd  June  2002
              entitled "Ex-Afghan Official Questions Cabinet";  and
           b. A copy of a BBC News article of 24th June 2002.


      He submitted that these provided evidence  of  the  difficulties  that
      emerged in relation to Yunis Qanooni's appointment in the position  as
      Education Minister in the transitional Government.  The second article
      confirmed that he has taken on the role of National Security  Advisor.
      The Associated Press report states that Qanooni had resigned from  the
      job as Interior Minister, one of the most powerful  Government  posts,
      at the start of the Loya Girga.  The Interior post had been  allocated
      to a Pashtun and not to Qanooni, who was an ethnic Tajik, in an effort
      to bring ethnic balance to the new line-up.  The  report  goes  on  to
      state that Qanooni had not  decided  whether  he  would  take  up  the
      appointment to the position as the Education Minister and Presidential
      National Security Advisor.  He  was  stated  to  have  questioned  the
      legitimacy of the Cabinet appointment and the article states:


           "Throughout the Loya Girga, there were grumblings that the  1650
           delegates were being excluded from the real decision  making  by
           war-lords and other power blocs.   However,  Qanooni's  comments
           were the first public criticism from an influential figure."


 50. Mr Oakeshott also  brought  to  our  attention  a  Home  Office  Paper
     'Afghanistan : Bulletin 2002 : Approach  to  Afghan  Caseload  in  the
     light of the current situation' dated 18th April 2002.   This  states,
     under the section relating to asylum claims, that:

           "10.  UNHCR have advised that serious problems could continue to
                 be faced by some individuals or groups if they are returned
                 to Afghanistan at the current time.   In  particular,  this
                 could be on political grounds depending  on  the  group  in
                 control of their area or origin or on  ethnic  grounds  for
                 persons originating from and returning  to  an  area  where
                 they constitute an ethnic minority.  In addition, those who
                 were  associated  with  or  are  perceived  to  have   been
                 associated  with,  either  former   Taliban   or   pre-1992
                 Communist Regimes might face serious problems on return."


h.    The Appellants' Submissions

 51. Mr Oakeshott provided us with a skeleton  argument  and  made  lengthy
     oral submissions.

 52. In respect of Appellant 30, he submitted that on the  evidence  before
     us, which he summarised, there was a present risk of serious  harm  to
     Appellant 30 from non-state  actors  within  Afghanistan  (Kabul)  for
     reasons of Appellant 30's  past  associations  with  the  PDPA.   That
     association indicated that he should be  seen  as  a  high  level  and
     significant member of the PDPA and the former Najibullah  regime.   On
     this basis, he submitted that the Appellant fell  within  a  group  of
     high profile ex-PDPA/Najibullah regime supporters who were recognised,
     even by the Home Office, as being at risk on  return  to  Afghanistan.
     This risk was also noted by the UNHCR in its Bulletin and in  the  two
     letters submitted and noted above.

 53. He submitted that the objective evidence presented, coupled with  that
     of the expert witness Peter Marsden and the heightening of the risk to
     this Appellant because of his involvement in the hijacking,  indicated
     that the risk to this Appellant was  at  the  level  of  a  reasonable
     likelihood.

 54. The non-state  actors  he  identified  were  those  radical  elements,
     including Jamiat-i-Islami and former supporters of the  Taliban,  who,
     because of the lack of state protection in Afghanistan, would be  able
     to act with impunity against persons such as these three Appellants.

 55. He also submitted that the role of Appellant 30  had  been  clearly  a
     political one in his work for Mr Sapand in the Farmers Co-op.  It  was
     also to be noted that there was an integral link between  the  Central
     Governing Committee of the former Communist regime and  its  operating
     arms such as the Farmers Co-op.  The family associations  of  the  two
     women Appellants also placed them in the area of being  at  high  risk
     because of their  ex-PDPA  associations.   He  argued  that  the  past
     treatment of all three Appellants, coupled with  their  current  risk,
     set against the objective information, confirmed the  reality  of  the
     current risks to them.  Their presence on the hijacked  airline  would
     be well-known in the Afghani community on their return and this  would
     unfortunately  give  them  a  higher   level   of   celebrity,   again
     contributing to their overall risk on return.

 56. He also pointed to the difficulties  that  all  three  would  have  in
     obtaining employment, particularly because  of  their  past  Communist
     party links.   In  the  current  situation,  they  would  be  rendered
     destitute thus being unable to  pursue  the  right  to  life  and  the
     avoidance of degrading or inhuman treatment, which he submitted was  a
     first level category right amounting to persecution under the analysis
     set out in Professor James Hathaway's text "The Law of Refugee  Status
     (Butterworths 1991)".    He submitted that we should look  at  all  of
     the evidence both subjective and objective and note the  expertise  of
     Mr Marsden and then reach a cumulative decision, taking  into  account
     the totality of the situation.

 57. Finally, he submitted that the level of protection on  a  day  to  day
     basis was clearly insufficient to meet the Horvath test and thus,  not
     only was there a real risk of  these  Appellants  being  subjected  to
     serious harm or persecutory treatment on their return,  but  also,  as
     required in the situation with non-state  actors,  there  would  be  a
     failure of state protection.

i.    The Respondent's Submissions

 58. Mr Blundell presented lengthy submissions  to  us,  supported  by  the
     objective information set out above.  At the outset, he submitted that
     the  recently  appointed  Cabinet  for  the   Interim   Administration
     reflected appointments  from  the  various  groupings  and  minorities
     within  Afghanistan  including  substantive  representation  for   the
     Pashtun (largest) ethnic group within  Afghanistan.   He  particularly
     took us to a number of articles and noted that these did  not  include
     reports of incidents of violence in Kabul to ex-PDPA, apart  from  the
     one Minister who had been assassinated.

 59. He also pointed us to the Bonn Agreement and noted that it called  for
     a new Afghanistan set in an environment of inclusivity and  tolerance.
     It also stated that the Mujahadeen forces were to be adopted into  the
     armed forces of Afghanistan.

 60.  He  laid  stress  on  The  Times  article  "Letter  from  Kabul"  and
     particularly asked us to note the tone of this article  as  reflecting
     day to day life in Kabul at the present time.

 61. He considered that Mr Marsden was an expert within his  field  but  it
     was not a field that was relevant to a refugee case, but one which was
     more confined to advising aid agencies.  He noted that Mr Marsden  had
     stressed that his work was in relation advising aid agencies and  that
     he was not a human rights expert or human rights  worker.   Therefore,
     he submitted his evidence insupport  of  there  appellants  should  be
     considered as outside the field of his expertise.  We should also note
     that his last  visit  to  Afghanistan  had  been  in  1997.   He  also
     questioned whether the comments by  Mr  Marsden  that  the  Appellants
     would be at a high level of risk were correct  in  the  light  of  any
     objective evidence of specific incidents.

 62. He accepted the evidence of Dr Zeary and the background  of  Appellant
     30 as related by Mr Sapand and also that the Appellant was a  Pashtun,
     but he did not accept that any of these  elements  of  his  background
     placed the Appellant in a situation where  there  was  a  well-founded
     fear of persecution at this time.

 63. In respect of the association with the PDPA,  he  submitted  that  the
     evidence did not show that all individuals were at risk and in need of
     protection.  He submitted that there were some inconsistencies between
     the UNHCR letters of 14th June and 24th June 2002, but would leave  it
     to the Tribunal to take the sensible course on which  to  follow.   He
     submitted that the correct test should be that only those with a  high
     ranking association with the PDPA should be seen as at risk in today's
     climate.  Appellant 30, he  submitted,  was  not  a  Minister  and  he
     questioned whether he was a high ranking member.

 64. In relation to the new Cabinet, he was able to  provide  us  with  the
     latest report of the new Cabinet which  he  contended  indicated  that
     only 9 out of 34 positions were held by Tajik or  Jamiat-i-Islami  and
     that this was not a dominant position.  It also appeared that Pashtuns
     held 15 of the 34 posts.

 65. The situation in Kabul, he submitted, could not be compared with  that
     when the Mujahadeen were in power between  1992  and  1996.   At  that
     time, there were thousands of  deaths  from  bombings  and  a  massive
     campaign of subjugation.  He submitted there  was  now  a  broad-based
     Government which indeed included one ex-PDPA member.

 66. As regards these Appellants, he considered that their past  experience
     with the Mujahadeen had caused them some minor problems  but  had  not
     shown any specific targeting of them, therefore it was not  reasonable
     to assume this would happen in the future.  He also submitted that the
     association of Appellant 30 with the Farmers Co-op was not an  overtly
     political one but more an administrative/public service role.

 67. In relation to possible risks to these three Appellants  from  parties
     associated with the Taliban, he submitted that while  there  may  have
     been a well-founded fear in the past, it  was  indisputable  that  the
     Taliban had been forced out of Kabul into small pockets only and  thus
     there appeared no reality in risk from them.

 68. He further submitted that the risk of society in Kabul moving back  to
     observe more fundamentalist Islamic mores was not realistic  and  that
     the perception of life in Kabul was  more  that  shown  in  The  Times
     article "A Letter from Kabul".  There was  no  suggestion  that  these
     Appellants had converted from Islam or that  they  would  be  able  to
     continue practising their Muslim faith on return.  He submitted  that,
     contrary to the position adopted by Mr Marsden, that radical Islam was
     not in force in Kabul at this time and the perceived westernisation of
     these Appellants would thus not put them at  risk.   In  addition,  he
     submitted that intellectuals and moderates had returned to  Kabul  and
     there was no evidence of them having difficulties as may have happened
     in the past.

 69. In respect of Appellants 27 and 28, he submitted that  the  past  PDPA
     associated imputed to them from their association  with  Appellant  30
     would fall with his claim.  Their risk from being on the plane was the
     same as his and should not place them  at  a  level  of  a  reasonable
     likelihood of persecution.  In relation to their risks  as  women,  on
     return, he again noted The Times report "A Letter  from  Kabul"  which
     showed that women were now wearing pretty dresses and headscarves  and
     so the past oppressive regime of the Taliban and  Mujahadeen  did  not
     appear to be in force.  Beyond this, there were reports of educational
     participation reflecting a markedly changed situation where women were
     not persecuted per se.

 70. In summary, he  submitted  that  any  risk  to  these  Appellants  was
     speculative and it was not sufficient to establish refugee status.

j.    The Issues

 71. We found the issues before us to be:


           a.     From  an  objective  and  subjective  assessment  of  the
                 accepted facts in relation to  these  Appellants,  do  they
                 either individually or  collectively  have  a  well-founded
                 fear of persecution on return to Kabul in Afghanistan?   If
                 so,



           b.    Is that risk of persecution for reasons of one or more  of
                 the five Refugee Convention reasons?

 72. In relation to these issues, Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention
     1951 relevantly states:

           "... owing to  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
           reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of  a  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality and is unable or unwilling owing to  such  fear,  to
           avail himself of the protection of that country ..."


 73. We also observe that in the  assessment  of  a  well-founded  fear  of
     persecution by these Appellants, the risk of persecution is claimed to
     be, at this time, from non-state actors hence, following the  guidance
     given by the House of Lords in decisions such as Shah  and  Islam  and
     Horvath, it is necessary for the Appellants to establish not only  the
     reasonable likelihood of serious harm (persecutorial  treatment),  but
     also that there would be a failure of state protection from that harm.
      Both elements must be  present  before  the  entitlement  to  refugee
     status arises.

k.    Assessment

 74. The general credibility of all three Appellants appears to  have  been
     accepted by the Respondent.   we agree and therefore  proceed  on  the
     basis of the evidence presented by them truthful.

 75. The evidence of Dr Zeary and Mr Sapand is also accepted as credible.

 76. We found that the expert evidence presented by Mr Marsden was of value
     to us.  We, note however, that his evidence  is  given  from  his  own
     perspective which he correctly conveyed to us.  His expertise is as an
     adviser to aid agencies and  governments  and  others  sponsoring  aid
     programmes in Afghanistan.  He is widely experienced  and  well-versed
     in the historic, current, social, cultural,  religious  and  political
     aspects of  Afghani  life.   He  is  not  a  human  rights  expert  on
     Afghanistan but we consider can be accepted as a person able to give a
     useful and well-informed perspective relevant to the claims  of  these
     three Appellants. His evidence, however, has been taken  into  account
     by us along with all of the  other  objective  evidence  received  and
     balanced  together  with   all  of  that  evidence  in  reaching   our
     determinations.

 77. We have had the opportunity of considering some of the other decisions
     relating to Afghans who were also on the hi-jacked airplane  and  have
     claimed  refugee  status  in  this  country  which  have  either  been
     promulgated before or contemporaneously with this  determination.   In
     particular, those where Mr Marsden gave evidence.  We  note  that  our
     conclusions on his expert  evidence  and  that  we  regard  him  as  a
     reliable witness on matters of fact within his own area  of  knowledge
     appear to be consistent with the findings in those other decision (for
     example, HX/51797/2000 and HX/51790/2000).  We also considered however
     that conclusions or conjecture that he made in areas  outside  of  his
     immediate expertise had to be treated with caution and balanced  along
     with all of the other evidence presented.  Where Mr Marsden did assist
     greatly was in presenting the historic and cultural background against
     which claims such as those presented by these three appellants must be
     assessed.  Two important aspects of this being  the  long  established
     culture of "War Lordism" which goes back hundreds of years and  is  so
     deeply  entrenched  that  the  possibility   of   it   being   changed
     significantly because of the US led toppling  of  the  Taliban  is  an
     unlikely prospect and the long term and entrenched societal  attitudes
     and actions towards women in Afghanistan.

 78. Turning to the first issue,  in  respect  of  appellant  30.   At  the
     outset, we note that clearly because of his position,  background  and
     relationship to the other two appellants,  he  must  be  seen  as  the
     primary claimant  and  prospective  treatment  of  him  on  return  to
     Afghanistan will be highly relevant and influential to  the  treatment
     of the other two appellants.  In refugee law terms, these are  classic
     cases where the totality of the appellants'  position  must  be  taken
     into account and then, after doing that, we are still left  with  some
     element of doubt, the benefit of  that  doubt  should  be  applied  in
     favour of the appellant(s).

 79. The totality of the all three of the appellants' situations causes  us
     to conclude that they are refugees within the meaning  of  Article  1A
     (2) of the Refugee Convention 1951.  Individual factors or elements of
     their cases on their own, would not in our view be sufficient to allow
     them to succeed.

 80. It is not contested by either party that any persecution  suffered  by
     these appellants on return would not be from the state, i.e.  the  new
     interim government lead by President Karzai.  Any fears therefore  are
     from non state actors.  We find after  a  full  consideration  of  the
     considerable country of origin information presented to us that  there
     is only the remotest possibility of these  appellants  being  able  to
     access meaningful protection from  the  Karzai  administration.   That
     administration is only operating, at this time,  with  any  degree  of
     authority or protection in  Kabul  itself  and  "protection"  is  only
     achieved for a select few senior government leaders and officials with
     the assistance of the international peace keeping forces.  Indeed  the
     President has had to call for a US guard himself as he could not trust
     local "police" or army.  The "protection test" therefore cannot be met
     for these appellants.  We move therefore to consider  if  there  is  a
     well-founded fear of persecution by non  state  actors.   That  is  is
     there a  real likelihood they will suffer serious harm of  persecutory
     nature on return.

 81. The factors we identify  in  respect  of  appellant  30  we  consider,
     cumulatively, discharge the relevant burden of proof.  These  findings
     are:

           a) He was a senior cadre in the PDPA for  a  lengthy  period  of
              time (approximately 1997-1991).   While  not  at  ministerial
              level in the Najibullah regime the evidence establishes  that
              he was one step immediately below that.


           b) While his role  was  largely  an  administrative  one  for  a
              lengthy period it is clear and accepted by us  that  he  also
              had a senior political advisory  role  with  the  ministerial
              level administrators, such as Dr Zeary, to whom he  reported.
              We agree  that  in  the  context  of  the  PDPA  very  senior
              administrative positions must be considered  as  having  been
              highly political in their nature.

           c) From approximately 1989  to  1991  the  appellant  fought  in
              defence of  Kabul  for  the  Najibullah  regime  against  the
              Mujahadeen.  While he managed to keep a  low  profile  during
              the time of the Mujahadeen and Taliban regimes,  he was at  a
              level of a real risk during all of that time.

           d) He, and the other two  appellants,  are  Pashtun  (Saif  sub-
              tribe) and  there  are  some  risks  associated  with  higher
              profile members of the Pashtun from radical elements  of  the
              Jamiat-i-Islami and other Islamic fundamentalists  groups  as
              has been evidenced by the assassination of the former tourist
              minister and, even  after  this  appeal  was  heard,  another
              notabe Pashtun, the Vice President, Abdul Qadir.

           e) Set against the ability  of  the  appellant  to  keep  a  low
              profile during the Mujahadeen and Taliban  regimes,  we  must
              accept the fact that if he was returned at this time he would
              have an elevated and more noticeable profile because there is
              a reasonable likelihood that it would known that he had  been
              on the hijacked plane.  This factor, on its own  has  a  real
              chance  of  causing  understandable  interest  to   many   in
              Afghanistan, particularly given  the  appellant's  relatively
              senior or high level position in the former PDPA government.

           f) The above interest must be coupled  with  the  fact  that  he
              worked for  Ariana  Airlines  as  a  Ticketing  Manager.   We
              consider that it is reasonable  to  conclude  that  this  may
              cause further interest and  raise  speculation  or  suspicion
              that he had some connection with  the  hijacking.   (This  of
              course has not been accepted by the  UK  authorities).   This
              suspicion would lead to a  real  risk  of  difficulties  with
              remnants of the Taliban regime who may  still  be  operative.
              While it may be inappropriate to assume that this is still an
              important factor, Mr Marsden did not consider it  to  be  the
              case.  We have formed the view, after seeing and hearing  him
              in a lengthy hearing, that the appellant appears as a  mature
              educated man who gives the air of being a professional member
              of the Afghan elite.   This  may  distinguish  him  from  the
              profiles of many others on the hijacked airplane who, we  are
              sure would attract less interest.

           g) The delay of this appellant  in  returning  to  his  country,
              despite the fall of the Taliban and the  substantial  changes
              in the regime, might also cause resentment and prejudice from
              fundamentalist Islamic groups.  It could give the  impression
              that he was not a supporter of the present  regime,  that  he
              has pro-western ideas and philosophies and is anti-Islamic.



           h) The appellant's role in Afghani affairs  in  London  and  his
              clear association with very senior  leadership  in  the  PDPA
              while in the United Kingdom may also be another  contributing
              factor to those seeing him as being pro-western,  secular  or
              anti-Islamic.


 82. We balance against those factors several other items that arose in the
     evidence.  These are are:

           a) The appellant successfully maintained a  low  profile  during
              the period of the Mujahadeen and Taliban regimes.


           b) He had employment, albeit virtually non  existent  at  times,
              when the Ariana Airlines would not fly, during that time.

           c) He  was  involved  in  two  minor  incidents  only  with  the
              Mujahadeen regime.  It is possible that these could be argued
              to be more accidental in  their  nature  rather  than  direct
              targeting of the appellant.

           d) While the appellant  is  a  Pashtun  it  of  course  must  be
              recognised that the Pashtun  are  the  largest  ethnic  group
              within Afghanistan and clearly this appellant, nor the  other
              two, could be considered to be  at  risk  simply  because  of
              their Pashtun ethnicity.

           e) The level of risk at which Mr Marsden would have placed  this
              appellant he considered was  "very  high".   We  consider  is
              based on many speculative assumptions  and  to  be  excessive
              when balanced against all  of  the  evidence  that  has  been
              presented before us.

 83. Considering the totality of the evidence cumulatively  therefore,  and
     noting that each factor considered, on its own, would be  insufficient
     to give rise to  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  this  appellant  being
     persecuted on return, we find that there is a real risk or  reasonable
     likelihood that this appellant  would  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
     persecution  from  Tajik  Jamiat-i-Islami,  and  other  fundamentalist
     Islamic  groups,  including  remnants  of  the  former  Taliban.   His
     situation is, in our view, borderline  as  in  all  three  appellants'
     cases.  However, we exercise any residual doubts in  favour  of  these
     appellants.

 84. In respect of issue 2, the Convention reason, we find  that  the  real
     risk or likelihood of persecution to appellant 30 on his return  would
     be primarily for reasons of his political opinions by  virtue  of  his
     former seniority within the PDPA.  Beyond this there are also possibly
     imputed religious reasons which could be imputed because  of  secular,
     pro-western, and anti-Islamic attitudes that  fundamentalist  elements
     could take against him.  His Pashtun ethnicity could  also  have  some
     minor influence.  Thus, we consider that the risk to the appellant  is
     for reasons of two or three of the five Convention grounds, or  a  mix
     of them.

 85. In respect of the first issue as it relates to appellant 27, the  wife
     of appellant 30, we consider that her risk is primarily  one  that  is
     derivative of the risk to  her  husband.   Additionally,  she  herself
     comes from a relatively high profile PDPA family and  is  an  educated
     woman who, having been to a western culture, when combined with all of
     the other aspects relating to her husband could have an elevated risk.
      She  may  now  be  seen  as  anti-Islamic,  pro-western  woman.   The
     Convention grounds for her are thus she is a member of the  particular
     social group (her husband's family) and/or the same mix of  Convention
     reasons that place appellant 30 at risk.

 86. Returning finally to appellant 28, the sister-in-law, her primary risk
     would arise if she returned as a woman alone, without  the  protection
     of appellant 30.  This we consider remains from the evidence before us
     from the entrenched attitudes by Afghani men to  treatment  of  women.
     We agree it appears to have improved but it is still  problematic  and
     would elevate her level of risk.  She would  return  as  an  educated,
     perceived pro-western, woman, with a high risk that she would not have
     the protection of her husband.  She therefore has the additional  risk
     of maltreatment from her husband or male members of his family to  add
     into the mix of risks she faces.

 87. Beyond this we note that the political profile of her own  family,  in
     the Najibullah government was also a high one,  possibly  even  higher
     than that of appellant 30.  The accumulation of risks therefore  which
     we have listed in respect of appellant 30 must be taken  into  account
     for this appellant if she returned in the protection of appellant  30.



 88. In both situations  therefore,  whether  she  returns  alone  or  with
     appellants 30 and 27, we  consider  there  is,  again  exercising  the
     benefit of the doubt,  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  she  would  be
     persecuted by the same groups as would target appellant 30  (plus  her
     own husband and his family) for reasons  of  her  background  and  her
     association with the family group now led by appellant 30.  Considered
     cumulatively therefore we  consider  that  she  is  also  entitled  to
     refugee status.

Decision

89.   After careful  and  close  consideration  of  these  three  associated
      cases,  we  conclude,  when  considered  in  the  round,  that   these
      appellants are all refugees within the meaning of Article 1A(2) of the
      Refugee Convention 1951.  Both issues are answered  in  the  positive.
      The appeals are allowed.



                                 A R Mackey


                               Vice President

                           -----------------------
      1


