
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX42030-2001      |
|On 10 October 2002         |        |DH (Risk-IMIK-KAA) Iraq CG  |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 05099          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|5 November 2002                                                   |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Dilshad Hamagharib                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant, a citizen of  Iraq,  appeals  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator (Mr N P Dickson)  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
     decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for
     asylum.

  2. Mr B  Caswell,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Parker  Bird,  Solicitors
     appeared for the appellant.  Mr J McGirr appeared for the Secretary  of
     State.

  3. The papers were in a poor state of preparedness.  Mr McGirr had not got
     a bundle from the appellant apparently but was able to make do with the
     material that had been  placed  before  the  Adjudicator.   A  skeleton
     argument  was  handed  in  after  the  commencements  of   proceedings.
     Authorities are referred to in  that  skeleton  without  any  reference
     being given and without copies being provided  in  breach  of  practice
     direction number 4, paragraph 8, reported at  [2001]  Imm.A.R.172.   Mr
     Caswell stated that he did not intend to refer to any authorities.   It
     must be clearly appreciated that the service of skeleton arguments this
     late in the day is of no assistance  to  anyone.  (In  fact  copies  of
     authorities reached us after the hearing, they had been faxed late  the
     previous afternoon). An additional feature of  the  case  is  that  the
     grounds of appeal are more or less illegible.

  4. The Chairman who granted leave did so on a limited basis.  He  observed
     that the Adjudicator had found that the appellant could safely live  in
     an area controlled by the KDP or the PUK but that he did  not  consider
     whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

  5. The appellant was born in 1966.  He had  joined  the  Iraq  army  as  a
     soldier in 1985 and  had  received  serious  injuries  during  chemical
     bombings in 1988.  He had left the army in 1991.   During  the  Kurdish
     uprising that year he had been arrested by Iraqi security services  and
     taken to Baghdad and detained for 40 days during which he was seriously
     ill-treated.  The Secretary of State in paragraph  11  of  the  refusal
     letter noted that the appellant had stated  that  the  reason  for  his
     arrest was because he had left his identification card at home and that
     he did not consider that this isolated incident had anything to do with
     his current asylum claim.

  6. He escaped and joined the Islamic Movement of Iraqi  Kurdistan  (IMIK).
     In 2001 he decided to leave IMIK.  IMIK attempted to  persuade  him  to
     change his mind and he was put in prison for 10  days.   The  appellant
     was of the view that IMIK would not allow him to leave the party as  he
     knew too many secrets.  He escaped from  prison  with  the  help  of  a
     friendly guard.  He went to stay with his  father.   IMIK  visited  his
     father while the appellant was in hiding in the house.  He then decided
     to leave Iraq.

  7. The  respondent  was  not  represented  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
     appellant gave evidence.  The Adjudicator had  before  him  documentary
     material including a report from a GP, Dr Clowes, and expert reports  -
     the same reports that are  relied  on  before  us.   The  Adjudicator's
     conclusion is expressed as follows:  he refers to IMIK as IMK:

           "18. I am prepared to accept that in the main the appellant is a
           credible witness although I do consider that he has  exaggerated
           the events since he decided to leave the IMK in 2001.  There are
           a number of discrepancies in the various accounts  he  gives  of
           events in Iraq until that  date.   I  have  however  taken  into
           account the report  of  Dr  Clowes  of  20  February  2002.   He
           suffered severe injuries during the bombing in 1988 and  he  has
           many scars from that event although no scars remaining from  the
           injuries whilst in detention in 1991.   The  appellant  suffered
           from a poor memory  since  his  detention.   He  has  difficulty
           remembering simple things such as his telephone  number  and  he
           does not sleep well.  Dr Clowes considers that "memory loss is a
           common manifestation of depression  and  post-traumatic  stress,
           following any  severe  life  event  which  would  include  being
           involved in an explosion or being tortured whilst in detention".
            I accept Dr Clowes' report and have taken this into account  in
           respect of certain discrepancies in  the  period  up  to  August
           2001.   The  appellant  suffered  horrifically  from  the  Iraqi
           government in 1991 and during the chemical bombings in 1988.  He
           received inhuman treatment while he was in detention.   However,
           in order to consider his claim for asylum he must have regard to
           the present position in the KAA which is set  out  in  the  CIPU
           (paragraphs 3.7 to 3.22 and 4.5 to 4.9 and pages 30 and 41 which
           deal with the IMK).
           19. In 1995 the appellant worked  for  the  IMK  military  as  a
           commander of a small group of freedom fighters.  In August  2001
           he decided to leave the party and I can accept that efforts were
           made by the IMK for him to stay.  ON balance I  am  prepared  to
           accept that the IMK detained the appellant who then  managed  to
           escape with the assistance of the  guard.   However  I  consider
           that if the appellant had been an important  prisoner  whom  the
           IMK intended to transfer to their main prison near  the  Iranian
           border, there would have been more security arrangements.  After
           the appellant said he escaped from prison, he went to his  house
           and was speaking to his wife when IMK  guards  kicked  down  the
           door of his house and again he managed escape over a  wall.   He
           was staying at his father's house in New Halabjah when  the  IMK
           guards came again and did not search  the  house  while  he  was
           hiding  inside.   I  consider  that  if  the  appellant  was  an
           important prisoner who had escaped from detention  and  had  run
           away from his own house while they kicked down the door, the IMK
           would have made efforts to search the house of his father.
           20. I am not satisfied that the appellant was in  possession  of
           such important secrets that the IMK were not prepared for him to
           leave.  The arrest and capture of  seven  freedom  fighters  and
           their subsequent sale to the Iranian secret agents was  probably
           not too surprising bearing in mind that the IMK receive aid from
           Iran and other Islamic countries (CIPU page 3 or 41).  The  sale
           of bullets and ammunition to the KDP happened some three to four
           years before the appellant left the IMK.  The  passage  of  time
           would not have made this incident significant.  Finally, in  his
           evidence the appellant said that the  opposition  did  not  know
           that the IMK were in possession of a valuable rocket and again I
           do not consider that this is a significant secret.
           21. I accept that the appellant  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
           persecution in the IMK area of influence and there is a risk  of
           ill treatment if he returned.  In order to succeed on the asylum
           claim, the appellant would have to show that there is nowhere in
           the KAA of northern Iraq where he can safely live.  It seems  to
           me quite clear that he could easily move to a different part  of
           the KAA in which to live which is either under  the  control  of
           the KDP or the PUK if he  feared  difficulties  in  ensuing  yet
           again from the IMK.  I do not consider that it  is  likely  that
           the IMK will continue to pursue him through the KAA in  view  of
           my  findings.   I  do  not  consider  that  he  is  sufficiently
           important for them to pursue him into another area.  The reports
           from Amnesty International and the Human  Rights  Watch  confirm
           that since 1991 some 94,000 Kurds and other non-Arabs have  been
           expelled from Kirkuk and other areas in Iraq to KAA.  While  the
           CIPU report does state that the IMK has offices in the  DKP  and
           the PUK areas of control, the IMK have splintered  in  2001  and
           dissident factions have emerged (CIPU 3.22).  While I have taken
           into  account  the  objective  evidence  and  in  particular  Dr
           O'Shea's report, in my view there is no reason why the appellant
           could not live safely in areas of the KAA not controlled by  the
           IMK.
           22. Insofar as the human rights appeal  is  concerned,  I  agree
           with the respondent's  conclusion  that  none  of  the  articles
           within the ECHR are applicable in this case.   For  the  reasons
           that I have already set out, there is certainly no evidence that
           his life will be at risk if returned to the  areas  of  Northern
           Iraq controlled  by  the  KDP  and  the  PUK  and  therefore  no
           potential breach of Article  2.   There  is  again  no  reliable
           evidence that he would be subjected to  torture  or  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment if returned to  these  areas  and  therefore
           Article 3 is not applicable.
           23. Mr Kooner also relied on Article 5.  Article 5 provides  for
           the right to liberty and security of  person  and  that  no  one
           shall  be  deprived  of  his  liberty   save   as   in   certain
           circumstances and in accordance with the procedure prescribed by
           law.  In considering such rights the burden of proof is upon the
           appellant to show that there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  for
           believing there is a risk of  exposure  of  human  rights  being
           violated on his return to northern Iraq.  For the reasons I have
           set out, I do not consider that Article 5 is relevant.
           24. Accordingly the asylum appeal is dismissed as is  the  human
           rights appeal for the reasons set out above."

  8. Mr Caswell submitted that it was not entirely clear from the  terms  in
     which leave to appeal was granted whether the issue of safe  areas  was
     before us or whether it was simply the question of the undue  harshness
     of relocation.  He acknowledged the possibility that it was open to  us
     to find in the light of the objective material and the fact  that  IMIK
     had ceased to exist that the appellant might not need  to  relocate  at
     all.  He would not have established that he had a fear of  persecution.



  9. Mr Caswell submitted that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to
     relocate, his wife being in Halabjah.  The appellant had not  lived  in
     the KDP and had only had a brief period of residence in the PUK between
     1981 and 1985.  He was of limited education and his only attainment was
     an ability to read.  He had limited work  experience;   as  a  soldier,
     builder's mate and labourer.  He had limited work prospects.  He  would
     have no political support from the  PUK  or  KDP  -  indeed  quite  the
     contrary.  He had no family or tribal support and no financial  support
     in the shape of benefits or savings.  He had some  physical  scars  and
     disability and psychological problems.  There was  general  lawlessness
     in the KAA as indicated in the expert reports.  The appellant's brother
     had been killed by the PUK.


 10. There would not be a safe haven for  him  in  any  event.   IMIK  would
     pursue him and the Adjudicator had applied the incorrect  test  in  his
     determination when he had said that he did not consider it likely  that
     IMIK would continue to pursue him.  The correct test was whether  there
     was a reasonable degree of likelihood of his being pursued.

 11. Although IMIK had ceased to exist, other groups had evolved and it  was
     stated in paragraph 3.26 of the Home  Office  Country  Assessment  that
     tension between the PUK and the Islamist Group remained unsolved.

 12. The people who had  persecuted  the  appellant  might  still  be  in  a
     position to do so.  Although the  group  had  changed  its  title,  the
     problems remained.  His enemies were high profile people.   There  were
     no real borders in the  KAA  and  there  was  no  safe  haven  for  the
     appellant.  The appellant had had a significant role and would  clearly
     come to the attention of the fractured  parts  of  IMIK.   In  all  the
     circumstances it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to  relocate
     and he could not, in any event move at all  since  there  was  no  safe
     haven.

 13. Mr McGirr submitted that the  Adjudicator's findings were  sustainable.
     He had concluded that the appellant had not been  an  important  figure
     and had given a rational explanation for his conclusion that he was not
     of continuing interest to IMIK or  its  successors.   While  Mr  McGirr
     acknowledged  that  the  passage  in  the  determination  dealing  with
     internal flight was not as well set out as it might be,  it  was  clear
     that he had by implication considered whether it would be unduly  harsh
     for the appellant to move.

 14. The appellant was, in the alternative, not in fear  at  all  given  the
     change in circumstances.  Paragraph  3.26  of  the  Country  Assessment
     dealt with IMIK.  There was no reason to believe that the appellant had
     a fear that the splintered parts of IMIK would be looking for him.

 15. The appellant had consistently talked about friction between  IMIK  and
     the PUK but had not referred to the KDP.

 16. The points relied on by Counsel for stating that  it  would  be  unduly
     harsh for the appellant to relocate applied with  equal  force  to  his
     circumstances in the United Kingdom.  The  Adjudicator  had  considered
     the  appellant's  medical  condition   and   had   given   a   generous
     interpretation to the evidence.  The appellant had  a  difficulty  with
     his right elbow, poor memory and did not sleep well.  The factors taken
     together did not mean that it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant
     to relocate.  There was a functioning medical service  in  the  KAA  as
     appeared from paragraph 4.57 of the Country Assessment.  The  situation
     had changed from the time when the O'Shea report had been  compiled  in
     July 2001.  The report of S J Laizer was based on her opinions and  was
     unsourced.  The CIPU assessment should be preferred.  The KAA  was  not
     lawless and there was an operating judicial system  (paragraph  3.7  of
     the Assessment) and while there was no evidence before the Tribunal  of
     any parliament in the KAA, paragraph 3.20 of the Assessment referred to
     the prospect of parliamentary  elections.   Mr  McGirr  suggested  that
     social security  was  available.   Paragraph  5.18  of  the  Assessment
     referred to  human  rights  organisations.   Human  rights  abuses  had
     reduced since the early 1990s.

 17. Mr Caswell submitted that there was no evidence  that  social  security
     existed in the KAA.  There was no evidence about any parliament in  the
     KAA.  The O'Shea report at paragraph 14 stated that there was no  means
     of support for Kurds who chose the internal flight option.  Even  if  a
     parliament  existed,  the  KAA  were  not  in  a  position   to   grant
     nationality.  Although the KAA might be beginning to  adopt  state-like
     characteristics it had not yet become an entity  capable  of  providing
     protection.

 18. Islamist groups still operated and tensions still existed in  the  KAA.
     The appellant remained at risk.  IMIK was fragmented and there  was  no
     safe haven.  The appellant's circumstances in the United  Kingdom  were
     not the same as in the KAA.  The points he relied on  in  his  skeleton
     argument for stating that it was unduly harsh for the appellant applied
     in the KAA in a way that they would not apply in the UK.

 19. Mr McGirr, in conclusion, stated that, for the avoidance of doubt,  the
     Secretary of State gave the usual undertaking in respect of returns  to
     the KAA.  Mr Caswell commented that that did not mean that  the  return
     would be to a safe location.

 20. At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination.

 21. The appellant's account, which was not tested in cross-examination, was
     found to be credible in the main by the  Adjudicator  although  he  did
     consider that he had exaggerated certain events.  He  was  prepared  to
     give the appellant the benefit of the  doubt  concerning  a  number  of
     discrepancies in his accounts prior to  2001.   He  bore  in  mind  the
     opinion of the GP.

 22. The Adjudicator was prepared to accept that IMIK was reluctant to  lose
     the appellant as a member of the party and that he was detained but not
     that he was a detainee of any  importance.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
     consider that the appellant had  any  significant  insider  information
     that would cause IMIK to be anxious not to lose track of him.

 23. Mr McGirr accepts that paragraph 21 of the Adjudicator's  determination
     is not as clear as it might be.  As the Adjudicator accepted that  IMIK
     had fractured in 2001 it is not clear to us  why  he  was  prepared  to
     accept that the appellant had a well founded fear of persecution in the
     IMIK area of  influence  since  there  was  no  longer  such  an  area.
     Paragraph 3.26 of the Home Office Country Assessment reads as follows:

           "3.26  The Islamic Movement of Iraqi Kurdistan (IMIK) has,  over
           the year 2001, splintered.  Four dissident factions have emerged
           - "Islamic Group", "Unification" movement and the "Soran Force",
           and "Jund al-Islam", with the  latter  founded  on  1  September
           2001.  The Jund al-Islam is a  militant  group  that  has  vowed
           destruction of established secular Kurdish political parties  in
           the northern enclave.  In turn, it was roundly condemned by  the
           KCP and the KDP, pledging every assistance to the PUK to  arrest
           Jund extremists.  The Jund  al-Islam,  seized  control  of  some
           villages near the Iranian border and attempted  to  institute  a
           strictly Islamic theocratic  regime.   According  to  press  and
           opposition reporting, the Jund al-Islam  attached  PUK  fighters
           near Halabjah, killing dozens of persons.  Intermittent fighting
           between the PUK, and the Jund al-Islam, and other Islamic groups
           continued until late November, when an agreement  between  those
           involved and the Iranian Government dissolved the Jund  al-Islam
           and imposed a cease-fire. [2f] Jund al-Islam, alongside a number
           of other Islamist groups, has merged into a new group, Ansar al-
           Islam, ("Supporters  of  Islam").   Despite  a  few  negotiation
           rounds with Iranian mediation, tension between the PUK  and  the
           Islamist group remains unsolved. [2f][26][28b]"

 24. Counsel submits the appellant will face exactly the same problems  from
     the new group as from the old.  However, it will be observed that  IMIK
     split into four and that one of the groups, Jund al-Islam  was  founded
     on 1 September 2001 - the appellant had left the KAA on 15 August 2001.
      In late November a ceasefire was imposed  and  a  new  group  emerged,
     Ansar al-Islam.  It is correct to say that tension remains despite  new
     negotiations but it is by no means established on the evidence, in  our
     view, that the group IMIK whose attentions the appellant was seeking to
     escape, has any interest in him today.  It has  ceased  to  exist.   It
     splintered into four.  One of the groups has merged with  other  groups
     to form yet another group.  There are at least two removes between IMIK
     and the new group and it would be speculative to assume  that  the  new
     group has any interest in the  appellant.   Counsel  submits  that  the
     appellant was of some  profile.   The  Adjudicator,  however,  did  not
     consider that to be the position.  He was  not  an  important  detainee
     with any information of significance.  We consider that  conclusion  to
     be  properly  sustainable  on  the  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator.
     Counsel submits that his former enemies are still around as individuals
     notwithstanding that IMIK has ceased  to  exist.   He  noted  that  the
     report by F J Laizer mentions speculation  about  the  PUK  seeking  to
     accommodate Jund  al-Islam  and  forge  an  agreement  to  contain  the
     violence that erupted in the autumn of  2001.   It  is  suggested  that
     alliances between the three main powers in northern  Iraq  threaten  to
     further  undermine  individual  liberties  and  the  opposition  forces
     freedom to organise in northern Iraq.  We  note  the  position  of  the
     UNHCR on 27 November 2000 that the KDP and PUK were considered to be de
     facto authorities but it could not be presumed without more to  provide
     adequate  and  effective  protection  to  those   residing   in   their
     territories.  The O'Shea  report  compiled  in  July  2001,  refers  to
     lawlessness.

 25. Paragraph 3.7  of  the  Country  Assessment  states  that  the  regions
     administered by the KDP and PUK each have a system of justice, based on
     Iraqi legislation with a police force to enforce public  order.   There
     are hospitals, schools and universities.  Both regions have  their  own
     administrations, in which several parties  have  seats.   In  September
     1998 the KDP and  PUK  reached  an  agreement  called  the  "Washington
     Accord"  following  talks  in  the  USA.   It  was  planned   to   hold
     parliamentary elections the following year though at  the  hearing  the
     parties were not able to confirm that  parliament  had  been  convened.
     Municipal  elections  were  held  in  February  and  May  2000.   These
     elections were reportedly fair according to foreign observers.

 26. At paragraph 5.18 of the assessment it is stated that  the  authorities
     on the whole cooperate fully with the implementation of aid  programmes
     and that UN representatives deal with the issue  of  displaced  persons
     and intercede with the KDP and PUK.  Although human rights  abuses  had
     been committed, the PUK  and  KDP  had  enacted  laws  establishing  an
     independent judiciary.  It was agreed by independent observers that the
     groups  had  generally  observed  the  laws  enacted.    Human   rights
     ministries had been  established  by  both  the  PUK  and  KDP.   These
     ministries monitored human rights conditions and submitted  reports  to
     relevant international bodies.  Ways were recommended to end abuses.

 27. The northern  Iraqi  community  had  developed  its  own  human  rights
     initiatives and a number  of  local  human  rights  organisations  were
     active in northern Iraq.  Local and international observers in northern
     Iraq had concurred that the human rights situation there  had  improved
     markedly in recent years - see paragraph 5.22 of the CIPU assessment.

 28. In the light of the material before us, we are not satisfied  that  the
     appellant  has  established  that  he  has  a  well  founded  fear   of
     persecution in the KAA.  The Adjudicator found that the source of  that
     fear was IMIK.  That source no longer exists and we are  not  satisfied
     on the material that is before us that the appellant can plausibly base
     his fear on the reconstituted fragments of what was once IMIK.

 29. It is not necessary for us accordingly to go into the question of undue
     harshness.  Had it been necessary to do so, we  would  have  tended  to
     agree with Mr McGirr that even viewed cumulatively the various  matters
     relied on by Mr  Caswell  would  not  make  it  unduly  harsh  for  the
     appellant to reside in a different area.  The difficulties that he  has
     would affect him to a certain degree anywhere and we are not  satisfied
     that he would have insuperable difficulties in getting employment -  we
     bear  in  mind  generally  the  guidance  given  in   Robinson   [1997]
     Imm.A.R.568.

 30. However, for reasons which we have set out above, it is not established
     that the appellant has a well founded fear of persecution in  the  KAA.
     He can properly be returned there without the United Kingdom  being  in
     breach of its international obligations.  We note the undertaking given
     by the Secretary of State that the appellant will not be  returned  via
     any part of Iraq under the control of Saddam Hussein.

 31. The appeal is dismissed.




                                                                      G Warr

                                                                    Chairman
