
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX44613-2001      |
|On 17 September 2002       |        |CA (Human Rights-Military   |
|Dictated 19 September 2002 |        |Service-SEntence)Turkey CG  |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 06709          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....20.02.2003....                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|CENGIZ AYDOGDU                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:
For the appellant:     Mr R Scannell of Counsel instructed by Brar & Co.,
                 Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms C Paddick, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. This is an appeal by Cengiz Aydogdu, a citizen of Turkey, against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs F M Kempton)  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision refusing to grant  him  leave
      to enter following the refusal of his claim for asylum.


   2. The appellant claimed asylum on 21 February 2001. He said that he  had
      travelled from Turkey to the United Kingdom by lorry, but he  did  not
      know which countries he had travelled  through.  He  claimed  to  have
      suffered persecution in Turkey because he was an ethnic Kurd.  He  had
      been detained on three occasions. When he reached the age of 20 he was
      supposed to report for military service but he did not do so. He  went
      into hiding for three years using his brother's identity. In  November
      2000 he considered that he could not continue using a  false  identity
      card and made arrangements through an agent to come to Europe.

   3. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  was  entitled  to
      asylum for the reasons which he has set out in  his  letter  dated  26
      April 2001.  The  appeal  against  this  decision  was  heard  by  the
      Adjudicator on 13 February 2002.

   4. The appellant gave oral evidence to supplement his written  statement.
      The Adjudicator has summarised his account in paragraphs 6 - 11 of her
      determination. The appellant said that he had  been  arrested  on  two
      occasions in 1993. On the first occasion he had been detained  for  36
      hours without food or drink. He was also  assaulted  and  sustained  a
      broken tooth. He had cuts and bruises all over his body. In late  1993
      he was woken up by the police who had kicked down the front  door.  He
      was dragged out of bed and taken to the police station. He was kept in
      a cell for 28 hours and then released. There was a further incident in
      1994 when he was arrested after a football match  but  it  turned  out
      that this was a case of mistaken identity  and  he  was  released.  In
      August 1997 he received his call-up papers. He could  not  face  doing
      this as he considered that by being in the Turkish army  he  would  be
      likely to be sent to an area  where  he  would  be  expected  to  kill
      Kurdish people and he was  not  prepared  to  fight  against  his  own
      people. He went into hiding and became  a  fugitive  for  four  years,
      living in Istanbul using his brother's identity card. In November 2000
      he made arrangements to leave. He is in fear of returning  to  Turkey.
      He has spoken to his family and has  been  informed  that  the  police
      still look for him as he has failed to attend for military service.


   5. The Adjudicator also heard evidence from the appellant's wife whom  he
      married in November 2001, having met her in June 2001. His wife had  a
      son aged 13 and a daughter aged 8.

   6. The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's version of events about  what
      had happened to him in Turkey. She  considered  that  any  persecution
      which had been sustained by the appellant was so long ago as to be  of
      limited value to him in claiming  asylum  on  that  ground.  The  last
      incident had been in 1994. It appeared that he had lived  in  relative
      safety for three years from 1994 to 1997 and that when he received his
      call up papers, he managed to evade the draft  successfully  by  using
      his brother's identity card. He left Turkey because he feared that  he
      might be caught.

   7. She was not satisfied that he was at risk of persecution on return nor
      that there were substantial grounds for believing  that  he  would  be
      subjected to treatment contrary  to  Article  3.  As  an  evader  from
      military service, he would be liable to imprisonment for a  period  of
      between six months to three  years.  She  noted  from  the  background
      evidence that the appellant was not alone in avoiding military service
      as apparently there are up to 250,000 people who  have  done  so.  She
      considered that the risk of imprisonment did not invoke Article  3  of
      the Human Rights Convention. She went on to consider Article 8 in  the
      light of the appellant's marriage  but  came  to  the  view  that  his
      marriage did not have the quality of permanency which  she  considered
      necessary as they had only been married for a few months. Accordingly,
      she dismissed the appeal.

   8. The grounds of appeal assert that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  not  to
      find that there would be a breach of Article 3.  The  appellant  as  a
      draft evader risked a period of imprisonment. There was evidence  that
      prisoners were subjected to serious  ill  treatment.  There  was  poor
      medical care and concern about  over  crowding.  At  the  hearing  the
      Tribunal gave the appellant leave to vary  his  notice  of  appeal  to
      include a number of further grounds. It is argued that the decision of
      the Court of Appeal in Sepet and Bulbul [2001] Imm AR  452  is  wrong.
      Permission has been given to appeal to the House of Lords, but in  the
      meantime, as Mr Scannell  accepted,  the  Tribunal  is  bound  by  the
      judgment of the Court  of  Appeal.  The  second  ground  is  that  the
      appellant is a refugee because at the time his liability for  military
      service arose (August 1997) the Turkish military were engaged in  acts
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct of a  type  condemned  by
      the international community. To be imprisoned for his failure to serve
      at that time would be persecution.

   9. Mr Scannell submitted firstly that the cumulative factors relating  to
      the appellant were such that he would be at risk  on  return.  He  had
      been detained in 1993 - 1994. He had  been  suspected  of  involvement
      with the PKK: see paragraph 11 of the reasons for refusal  letter.  He
      would not be regarded as just an Alevi Kurd but someone with a history
      of detention and suspected separatist sympathies. In addition  he  had
      evaded military service and had been a fugitive for  four  years.  The
      Adjudicator had accepted his evidence. If he  returned,  there  was  a
      real risk of detention and imprisonment for a period of  up  to  three
      years. He risked being detained in a house of correction. In the light
      of  the  background  evidence  there  was  good  reason  to  fear  ill
      treatment.

  10. Mr Scannell's second submission was that when the appellant was called
      for military service in 1997, he would have been required to serve  in
      an army committing acts condemned by the international  community  and
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.  Sepet  and  Bulbul  had
      established that an objection to military service by  itself  did  not
      amount to a convention reason under the Refugee Convention, but it was
      clear that certain categories of military service could give rise to a
      claim for refugee status. It would be  wrong  to  require  someone  to
      serve in an army engaged in conduct  condemned  by  the  international
      community. This was not a case of the appellant  being  opportunistic.
      He had not been prepared to fight against his  fellow  Kurds  or  take
      part in the kind of behaviour being perpetrated in 1997 - 1998.

  11. Ms Paddick submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  that  the
      appellant would only be of interest to the authorities because he  had
      failed to attend for military service were properly open to  her.  His
      detentions had been in 1993 - 94. He had not come to the attention  of
      the authorities between 1994 and 1997. It  was  not  established  that
      there would be any  record  of  his  detentions,  nor  would  they  be
      regarded  of  any  significance.  He  would  not  be  regarded  as   a
      separatist. She referred to Faith Akan  [2002]  UKIAT  01111.  If  the
      appellant had undertaken military service in 1997,  it  could  not  be
      shown what kind of activities he would have  been  involved  with.  In
      reply, Mr Scannell referred to paragraph 171 of the UNHCR handbook and
      submitted that the appellant was entitled to say that he would not  be
      associated with the kind of conduct being carried out by  the  Turkish
      army in 1997 - 98. It was not a case of rogue elements within the army
      carrying out unauthorised activities but a  state  policy  of  conduct
      which had been condemned by the international community.

  12. The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's account  of  his  failure  to
      undertake  military  service  and  his  continued  attempts  to  avoid
      military service by using the identity of his brother.  There  appears
      to have been no particular incident which led  him  to  leave  Turkey,
      save the fact that in November 2000 he came to the belief that it  was
      too dangerous to continue using a false identity.  However,  the  fact
      remains that the appellant has, on the Adjudicator's findings,  evaded
      military service and for this reason would be at risk of detention and
      prosecution on return. The penalties are on a sliding  scale,  varying
      with the length of time between the arrest and the date  when  he  was
      obliged to start military  service.  A  person  arrested  after  three
      months is sentenced to six months to three years  heavy  imprisonment:
      paragraph 4.32. A Report from the Dutch Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs
      reports that military judges in general impose minimum  sentences.  It
      is also reported that as a general rule, prison sentences of less than
      one year can be commuted into a fine. Prison sentences for evasion  of
      registration/examination or enlistment, or for desertion are generally
      commuted into fines which must be  paid  after  the  end  of  military
      service. However, heavy prison sentences for  evasion  lasting  longer
      than three months without giving oneself up may not be  commuted  into
      fines. In paragraph 5.86, the CIPU Report deals  with  the  return  of
      draft evaders. There is little reliable information on whether or  not
      a draft evader sent for military service having returned to Turkey  is
      likely to suffer ill treatment.


  13. The Tribunal agree with the Adjudicator's conclusions  that  the  only
      interest the authorities are likely to have in the appellant is  as  a
      result of his  draft  evasion.  The  appellant  was  arrested  on  two
      occasions in 1993. The third arrest in 1994 was  a  case  of  mistaken
      identity. The Tribunal do not accept even  if  these  detentions  have
      been recorded, that there is any reasonable degree of likelihood  that
      the  appellant  would  be  regarded   as   a   suspected   separatist,
      particularly  in  the  light  of  the  improved  situation  in  Turkey
      following the cessation of hostilities by the PKK.

  14. The risk to the appellant is of prosecution for failing  to  undertake
      his military service. On the evidence before the Tribunal, there is  a
      real risk that he will be detained for a period of heavy  imprisonment
      of between 6 months and three years. The  evidence  tends  to  suggest
      that the detention will be nearer 6 months rather than 3 years, but it
      will still be heavy imprisonment and on the evidence before us, cannot
      be commuted into a fine. The Tribunal do not accept that the appellant
      will be treated any differently from any other  draft  evader.  Whilst
      the conditions in a house of correction may be harsh, the Tribunal are
      not satisfied that they cross the high threshold to establish a breach
      of Article 3.

  15. This leaves Mr Scannell's second argument. He submits that any  period
      of imprisonment would be persecution as the appellant would have  been
      required in 1997 - 98 to undertake military service which  contravened
      basic human rights and was condemned by the  international  community.
      As we have already indicated, the Tribunal is bound by  the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgment in Sepet and Bulbul but it is clear  from  paragraph
      61 of the judgment of Laws LJ that there are circumstances in which  a
      conscientious objector may rightly claim  that  punishment  for  draft
      evasion would amount to persecution: where  the  military  service  to
      which he was called involved acts with  which  he  may  be  associated
      which are contrary to the basic rules  of  human  conduct,  where  the
      conditions of military service are themselves so harsh as to amount to
      persecution on the facts and  where  the  punishment  in  question  is
      disproportionately harsh or severe. In this case there are two  issues
      which arise. The  first  is  whether  the  appellant  was  called  for
      military service which may have resulted in him being associated  with
      acts contrary to the basic rules of human conduct and secondly whether
      the imposition of punishment now would amount to persecution.


  16. The first issue involves showing that the appellant reasonably  feared
      that he would be required to engage in  such  condemned  actions,  but
      also that there was more than a fanciful chance that such a fear would
      eventuate in fact: see paragraph 98 of the  judgment  of  Laws  LJ  in
      Sepet and Bulbul. In support of his claim that the appellant would  be
      associated with military service contrary to the basic rules of  human
      conduct Mr Scannell submitted that in 1997 and 1998 appeals were being
      allowed by Adjudicators and the  Tribunal  on  this  very  ground.  He
      points to a determination of the Tribunal in Ince (17744) heard on  21
      April 1998 where the Tribunal was satisfied that the activities of the
      Turkish military had been internationally condemned. That Tribunal had
      been referred to a decision of the  Tribunal  in  Gokay  (14233).  The
      Tribunal were also referred to Ekinci (20085) where  the  evidence  of
      human rights abuses by the Turkish military was considered.

  17. There is an issue as to whether the appellant has to show  that  there
      is a real risk that he, personally, would have been  engaged  in  such
      activities or whether he  and  presumably  every  other  draft  evader
      during this period is entitled to say that  he  did  not  wish  to  be
      associated with such activities.

  18. The Tribunal accept the principle that  no  one  can  be  required  to
      participate in hostilities which contravene the basic rules  of  human
      conduct or which are internationally condemned: see for example  Drvis
      (13129) and more recently Foughali (00/TH/01513). The issue is whether
      the appellant would have been required to  be  involved  in  any  such
      activities. Although the likelihood seems low, the Tribunal cannot  on
      the evidence before us, dismiss it as speculative. The policy  of  the
      Turkish army, albeit against  a  determined  and  vicious  enemy,  did
      result in international condemnation as it  involved  a  programme  of
      compulsory village clearances and the large scale displacement of  the
      Kurdish civilian population.

  19. According to the evidence before the Tribunal, the appellant does  not
      have the option of undertaking his military service  now  and  thereby
      avoiding prosecution. There is certainly no evidence  of  any  amnesty
      for draft evaders. It is clear that the Turkish authorities  take  the
      issue  of draft evasion seriously, despite the large number  of  draft
      evaders  referred  to  earlier  in  this  determination.  There  is  a
      procedure for depriving draft evaders of their citizenship.  There  is
      no evidence to suggest that any distinction  would  be  drawn  by  the
      Turkish authorities between those who evaded the draft during a period
      when the hostilities were condemned by the international community and
      subsequent periods after the cessation of hostilities in 1999.

  20. Mr Scannell's submission put at its simplest,  is  that  any  form  of
      imprisonment would be wrong for someone who evaded the  draft  because
      he  genuinely  objected  to  taking  part  in  activities  which  were
      internationally condemned and were contrary to the basic laws of human
      conduct. The Tribunal accept that this is a valid proposition and that
      in such circumstances punishment would amount  to  persecution  for  a
      convention reason, an actual or  imputed  political  opinion.  In  the
      light of the Adjudicator's findings of credibility, we  are  satisfied
      that the appellant did have a genuine  objection  to  this  particular
      type of military service and we are satisfied on the  evidence  before
      us that there was a real risk that he might have been involved in such
      activities. To be punished for a refusal to serve in the  military  in
      such circumstances, would amount to persecution.

  21. In these circumstances and on this ground only, the Tribunal have come
      to the view that this appeal should be allowed.



                                                                H J E Latter


                                                              Vice President

