
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX35088-2002      |
|On 19 November 2002        |        |FM (Risk-Homosexual-Illegal |
|                           |        |Departure) Iran CG [2002]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 05660                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......5 December 2002...................................         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Justice Collins (President)                                    |
|Mr R Baines, JP                                                   |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|FARHAD MOHAMMADZADEH                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant in this case is from Iran.  He is  a  young  man  who
        claims to be a homosexual.  He left Iran because he was afraid that
        his  homosexual  activities  would  have  become   known   to   the
        authorities.   That  was  because  two  of  his   companions   were
        themselves arrested.  This all happened in February  2002  when  he
        went to his friend's house and was told that  his  friend  and  the
        other man had been arrested because they were gay.  He  was  afraid
        that they would reveal his identity.  He left for Tehran by  coach,
        persuaded his father to send him money and found an agent, paid him
        sufficient monies to get him into a lorry in which he came  to  the
        United Kingdom and entered unlawfully.  He claimed asylum.

     2. The Adjudicator decided that this account was not true.   He  gives
        various reasons for those findings.  We do not need to go into them
        in any detail because leave to  appeal  has  not  been  granted  to
        enable an attack to be made upon  them.   However  the  Adjudicator
        does not in terms reject the appellant's assertion  that  he  is  a
        homosexual.  Indeed, it may be that  there  is  no  reason  why  he
        should reject that account.   Accordingly,  what  is  in  issue  is
        whether if he were to be returned he would  suffer  persecution  or
        ill-treatment contrary to his human rights.

     3.  The  Adjudicator  deals  with  this  in  paragraph   27   of   the
        determination as follows:

           " I have considered  what  might  happen  to  the  appellant  if
           returned.  The mere fact someone has left Iran to  claim  asylum
           is not itself regarded as a political act by the authorities and
           is not punishable as such.  That is the conclusion to  be  found
           in paragraph 7.24 of the October 2002 CIPU Report.  He will face
           the possibility of prosecution for having  left  unlawfully  and
           that is not something  that  can  be  regarded  as  persecution.
           Sentences can range from 1 month to 3  years  imprisonment.   In
           the April 2002 CIPU Report this is further relaxed.  This is set
           out in paragraph 5.889.  Those penalties  are  not  in  any  way
           disproportionate to the offence which has been committed.  There
           is ample evidence in both CIPU  Reports  that  active  but  non-
           public homosexual acts done discreetly are  in  effect  ignored.
           The US Department of State Report on the subject is silent."


     4. He then goes on to conclude that  the  appellant  would  be  of  no
        interest to the authorities and  the  consequences  that  might  be
        visited on him upon return would not amount to persecution.

     5. The point is made that the conclusion to be found in paragraph 7.24
        of the October 2001 CIPU Report upon which the Adjudicator  relied,
        is itself unreliable.  That is because the report  from  the  Dutch
        Authorities which form the basis of that conclusion has since  been
        shown to be erroneous.  There has been put before us  a  letter  or
        rather an internal memorandum in the IAS which refers to  enquiries
        which established that the Dutch indeed had accepted that what  was
        said in that report was not correct.  And It is to  be  noted  that
        the April 2002 CIPU Report which the Adjudicator  also  had  before
        him does not contain a paragraph equivalent to  7.24  in  the  2001
        Report.  What it does contain, is paragraph  5.88  which  reads  as
        follows:-

           "Citizens returning  from  abroad  are  sometimes  searched  and
           interviewed by  the  authorities  upon  return.   This  happened
           particularly  at  times  when  the  authorities  note  increased
           activities of dissident groups outside the country  as  in  late
           1998.  On the basis of  the  information  Amnesty  International
           receives, usually a person who gets back will be asked why he or
           she was abroad.  If the answer is along the lines I  just  tried
           to find a job, they will most likely be allowed to  go  home  to
           their families.  Generally speaking, it does depend on what kind
           of documentary documentation exists on the returnee and what the
           actual practice  of  the  country  is  in  which  the  concerned
           individual applied for asylum."


     6. On the Adjudicator's findings there is no reason whatever  why  the
        authorities should have had any interest in this  appellant  before
        he left Iran.  There is no reason equally why they should have been
        aware (if indeed it is the case) that he was a homosexual since the
        Adjudicator rejected the account  of  the  arrest  of  his  friends
        leading to his leaving the country.  Accordingly, he will  face  if
        he is returned the possibility of action  being  taken  because  he
        left the country illegally, that being a criminal offence in Iran.

     7. Miss Brown on his behalf has relied upon a report from a  Professor
        Afshar which was before the Adjudicator and  which  indicated  that
        there was a real possibility that the appellant on return might  be
        regarded as having acted contrary to the state and might  therefore
        be accused of defection and  of  spying.   There  is,  as  we  say,
        nothing to suggest that  he  has  in  fact  been  involved  in  any
        disaffection since he has been out of the country.  He has not done
        anything, and has not drawn himself to the attention of any of  the
        authorities as having done anything wrong.  So we have someone  who
        left unlawfully in order to better himself in this  country  rather
        than remain in Iran.

     8. In our view, to suggest in those circumstances that there is a real
        risk that he  would  be  regarded  as  a  security  risk,  is  pure
        speculation.  We do  not doubt as Professor Afshar  indicates  that
        there have been individual cases where people have been ill-treated
        on return and have been accused  of  anti-state  activities.   That
        will of course depend upon the individual facts of those cases.  We
        have had placed before us by Mr Sheikh a document from the  British
        Embassy In Tehran.  That was not served in time, indeed it was  not
        served until this afternoon.  Accordingly, we decline  to  take  it
        into account directly.  We put it that  way,  because  we  are  not
        going to hold it as it were  against  this  appellant,  but  it  is
        material to the point that led Mr Freeman to grant leave to appeal.
         He did so on the  basis  that  the  Tribunal  ought  to  have  the
        opportunity  of  considering  the  point   that   the   Netherlands
        Government report had been discredited.   As  we  say,  we  do  not
        accept that there is a real risk that a person who  has  left  Iran
        albeit unlawfully in order to seek to  better  himself  in  another
        country and has done so by making a false claim  for  asylum  which
        leaves him  to  be  returned  is  going  to  run  a  real  risk  of
        persecution.  Indeed, we need no more than the CIPU  Report  as  it
        now exists and the evidence that  was  before  the  Adjudicator  to
        reach that conclusion.  We do not regard Professor Afshar's  report
        as sufficient to raise a real risk that he may  be  regarded  as  a
        security risk.

     9. So far as Mr Freeman's point is concerned,  the  existence  of  the
        report from the British Embassy in Tehran makes it clear  that  the
        conclusion that we have reached without it is a correct  conclusion
        and that the situation is that there is no evidence of any  general
        persecution  or  ill-treatment  of  failed  asylum  seekers  merely
        because they are failed asylum seekers.  Otherwise it would not  be
        safe  to  return  anyone  to  Iran;   indeed  that  really  is  the
        conclusion that Professor Afshar would have us reach.   As we  say,
        we do not accept that is the reality of the  situation.   There  is
        also reliance sought to be placed on the prison conditions in Iran.
         They are said to be awful and accordingly it  would  be  wrong  to
        send someone back on the basis that he might be prosecuted.  As the
        Tribunal has said in other determinations, it  is  not  for  us  to
        apply the European Convention world wide.  We  have  to  regard  to
        what are the expected conditions in the individual country.  We  do
        not doubt the prison conditions  are  unpleasant.   We  put  it  no
        higher, but that in itself is not a good reason for saying that  no
        one should be returned merely because he is likely to be prosecuted
        and possibly imprisoned.  Of course,  if  there  is  likely  to  be
        torture, that is a different matter.  But for reasons that we  have
        already given we do not regard that in the  circumstances  of  this
        case as a real risk.

    10.  Accordingly,  for  those  reasons,  we  take  the  view  that  the
        Adjudicator reached a correct conclusion on the material before him
        and the supposed unreliability of the Dutch Report is not a  proper
        basis  for  saying  that  the   Adjudicator's   determination   was
        erroneous.

    11. This appeal is therefore dismissed.








                                                              MR     JUSTICE
      COLLINS

      PRESIDENT






