
H-LP-V1(KHv2)
                                                 Appeal Number :HX51619-2001
                           MS (Risk-Homosexual) Turkey CG [2002] UKIAT 05654

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  2nd October 2002                        |                 6 December  |
|                                              |2002                         |
|Dictated : 4th October 2002                   |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                       Mr A R Mackey - Vice President
                              Mr A G Jeevanjee
                                 Mr A Smith


between
                                Mehmet SEVER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T Siddle of Counsel representing Trayman & Co,
                           Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Graham, Home Office Presenting Officer



1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals with  leave,  against  the
    determination of an Adjudicator Mr H W Turcan, promulgated  16th  April
    2002, wherein he dismissed  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent who had  issued  directions  for  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom following refusal of an asylum claim.  A human rights claim was
    also dismissed.

2.    This matter came before the Tribunal on an earlier date  when  it  was
    noted that the file of the Appellate Authority was largely missing.  It
    was agreed by both parties that a file would be "cobbled together" from
    the copies of relevant documentation held by both parties so  that  the
    appeal could proceed.  We were assured by Mr Siddle at the hearing that
    this had taken place and proceeded on that basis.

3.    The grounds upon which  leave  had  been  granted  had  been  somewhat
    restricted by the Acting Vice President but however in the light of the
    situation that parts of the file were not available to the Acting  Vice
    President we determined at the outset that all grounds of appeal  could
    be argued.

The Adjudicator's determination.

4.    The claim made by the Appellant was  that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or treatment contrary to provisions of the ECHR if he  were
    returned to Turkey. He based this on two grounds.  The first  based  on
    his support for the DHKP/C and Alevi religion  and  more  significantly
    risks based on his homosexuality.

5.    The Appellant claimed that he had failed to mention that  he  was  gay
    in his initial interview as he had been accompanied by his  brother-in-
    law when he  completed  the  SEF  and  his  brother-in-law  would  have
    disapproved very strongly of his  sexual  orientation.   The  Appellant
    claimed he had been gay for some two years but his family did not  know
    of this although they may have been suspicious.  He claimed that he had
    been raped by two police officers in a woodland in 1999 or  2000  after
    they had discovered he was gay.  He was not under arrest  at  the  time
    but the officers threatened that they  would  tell  his  family  if  he
    complained about their behaviour.  He then claimed that  some  officers
    had subsequently taken him to the police station in 1999  in  order  to
    scare him but they did not repeat the  behaviour.   The  Appellant  had
    also confirmed he  had  received   call  up  papers  for  his  military
    service.  This had been deferred because he  was  preparing  to  go  to
    university.  However he stated that  in  fact  he  would  not  have  to
    perform military service if he satisfied the authorities he was gay but
    this would mean that he would need to be issued with a "pink card"  and
    his family would then learn about his homosexuality.

6.    Before the Adjudicator it was noted that evidence and  submissions  by
    Mr Siddle were put forward and that the objective evidence relating  to
    the attitude of the Turkish authorities to gays was very limited.   The
    CIPU Report set out two sentences which stated:

      "There are no laws specifically concerning homosexual  acts.   In  the
         penal code there are  articles  which  are  intended  to  safeguard
         public morals, and which can be used against homosexuals".

      Mr Siddle also submitted evidence of the banning of  a  party  of  gay
    tourists in Turkey.

7.    The Adjudicator went on to conclude  that  he  had  no  difficulty  in
    accepting the Appellant was gay and understood his  initial  reluctance
    to share this information with his brother-in-law.   He  also  accepted
    that the gay community in Turkey were seen as objects of suspicion  and
    contempt and "may be subjected to an  element  of  discrimination  when
    they are seeking employment".  In relation to the incident of  the  gay
    tourists on the cruise he noted that the report stated that  the  local
    mayor suggested the police had acted on their own initiative  and  that
    the interior ministry denied the police were  acting  on  instructions.
    The local mayor had  later  apologised  for  the  police  action  to  a
    spokesman for the US Embassy and that he had brought the  case  to  the
    attention of  the  Turkish  authorities  and  was  pleased  with  their
    response.

8.    On the issue of whether the  Appellant  had  been  raped  by  the  two
    police officers the Adjudicator concluded:

      "Whilst I recognise that the Appellant  claims  to  have  been  warned
        against making a complaint the fact remains that he did not register
        a complaint nor does he claim to have received any physical injuries
        as a result of the attack.  I recognise  that  in  a  country  where
        homosexuals are viewed with contempt it  is  possible  that  he  was
        indeed subjected to a homosexual rape but I am unable to find,  even
        to the lower Sivakumaran standard that such an attack  did  in  fact
        take place".

9.    The Adjudicator then went on to  state  that  he  was  satisfied  that
    "even if the rape did take place the police officers  responsible  were
    not attacking in furtherance of any official policy  to  intimidate  or
    humiliate practicing homosexuals and that their actions would not  have
    been  condoned  by  their  superiors.   They  could  not  therefore  be
    described as agents of persecution for whom the Turkish state should be
    held responsible."  The Adjudicator then concluded that  the  Appellant
    did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason.  He went on to consider whether the Appellant  would
    suffer cruel or inhumane treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the  ECHR.
    In this regard the Adjudicator considered the Appellant's objection  to
    military service and noted that although the Appellant may suffer  some
    harassment before his homosexuality is officially  recognised.  He  was
    satisfied that the Appellant would be issued with  a  "pink  card"  and
    thus not required to serve.  On the issue of the rapes  by  the  police
    which the Appellant claimed had taken place, the  Adjudicator  accepted
    that the Appellant may well have been arrested by the police  and  they
    may have employed intimidatory tactics however while  recognising  that
    past ill-treatment may sometimes be evidence of a future  risk  he  did
    not consider that the Appellant was at such a risk.

10.   At paragraph 25 of the determination the  Adjudicator  considered  the
    ECHR, Articles 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 and Article 2  of  the  first
    Protocol and noted that while he accepted that gays were not popular in
    Turkey: "I am not satisfied that the difficulties which  the  Appellant
    would face are such as would amount to a breach of his human rights."

11.   He therefore dismissed the appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

12.   At the outset Mr Siddle asked us to  note  that  the  Adjudicator  had
    accepted the Appellant was a homosexual.  He submitted that  there  was
    sufficient evidence before the Adjudicator to reach a  conclusion  that
    the rapes by the policemen had taken place and that the conclusions  of
    the Adjudicator  that  he  was  unable  to  find,  to  the  Sivakumaran
    standard, that such an attack took place was flawed.  He directed us to
    the Appellant's reply to question 47 in the initial interview where the
    Appellant stated that he had been  subject  to  more  than  one  sexual
    assault, with a period of time in between them and that he had suffered
    injuries in those attacks but they had healed.  He submitted  therefore
    that all that was left from the findings of the  Adjudicator  was  that
    there had been a lack of formal complaint. This was a  weak  point,  in
    his submission, given that it would be unlikely a person  such  as  the
    Appellant would complain to the police when  it  was  police  behaviour
    that was at issue.

13.    In  relation  to  the  possible  "alternative  conclusion"   of   the
    Adjudicator Mr Siddle submitted that the conclusions of the Adjudicator
    did not go far enough and that his findings at paragraph  16  undermine
    the whole determination  to  the  extent  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted for hearing afresh.

14.   In addition he submitted that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to  give
    sufficient reasoning for his conclusions under the human rights  claims
    and in particular the  Appellant's  right  to  a  private  life,  under
    Article 8 had not been  adequately  considered  in  the  determination.
    Beyond this the Adjudicator had not given sufficient  consideration  to
    Article 14 and the discriminatory behaviour against  the  Appellant  in
    respect of his search for work.  He submitted that in this  regard  the
    Adjudicator had failed to make a finding as to whether there was a real
    risk of a breach of Article 14 and the required  consideration  of  the
    proportionality of that breach.

15.   Finally he submitted that the attacks by the  police  officers  raised
    the issue of  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  Appellant  and  he
    submitted this was not available from the Turkish authorities.

The Respondent's Submissions

16.   Mr Graham submitted that the findings of the Adjudicator at  paragraph
    16 did not  indicate  inconsistencies  and  that  paragraph  16  merely
    recorded the Adjudicator's reasoning process and  not  an  improper  or
    flawed determination.  The  Adjudicator  had  taken  into  account  the
    objective situation and recognised that rape could take  place  in  the
    situations the Appellant had described however, based on  the  evidence
    before him the Adjudicator was entitled to reach a conclusion  that  he
    was not satisfied, to the lower standard, that the attack had  in  fact
    taken place.

17.   In addition to this there was no finding in  relation  to  Article  8.
    He submitted that as there was no finding of past persecution in Turkey
    or risk of future persecution,  that  the  consideration  of  the  ECHR
    issues was not necessary.

18.   He submitted further that the acts of  the  police  officers  even  if
    accepted should be seen as those of rogue officers.  In that  situation
    the Appellant could have complained  and  there  was  no  evidence  put
    forward as to the other avenues of redress  that  the  Appellant  could
    have availed himself of.

19.   He therefore submitted that  the  reasoning  of  the  Adjudicator  was
    sustainable and that the appeal should be dismissed.

20.   In reply Mr Siddle submitted that the evidence of past persecution  or
    degrading behaviour should  be  noted  by  us  and  in  particular  the
    determination in Demirkaya.  He stated that he was unable to direct  us
    to any further objective information on the situation relating  to  the
    treatment of homosexuals in Turkey but referred us to the  CIPU  Report
    and the incident relating to the gay tourist cruise.

21.   In summary he submitted that the  risks  to  this  Appellant  were  of
    torture or degrading treatment while in detention.  The risk  of  being
    detained, he submitted would arise when the Appellant went to obtain  a
    pink certificate in order that he could evade the draft.

22.   We reserved our determination.

The Issue

23.   We found the only issue before us to be whether the  determination  of
    the Adjudicator was a sustainable one or whether the  submissions  made
    by the Appellant indicated that it was unsafe.

Decision

24.   After careful consideration of the submissions and  the  determination
    we are satisfied that this appeal should be dismissed.  While there may
    be some possible errors of fact  in  the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    Adjudicator at paragraph 16 we consider that even if the credibility of
    the Appellant is accepted in full that there is  not  a  real  risk  or
    likelihood of persecution or maltreatment contrary to the ECHR  on  the
    return of this Appellant to Turkey.

25.   The Appellant is in a situation where he is accepted as  a  homosexual
    who had suffered male rape by police officers in 1999/2000.   There  is
    no evidence to indicate that this action by the police officers was  in
    any way condoned by their superiors and indeed on the  scant  objective
    evidence in relation to the  gay  cruise  it  would  appear  that  such
    behaviour would not be condoned by the Turkish authorities.   There  is
    no evidence to suggest that an official complaint could not  be  lodged
    against what were clearly rogue officers endeavouring  to  threaten  or
    intimidate the Appellant.

26.   The issue before us however is that of the  real  risk  or  reasonable
    likelihood of the Appellant  suffering  such  treatment  on  return  to
    Turkey.  Mr Siddle agrees that any risk in this situation  would  arise
    in the Appellant's attempts to obtain a "pink card".  There  is  simply
    no objective evidence that was before the Adjudicator or us that  would
    point to a risk to this Appellant of being detained when he attended  a
    medical or went to register for his military service.   It  is  correct
    that there may be some discriminatory behaviour but this would  appear,
    from the objective evidence before us to fall well short of persecution
    or  torture,  inhumane  or  degrading  treatment.   Thus  any  risk  of
    persecution or maltreatment in breach of  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  we
    consider is highly remote or fanciful and certainly not at the level of
    a real risk.

27.   In relation to the claims under Article 8 and 14 of  the  ECHR  we  do
    not consider that there is any evidence to indicate a real  risk  to  a
    breach of the Appellant's right to a private life.  It appears that  he
    conducted a gay relationship  for  some  two  years  prior  to  leaving
    Turkey.   Beyond  this  any  breach  of  Article   8   or   indeed   of
    discriminatory behaviour on the basis of his sexuality we  consider  is
    outweighed by the valid immigration control obligations of  the  United
    Kingdom and that  it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to  return  the
    Appellant to Turkey.


Decision

28.    The  appeal  is  therefore  dismissed.   The  determination  of   the
    Adjudicator we find to be a sustainable one.











                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


