
                                               MB (Article 2 - Article
3)Algeria CG [2002]UKIAT 01704     | |
|                                                                      |
|Appeal No: HR15931-2001                                               |







                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date of Hearing: 9th May 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                 28.05.2002.


                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Collins (President)
                                 Mr J Barnes
                              Mr C A N Edinboro

Between:





                               MOHAMED BERKANI


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Algeria.   He  arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom on 25th August 1999 and claimed asylum.  That application  was
     refused on 30th November 1999.  His appeal against that  decision  was
     dismissed on 17th January 2000.  That was therefore  the  end  of  his
     asylum claim.  However, the Human Rights Act came into  force  on  2nd
     October and he made a human rights application.  That was  refused  on
     13th November and on 23rd November, he alleged that if he was returned
     to Algeria this would constitute a breach of his human  rights.   That
     claim was rejected.  He appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  an
     Adjudicator, Mark Davies, on 26th July 2001. It is the appeal  against
     that determination, which dismissed his appeal, which now comes before
     us.

  2. Before the  Adjudicator,  the  Appellant  raised  arguments  based  on
     Articles 2, 3 and 9 of  the  European  Convention.   He  relied  on  a
     substantial body of evidence to  show  that  there  were  considerable
     difficulties created  in  Algeria  for  those  such  as  him  who  had
     converted to Christianity.  We should say that there  was  no  dispute
     that he had indeed so converted.  In addition, he  was  a  Berber  and
     thus, for both reasons, would attract the hostility of  the  GIA.   In
     addition to the concerns that there was state  antipathy  to  converts
     such as himself, he relied upon the evidence that the GIA would target
     such as him and thus he would suffer  possible  death,  and  certainly
     treatment contrary to Article 3 and the state would not  be  able,  or
     possible willing, to provide him with the necessary protection.

  3. The asylum claim was, of course, and inevitably,  based  on  much  the
     same material.  As we have said, it  was  rejected.   The  Adjudicator
     rejected the claims based on Articles 2, 3 and 9.  He had doubts about
     some aspects of the Appellant's credibility  and  indeed  he  rejected
     some of the evidence that the Appellant had given which  was  intended
     to support the claim that he had a fear and that there was a real risk
     that he would be treated contrary to Article 3.  The  Adjudicator  did
     not accept that there  was  an  inability,  or  an  unwillingness,  to
     provide the necessary protection.  What the Adjudicator decided is set
     out in paragraph 30  of  his  determination.   He  said  that  he  was
     prepared to accept the findings made by the previous Adjudicator,  but
     that he believed that the Appellant had not  given  truthful  evidence
     and had exaggerated the position (that is the matter to which we  have
     already referred).  He went on thus:

           "Clearly from the evidence before me, the Appellant suffered  no
           difficulties  whilst  he  was  in  Algeria  from   any   Islamic
           Fundamentalist group or from his cousin who he claims was in the
           GIA.  I do not accept from the evidence before me that there are
           substantial grounds for believing if the Appellant  is  returned
           to Algeria that there is a real risk either  that  he  would  be
           killed and therefore Article 2 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
           would be breached, that he would be treated in a way  in  breach
           of Article 3 or that Article 9 would  be  breached  in  that  he
           would not be allowed to  practice  his  Christian  beliefs.   In
           relation to Articles 2 and 3, I take into account  that  nothing
           happened to the Appellant for  a  considerable  period  of  time
           whilst he was in Algeria because he practiced Christian beliefs.
            If an Islamic Fundamentalist group wished to kill him or  treat
           him in a manner which would be in breach of  Article  3  of  the
           European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  they  had   plenty   of
           opportunity to do so.  If his cousin was a member of the GIA and
           wished to cause harm to the Appellant because of  his  Christian
           beliefs,  he  had  plenty  of  opportunity  to  do  so.   It  is
           significant (if the Appellant's evidence is to be believed) that
           the Appellant did not suffer any difficulties  from  his  cousin
           even though his cousin moved back to  the  Appellant's  area  in
           1995."


  4. The grounds of appeal did not challenge the Adjudicator's findings  in
     relation to Articles 2 and 3.  They sought to raise the argument  that
     Article 9 would be breached and that the Adjudicator's conclusion that
     it would not was erroneous.  The Tribunal granted leave to appeal, but
     on the basis that this was a matter which needed to be  considered  in
     the terms of paragraph 18(7)(b) of the Procedure Rules 2000.  That  is
     to say, not on the basis that there was any real prospect  of  success
     necessarily, but that there was another compelling reason why  it  was
     desirable that the matter should be considered.
  5. Mr Jorro, who has helpfully put before us a skeleton argument and  has
     said everything that could be said in  support  of  this  appeal,  has
     recognised, inevitably, the difficulty that he faces as  a  result  of
     the findings of the first Adjudicator that the  asylum  claim  failed,
     and of the second Adjudicator that there was no breach of  Articles  2
     or 3.  As we say, there has been no appeal against those findings.

  6. Article 9  is  the  Article  which  deals  with  freedom  of  thought,
     conscience and religion.  It has two parts to it.  Paragraph 1 reads:

           "Everyone has the right to freedom of  thought,  conscience  and
           religion.  This right includes freedom to change his religion or
           belief and freedom either alone or in community with others  and
           in public or private to  manifest  his  religion  or  belief  in
           worship, teaching, practice and observance."


      Paragraph 2:


           "Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be  subject
           only to such limitations  as  are  prescribed  by  law  and  are
           necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of  public
           safety for the protection of public order, health or morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."


  7. The first argument deployed by Mr Jorro is based on the first part  of
     Article 9(1).  He submits that the right to freedom of religion  is  a
     right which is not derogable.  It is only the manifestation  that  can
     be breached provided that breach is proportionate within the terms  of
     Article 9(2).  Thus, the right to freedom of religion is,  submits  Mr
     Jorro, an absolute right.  That may well be so but, in our  judgement,
     it does not get the Appellant anywhere.  It is clear that there is  no
     bar to the private belief that the Appellant may have, or indeed  that
     anyone may have,  in  Algeria.   A  Christian  is  entitled  to  be  a
     Christian.  The problem may arise, if it does at all, in  relation  to
     manifestation and we would have thought that that was the position  in
     any situation where a breach of Article 9 is  in  issue.   Anyone  can
     think what he or she likes.  If he or she does not say or do  anything
     to manifest that belief, then there is no reason why anyone should  do
     anything  adverse  to  him  or  her.   It  is  only  if  there  is   a
     manifestation that problems can  arise,  and  that  is  recognised  by
     Article 9.  We suppose that if a signatory to the European  Convention
     passed a law which in terms prohibited freedom of religion, that would
     manifestly be a breach of Article 9, but that  situation  is  not  the
     situation which we face here.

  8. We are concerned with the obligations of the United Kingdom,  not  the
     obligations of Algeria and it must be borne in mind that it is no part
     of the purpose behind the European Convention that it should  seek  to
     impose its requirements upon the whole of the  world.   We  note  that
     that was referred to in terms by the Tribunal in the starred  decision
     of Devaseelan which was decided on 13th March this year.  That  was  a
     case which concerned the application of Articles  5  and  6,  but  the
     principle is applicable also to Article 9.  In paragraph 110  of  that
     determination, the Tribunal said this:

           "It is clear that the court  does  not  attempt  to  impose  the
           duties of the Convention on states that are not party to it.  It
           is also clear that the fact that a person may be  treated  in  a
           manner that would in a  signatory  state  be  a  breach  of  the
           Convention, does not, in itself, render his expulsion to another
           country unlawful, unless either the breach will be of Article  3
           or the consequences of return will be so  extreme  a  breach  of
           another  Article  that  the  returning  state,  as  one  of  its
           obligations under the Convention, is obliged to have  regard  to
           them."


      That, in our judgement, is of  general  application  when  considering
      Articles other than Articles 2 or 3 or  indeed  any  Article  that  is
      truly absolute.  Another example, perhaps, might be  Article  4.   The
      need to maintain an immigration control and the right of  a  state  to
      maintain such control is, and has been,  recognised  by  the  European
      Court of Human Rights  in  a  number  of  cases.   Provided  that  the
      operation of such control is proportionate to any breach of an Article
      that might be occasioned by such control, that is to say any breach of
      an Article which is not absolute, has equally been recognised.


  9. The problem, as we see it, that Mr Jorro faces is that,  if  there  is
     any sanction against the manifestation of religion, that sanction will
     inevitably result in something unpleasant happening to the  individual
     who seeks to exercise his freedom of religion.  That  something  will,
     if the state imposes it, be a form of detention or a form of  penalty.
     In circumstances such as are relied on here, it will be  treatment  by
     the GIA or by those who believe that it  is  wrong  for  a  Muslim  to
     convert to Christianity which also will amount to something thoroughly
     unpleasant happening to the individual in question.

 10. Once, as here, persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  has
     been negated, it is in our view,  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
     envisage  circumstances  where  the  immigration  control   would   be
     disproportionate.  There may be difficulties, there may be a degree of
     hardship in manifesting the  beliefs,  but  there  would  not  be  any
     prevention of that manifestation, or  at  least  no  prevention  which
     would be effective because, unless there  is  some  sanction  such  as
     penalty or detention or  ill-treatment,  there  can  be  no  effective
     sanction  against  the  manifestation  of  that  belief.    In   those
     circumstances it is, as we say, in our judgement, almost impossible to
     see that  there  could  be  breach  of  Article  9  unless  there  was
     persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

 11. That is entirely consistent with what  the  Tribunal  said  in  Kacaj.
     That  case  recognised  that,  in  theory  at  least,  there  was  the
     possibility of relying on the breach of any of  the  Articles  of  the
     European Convention, but that that possibility is in  relation  to  an
     Article such as Article  9  more  theoretical  than  real.   That  was
     recognised by the Tribunal in Kacaj in relation to treatment which was
     said to contravene Article 8 where such treatment would occur when the
     individual was removed.  Of  course,  Article  8  has  a  further  and
     different application where there may be a  breach,  for  example,  of
     family life by the fact of removing the individual from this  country.
     He may have a wife, a child, or whatever in this country, but where it
     is alleged that the treatment will occur in the country to which he is
     removed, it is difficult to envisage a case where Article 8  would  be
     breached absent, persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment because, as we
     say,  the  need  to  control  immigration  would  make   the   removal
     proportionate.

 12. We are reluctant, in this jurisdiction, to use the word never  because
     one finds, sometimes, that there is a  case  which,  on  its  peculiar
     facts, shows that that word should not have been used  but,  although,
     as we say, we do not use that word, this case comes as  close  as  one
     could imagine to that situation.

 13. In those circumstances, this appeal must be dismissed.










                                             Mr Justice Collins

                                             President


-----------------------
      1


