

                  HL (Risk -Return - Snakeheads) China CG [2002] UKIAT 03683
                                                               CC/21125/2001
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date of hearing: 14 May 2002

                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            13TH AUGUST 2002
                                   .........................................
                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)
                                Mr J. Freeman
                             Mrs L. H. S. Verity

Between

                                 HUI MEI LUI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of China who has been given leave to appeal
      the determination of an Adjudicator (Miss A. D. Baker) dismissing  her
      appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  her
      asylum.


   2. Mr A. Yuen, an authorised representative from Phoenix Nova, Solicitors
      appeared for the Appellant.  Mr I. Graham, a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the Respondent.

   3. The Appellant left China in May 2000 and arrived in the United Kingdom
      on 7 August 2000.  Her application was refused  on  9  February  2001.
      The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 1 October 2001 and leave to appeal
      was granted on 9 January 2002.  The Adjudicator dismissed  the  appeal
      on both Refugee Convention and  human  rights  grounds.   The  current
      appeal is on human rights grounds only.


   4. The Adjudicator found the Appellant to be a credible witness.   It  is
      clear that in doing so the Adjudicator gave the Appellant some benefit
      of the doubt. She had come to the United Kingdom to  find  work.   Her
      passage had been arranged by snakeheads.  She was a country  girl  and
      illiterate.  Her family were farmers.  She did not know that  she  had
      paid more than the usual fee for the package to travel to  the  United
      Kingdom.  She had been told to claim that she was a member  of  Falun-
      gong, which was not true.  She feared that if she  returned  to  China
      she would not be able to repay her debt to  the  snakeheads  and  they
      would kill her.  She was more  concerned  about  the  dangers  to  her
      family than for her own personal safety.   She  had  to  pay  interest
      equivalent to the whole of her annual earnings in  China  each  month.
      The interest would mount up.  The Appellant refused to give  the  name
      of the family friend of her elder brother who had  put  her  in  touch
      with the snakeheads.  She refused to say which Province  or  town  she
      came from.


   5. After reviewing the country information the Adjudicator found that the
      Appellant was persuaded to travel to the  United  Kingdom  to  seek  a
      better life.  Her family were very poor.  Her father had been ill with
      liver cancer and had died before she left China.  She was told to tell
      a false story:  she  had  not  been  involved  with  Falun-gong.   The
      Adjudicator found that the Appellant had not been able to obtain  work
      in the  United  Kingdom.   However,  the  situation  appears  to  have
      changed. Mr Yuen informed us, on instructions, that the Appellant  was
      working and up-to-date with  her  payments  to  the  snakeheads.   The
      Adjudicator found that the Appellant was afraid that if  she  returned
      to China she would not be able to repay the debt  to  the  snakeheads,
      who would kill her.  She  was  concerned  about  the  dangers  to  her
      family.  She was afraid that she would be attacked, lose her eyes,  or
      have other body parts removed for transplant.


   6. We need not deal with the Adjudicator's findings  in  respect  of  the
      Refugee Convention appeal  against  which  there  is  no  appeal.   In
      respect  of  the  human  rights  appeal  the  Adjudicator  found  that
      corruption was a problem in China but this did not have any effect  on
      the risks facing this Appellant on  return.   There  were  reports  of
      terrifying attacks by snakeheads on Chinese "illegals" in  Europe  but
      no reports of retribution in  respect  of  failed  illegal  immigrants
      forcibly returned to China.  There are reports of visits by  reporters
      to snakehead homes of great affluence in  China  and  interviews  with
      those involved in human trafficking.  The illegal trade had  continued
      for many years and there was no  reliable  evidence  of  the  type  of
      punishment meted out to failed  asylum  seekers  which  the  Appellant
      claimed to fear.  The evidence relied on  by  the  Appellant  and  the
      claim that some had been killed, related to deaths outside China,  not
      the fate of those who returned.   Reports  of  extortion  from  family
      members remaining in China related to those whose relatives failed  to
      make payment whilst in foreign countries.  The  Adjudicator  concluded
      that the Appellant had not made out a real risk that her human  rights
      would be infringed.


   7.  We  are  grateful  to  Mr  Yuen  for  the  carefully   prepared   and
      comprehensive bundle.  The Respondent has  submitted  the  April  2002
      Country Assessment.   The  Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument  adds  some
      further information to her account, which is helpful but does not make
      a material  difference  to  our  conclusions.   It  alleges  that  the
      Appellant fears  not  only  snakeheads  but  also  loan  sharks.   The
      snakeheads are the gangsters who  make  and  often  implement  is  the
      arrangements for an individual's journey to the United Kingdom  whilst
      the loan sharks lend some or all of the money to pay the snakeheads.


   8. We do not accept that the credibility of the evidence submitted by the
      Secretary of State is in issue in this appeal, except  to  the  extent
      that  the  appeal  turns  on  an   assessment   of   the   Appellant's
      circumstances in the light of the country information.  We  must  make
      an objective  assessment  of  all  the  country  information,  whether
      submitted by the Appellant or the Respondent.   Mr  Yuen's  submission
      that we should look at the credibility of  the  Respondent's  evidence
      flows from the submissions set out in paragraphs  64  and  70  of  the
      skeleton argument that the burden of proof falls on the Respondent  to
      establish that the Appellant's human rights  will  not  be  infringed.
      This is summarised in paragraph 68 in the statement, "the Secretary of
      State, in receipt of an application, is bound  to  provide  protection
      unless he can show substantial grounds for believing that the  alleged
      risks are not real, for it would  clearly  be  incompatible  with  the
      underlying values of the Convention were the  Secretary  of  State  to
      return the Appellant to China without first ensuring that it  is  safe
      to do  so".   We  find  no  merit  in  these  submissions,  which  are
      misconceived.  The burden of proving that her  human  rights  will  be
      infringed falls on the Appellant who must establish this to  the  same
      standard, a reasonable  likelihood,  which  applies  both  to  Refugee
      Convention and human rights claims.  This is made clear in the starred
      Tribunal determination  in  Kacaj.   We  can  find  no  merit  in  the
      submissions which appear between paragraphs 71 and 75 of the  skeleton
      argument that Article 19 or the obvious purposes of the  Human  Rights
      Convention support the view that the burden  of  proof  falls  on  the
      Respondent or that to place the burden of proof on the Appellant  puts
      the Respondent in breach of his duties.


   9. In his skeleton argument Mr Yuen criticises  the  Country  Assessment,
      arguing  that  the  different  threads  and  contradictions  make   it
      impossible to interpret the assessment correctly  and  that  the  Home
      Office, with an interest in returning illegal immigrants, has not made
      an  impartial  or  objective  assessment.   We  do  not  accept   this
      criticism.  The Assessment is sourced and, in our  judgment,  makes  a
      balanced  and  careful  assessment  of  the  available   evidence.   A
      comparison of Mr Yuen's evidence, which appears to have been given  to
      a Parliamentary Committee, and is set out between pages 98 and 100  of
      the Appellant's bundle, with the Country Assessment leads us to prefer
      the latter.  Mr Yuen's evidence relies heavily  on  newspaper  reports
      and, although he criticises contradictions between the reports of  the
      experts referred to in the Country Assessment, he  does  not  indicate
      what expert evidence he prefers or refer to any other expert  evidence
      which might support the conclusions  for  which  he  argues.  We  have
      treated Mr  Yuen's  submissions  to  the  Parliamentary  Committee  as
      submissions to us.  Had we  not  done  so  he  would  have  faced  the
      obstacle of attempting to provide expert evidence in a case  in  which
      he appears as an advocate.

  10. We find considerable force in the reply to Mr Yuen's submissions  from
      Mr Carlyle of the China and Far East and the Americas section  of  the
      Country Information and Policy Unit, which appear  between  Pages  121
      and 124 of the Appellant's Bundle.  On page 123 Mr Carlyle  lists  the
      experts whose reports are relied on in the Country Assessment.   Their
      qualifications  are  impressive.   There  is  no   justification   for
      dismissing their views out of hand, as Mr Yuen suggests.   We  do  not
      accept that the Home Office has produced a biased  assessment.   There
      is clear evidence of a balanced  approach  and  no  relevant  evidence
      appears to have been ignored.   There  are  no  clear-cut  conclusions
      adverse to the interests of Chinese asylum claimants, which might have
      lent some support to his submissions.


  11. We can find no merit in the criticism contained in paragraphs  27  and
      28 of the skeleton that the Respondent should have  produced  evidence
      from, for example, Scotland Yard or the National Crime Squad following
      the tragic deaths of a number of Chinese in a container lorry.   There
      is no duty on the Respondent to produce such evidence and  it  is  not
      self-evident that, if such evidence exists, it would  be  relevant  to
      the question of the risk on return to China for those individuals  who
      are indebted to snakeheads or loan sharks.


  12. There is an important fallacy in Mr Yuen's submissions.  On more  than
      one occasion (for example paragraphs 29 and 42  of  the  skeleton)  he
      refers to the lack of evidence "that a returnee indebted  to  criminal
      elements has ever been left unharmed". It is unrealistic to expect any
      source or combination of sources  to  establish  that  every  indebted
      returning failed asylum seeker has come to no harm.   Furthermore,  as
      we have already stated, no such obligation to establish this falls  on
      the Respondent.  It is for the Appellant to prove  the  risk  of  harm
      based on the experiences of others  and  expert  opinion.   Whilst  we
      accept that China is a country from which it is  difficult  to  obtain
      comprehensive and relevant information, it is not  impossible,  as  is
      borne out by the Country Assessment and the other reports  before  us.
      Quite simply the totality of the evidence does not  establish  that  a
      returning failed asylum seeker who is indebted to snakeheads  or  loan
      sharks will come to harm on return to China.  If this had happened  to
      returning failed asylum seekers  from  the  United  Kingdom  or  other
      countries it is  likely  that  relevant  evidence  would  have  become
      available.


  13. In this appeal we do not need to consider or make specific findings in
      relation to what might happen to  an  individual  who  owes  money  to
      snakeheads or loan sharks, remains in the United Kingdom and does  not
      for whatever reason make the required payments.   Suffice  it  to  say
      that there is evidence before us to indicate that such individuals and
      their families or guarantors in China  may  be  at  risk.   There  are
      strong indications that the snakeheads are violent  and  ruthless,  at
      least towards those who can pay but do not do so.  This does not  mean
      that they will be  equally  ruthless  towards  those  who  cannot  pay
      because they have been returned to China.

  14. Mr Yuen seeks to establish a material  difference  between  successful
      and unsuccessful arrivals.  He argues that the  debt  crystallises  as
      soon as the individual arrives in the United Kingdom.  The  debt  does
      not crystallise and the individual is  not  expected  to  pay  if  the
      snakehead organisation is not successful in getting him onto UK  soil.
      If, on the other hand, the individual arrives in  the  United  Kingdom
      then the debt crystallises and,  whatever  happens  subsequently,  the
      individual is expected to repay  the  extortionate  interest  and  the
      capital. The  evidence  before  us  does  not  support  so  precise  a
      difference of approach.  We are told  that  this  Appellant  has  made
      payments since her arrival and is up-to-date with  them.   It  is  not
      suggested that she has anything  to  fear  whilst  she  maintains  the
      payments.  If her appeal fails and she is  returned  to  China  it  is
      common ground that she is never likely to earn enough in China to  pay
      even a small part of the interest, let alone the capital.  There is no
      suggestion  that  her  family  or  any  guarantor  would  be  in   any
      substantially  better  position.   If,  as  the  country   information
      indicates, most illegal entrants come from an impoverished background,
      their situation is likely to be similar.


  15. The principal reason for our conclusion that the Appellant  would  not
      be at risk on return  is  the  lack  of  any  country  information  to
      indicate that she would be at risk.  Nevertheless, logic also supports
      this conclusion.  The snakeheads  and  loan  sharks  are  violent  and
      unscrupulous, but they are running what  is  likely  to  be  a  highly
      profitable business and would prefer  to  avoid  actions  which  might
      damage that business. Violent  or  other  persecutory  action  against
      those who are returned to China would be unlikely  to  result  in  the
      recovery of much money, but  would  be  likely  to  discourage  future
      customers.  Amongst the press reports submitted by Mr Yuen are reports
      of snakeheads going to great lengths to build  spectacular  houses  to
      show  to  potential  customers,  as  an  indication  of  the  sort  of
      accommodation and lifestyle they  can  expect  if  they  travel  to  a
      western country.  If the snakeheads or loan sharks go to these lengths
      it is not likely that they would risk deterring potential customers by
      taking hostile action against those who are returned, usually  through
      no fault of their own.  Clearly it is a  different  matter  to  ensure
      that those who remain abroad and are able to pay continue to  pay  for
      fear of what might happen to then or their relatives at home.


  16. Whilst there is some  evidence  of  the  removal  of  body  parts  for
      transplant, this relates to executed  criminals  and  countries  other
      than China.  We can find no evidence that  indebted  returning  failed
      asylum seekers have  body  parts  removed  and  sold  as  a  means  of
      recovering  the  money  they  owe.  We  can  find  no  evidence   that
      individuals in  this  position  are  forced  into  prostitution,  drug
      trafficking or other crime. There is speculation, but no evidence that
      indebted returning failed asylum seekers may make further  efforts  to
      travel to remain in a western country.  There is insufficient evidence
      to establish a reasonable likelihood that snakeheads  or  loan  sharks
      would force such a person to try again.


  17. We can find no merit in the submission set out in paragraph 44 of  the
      skeleton argument that the Secretary of State is in any way  bound  by
      the  submissions  of  his  Counsel  to  the  Tribunal  in  Hou   andWu
      (01/BH/0059).   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  concede  that  an
      individual who effected a "safe" arrival in the United  Kingdom  would
      be at risk on return.


  18. The Appellant is not at risk on  return.   In  the  circumstances  the
      question of sufficiency of protection does not arise.   The  Appellant
      has not established a reasonable likelihood that her human rights will
      be infringed under any Article in particular under Articles 3,  4,  or
      8.


  19. We dismiss this appeal.











......................................
P. R. Moulden
Vice-President
