

    AG (Democratic Party - Abduction - Prostitution) Albania CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       07205
                                                                HR11942-2002


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of hearing: 9 January 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                 13/03/2003.
                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)

                              Mr A. A. Lloyd JP


                              Mr M. E. A. Innes


Between

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR

                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              Ms ALKETA GJERGJI


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State.  The Respondent is a  citizen
      of Albania.   The  Appellant  has  been  given  leave  to  appeal  the
      determination of an  Adjudicator  (Mr  J.  P.  McClure)  allowing  the
      Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's decision that her  removal
      to Albania would not  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
      obligations under the Human Rights Convention.


   2. Ms M. Banwait, a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
      Appellant. Mr  G.  Robson,  a  Solicitor  from  Davis  Blank  Furniss,
      appeared for the Respondent.  The hearing was conducted by video link.


   3. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 February  1999  and
      claimed asylum.  The application was refused on 22 July 2000  and  the
      Appellant gave directions for her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.
      Following a hearing on  18  December  2000  her  appeal  against  this
      decision was dismissed by an Adjudicator (Mr R. Kay).  The  Respondent
      did not appeal against this determination.   She  then  made  a  human
      rights application, which was considered and refused on  9  May  2001.
      The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 21 May 2002 and  leave  to  appeal
      was granted on 18 October 2002.


   4. The Respondent claimed that her human rights would be infringed if she
      were returned to Albania. The summary of the facts of the Respondent's
      case which follow are taken from the  Respondent's  witness  statement
      dated 14 May 2002 and the determinations of  both  Adjudicators.   The
      summaries in the determinations do not set out the  Respondent's  case
      in sufficient detail.  Both Adjudicators found the Respondent to be  a
      credible witness. She was a member of the Democratic Party in  Albania
      and the Secretary of the Democratic Youth Union.  After completing her
      university studies in 1996 she was employed by the local Town Hall  as
      an English-language translator. In June 1997 the Democratic Party lost
      power  to  the  Socialist  Party  in  the  elections.   This   had   a
      considerable effect on the Respondent.  On  10  July  1997,  during  a
      meeting of the Democratic Party she was arrested and detained  by  the
      police on the false pretext that permission had not been obtained  for
      the meeting.  She was detained with about ten  other  girlfriends  and
      held for two days, during  which  time  she  was  sexually  assaulted.
      Senior officers did not provide  her  with  protection  and  were  not
      prepared to investigate the actions of other officers.


   5. In September 1997 the Respondent lost her job,  for  no  good  reason.
      Her father, who was also involved in Democratic Party  politics,  lost
      his job in the army.  On 8 September 1998 her  brother  was  shot  and
      killed, although the Respondent accepted that his death  was  to  some
      extent an accident.  He was a chauffeur for a leading Democratic Party
      politician and the assassin intended  to  kill  the  politician.   The
      family made inquiries to try and identify the murderers.   The  police
      told them not to pursue the matter and indicated that if they did  not
      do  so  they  could  be  charged.   After  this  the  family  received
      threatening telephone calls demanding money and also warning them  not
      to pursue the matter.


   6.  In December 1998, in an  incident  which  it  is  not  suggested  was
      connected with the earlier problems encountered by the Respondent  and
      her family, she was walking in the street with a friend when  she  was
      kidnapped.  Both of them were taken to a  house  where  there  were  a
      number of other girls.  It was apparent to the Respondent that she had
      been kidnapped for the intended purpose of prostitution.  After  about
      five hours and before she could suffer any serious harm the Respondent
      was rescued by her father and a friend. The friend  was  in  some  way
      involved with the kidnappers but had agreed to help  her  father.  The
      matter was not reported to the police because the family thought  that
      the police were likely to be involved and would not help.


   7. The family sold their house to finance the Respondent's journey to the
      United Kingdom.


   8. The first  Adjudicator  found  that  the  Respondent  was  a  credible
      witness.  Applying Devaseelan  principles,  the  Adjudicator  in  this
      appeal followed that finding.  He concluded that  the  Respondent  had
      been mistreated  and  abused  whilst  in  police  custody.   This  was
      sufficient to infringe her Article 3 human  rights.   The  authorities
      would not provide her with a sufficiency of protection and  would  not
      properly investigate the misconduct of police  officers.   The  kidnap
      and attempt to force her into prostitution also infringed her  Article
      3 human rights.  The problem was exacerbated by  the  involvement  and
      corruption of the police.


   9. The Adjudicator found that if the Respondent were to return to Albania
      she would be at substantial risk of further mistreatment.  Individuals
      inside  or  outside  the  police  would  wish  to  prevent  a   proper
      investigation of her brother's  death  and  the  apprehension  of  his
      murderers.  The Respondent might be subjected to kidnap  attempts  and
      would  not  be  protected  by  the  police.   He  found  a  reasonable
      likelihood that in this regard the Respondent would  be  subjected  to
      treatment that would breach her Article 3 human  rights.   The  police
      would not provide her with a sufficiency of  protection.   He  allowed
      the appeal under Article 3, concluded that it  was  not  necessary  to
      come to a conclusion under Article 2 and, on  the  same  facts,  found
      that there would be an interference with the  Respondent's  moral  and
      physical integrity.  There would be an interference  with  her  family
      life.  This would be in accordance with  the  law  but  would  not  be
      proportionately justified in the interests of immigration control.


  10. The grounds of appeal allege that it is not clear what aspects of  the
      Respondent's evidence the Adjudicator did and did not accept: that  he
      erred in his assessment of the risk on return to Albania, particularly
      in the absence of  any  findings  as  to  the  Respondent's  political
      activities or her intention of investigating her brother's  death:  he
      erred in  assessing  sufficiency  of  protection  by  not  considering
      whether this was a breakdown in command, corruption of individuals and
      whether there  was  a  system  in  place  which  would  provide  state
      protection: he failed to pay proper  heed  to  the  country  material:
      failed to apply the proper step-by-step tests in relation  to  Article
      8: failed to consider adequately whether interference with family life
      would be proportionate in the particular circumstances of the case and
      generally failed to apply the facts to the law.


  11. Leave to appeal was granted in  general  terms  encompassing  all  the
      grounds of appeal.  We  have  been  supplied  with  the  Albania  CIPU
      assessment of October 2002 and the determination  of  the  Adjudicator
      (Mr  Kay)  in  the  Respondent's  Refugee  Convention   appeal.    The
      Respondent did not submit any documents.


  12. Ms Banwait relied on the grounds of appeal and referred us to a number
      of  passages  in  the  CIPU  assessment.   She  submitted   that   the
      Adjudicator's findings were unsustainable, particularly in relation to
      police  protection.   The  authorities  would  provide  her   with   a
      sufficiency of protection.  In relation to Article 8  the  Adjudicator
      did  not  follow  the  appropriate  Nhundu  and  Chiwera  step-by-step
      principles.  He did not set out  the  facts  on  which  he  relied  in
      concluding that she had the family life in the  United  Kingdom.   She
      would not be at risk on return to Albania.  We were asked to allow the
      appeal.


  13.  Mr  Robson's  submitted  that  we  should  pay   attention   to   the
      determination  of  the  first  Adjudicator,  who  concluded  that  the
      Respondent was credible, honest and truthful.  At this point, and  for
      the avoidance of doubt Ms Banwait conceded that the Appellant accepted
      the Respondent's credibility.  Mr Robson referred us to  paragraph  59
      of the first Adjudicator determination in which he said, "Although  it
      has not been argued before me I consider that Articles 2, 3, 4  and  8
      could well be submitted as applying in this case".  Even when this  is
      combined with the  recommendation  made  by  the  Adjudicator  in  the
      following paragraph it does not, as Mr Robson suggest, mean  that  the
      present human rights appeal should succeed.


  14. Mr Robson submitted that, on instructions, given with great reluctance
      by his client, the allegation of sexual abuse in the police station in
      July 1997 was that her "breast and private parts  had  been  fondled".
      In his submission there were no significant  differences  between  the
      April 2002 CIPU report, which was  before  the  Adjudicator,  and  the
      October report before us.  Corruption was still  endemic  in  Albania.
      The Respondent was arrested without just cause and subjected to abuse.
       Changes in the law relating to trafficking in women had not  resulted
      in a material change in the situation.  The  Respondent  was  a  young
      single woman at risk of abduction for forced prostitution.  She was an
      activist for the Democratic Party and as a result the  lost  her  job.
      The country information showed that some members of the party had been
      arrested and beaten.  We asked Mr Robson whether he  could  assist  us
      with submissions  which  might  indicate  how  the  Respondent  should
      succeed in an appeal under Article 3 if she had failed in her  Refugee
      Convention appeal.  Unfortunately, the submission in reply,  that  she
      would be subject to inhuman  and  degrading  treatment,  sheds  little
      light on this question.


  15. Mr Robson accepts that the Adjudicator erred in his assessment of  the
      Article  8  criteria.   He  conceded  that  the  Respondent  had   not
      established a family life in the United Kingdom.  However,  he  argued
      that she did have a private life.  The circumstances  of  her  private
      life in the United Kingdom were, he submitted, set out  in  the  final
      paragraphs of her witness statement dated 14 May 2002.   He  submitted
      that she could succeed under  Article  8  even  if  she  failed  under
      Article 3.


  16. In reply, Ms Banwait submitted that  the  country  information  showed
      political activities and demonstrations were now  permitted  and  that
      the Democratic Party were part  of  the  legitimate  opposition.   The
      Respondent would not be at risk.


  17. The country reports (for example the Country Assessment at  paragraphs
      4.7 - 4.11) confirms the chaotic conditions in  Albania  in  1997  and
      also show that threats and violence were often part of  the  political
      scene, particularly in the run-up to the 1997 Parliamentary elections.
       However, since 1998, the situation is much improved, even at election
      times.  The  period  preceding  the  October  2000  local   government
      elections was tense but more peaceful (paragraph 4.23 of  the  Country
      Assessment).

  18. We find that on the facts and the country information it was not  open
      to the Adjudicator to find that the Respondent would  be  at  risk  on
      return.  She has not  said  that  she  wishes  to  resume  politically
      related activities, with the Democratic  Party  or  any  other  party.
      However, on the country information, even if she were  to  resume  her
      former level of political activity  with  the  Democratic  Party,  she
      would not now be at risk.  She has not claimed that she or any  member
      of her family still wish to pursue inquiries into  the  death  of  her
      brother.  There is no indication that her family have encountered  any
      difficulties since she left the country, for this or any other reason.
       In any event, in the  light  of  the  improvement  in  the  political
      climate, it is not likely that if she returns, even to her former home
      area, she will be at risk because of  the  inquiries  and  search  for
      justice pursued by her and her family in 1998.  It is more  than  four
      years since she left Albania.

  19. We find that there is no  real  risk  that  the  Respondent  would  be
      abducted and forced into prostitution in Albania or abroad.  There  is
      no suggestion that her earlier abduction was in any way connected with
      the other problems encountered by her and  her  family.   The  country
      information and in particular paragraphs 6.93 to  6.106  of  the  CIPU
      show that the majority of women and young girls are not abducted  into
      prostitution  but  lured  or  tricked  on  promises  of  marriage   or
      attractive jobs.  Only in the minority of  cases  are  they  kidnapped
      (paragraph 6.95).  In the light of  her  age,  intelligence  and  past
      experience it is not likely that the  Respondent  would  be  lured  or
      tricked into  prostitution.   The  chances  of  random  abduction  are
      extremely low, notwithstanding her past  experience,  from  which  her
      father was in any event able to rescue her  before  any  serious  harm
      could befall her.


  20. We find  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  his  conclusion  that  the
      Respondent would be at  risk  on  return.   She  is  not  at  risk  of
      infringement of her Article 2 or  3  human  rights.  It  circumstances
      where she is not at risk on return it is not necessary or  appropriate
      to consider the question of sufficiency of protection.  She  does  not
      need it. To return her to Albania would not  infringe  her  moral  and
      physical integrity.  The only information to which Mr Robson  directed
      our attention in connection with the Respondent's circumstances in the
      United Kingdom is contained in the final  paragraphs  of  her  witness
      statement dated 14 May 2002 in which it is said,


           "I have a degree in English language  and  a  legal  secretarial
           certificate.   I  am  employed  by  the  parent  company  of   a
           restaurant and cafe in Manchester and my  position  within  this
           company is as assistant administrator.  I am  also  employed  by
           Manchester Town Hall, as  a  translator,  providing  an  ad  hoc
           service.  I believe that I have  integrated  well  into  British
           society and despite  the  fact  that  I  am  separated  from  my
           parents, which causes much heartache to all  of  us,  it  is  my
           deepest desire to remain  within  an  environment  where  I  can
           utilise my intelligence and my need for learning.  To lose  this
           opportunity will result in not only  the  loss  of  my  personal
           freedom, but also the suppression of my personality."

  21. It is clear that the Adjudicator erred  in  his  conclusion  that  the
      Respondent had established a family life in the United  Kingdom.   She
      does not claim to have a family life in the United Kingdom.   However,
      she does have  a  private  life.   To  return  her  to  Albania  would
      interfere with this.  To do so would be in accordance  with  the  law.
      We have no doubt that a proper assessment of proportionality leads  to
      the conclusion that in all the circumstances it would be proportionate
      to return her to Albania


  22. For these reasons we allow the Secretary of State's appeal.











   ...........................................
   P. R. Moulden

   Vice President



