
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO GV/30626-1996     |
|On 9 May 2002              |        |                            |
|                           |        |HX/51085-2000               |
|                           |        |HX/59124-2000               |
|LR & Others (Persecution - Vendetta) Colombia CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|03158                                                             |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|26 July 2002                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|LILIA HURTADO DE RINCON                                           |
|NELSON ARTURO RINCON-HURTADO                                      |
|DANIEL NIETO HURTADO                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1.  The  appellants,  who  are  citizens  of  Colombia,   appeal   the
        determination of an Adjudicator (Miss M N Lingard) dismissing their
        appeals against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
        their applications for  asylum.   The  Tribunal  initially  refused
        leave, but that decision was quashed by Order of  the  High  Court.
        Leave was granted on 20 March 2002.

     2. Mr D H Southey, of Counsel, instructed by Glazer Delmar represented
        the appellants while Mr Davidson  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
        State.

     3.  The  first  named  appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  other  two
        appellants, Nelson and Daniel.  Their appeals have at all  material
        times been dealt with  together  by  agreement.   The  first  named
        appellant has some immigration history.  She first arrived here  in
        May 1996.  She was refused  entry  as  a  visitor  and  removed  to
        Colombia.  On 10 June 1996 she returned to the United  Kingdom  and
        applied for asylum.  Her application was refused and she  was  sent
        to Spain on safe third country grounds on 9 August 1996.   She  was
        returned to the United Kingdom on 10 August 1996 and claimed asylum
        on  re-entry.   That  application  was  refused.   An   Adjudicator
        dismissed the appeal.  However,  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
        allowed an appeal from that decision  on  14  August  1997  to  the
        extent of remitting it to  a  different  Adjudicator  to  be  heard
        afresh.  The background to those proceedings was that the  original
        Adjudicator had been requested to adjourn the  proceedings  because
        it was said that the appellant  was  unfit  to  give  instructions.
        When the matter came before the Tribunal on 7 May 1997 the Tribunal
        adjourned the matter to 11 June 1997 in order  that  the  appellant
        could produce further and unequivocal evidence  indicating  whether
        or not the appellant was in a fit state to give  evidence.   On  11
        June the Tribunal had a medical report from a psychiatrist.   While
        it did not consider it necessarily unreasonable of the  Adjudicator
        not to adjourn the proceedings, the Tribunal felt that it  was  now
        clear the appellant  was  now  in  a  position  to  give  evidence.
        Accordingly, the matter was remitted for a fresh hearing.  When the
        matter came before the Adjudicator  on  9  February  2001  she  was
        handed a psychologist report dated 7  February  2001  stating  that
        Lilia  was  still  unable  to  give  an  accurate  account  of  her
        experiences in  Colombia.   Accordingly,  only  her  children  gave
        evidence before the Adjudicator.  Lilia was, however,  present  for
        much of the lengthy hearing before her.  Nelson and Daniel  arrived
        in the United Kingdom  on  24  March  1997  and  27  November  1996
        respectively.

     4. The case of all three appellants concerns a family feud between the
        Hurtados and two other families, the Correa  and  Acosta  families.
        The Hurtado family are historically based in Santuario and the feud
        between the families is, apparently, long established.

     5. The  Adjudicator  reviewed  the  facts  and  made  her  credibility
        assessment in the following closing extract from her determination:

        "101.    My  first  findings  of  fact  relate  to  my  credibility
                 assessments of each appellant.  Only Nelson and Daniel gave
                 oral evidence before me.


            102. In my deliberations about each  appellant's  credibility  I
                 have taken into account each appellant's own  evidence  and
                 also objective evidence before me.

            103. Lilia was not called to give oral evidence before me on the
                 basis of an up-to-date psychologist's report the summary of
                 which identified that as  at  7  February  2001,  two  days
                 before  the  hearing   date,   a   qualified   psychologist
                 considered Lilia was and is  still  not  able  to  give  an
                 accurate account of her experiences in  Colombia.   I  have
                 borne in mind in my deliberations that the appeal Tribunal,
                 having  received  psychiatrist's  report  identifying   the
                 appellant to be fit to give  oral  evidence,  Lilia  having
                 failed to give oral evidence at the initial appeal hearing,
                 determined that the appeal be heard afresh in order to give
                 Lilia a chance to be orally examined.  I realise  that  the
                 psychiatric report  had  indicated  a  possibility  of  the
                 appellant subsequently relapsing into a state where she was
                 unable to give oral evidence but I am bound  to  note  that
                 the most  up-to-date  report  on  this  appellant's  mental
                 health is not one emanating from a qualified psychiatrist.

            104. Lilia had adduced for this  appeal  an  unsigned  statement
                 dated 2 August 2000 in which she  expresses  (paragraph  1)
                 her fears of being unable to  answer  questions  about  the
                 contents of her statement during her appeal hearing because
                 of her memory problems.

            105.  The  respondent  has  attacked  the  credibility  of  this
                 appellant  due  to  discrepancies  in  her  accounts.   For
                 example, in her first  statement  (annexure  B1-B5  of  the
                 appropriate  respondent's  bundle)  the  appellant  clearly
                 stated that she and her family  were  not  members  of  any
                 political party but that they  did  vote  for  the  Liberal
                 party.  Subsequently Lilia has indicated her membership  of
                 and activities for the Liberal party is the reason she  has
                 been persecuted.  There were discrepancies as to  the  date
                 of her husband's death and the period of time during  which
                 in  one  account  the  appellant  was  separated  from  her
                 husband.  While the appellant has sought to  clarify  these
                 matters in her latest statement there has of course been no
                 chance for her to be  cross-examined  and  I  am  bound  to
                 question   the   appellant's   credibility   or,   in   the
                 alternative, on account of medical evidence which questions
                 her ability, among  other  things,  to  recall  events,  to
                 disregard what she has had to say in her accounts.

            106. On account of al these factors, therefore  I  do  not  find
                 credible Lilia's particular claims about being targeted for
                 adverse interest by Correas or  Acosta  family  members  of
                 their hired hands.

            107.  Each  of  the  appellant  has  adduced  a  large  body  of
                 background evidence related  to their claims  such  as,  in
                 the case of Lilia, her Liberal party membership card issued
                 in  1966,  and  in  respect  of  the  whole  family,  death
                 certificates and police reports.   In  many  instances  the
                 originals of such documents  were  adduced  and  I  see  no
                 reason to question the  genuine  nature  of  any  of  these
                 documents.  The respondent has certainly not done so or  if
                 he has, has not taken ample opportunity  given  to  him  to
                 verify or authenticate any of  the  documents.   Lilia  has
                 identified  that  many  of  the  references  to  date   and
                 occurrences  in  her  statement  have  been   obtained   by
                 references to these documents.

            108. By the first named appellant's own admission in one of  her
                 accounts she first became a card  carrying  member  of  the
                 Liberal party in 1966, three years after Nelson  was  born,
                 but claims that she stopped working for the  Liberal  party
                 in 1991.  However, Lilia's first claimed problem appears to
                 have arisen in 1988 when her husband was  attacked  on  the
                 way to the family home in  Santuario.   This  event,  which
                 several years  later  resulted  in  the  death  of  Lilia's
                 husband, seems to me to be related to  individuals  looking
                 for a third party whom they located as staying with Lilia's
                 family.  It would seem  unlikely  to  me,  therefore,  that
                 Lilia's Liberal party membership or activities  played  any
                 part in this, or indeed subsequent problems that she claims
                 to have had within Colombia.

            109. By Lilia's own admission  she  has  never  been  physically
                 attacked or harmed, she has never  been  able  to  identify
                 anyone approaching or threatening her in  relation  to  her
                 problems and, apart from receiving threats over the  years,
                 in  various  locations  where  she  had  lived   throughout
                 Colombia there was only one incident  where  the  appellant
                 suffered the likelihood of  physical  harm,  namely  on  20
                 March 1996 when people went to  the  house  where  she  was
                 staying in Bogota at 2:00 a.m. in the morning, were banging
                 the house with stones and threatening  to  kill  her.   The
                 appellant was, however, able to  escape  her  attackers  on
                 that occasion and, shortly thereafter she  made  her  first
                 journey out of Colombia to the UK.

            110. Bearing in mind that, quite clearly, from evidence supplied
                 by Lilia and her family, numerous members  of  the  Hurtado
                 clan have been violently  killed  or  have  disappeared  it
                 seems to me that, particularly from the  first  appellant's
                 claims that those who meant her harm often knew  where  she
                 lived, that if members of the  Acosta  or  Correa  families
                 were behind the problems that arose and meant her harm they
                 would have easily been able to have taken  action  to  have
                 added Lilia to the list of those other deceased members  of
                 the Hurtado family.

            111. I have difficulty in identifying any reason that might  lay
                 behind any adverse interest in Hurtado family members  from
                 the Acosta or Correa families.

            112. In any event I find it unlikely that politics has been  the
                 motivation that lay behind any problems the  Hurtados  have
                 had in Colombia.  Apart from anything else, during the time
                 when it is likely, by Lilia's own claims, that she was  mot
                 politically active, she does not appear  to  have  had  any
                 problem herself from any quarter.

            113. There have been different accounts between  the  appellants
                 as to what  lies  behind  the  problems  that  have  arisen
                 between the Hurtado, Correa and Acosta families.

            114. There have, at times,  been  indications  that  it  is  the
                 Hurtado name itself that  marks  someone  out  for  adverse
                 attention, although I cannot see how this can be  the  case
                 as clearly,  by  Lilia's  own  admission,  her  mother  has
                 remained in Santuario and  never had  any  problem.   Also,
                 the  appellant's  daughter,  Dora,  never  had   any   real
                 problems.  There are discrepancies in the  accounts  as  to
                 whether or not Dora had any problems at all.  I do not find
                 it credible that Dora did have problems as  while,  in  one
                 account, it is stated that  she  received  threats  on  the
                 other hand Nelson has identified that no one knew of Dora's
                 association with the Hurtado  family  since  she  had  been
                 married and lived in Bogota since around 1976.   I  do  not
                 find credible that the Correa  and  Acosta  families  would
                 have   been   ignorant   of   Dora's   family   background,
                 particularly as the March 1996  and  March  1997  incidents
                 occurred at the home of Dora.  I do no believe Nelson  when
                 he tries to indicate that Dora identified herself to others
                 as someone renting the house so that they were  unaware  of
                 her Hurtado connections.

            115. I am only able to make a very low credibility assessment in
                 respect of Nelson.

            116.  In  my   considered   opinion   Nelson   has   not   given
                 straightforward and clear evidence  regarding  his  claimed
                 connections with the Liberal party.  He gave  a  number  of
                 factually incorrect answers at interview with regard to the
                 Liberal party.  He has tried subsequently to indicate  that
                 he was tired confused and anxious at that interview.  I can
                 understand this.  However, when Nelson was orally  examined
                 before me he displayed the same lack of political awareness
                 that I would not have expected from someone who  had  once,
                 he claims,  been  a  Liberal  party  member,  incidentally,
                 evidence of which has never been submitted.   While  I  can
                 accept the difficulties posed to any asylum seeker  in  the
                 production of evidence in this  particular  case  it  would
                 have been reasonable to suggest that  if  Nelson  had  ever
                 been a member of the Liberal party or had  been  a  Liberal
                 party activist that he would have been able to produce some
                 evidence regarding this, particularly in the light  of  the
                 very  large  body  of  evidence  that  has  otherwise  been
                 adduced.

            117. Again, Nelson was never physically hurt in an  attack  and,
                 by his own admission, was unable to identify his attackers.
                  I discount and give no weight to Nelson's claims of having
                 been arrested  in  1983  as,  even  were  I  to  find  this
                 credible, whatever led the police to  arrest  him  on  that
                 occasion  they  clearly  had  no  long  term  interest   or
                 suspicions about him as he was released within the space of
                 twenty-four hours and never  had  any  subsequent  problems
                 from the authorities.

            118. I do not accept Nelson's claims that  he  was  in  any  way
                 frightened of the police or police  authorities.   Clearly,
                 by his own admission, Nelson has approached the police  and
                 other Colombian authorities on occasions to make statements
                 about threats/attacks and to ask the police to  investigate
                 matters on his behalf.

            119. It is also worth noting, with regard to political  matters,
                 that, even if one were  to  accept  that  Nelson  had  been
                 associated with the Liberal party he  has  identified  that
                 any work he may have carried out for the  party  ceased  in
                 1987.

            120. Daniel was an entirely credible witness.  I have,  however,
                 to bear  in  mind  that,  by  his  own  admission  Daniel's
                 evidence relies entirely upon accounts he has been given of
                 the situation by Lilia and  Nelson.   Daniel  mainly  lived
                 with his sister, Dora in Bogota  and  has  never,  himself,
                 been threatened or attacked.

            121. There have been  references  in  evidence  put  forward  on
                 behalf of the appellants that the Liberal and  Conservative
                 parties within Colombia are split  along  religious  lines,
                 the  Conservatives  representing  Catholicism   while   the
                 Liberals do not.  Each  of  the  appellants  are,  however,
                 identified as being of the Catholic religion.

            122. There has been  evidence  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
                 appellants that the Hurtado family have represented Liberal
                 party interests whereas the  Acostas  and  Correa  families
                 represented Conservative party interest.  However,  I  must
                 note from background evidence that  a  faction  within  the
                 Conservative party of (the Movimiento De Salvacion Nacional
                 (MSN) was led by one Alvaro  Gomez  Hurtado  until  he  was
                 murdered in the October of 1995.

            123. I have also borne in mind in my deliberations  the  starred
                 Tribunal determination in  Gomez.   Although  I  appreciate
                 that the facts involved in that case and the appeals before
                 me  are  entirely  different  this  starred   determination
                 thoroughly pursues many of the same questions raised by the
                 appeals before me.

            124. Were I to have found any of the appellants to have made out
                 a 1951 Convention ground of political opinion I note  that,
                 in the  Gomez  determination  of  the  Tribunal,  where  an
                 appellant can make out a  Convention  ground  of  political
                 opinion he or she must also establish that the  persecution
                 is on account of that political opinion.  As is  stated  by
                 the Tribunal:

                 "A family wishing to revenge the killing of their  son  may
                 not   impute   a   political   opinion   to   the   murder,
                 notwithstanding that the murderer is one of their political
                 opponents.  Of course the family's motives in a  particular
                 case maybe both private revenge and political  animus,  but
                 that will not always be so.


                 It is also common  sense  that  although  one  may  hold  a
                 political opinion, not everything one does is motivated  by
                 that political opinion."


            125. The vast majority of death  certificates  identify  Hurtado
                 family members being the subject of violent  deaths  within
                 Santuario or in neighbouring areas.  Claims  by  the  first
                 and second appellants, therefore, that they were pursued by
                 opposing family members within far flung areas of  Colombia
                 are not for reasons  already  stated  found  by  me  to  be
                 credible and also seem an unlikely eventuality even on  the
                 lower standard of proof applicable.

            126. I have looked at and carefully considered evidence supplied
                 on behalf of the appellants which try to  shed  some  light
                 upon the problems that have arisen and the likely causes of
                 the family feuds that began many years ago in Santuario.

            127. These reports relate to an extract from the book "El Hueco"
                 (The  Hole)  by  German   Castro   Caycedo,   a   Colombian
                 journalist, and expert reports by Professor  Jenny  Pearce,
                 dated respectively 28 February 1997 and  14  December  1997
                 and also the expert report of Dr Elizabeth Allen  dated  14
                 September 2000 (these are contained at, respectively, pages
                 227-292, 295-229 and 302A-302G of the appellants' bundle.

            128. The first mentioned report indicates:

                 "In the cemetery of Santuario the graves do speak and  talk
                 all these stories, in  spite  of  being  divided  into  two
                 distant and irreconcilable  pavilions,  one  by  tombstones
                 with the surname Correa and the other  by  tombstones  with
                 the surname Hurtado.  In  total  there  are  90-2  plaques,
                 corresponding to the same number of dead people of the  two
                 families which decided to eliminate each  other  since  May
                 1983, in a war which began because of a  bunch  of  bananas
                 and which has also involved  other  families  such  as  the
                 Acosta have been victimised, of which there  are  only  two
                 women left because even the paralytic man was  ridden  with
                 shots."


            129. Mr Southey pointed out it is difficult  if  not  impossible
                 for a voyeur or expert from outside  of  the  area  of  the
                 family feud to identify exactly how  or  why  the  vendetta
                 first started or indeed why it continues.


            130. The reports of Dr Allen and Professor Pearce refer  to  the
                 great deal of criminal as well as political violence within
                 Colombia, identifies, regarding Lilia's story, the way  her
                 family got caught up in party  political  violence  as  not
                 being at all unusual and provides specific evidence that 36
                 members of the Liberal party  were  assassinated  in  1995.
                 Professor Pearce's second report, of December 1997,  refers
                 to the fact that historically, in the  nineteenth  century,
                 local leaders took the colour of one or other  of  the  two
                 ruling  parties,  namely,  Liberal  or  Conservative.   She
                 identifies that the  differences  between  them  were  most
                 significantly over religion and also indicates  that  local
                 feuds or disagreements took on a political character  which
                 has stamped itself on generations of the  same  family  and
                 led to revenge killings which characterise  many  areas  of
                 Colombia today.  There is also reference in this report and
                 other reports to these family feuds being fuelled by family
                 associations with the drugs/criminal industry.

            131. None of the writers of any  of  these  reports/publications
                 have come before me to be orally examined on  the  material
                 which have been adduced on behalf  of  the  appellants  and
                 although I have no doubt at all that each of the authors of
                 these materials is  eminently  expert  on  the  subject  of
                 Colombia I must bear in mind that I am unaware of when,  if
                 ever, these experts have travelled to Santuario and none of
                 the authors have provided source materials in  relation  to
                 the particular claims made about the historical and current
                 reasons which lay behind the deaths of so many  members  of
                 the Hurtado, Correa and Acosta families.

            132. I note that in  Gomez,  while  recognising  that  Professor
                 Pearce has a great fund ad depth of knowledge  in  relation
                 to the situation in Colombia, the Tribunal, in relation  to
                 the expert report submitted in that case,  identified  that
                 Professor Pearce should not attempt in her report to  usurp
                 the fact-finding function of the Appellate Authority  whose
                 duty it is to test and evaluate the evidence in  accordance
                 with the legal  criteria  contained  in  the  1951  Refugee
                 Convention.

            133. From assessing all of the evidence now before me it  is  my
                 considered opinion that there have been many violent deaths
                 within not only the Hurtado  family  but  also  within  the
                 Correa and Acosta families too and  that  the  majority  of
                 these  problems  have  arisen  within  Santuario  and   its
                 immediate environs.  It is difficult, if not impossible, in
                 my view to identify  the  original  cause  of  this  family
                 feud/vendetta or to specifically relate one family death or
                 another to either crime,  politics,  drugs  trafficking  or
                 even simple tit for tat killing.

            134. In my view the appellants fail to show that they have  been
                 persecuted on account of politics or of their membership of
                 a particular social  group.   Membership  of  a  particular
                 family is capable of  falling  within  the  category  of  a
                 particular social group.  It is  accepted,  in  this  case,
                 that the agent of persecution is not the state and neither,
                 in these particular cases at least, is it argued  that  the
                 state has colluded in any way with the non-state agents  or
                 persecution.  However, it seems to me, that the persecution
                 does not arise because of an appellant's membership of  the
                 Hurtado family.  There are Hurtado family members who  have
                 clearly not been subjected to  difficulty  or  persecution,
                 both inside Santuario  and  in  other  areas  of  Colombia.
                 Neither can it be shown, in  my  view,  to  the  reasonable
                 likelihood standard, that Hurtado family  members  who  may
                 have been persecuted have  been  persecuted  for  any  1951
                 "Convention reason".

            135. I think one must  not  lose  sight  here  of  the  vendetta
                 aspects which involve not only Hurtado family members being
                 killed by  Acosta  and  Correa  family  members  but  also,
                 presumably Correa and Acosta family members  being  killed,
                 for one reason or another, by Hurtado family  members.   It
                 does not seem to me that  the  1951  Convention  should  be
                 brought into play and offer international protection  where
                 such circumstances exist, even set against the  background,
                 identified  in  the  Gomez  decision,  that  the   Colombia
                 authorities cannot provide an adequacy of protection.

            136. As I have already  identified  it  is,  I  determine,  very
                 difficult if not  impossible  to  locate  the  original  or
                 current reason why the family vendetta  commenced/continues
                 and from the evidence before me it seems, in my opinion  to
                 be continuing  for  a  variety  of  differing  complex  and
                 perhaps interconnected reasons and is not directed  at  all
                 members of the  Hurtado  family,  or  even  necessarily  on
                 account of the fact that one is a Hurtado family member.

            137. In conclusion I find  that  none  of  the  appellants  have
                 shown, even to the lower standard,  that  they  have  well-
                 founded fears of persecution in Colombia on  account  of  a
                 1951 "Convention reason" or that any of them  would  be  so
                 persecuted should they now return to Colombia."


     6. The decisions under appeal in these cases pre-date the coming  into
        force of the Human Rights Act.  Consequently, the  Adjudicator  was
        not concerned with any issues other than asylum issues.

     7. Mr Southey submitted that some of the Adjudicator's findings  might
        be sufficient but others were  suspect  and  a  remittal  might  be
        appropriate.  There was a history  of  political  violence  and  no
        other apparent explanation for the feud.  It was either a political
        feud or it was one which had developed into a  feud  where  no  one
        could remember what the origins were.  Mr Southey  referred  us  to
        Skenderaj [2002] EWCA CIV 567, a decision of the Court  of  Appeal.
        It was not necessary to find discrimination.  The Court  of  Appeal
        had stated in paragraph 29 of the decision that there was "powerful
        authority that kinship or family membership may, depending  on  the
        circumstances, qualify as membership of a particular social group."

     8. The feud was not simply a private matter  in  the  Hurtado  family.
        Even by the standards of Colombia, the events  complained  of  were
        particularly shocking.  Mr Southey  also  relied  on  the  Tribunal
        decision of Jaramillo-Aponte (00/TH/00428) promulgated on 28  April
        2000.  In paragraph 33 of that case  the  Tribunal  had  said  that
        where the target was the family and individuals were persecuted  as
        members of the family, the family  were  a  social  group  for  the
        purposes of the Convention. "On the other hand where the target for
        the persecutory acts is an individual  member  of  the  family  any
        asylum claim based on family membership will depend on whether  the
        individual is being persecuted for a Convention reason.  A critical
        element is therefore, the  identification  of  the  target  of  the
        persecutory acts."

     9. In the case of the Hurtados, the family was the target.  It was not
        a question of one particular individual.   On  the  other  hand,  a
        straightforward family feud did  not  engage  the  Convention:  see
        Naranjo Correa (01/TH/01177) a decision of the Tribunal promulgated
        on 7 June 2001.

    10. The Adjudicator had felt that Lilia was not at risk because no  one
        had attacked her so far.  However there had been a large number  of
        killings over a long period of time.  Not all of the  victims  were
        young.  Counsel did not dispute that the majority  of  the  victims
        had been in Santuario - after all that was  where  the  family  was
        based.  The Adjudicator appeared willing to accept that there would
        be some problems outside Santuario.   A  supplementary  report  had
        been filed by Elizabeth Allen who had dealt with the possibility of
        persecution in areas outside  Santuario.   Reference  was  made  to
        paragraph 133 of the determination.

    11. Mr Davidson accepted that paragraph 133 of the determination  which
        we have re-produced above could  not  be  sustained.   However,  in
        other respects he sought to uphold the Adjudicator's determination.
         He also relied on Skenderaj.  The Hurtado family  were  simply  an
        ordinary family which had got involved in  a  feud.   It  would  be
        artificial to regard it as a particular social group.  Even if  the
        family was a group, the fear of  persecution  was  not  because  of
        membership of the group but because of  fear  of  reprisals  -  see
        paragraph 37 of Skenderaj.   Mr  Davidson  drew  our  attention  to
        paragraph 126 of the determination.   The  feud  appeared  to  have
        begun over a bunch of bananas in May 1983.  It was a  tit  for  tat
        feud and the motivation seemed to be revenge and the fear  was  one
        of reprisals and not because of membership of the group.  There was
        no nexus between the persecution feared and  a  Convention  reason.
        In paragraph 51 of the determination it was confirmed that  neither
        the first appellant nor Daniel had ever  been  physically  hurt  by
        anyone and apart from Nelson's overnight arrest in 1983 neither he,
        his mother nor Daniel had ever been arrested.  In paragraph  58  of
        the determination the Adjudicator had recorded Nelson stating  that
        his sister, Dora, who remained in Colombia, had no  problems.   The
        risks facing the appellants were simply speculative.   It  was  not
        demonstrated that all Hurtados would be  killed.   The  possibility
        for relocation was available - Dora lived in Bogota,  for  example.
        The Adjudicator had dealt with the matter in paragraph 114  of  the
        determination.

    12. Mr Southey submitted that different individuals had been killed  on
        a basis which was unclear.  It was not apparent  immediately  prior
        to their deaths that they were other than safe.  The rival families
        were systematically weeding them out.  The appellants were at  risk
        as members of the  Hurtado  family.   The  reference  to  the  feud
        originating over a dispute about  bananas  did  not  undermine  the
        claim that the origins of the claim were political in nature.

    13. We have carefully considered all the material before us.   It  does
        not appear to us that  the  Adjudicator,  in  a  long  and  careful
        determination was not entitled to make the findings that she did in
        respect of the credibility of the  story  of  the  appellants.   In
        particular, we do not find that she was not entitled  to  make  the
        observations that she did about Lilia's credibility.  The Tribunal,
        when it remitted the matter for rehearing, was  concerned  to  give
        the appellant the possibility  of  an  oral  hearing.   Mr  Southey
        accepted responsibility for not calling the appellant.   It  should
        be borne in mind that Adjudicators have great experience of hearing
        evidence from those who have,  or  who  claim  to  have,  undergone
        traumatic experiences.  They will be  receptive to  arguments  that
        the quality of evidence that an appellant is able to give  will  be
        affected by those experiences.  Medical evidence can be relied upon
        to explain the quality of the evidence.   For  the  most  part,  we
        would feel it preferable for  appellants  to  be  called  in  these
        circumstances.  Where an appellant is not called,  the  Adjudicator
        has to do his  or  her  best  with  the  material  available.   The
        appellant  had  the  advantage  of  being   represented   by   very
        experienced Counsel and we do not wish to  query  in  any  way  the
        course he took.  He had to weigh the advantages  and  disadvantages
        of calling or not calling the appellant.  We do not feel  that  the
        Adjudicator's  credibility  findings  were  other   than   properly
        reasoned and sound and we see no reason to interfere with them.

    14.  Argument  before  us  concentrated  on  the  findings   that   the
        Adjudicator had made in the appellant's favour.  It  appears  clear
        that there has been a long running feud between the families.   The
        origins of  this  feud,  as  the  Adjudicator  said,  are  obscure.
        Nevertheless, it is not in our view, established that  the  origins
        were political.  The extract from the report which the  Adjudicator
        mentions in paragraph 126 suggests that  a  dispute  of  a  private
        nature caused the violence in 1983.  Even Counsel acknowledged (see
        paragraph 127 of the determination) that it was  difficult  if  not
        impossible to identify  exactly  how  or  why  the  vendetta  first
        started or indeed why it continued.  The burden of proof remains on
        the appellants, light though it is in appeals  of  this  kind.   In
        Skenderaj the Court of Appeal considered in paragraph 30 the threat
        faced by the Skenderaj family:

        "The threat was, as in Pedro (which concerned the rape of  a  woman
        in Angola by a soldier) a private matter, just as would be  a  long
        standing and violent feud between neighbours or threats of violence
        from criminals for some actual or perceived  slight  or  with  some
        motive of dishonest gain.  It would be absurd to regard  the  first
        limb of the refugee test as engaged every time a family is  on  the
        receiving end of threatening conduct of that sort."


    15. Mr Southey submits that the family as a family is persecuted  -  if
        it be the case that it cannot  be  established  that  the  feud  is
        political.  The  Court  of  Appeal  approved  the  remarks  of  the
        Tribunal in Naranjo Correa in paragraph 36 of the judgment which it
        may be convenient to set out here:

        "In our view, a straightforward family feud  does  not  engage  the
        protection of the Refugee Convention, unless for example  there  is
        some evidence  of  a  differential  lack  of  protection,  or  some
        Convention  content  over  and  above  the  family  background  (as
        required in (Quijano).    Otherwise  one  might  be  faced  with  a
        bizarre situation that one man would not be protected against  fear
        of his personal enemies; but if they  took  out  vengeance  on  his
        brother, then the brother would be  protected.   No  doubt  if  the
        first man sought to protect his brother, and brought down the wrath
        of his enemies on himself while engaged in that, then he too  could
        expect protection."


    16. The Court of Appeal concluded in the Skenderaj case  that  although
        the family was a particular social group "his fear  of  persecution
        was not because of that membership but because of fear of  reprisal
        for his uncle's act of killing one of the other family."

    17. There is also the question of relocation.  Elizabeth  Allen  states
        as follows in paragraph 3 of her latest report:

        "One  could  argue  that  there  are  degrees  of   risk   in   the
        circumstances described by the client,  and  that  there  could  be
        greatest danger, for  example  in  the  local  area  of  Santuario,
        Pereira and Risaralda.  One could suggest that the risk is  not  so
        great in other larger cities, outside the surrounding region.   One
        could argue that there is lesser risk of danger in "far flung areas
        of Colombia".  In the context of the present situation in Colombia,
        the persecution of individuals is such that  internal  flight  from
        violence has sent over 2 million people to flee from their homes.


        In the whole country, whatever the area, there is justifiable  fear
        and suspicion of strangers, particularly those who have  no  family
        connections.  Persecution, of various kinds, has  found  people  in
        shanty towns, in middle class areas, in small towns  and  villages,
        and in the  main  cities,  through  design  and  sometimes  through
        accidental identification.   In the circumstances that  the  client
        describes, it is credible that the client could still be in fear of
        persecution, even if she moved to another part of the country."


    18. It was not of course necessary for the Adjudicator to consider  the
        question of internal relocation and it is not clear that she indeed
        meant to do so.  She was simply commenting that the majority of the
        problems had arisen in the locality.   The  report,  however,  does
        appear to acknowledge that the degree of  risk  can  to  a  certain
        extent be reduced by moving.

    19. On the authorities, and on the Adjudicator's findings of  fact,  it
        is not established that what is being described  in  this  case  is
        other than a straightforward family feud.  The scale  of  the  feud
        does not transform it from being in the nature of a serious private
        quarrel.  It is, in another words, "a private matter, just as would
        be a long standing and violent feud between neighbours  or  threats
        of violence from criminals for some actual or perceived  flight  or
        with some motive of dishonest gain...." See paragraph 30 Skenderaj.

    20. Valiantly though Counsel has striven to take this case out  of  the
        type of case considered by the Court of Appeal, we do  not  believe
        that in the end he has succeeded.  On the  Adjudicator's  findings,
        she was correct to dismiss these appeals on  all  points  save  for
        those matters canvassed in  paragraph  133  of  her  determination.
        Accordingly, we affirm the Adjudicator's determination and  dismiss
        these appeals.





                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President

