
ar                                                                   Appeal
No.HX37181-01                    MO (McDowall-Reviewed-Objectivity)  Turkey
CG [2002] UKIAT 02583



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 30 April 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 12th July 2002.............

                                   Before:

                           Mr J Barnes (Chairman)
                                Mrs J Harris




                               MEHMET  OZDEMIR


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellants    : Mr G. Hodgetts, counsel,  instructed  by  Gotelee  &
Goldsmith
For the respondent  : Ms C. Cooper, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant  is a citizen of Turkey  of  Kurdish  ethnic  or  racial
      origin who was born on 2 February 1975.  He arrived  illegally in  the
      United Kingdom on 24 November 1999 and claimed asylum on the following
      day.   Following  an   interview   in   January   2000   and   further
      representations  by  his  representatives  shortly  thereafter,    the
      Secretary of State refused his asylum application for the reasons  set
      out in a letter dated 10  April  2001.   On  12  May  2001  he  issued
      directions for his removal to  Turkey  as  an  illegal  entrant  after
      refusal of his asylum application. He appealed against the decision on
      asylum grounds only and his appeal was heard on 20 November 2001 by an
      adjudicator, Mr E.F.  Cousins,  who  dismissed  his  appeal.   At  the
      hearing before the adjudicator  enlarged  his  grounds  of  appeal  to
      assert also that removal would result in breaches of his human  rights
      under Articles 3 and 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
2.    The adjudicator did not believe  that  the  appellant  had  ever  been
      detained as he claimed and the grounds of appeal challenge his adverse
      credibility findings, particularly in relation to failure to take into
      account the medical evidence which was before him. They challenge also
      his failure to make any findings in relation to the expert  report  of
      Mr David McDowell, specific to the appellant, which had been  produced
      to him.  Finally, the determination was challenged on the basis  of  a
      failure to make any assessment of  prospect  risk  on  return  of  the
      appellant, highlighting that there was a lack of record  of  the  oral
      evidence in which the appellant had claimed a further short  detention
      in a general round-up;  that the adjudicator had not made  clear  what
      of the appellant's claims he did  accept,  but  only  those  which  he
      specifically  rejected;  and  that  the  adjudicator  had  rejected  a
      potentially corroborative evidence because he did not  accept  primary
      evidence, and had therefore not looked at the evidence in the round.

3.    Before us, it was common ground that the  challenges  mounted  to  the
      adjudicator's approach his credibility findings were well-founded  and
      that it followed that his dismissal of the appellant's claims  on  the
      basis of those flawed findings was unsafe and  could  not  stand.   Mr
      Hodgetts urged that we should remit the case for hearing afresh before
      another adjudicator but we made it clear that  we  would  follow  this
      course only if we were persuaded that, taking the  appellant's  claims
      at their highest, it was arguable that the appellant was  entitled  to
      succeed, either  by  reason  of  prospective  breach  of  the  Refugee
      Convention or of his human rights on removal to Turkey.  We  therefore
      heard  full  submissions  from  both  advocates  predicated   on   the
      assumption that the appellant was to be regarded as a credible witness
      in relation to the specific acts of adverse attention which he claimed
      he had suffered.

4.    We are satisfied that, even approached on this  basis,  the  appellant
      would fail to discharge the evidential burden of proof on him to  show
      a reasonable likelihood that his removal would lead to a breach of the
      United Kingdom's international obligations either  under  the  Refugee
      Convention or  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   Had  we
      concluded otherwise we would, as we made clear to  the  parties,  have
      remitted this appeal for rehearing.

5.    Approaching the appellant's claim on the basis that, for the  purposes
      of this determination he is being treated a credible  witness  as  set
      out above, the basis of his claim is that he is an ethnic  Serb,  born
      and brought up in Karakocan in the  province  of  Elaziag  in  eastern
      Turkey.    This village is situated in the north eastern part  of  the
      province in what Mr McDowell describes as a salient sandwiched between
      the provinces of Bingol and Tunceli, the later remaining in one of the
      four provinces still within the state of emergency.  He says  that  it
      is an area recognised by the authorities as having  a  high  level  of
      support for  the  PKK.  Apart  from  generalised  discrimination,  the
      appellant claims that he has been detained on  three  occasions.   The
      first was in 1994 when he was going to get medicine  for  his  father.
      He says he was arrested and tortured  for  two  days  because  it  was
      believed that he was getting medicine for the PKK, although his  claim
      was apparently subsequently  accepted  and  he  was  released  without
      charge.  Although no date is given for the second arrest,  it  appears
      that this happened fairly shortly after the  first  arrest.   On  this
      occasion he was arrested with others in  the  village  after  two  PKK
      guerrillas had been killed there and was assaulted,  with  one  severE
      blow by an officer, after being asked  whether  he  was  again  taking
      medicine to the PKK - a clear reference to the earlier occasion -  but
      says that he was then provided with medical treatment, released  later
      on the same day, having again said that he was taking medicine to  his
      father.  His military service, which should have  commenced  in  1995,
      was deferred because he was looking after his parents in the  village,
      but he subsequently served  from  February  1997  until  August  1998,
      returning to the village on his discharge from service.

6.    Although he made a general claim of  arrests  on  numerous  unspecific
      occasions, he also said that in the period from   his  discharge  from
      service, he was able to  avoid  getting  into  any  trouble  with  the
      authorities by maintaining a low profile, and the next  occasion  when
      he claims to have been arrested and detained was in August 1999 during
      a general round-up of males in the village when  they  were  generally
      lectured about PKK support, and he claims that the  authorities  began
      torturing them, although he does not claim to  have  been  ill-treated
      himself on that occasion and the first mention of  it  did  not  occur
      until late in cross-examination a the hearing before the  adjudicator.
      Those detained were released without  charge  on  the  following  day.
      After this he said that his parents advised him to leave  the  village
      and on 15 November 1999 he did so, travelling  to  Istanbul  where  he
      made arrangements to leave the country.  When he left he left  he  had
      his Nufus card which he apparently still retains so that he  is  in  a
      position to prove his identity if returned.

7.    It was Mr Hodgetts' submission to us  that,  on  the  basis  that  the
      credibility of that account was accepted, the appellant would  have  a
      well-founded fear of persecution on return by reason  of  his  imputed
      political opinion.  He  relied  on  a  combination  of  the  following
      factors:  First, that the appellant  would  have  no  valid  passport,
      although he would have his valid  identity  card,  as  we  have  noted
      above; secondly, his own past record of arrest and  detention,  albeit
      for short periods without charge;  thirdly the  fact  that  his  uncle
      had, at some unspecified time, been arrested and tortured in detention
      for three months for having aided PKK guerrillas;  the appellant said,
      however, that his father had no difficulties with the authorities  and
      that his five younger siblings remained  at  home  with  his  parents;
      thirdly, the fact that he came from Karakocan because   of  the  known
      high level of PKK support in the area; fourthly, the fact that he  had
      been abroad now sine November 1999.  It was his submission  that  this
      combination of factors was reasonably likely to lead to suspicion that
      the appellant was a separatist.  Finally, it was relevant to take into
      account that a Dr M.H. Gaddal, a consultant  psychiatrist,  had  given
      his opinion that the appellant satisfied the criteria for diagnosis of
      post-traumatic stress disorder which he ascribes to his  treatment  at
      the  time  of  his  arrest  in  1994.   The  doctor  had   recommended
      prescription  of  an  anti-depressant  and   specialist   counselling,
      although there was no evidence as to whether or not the appellant  was
      currently undergoing any medical treatment.

8.    It  was  Mr  Hodgetts'  submission,  however,  that  because  of  this
      diagnosis there was a reasonable likelihood that the  appellant  would
      be less able to deal with interrogation  on  return  and  might  place
      himself in further difficulties as a result. Mr Hodgetts accepted that
      the issue was whether there was a real possibility of treatment  which
      was either persecutory under the Refugee Convention  or  would  be  in
      breach of Article 3 during initial enquires and interrogation  on  the
      appellant's removal and return to Turkey.

9.    Even accepting all that the appellant says as to his past  experiences
      in Turkey, this can hardly be described as a strong case.  There  were
      two major incidents but both occurred in or about 1994 but cannot,  it
      seems to us, be regarded as in any way instrumental to the appellant's
      departure some five years later in late 1999.   However  improper  the
      behaviour of the authorities at that earlier time, the  appellant  had
      remained in his home village looking after his parents as  the  eldest
      child  and  assisting  on  the  farm  without  any  further   specific
      difficulties.  The authorities  had  agreed   to  defer  his  military
      service because of the  family  circumstances.   He  had  subsequently
      carried out that service and returned once more to  his  home  village
      where he stayed for a further fifteen months.  On his own account,  he
      was able to avoid any further problems with the authorities from  1994
      until August 1999 by keeping a low profile in his  home  village.  His
      father had no difficulties with the  authorities  but  one  uncle  did
      because, he claims, the authorities discovered  the  uncle  had  given
      some forced assistance to the PKK on one occasion.  Although the uncle
      was detained and ill-treated, he was subsequently released  and  there
      is no suggestion  that  he  has  ever  been  re-arrested,  it  is  not
      suggested that as a result of what happened to the uncle the appellant
      experienced any difficulties whilst in Turkey.  The  appellant  claims
      that the reason he decided to leave  his  country  was  the  overnight
      detention in the general round-up in village in  August  1999,  during
      which he has not claimed that he personally was ill-treated.  We  note
      also that this incident occurred at a time of heightened tension  when
      Ocalan, the PKK leader, had  been  captured,  returned  and  tried  in
      Turkey, and that there were moves afoot  for  the  PKK  to  declare  a
      ceasefire at his request, following his  conviction  and  sentence  of
      execution, which has never been carried out.

10.   The appellant has produced an expert report from  Mr  David  McDowell,
      who has provided expert reports in relation to the  situation  of  the
      Kurds in Turkey on many previous occasions. This report is specific to
      the appellant and is dated 31 October 2001.  He says that the province
      of Tunceli is notorious as arguably  the  most  recalcitrant  part  of
      Turkish Kurdistan and remains  within  the  region  of  the  state  of
      emergency.  As we have already noted, the appellant's home village  is
      in a part of Elazig  province,  close  to  the  province  of  Tunceli,
      although it appears that the main mountain ranges are somewhat to  the
      north of the appellant's home area. We note  that  he  says  that  the
      worst period during the 1990s was the second part of 1994


              '... when the security forces launched  major  operations  in
             all three provinces, aimed not only  at  getting  rid  of  PKK
             guerrillas  but  also  aimed  at  intimidating   the   Kurdish
             population.'
11.   He says that hundreds of villages  were  either  wholly  or  partially
      empty in the area and that Karakocan was one of those emptied in 1994,
       although curiously the appellant makes no such claim himself  and  it
      is clear that he and his family lived there  throughout  this  period,
      working the family farm.

12.   In support of his views expressed as to the state of  affairs  in  the
      appellant's home area, Mr  McDowell  then  quotes  at  length  from  a
      statement  he obtained as to the treatment of a former father from the
      province of Mus, to the east of Bingol  province  and  therefore  some
      distance  from  the  appellant's  home  area,  which  relates  to  the
      treatment of him and his family there until they left the area in late
      1993.

13.   Harrowing though that account, we are bound to say that  in  our  view
      it can have little relevance to the appellant's  account  of  his  own
      experiences from 1994 onwards at some remove from the  area  referred.
      It seems to us also significant that the appellant certainly has never
      claimed such treatment in his home area or any  forced  evacuation  of
      his village such as is referred to in the anecdotal  reference  by  Mr
      McDowell.  With all respect to Mr McDowell, we cannot  think  that  it
      assists us in accepting his report when he says in terms:


              'This example provides a powerful indication not only of  the
             kind of violations Mr Ozdemir has good grounds  to  fear,  but
             also the dangers he faces if returned to Turkey.'

14.   We therefore have some concerns about the degree of objectivity  which
      can be attached to Mr McDowell's report.

15.    We  note  that  Mr  McDowell  says  that  the  only  bearing  on  the
      appellant's situation of his having carried out  military  service  is
      'that it will be seen that he is not evading his military service' and
      that he goes on to say:

             'The vast majority of Kurds complete  military  service,  most
             probably unwillingly as they cannot possibly  agree  with  the
             prime purpose of the Turkish armed forces which  is,  and  has
             been ever since 1925, to keep the Kurds in subjection.'


16.   With all respect to Mr McDowell, this would again seem  to  call  into
      question  the  objectivity  of  his  report,  having  regard  to   the
      considerable percentage of the Turkish  population  comprising  ethnic
      Kurds and the large numbers whom it is accepted are  assimilated  into
      Turkish society.  That  there  may  be  many  of  those  carrying  out
      military service who do  not  agree  with  the  aims  of  the  Turkish
      government in relation to the Kurds, we accept will be the  case,  but
      to say of all Kurds that 'They cannot possibly agree  with  the  prime
      purpose of the armed forces' does cause us some further concern.

17.   Mr McDowell deals specifically with the  question  of  return  of  the
      appellant in the following terms:
             "Being without a valid travel document, Mr  Ozdemir  will,  if
             returned, be held at Istanbul airport.  His name  and  details
             will be passed to the anti-terror police on Vatan  Caddesi  in
             Istanbul.  They will contact the  jandarma  in  Karakocan  who
             will check their records and  will  probably  also  check  the
             village he actually comes from.   If  there  is  no  suspicion
             regarding him, he will be  allowed  to  enter  Turkey  without
             further difficulty, but it is a very big   "if",  particularly
             bearing in mind that Karakocan is close to one  of  the   last
             remaining "hot" areas of PKK or other armed activity.'


18.   Pausing there, it is apparent that what Mr McDowell is saying is  that
      if the appellant is not of adverse interest  to  the  authorities,  he
      will face no difficulty in returning to Turkey.  There is, of  course,
      evidence cited in the Home Office Country Information and Policy  Unit
      (CIPU) assessment that there is no reasonable  likelihood  of  adverse
      treatment whilst such enquires are being made.   As  we  have  already
      noted, the appellant will be in a position to prove  his  identity  by
      production of his Nufus card and the thrust of the evidence before  us
      is that the appellant  was  able  to  live  in  his  home  village  in
      circumstances where he has not been the subject of any direct  adverse
      attention since his original short period for detention in 1994, dealt
      with above.  On the other  two  occasions  he  had  been  day  without
      charge.  It does not seem to us on the basis  of  that  evidence  that
      there is any reason to conclude that there is a reasonable  likelihood
      of therein being caught up in a general round-up and  released  either
      on the same day or on the following any suspicion in  relation to him.

19.   It is right, however, to record that Mr McDowell goes to say  that  he
      is duty bound to remind the court of the warnings given by  two  human
      rights organisations in Turkey, the Human Rights Foundation of  Turkey
      (TIHV) and the Turkish Human Rights Association (IHD).  He  says  that
      they no more than any other body regarding what happens  to  returnees
      and that this led to them issuing explicit warning in March 1999  that
      no European country should return anyone who was refused  asylum.   He
      goes on to say that 'They did so primarily because they  were  alarmed
      at the cases of mistreatment on reactor about which they had heard and
      their belief, based on experience, that they only  learn  of   a  very
      small fraction of the total amount  of  mistreatment,  probably  under
      10.'

20.   He then refers to what was said by TIVH in March 1999, which  referred
      to 'certain risks' for returned failed asylum seekers, adding that the
      risks 'had reached a peak at a  time  when  substantial  human  rights
      violations are occurring at a sensitive period'.

21.   It is appropriate to note at this point that this warning  was  issued
      shortly after Ocalan was forcibly returned to Turkey  on  15  February
      1999 and we accept that was indeed a highly sensitive period.
22.   Speaking of matters at that time, it is clear that  what  is  said  by
      TIVH is anecdotal rather than derived from any direct  evidence.  They
      refer to the likelihood of detention on return,  saying  that  it  may
      last a few hours when the period  is  released  but  that  'there  are
      examples of such detention practices leading to serious consequences'.
       They then go on to say:

             'The risk of facing ill-treatment is very high for  those  who
             are deported to Turkey. In this matter, the examples  reaching
             human rights organisations in recent times show that  some  of
             those who claim for political asylum and had been refused  and
             sent back to Turkey, were subjected to  torture  and  inhumane
             treatment.'

23.   It is immediately apparent to us that, having started  by  claiming  a
      high risk of ill-treatment for all those deported, this claim is  then
      very much reduced within the same paragraph as being based on the fact
      that some of the returned failed  asylum  seekers  were  subjected  to
      torture and inhumane treatment.

24.   Perhaps the IAD, also issuing a statement in March 1999, may  be  seen
      to be more realistic because Mr McDowell reports that they  criticised
      European governments repatriating Kurdish activists whose applications
      had been refused - a class where there may well be a greater degree of
      risk - but it seems to us that the validity of their position is  then
      seriously undermined from the passage which Mr McDowell  then  quotes,
      which makes it clear that they regard deportation of Kurdish  refugees
      as contrary to the Refugee Convention and the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights as a matter of principle. They say  in  terms:  'The  IHD
      objects in principle to the deportation of any  person  to  a  country
      where such problems [routine  and  flagrant  violation  of  the  basic
      Articles of the  European Convention] exist'.

25.    The  first  obvious  point  is  that  European  countries  have  been
      returning failed Kurdish asylum seekers, as have  the  United  States,
      Canada and Australia.  According to the CIPU table, over  7000  failed
      asylum seekers have been returned between 1989 and 2000. If there were
      routine  ill-treatment  of  failed  asylum   seekers,   we   find   it
      inconceivable that there would not be substantial  evidence  of  this.
      In those circumstances,  we  are  not  particularly  impressed  by  Mr
      McDowell's statement that he asked those two organisations in  October
      2000 whether they would now modify their warnings but they  said  that
      they would  not.   In  any  event,  that  was  a  year  prior  to  the
      preparation of his report and is now eighteen months in the past as at
      the date of the hearing before us.  Mr McDowell also refers to Amnesty
      International having expressed its concern  over  forcible  return  of
      asylum seekers, but makes  it  clear  that  the  last  such  expressed
      concern was in a statement issued in early  February  1994.   He  says
      that he spoke with an Amnesty official in October 2000 and understands
      that the reason the warning has not been updated  'is  not  that  they
      believe it no longer to be applicable, but that they  lack  sufficient
      staff to maintain a close monitor on the asylum issue'.   Included  in
      the appellant's bundle are number  of  Amnesty  International  reports
      issued between August 1999 and 30 November  2000.   They  all  express
      concerns about the treatment of those detained in Turkey but there  is
      no reference to  any  particular  danger  to  returned  failed  asylum
      seekers.  The position of the UNHCR  is  that  failed  Turkish  asylum
      seekers may be returned provided that their cases have  been  properly
      investigated and they have been found not to be refugees or in need of
      international protection on other grounds.

26.   So far as Mr McDowell's views  are  concerned,  it  also  comes  as  a
      surprise to us that in a report obtained in October 2001, there should
      be such reliance on earlier material, particularly  having  regard  to
      the absence of  any  reference  at  all  to  the  capture,  trial  and
      conviction of Ocalan and to this call on 2 August 1999 to the  PKK  to
      withdraw its troops from Turkey and to cease military operations  from
      1 September 1999. Two days later the PKK Presidential Council  confirm
      that PKK combatants would cease operations  against  Turkey  and  that
      appears to remain the position. Those are matters which must have such
      a  clear bearing on the situation  in Turkey that  it  does  not  seem
      credible to us that the independent report of an expert should fail to
      deal with them at all.

27.   For all these  reasons,  we  find  ourselves  unable  to  rely  on  Mr
      McDowell's view as being objectively based and we do not consider that
      his report adds any weight to the appellant's case.

28.   Mr McDowell also dealt with the question of  internal  relocation  and
      suggested that this was not an option for someone like the  appellant,
      basing himself largely on the anecdotal evidence quoted at  length  of
      the Kurd from Mus province, to which we have already referred.  It was
      clear, however, that he  and  his  family  were  regarded  as  Kurdish
      activists from his own account.  He had moved to a shanty town outside
      Istanbul where he had  registered  with  the  Mukhtar  under  a  false
      address.  It maybe that this man had good cause to be  concerned,  but
      what is apparent is that the appellant is not in  a  similar  category
      since the authorities have shown no active current interest in him for
      many years.  Many thousands of  Kurds  have,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
      relocated within Turkey and we also place no weight upon Mr McDowell's
      views as to the ability of this appellant to move to  other  locations
      in Turkey should  he  so  desire.   We  note  from  the  current  CIPU
      assessment (paragraph 7.26)  that  Turkish  citizens  generally  enjoy
      freedom of movement domestically and (paragraph 7.31) that  UNHCR  are
      advised that, in general, Kurds  fleeing  south  east  Turkey  have  a
      possibility to relocate within Turkey provided that they  are  not  at
      risk of being suspected of connection to or sympathy with the PKK,  or
      have otherwise a political profile.

29.    Having  carefully  considered  the  background  evidence  before  us,
      including that to which we have not made  specific  reference,  taking
      the facts at their  highest,  we  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
      discharged the burden upon him to show that he has a well-founded fear
      of persecution by reason either of his ethnicity  or  of  any  imputed
      political opinion if now returned to Turkey.  We accept  that he  will
      be interrogated on his arrival to  ascertain  whether  he  is  of  any
      adverse interest to the Turkish authorities.   Taking  his  claims  at
      their highest, he fails to satisfy us that he is of such interest.  We
      find that he had no subjective fear of persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason when he left Turkey and that he  has  no  current  well-founded
      objective fear if now returned.

30.   For similar reasons, we find that there is  no  reasonable  likelihood
      that on return he will be subjected to  treatment  in  breach  of  his
      human rights under Article 3 of the European Convention or that  there
      will be any  other  breach  of  his  human  rights.   If  he  requires
      treatment  for  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  arising  from   what
      happened to him in  1994,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  such
      treatment will not be  available to him in Turkey where he was able to
      live until his departure in 1999 whilst so suffering.  That  the  fact
      of such a condition may lead to any danger of ill-treatment to him  on
      return, is, with respect to Mr Hodgetts, no more than  speculation  on
      his part.  There is no evidence on the facts of this case  to  support
      such a submission.

31.   For the above reasons we have  concluded  that  the  appellant  cannot
      succeed  in  his  claims  even  if   his   credibility   is   accepted
      unreservedly.

32.   We accordingly dismiss his appeal.







                                  J BARNES
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


