
ar          FJ (FARC- Convention Reason) Colombia CG [2002] UKIAT 03219
                                                   HX45998-01

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of Hearing : 9 May 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              29.07.2002....

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                                Mr D K Allen
                                Mr C P Mather




                          FRANCISCO ANTONIA  JURADO


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Mr S. Khan, counsel, instructed by Nimal Jay & Co.
For the respondent : Mr A. Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, who is a citizen of Colombia, appeals by leave  of  the
      Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  an  adjudicator  (Mr  J.   Azam)
      dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to
      grant leave to enter and asylum.  The grounds of  appeal  are  in  the
      bundle before us.

2.    The appellant entered this country on 2  March  2000  and  immediately
      claimed asylum. The basis of his claim is that he was a farmer who was
      approached by FARC and who required him to grow coca  crops  in  order
      that they might manufacture cocaine.  He refused to do this and handed
      over a part of his farm land on  which  the  guerrillas  then  planted
      their own coca crop which he subsequently destroyed.  Because  of  his
      fear of the guerrillas he then fled the village and abandoned his farm
      to the guerrilla forces.  He claimed that he fled to  the  town  where
      his brother lived and that he was  followed  there  by  the  guerrilla
      forces who in fact shot at him and his brother, killing his brother in
      the process. Subsequent  threats  were  made  by  letters  which  were
      produced to the adjudicator at the hearing. He then decided  to  leave
      the country. The murder of his brother was reported to the police,  as
      was the loss of his land.

3.    The adjudicator has found that  the  death  of  the  brother  was  not
      connected with the loss of the appellant's land to the guerrillas  and
      that, having achieved their object  in  obtaining  possession  of  the
      land, there was no further threat to the appellant were he to  return.



4.    The grounds of appeal maintain that the adjudicator has  not  properly
      considered  the  Tribunal  determination  in   the   case   of   Gomez
      (00/TH/02257) and that he has not  made  proper  findings  as  to  the
      authenticity of the threatening letters to which he was referred.

5.     Miss  Khan  in  her   submissions,   in   particular   attacked   the
      adjudicator's failure to make  proper  findings  with  regard  to  the
      authenticity of the threatening letters. She submitted that FARC has a
      political agenda and drew our attention to certain objective  material
      in support of this submission. The threats he  had  received  indicate
      quite clearly that the appellant was targeted because of  his  refusal
      to cooperate with FARC and they thus imputed a  political  opinion  to
      him. She submitted that the Tribunal should find that these  documents
      are  genuine  and  that  following  such  a  finding  the   Tribunal's
      determination in the case of  Quintero  (01/THE/01923)  should  apply.
      She submitted that relocation anywhere in  Colombia  was  out  of  the
      question as FARC would follow the appellant wherever he  might  be  in
      that country.

6.    Mr Sheikh, in his submissions, pointed out that  the  object  of  FARC
      obtaining possession of the appellant's land was in order  to  produce
      coca for subsequent production of cocaine and that  their  motive  was
      therefore entirely economic and criminal.  It may well be that FARC as
      a guerrilla organisation does have a political aim but not within  the
      context of this particular appellant, and then it could not be  found,
      within the context of the Tribunal's determination in Gomez,  that  he
      has an imputed political opinion.  We were referred to extracts of the
      Tribunal's determination in Gomez to which we shall  refer  hereafter.
      The objectives of FARC, so far as this appellant  is  concerned,  have
      been achieved and  therefore  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should
      persecute him any further.

7.    Mr Sheikh submitted that the  adjudicator  had  made  proper  findings
      with regard to the death of the appellant's brother.  He accepted that
      the adjudicator  had  made  no  clear  findings  with  regard  to  the
      authenticity of the documents produced at the  hearing  and  submitted
      that this was an error which  the  Tribunal  can  itself  rectify.  He
      submitted  that  the  letters  of  themselves  did  not  justify   the
      appellant's claim that he was  persecuted  for  an  imputed  political
      opinion.  He submitted that the objective evidence before us indicated
      that FARC does not control the whole of Colombia and  therefore  there
      were areas in that country to which the appellant could relocate.

8.    We will deal first with ground  1  and  the  question  of  an  imputed
      political opinion, and in this connection we have considered with care
      the Tribunal's starred determination in the case of  Gomez.   In  that
      determination the Tribunal  considered  extensively  the  question  of
      political opinion and imputed political opinion.  The  case  of  Gomez
      also related to a Colombian citizen who had been threatened  by  FARC.
      With regard to imputed political opinion, the Tribunal states:

             'The political opinion ground requires a broad definition  but
             not so broad as to cover any opinion which a  non-state  actor
             may impute.' (para (v) of the summary of conclusions).

9.    In the following paragraph the Tribunal states:

             'To qualify as political, the opinion in question must  relate
             to  the  major  power  transactions  taking  place   in   that
             particular society.  It is difficult to see  how  a  political
             opinion can be imputed by a non-state actor who, or which,  is
             not itself a political  entity.'

10.   Further on in the same section  of  the  determination,  the  Tribunal
states:

             'Even in a case where an appellant can make out  a  Convention
             ground of  political  opinion,  he  or  she  must  still  also
             establish  that  the  persecution  is  on   account  of   that
             political opinion.  It is commonsense under  this  nexus  test
             that even where persecutors have political views  about  those
             they target, it may not always be the political  opinion  that
             motivates their  action.   As  was  said  in  Jeah,  the  mere
             existence of a generalised political motive does not  lead  to
             the conclusion that the persecutor perceives what the claimant
             has said or done as political.'

11.   Again, at paragraph (xii) it is stated:

             'Even  in  cases  involving  criminal  gangs  or   guerrillas,
             however, evidence of imputed political  opinion cannot consist
             solely of the general political purposes of the persecutor.'

12.   It is our view, and this view is supported by the Tribunal  in  Gomez,
      that  FARC,  although  a  guerrilla  organisation  employing  criminal
      activities in pursuit of its aim, is a political entity, albeit a non-
      state actor. A study of the objective evidence can only lead to such a
      conclusion and the activities of FARC,  its  political  aims  and  the
      efforts it employs in achieving those aims,  are  well  known  to  the
      Tribunal and well-documented in the objective evidence which is before
      us in this case and has been before other Tribunals.

13.   It is not in  dispute that this appellant is apolitical,  and  has  no
      record of having opposed FARC  in  any  manner  whatsoever  whilst  in
      Colombia, save when FARC sought to compel him to  plant  coca  on  his
      farm, which he refused to do, but nevertheless, presumably by  way  of
      compromise, handed over certain acreage to FARC in order that they may
      themselves plant the coca.  He subsequently destroyed that  crop.   It
      was at that point that he then fled the farm and has abandoned  it  to
      FARC.

14.   We asked ourselves whether that  action  of  his  and  his  subsequent
      action in reporting the activities of FARC in relation to his farm and
      the death of his brother to the police can amount to imputed political
      opinion.  This aspect of imputed political opinion  has,  as  we  have
      stated earlier, been extensively examined by the Tribunal in Gomez. It
      might  be  useful  if  we  were  to  quote  some  extracts  from  that
      determination.  The Tribunal referred to the case of Canada  (Attorney
      General) v Ward [1993] 2 SCR 689 747.

             'The persecution stems from the desire to put down any dissent
             viewed  as  a  threat  to  the  persecutors.    Grahl-Madson's
             definition assumes that the persecutor from whom the  claimant
             is fleeing is always the government or  ruling  party,  or  at
             least some party having parallel interests to the  government.
             As noted earlier, however,  international  refugee  protection
             extends to situations where the state is not an accomplice  to
             the persecution  but is unable to protect  the  claimant.   In
             such cases it is possible that the claimant may be seen  as  a
             threat  by  a  group  unrelated,  and  even  opposed,  to  the
             government,  because  of  his  or  her  political   viewpoint,
             perceived or real.'

15.   At paragraph 36, the Tribunal quotes from the case of Sanga v INS  103
      F3DL482487  (9 CRII 1997):

             'In establishing any imputed political opinion, the  focus  of
             enquiry turns away from the views of the victim to  the  views
             of the persecutor. We consider, however, not the  persecutor's
             own political opinions, but rather  the  political  views  the
             persecutor, rightly or in error, attributes  to  his  victims.
             If the  persecutor  attributed  a  political  opinion  to  the
             victim, had acted upon that  attribution,  this  imputed  view
             becomes the applicant's political opinion  as  required  under
             this act.'

16.   Prima facie, therefore,  it  would  appear  that  there  is  a  strong
      argument in favour of Miss Khan's contention that  by  destroying  the
      coca crop and by subsequently reporting FARC activities to the police,
      FARC has attributed an imputed political opinion to this appellant.

17.   At paragraph 52 of the determination in Gomez, the Tribunal states:

              'It is necessary at this point to record that even in a  case
             where an  appellant  can  make  out  a  Convention  ground  of
             political  opinion,  he  or  she  must  also  establish   that
             persecution is on account of that political opinion.'

      Later in the same paragraph, the Tribunal states:

             'Just  because  persecutors  may  in  some  cases    attribute
             political opinions to victims or opponents, does not mean that
             they will necessarily do so in every case.'

18.   At paragraphs 53 and 54 the Tribunal states:

             '53. It is also commonsense  that  although  one  may  hold  a
                 political opinion, not everything one does is motivated  by
                 that political opinion.


             54.  Reflecting these commonsense notions, the Tribunal  would
                 categorically reject the idea that even in  countries  such
                 as Colombia where the boundaries between the political  and
                 the  non-political  have  been  heavily  distorted  by  the
                 conduct of paramilitary bodies and drug cartels, every case
                 where such a body persecutes  must  be  on  account  of  an
                 imputed political opinion.  We  would  reaffirm  the  point
                 made  in  Quijano  (10699)  that  where  the   concern   of
                 persecutors was not a political one  but  one  to  maintain
                 their economic position through criminal activities and  to
                 that end intimidate, and if necessary eliminate, those that
                 oppose the pursuit of that aim,  then  there  would  be  no
                 conflict based upon refusal to perform political  acts  but
                 only criminal ones.

19.   It is clear from the facts of this case which are not in dispute  that
      the original threats made by FARC against the appellant were made  for
      purely economic reasons  i.e.  the  desire  of  FARC  to  improve  its
      economic  strength  by  the  manufacture  of  cocaine  illicitly   and
      therefore by the planting of coca upon  the  appellant's  land.  Their
      action in  planting  the  coca  and  in  taking  possession  from  the
      appellant of a portion of his land, and subsequently taking possession
      of the whole of  his  land  indicates  a  purely  economic  motive  in
      relation to this appellant  and  his  land.  There  was  no  political
      motivation on their part at that stage.

20.   We would quote from paragraph 67 of the Gomez determination:

             'Even where the non-state actor is  a  guerrilla  organisation
             (like FARC), carrying out state-like functions in parts of the
             country, there will  arise cases in which no political  motive
             is involved. Such organisations for some if not  much  of  the
             time may act for purely economic reasons.  Their  reasons  for
             seeking retribution against victims may for some if  not  much
             of the time be purely criminal. Indeed the background evidence
             suggest that most of the kidnappings undertaken  by  FARC  and
             ELM are financially motivated  (1,985  in  1999)  rather  than
             politically motivated (372 in  1999).   Deciding  whether  any
             kidnapping is purely financial or purely political or  is  for
             mixed financial and political motives will obviously therefore
             depend upon the particular circumstances of each case.'

21.   We have no hesitation, on  the  facts  of  this  particular  case,  in
      finding that FARC's objective in threatening the appellant, in seizing
      part of his land, in  planting  it  with  coca,  and  in  subsequently
      seizing  the whole of his land, was purely financial, not a mixture of
      financial or political motives.

22.   We then move to  consider whether or not the disruption  of  the  coca
      crop by the appellant and the report by him to the  police  of  FARC's
      activities upon and in relation to his  land,  can  give  rise  to  an
      imputed political opinion.

23.   The action of the appellant was to seek police  protection,  which  in
      all probability was not available,  and  to  attempt,  presumably,  to
      regain possession of his land with the help of the state  authorities.
      In paragraph 47 of the determination in Gomez the Tribunal states:

             'It also follows from this approach that it cannot be said  as
             a universal proposition that those on  the  side  of  law  and
             order and justice who face persecution from non-state  actors,
             by the guerrilla organisations or political gangs or  criminal
             gang, will have a political opinion imputed to them.  If  that
             is  what  Acero-Garces  meant,   then  we  must   respectfully
             disagree.  Rather it will depend on the particular country and
             its particular circumstances  whether  that  is  so.  Thus  in
             Storozhenko (19935) a Tribunal chaired by  the  President,  it
             was held that those on the  side  of  law  and  order  in  the
             Ukraine, would not have a political opinion imputed to them by
             criminals intent on persecuting the appellant.


      24.   In Storezhenko, the Tribunal states:

             'We  do  not  regard  Acero-Garces  as   authority   for   the
             proposition that any victim of crime  who  seeks  redress  but
             cannot because of police corruption  or the power of  criminal
             element, is entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  Convention
             ground because he may be perceived to be on the  side  of  law
             and order.  Normally, imputed  political  opinion  will  arise
             where there is perceived opposition to a  policy  espoused  by
             the  government  or  its  agents.   Since  protection  can  be
             extended to  cover  those  who  are  persecuted,  not  by  the
             government or its agents, but because government  is unable or
             unwilling to  afford  the  protection  from  the  persecutors,
             witnesses to crime may,  if  they  come  forward  to  help  be
             properly regarded as coming  under  the  umbrella  of  imputed
             political opinion. But we think that such cases would be  rare
             and limited to situations such as existing in  Colombia  where
             no protection can  be  given  because  the  criminals  are  in
             effective control.'

25.   The final sentence in our quotation from the Storezhenko case has,  in
      our, view been dealt with by the Tribunal in  Gomez  in  paragraph  67
      from which we have quoted above.

26.   For these reasons we therefore would find that the appellant  has  not
      been persecuted by reason of any imputed political opinion.

27.   Turning to the question of the failure by the adjudicator to make  any
      findings as to the authenticity of the documents, being  ground  2  of
      the ground of appeal, the adjudicator has stated in paragraph 33:

             'As far as the remaining documents are concerned, I am  unable
             to come to any firm conclusion about their authenticity.'

28.   This does not of itself fatally flaw the  determination  and  in  fact
      does to some extent follow the guidelines of the Court  of  Appeal  in
      the  case  of  Karanakaran  where  their  lordships  stated  that   an
      adjudicator, if unable to come to any conclusion about any  aspect  of
      the evidence before him,  he should consider the possibility that  the
      event in question occurred. Their lordships did go on to indicate that
      the benefit of the doubt might well be given to the appellant in  such
      circumstances.

29.   The letters of which complaint is made are those quoted in  paragraphs
      19, 20 , 21 and 22 of the determination. In  our  view,  even  it  was
      accepted that the documents were authentic, we do  not  consider  that
      they strengthen the appellant's claim that FARC persecuted him for  an
      imputed political opinion.   The  first  of  such  letters  quoted  in
      paragraph 19 makes it clear  that  the  motive  of  FARC  is  entirely
      economic.  It states:

             'Mr Francisco Jhirao we don't want to  harm  you.   Just  hand
             over your land and everything will be OK, or  else;  you  know
             that your life is at risk, FARC.'

30.   That in our view clearly indicates that FARC is acting  for   economic
      reasons, and certainly not at that  stage  attributing  any  political
      opinion whatsoever to the unfortunate victim.

31.   The remaining three letters quoted  in paragraphs 20,  21  and  22  do
      not, in our view, further the  appellant's  claim  that  there  is  an
      imputed political opinion.  As  we  have  indicated  earlier  in  this
      determination, leaning on the side of law and order does not impute  a
      political opinion.  The tenor of  the  letters  makes  it  clear  that
      threats arise out of the fact that the appellant  drew  the  attention
      of the police to the FARC activities on  his  land.  For  the  reasons
      which we have indicated earlier in this determination, this  does  not
      amount to the imputation of political opinion.

32.   For these reasons the appeal is dismissed.





                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


