
ar                                                      Appeal No. HX25996-
2001
                            ME (Failed Asylum Seeker-Danian) Sudan CG [2002]
                                                                 UKIAT 00997

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 27 February 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  05.04.2002

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                                 Mr R Baines
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP





                 MAGDA  ABDALLA  HASSAN  ABDELAZIZ  ELSAYED


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For  the  appellant  :  Mr  P.  Dovey  of  Peter  Dovey  &  Co.,  solicitors


For the respondent : Mr D. Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of the Sudan and appeals by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an adjudicator  (Mr  A.W.  Rose)
      dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent  refusing
      leave to enter and asylum.

   2. The appellant arrived in this  country  on  her  own  passport  on  15
      January 1996 and immediately claimed asylum.  The basis of  her  claim
      is set out in paragraphs 14 to 16 of the determination.


   3. Her husband is in this  country.   He  arrived  in  1991  on  his  own
      passport with a valid UK entry visa for six months.  He claimed asylum
      shortly before this period expired. On 6 May 1994 his  appeal  against
      refusal was dismissed by a special adjudicator.  Leave  to  appeal  to
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal was refused on 22 July of  that  year.
      Her husband continues to remain in this country.

4.    The adjudicator found the appellant  to  be  lacking  in  credibility,
      dismissed her claim that she was at risk of persecution by  reason  of
      her husband's activities and dismissed her claim under Articles 3  and
      8 of the ECHR.

5.    The grounds of appeal attack the adjudicator's findings,  particularly
      so far as they relate to the husband's failed asylum  application  and
      appeal. It is common  ground  that  the  appellant  had  no  political
      involvement prior to leaving the Sudan and therefore the basis of  her
      claim was essentially risk of  persecution  by  association  with  her
      husband.

6.    Mr Dovey informed us that the husband was attempting  to  re-open  his
      claim for asylum and to regularise his  status  in  this  country.  He
      submitted that the basis of this application to the  Home  Office  was
      that the appellant did not receive proper legal advice at the time  he
      applied for asylum and during the course of his subsequent appeal.  We
      indicated to Mr Dovey that this may or  may  not  be  so  but  was  no
      concern  of  ours.   So  far  as  we  were  concerned,  the  husband's
      application for asylum had been refused by the Secretary of State, his
      appeal had been dismissed and leave to appeal to the Tribunal had been
      refused and the matter therefore ended there.   Bearing  in  mind  the
      fact that the wife's claim was based entirely  upon  association  with
      her husband, that she herself had  no  political  involvement  in  the
      Sudan, we did not consider it at all unreasonable that the adjudicator
      should have examined the basis upon which the husband's claim had been
      dismissed by another adjudicator in order to ascertain  whether  there
      was any possibility of a reasonable likelihood of persecution  of  the
      wife by reason of any of the matters  found  by  that  adjudicator  in
      respect of the husband's failed appeal.  We indicated to Mr Dovey that
      it was not our function to re-examine the husband's claim for  asylum,
      this having been dealt with and was, so far as we were concerned,  now
      closed.  Mr Dovey accepted this position.

7.    The basis of his  submissions  to  us  is  that  the  appellant  since
      arriving in this country  has  herself  become  involve  in  political
      activities because she has joined the UK branch of the DUP  party  and
      therefore there was a reasonable likelihood of  persecution  upon  her
      return, irrespective of her motives in joining the DUP party  in  this
      country.    In Mr Dovey's submission, the appellant was covered by the
      Court of Appeal decision in the case of Danian [2000] IAR 96. He  also
      submitted that the adjudicator's assessment of the human rights  claim
      was flawed.

8.    Mr Ekagha drew our attention to the fact that  the  appellant  had  no
      political activity in the Sudan, she maintains that she had  left  the
      country because of her husband's position but that position  had  been
      rejected by an adjudicator.  There is no evidence that  the  appellant
      has attended any demonstrations  in  this  country  and  he  drew  our
      attention to the adjudicator's assessment of the appellant's claim  to
      be a refugee sur place and in particular paragraphs 61 and 62  of  the
      determination.   He pointed out that the  appellant  arrived  in  this
      country after her husband's appeal had been  dismissed  and  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal had been refused, and that the husband had been
      in this country since the refusal of leave to appeal to  the  Tribunal
      in 1994 in breach of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  legislation.   The
      wife's attempts to show that  she  is  politically  involved  in  this
      country is merely an attempt to bring herself within the provisions of
      Danian.

9.    Notwithstanding what is contained in the grounds of appeal, Mr  Dovey,
      in our view quite rightly, did  not  seek  to  persuade  us  that  the
      adjudicator's findings with regard to the  basis  of  the  appellant's
      claim are perverse  and  should  be  overturned.   We  have  carefully
      examined the determination and  we  consider  that  the  adjudicator's
      findings in relation  to  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  suffered
      persecution prior to arrival in this country  lacked  credibility  are
      perfectly  sound,  for  the  reasons  which  are  set   out   therein.
      Furthermore, we consider that the adjudicator's finding upon her claim
      that she is at risk upon return by  reason  of  association  with  her
      husband's activities with the DUP and, apparently, his involvement  in
      a coup,  are  in  our  view  perfectly  valid.   The  adjudicator  has
      carefully considered the basis upon  which  the  husband's  claim  was
      rejected on appeal  to  a  special  adjudicator,  and  refers  to  the
      determination of that  adjudicator  in  his  own  determination.   The
      husband was found to be lacking  in  credibility  and  his  claim  was
      rejected for  that  reason.   We  do  not  have  the  benefit  of  the
      adjudicator's determination in relation to the husband's claim  before
      us but we are satisfied that the adjudicator in the instant appeal has
      carefully considered  the  implications  upon  the  appellant  of  the
      husband's claim and the rejection of that claim.  We can therefore see
      no reason to re-examine the adjudicator's finding that  there  was  no
      reasonable likelihood of persecution of the appellant  by  association
      with her husband were she to return.

10.   The essence of this claim  is  the  appellant's  dependence  upon  the
      judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case  of  Danian.   It  is  not
      disputed that the appellant joined the UK branch of the  DUP  in  this
      country.  It would appear that she is a member of a women's  committee
      of that party in this country.   The  objective  evidence  before  the
      adjudicator indicates that there are instances of  the  DUP  party  in
      this country being infiltrated  by  representatives  of  the  Sudanese
      government.

11.   Lord Justice Brook gave the leading judgment in  the  case  of  Danian
      and         states         (at          page          122)           :



             'For  all  these  reasons  I  do  not  accept  the  Tribunal's
             conclusion that a refugee sur place who has acted in bad faith
             falls outwith the Geneva Convention and can be deported to his
             home country, notwithstanding that he has a genuine and  well-
             founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason and  there
             is a real risk that such persecution may take place.  Although
             his credibility is likely to be low  and  his  claim  must  be
             rigorously scrutinised, he is still entitled to the protection
             of the  Convention,  and  this  country  is  not  entitled  to
             disregard the provisions of the Convention   by  which  it  is
             bound, if it should turn out that he does indeed  qualify  for
             protection against refoulement at the time his application  is
             considered.'

12.   Later in the same judgement he states:

             'I wish to end this judgement by saying  that  nothing  in  it
             should be read as giving any kind  of  green  light  to  bogus
             asylum seekers.  If the UNHCR guidance is followed in the vast
             majority of cases of the type  I  have  been  considered,  the
             claim for asylum will be peremptorily  dismissed  without  any
             real difficulty.  It is  only  what  Lee  J  describes  as  an
             extraordinary case that a genuine  entitlement  to  protection
             from refoulement may arise, and  in  such  a  case  the  calim
             should be tested on the principal basis that I have set out in
             this judgment.  It should not be rejected  peremptorily  on  a
             basis that appears to have o sound foundation in international
             law.'

13.   The adjudicator has  to  all  intents  and  purposes  found  that  the
      appellant's involvement with the DUP in this country is 'in  order  to
      enhance her claim to refugee status.'  He has given his reasons and we
      would not disagree with those reasons.   We  would  emphasis  that  in
      finding that membership of the DUP is mala fide the  following  points
      have to be borne in mind:


      (a)   The appellant had no political activity in the Sudan
      (b)   Her claim to have been  persecuted  in  that  country  has  been
           dismissed by the adjudicator as lacking  in  credibility.   This
           finding has not been seriously challenged before us.
      (c)   The appellant arrived  in  this  country  two  years  after  her
           husband's appeal against refusal of asylum  had  been  dismissed
           and leave to appeal to the Tribunal had been refused.
      (d)   Her husband had been found to be lacking in credibility.
      (e)    Her  husband  has  remained  in   this   country   since   1994
           notwithstanding lack of proper immigration status  and  did  not
           give evidence at the appellant's appeal.

14.   Prima facie, these  facts  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant's activities in this country are self-serving and  that  she
      has acted in bad faith.

15.   Notwithstanding this, we now come to consider whether Danian  applies.
       It should be emphasised that  their  Lordships  in  the  Danian  case
      remitted the case for hearing by a  differently  constituted  tribunal
      because the Tribunal  had  rejected  peremptorily  Mr  Danian's  claim
      without full examination of it, taking the view  that  his  claim  was
      based upon bad faith.  What is clear to us from  the  Danian  case  is
      that, irrespective of the motive of an appellant,  the  obligation  is
      upon the Tribunal to examine whether or not an appellant's  activities
      in this country would be likely to give rise to a well-founded fear of
      persecution upon return.  Brooke LJ in Danian quoted extensively  from
      a letter which was before the Court of Appeal from  the  UNHCR.   That
      quotation is contained on page 121 of the judgement.  The UNHCR state:



             'Accordingly, even if the applicant has  created  a  claim  to
             refugee  status  by  resorting  to  opportunistic  post-flight
             activities,  it  would  not  be  right  to  deprive   him   of
             international protection and return him/her to his country  of
             origin if it is established  that  the  consequences  of  such
             return may result in such persecution for one of  the  reasons
             enumerated in the 1951 Convention.  The  following  paragraph,
             when  dealing  with  the  right  of  that  letter  refers   to
             "opportunistic actions" stated  "for  this  reason  the  UNHCR
             would not object to a more stringent evaluation of  the  well-
             foundedness  of  a  person's  fear  of  persecution  in  cases
             involving opportunistic claims."


             In  this  connection  it  should  be  borne   in   mind   that
             opportunistic post-flight  activities  would  not  necessarily
             create a real risk  of  persecution  in  the  claimant's  home
             country, either because they will not come to the attention of
             the  authorities  of  their  country   or   because   of   the
             opportunistic nature of such activities will  be  apparent  at
             all, including to those authorities.'

16.   On the basis of their lordships judgments and those guidelines of  the
      UNHCR, we examine whether or not there is a reasonable  likelihood  of
      the appellant being persecuted by reason of  her  activities  in  this
      country.  As the adjudicator rightly points  out,  the  appellant  was
      unable to give any details as to the demonstrations she  had  attended
      in London, though it is apparent from the supporting evidence  of  one
      of her witnesses that one or more of these demonstrations was  outside
      10 Downing Street.  There is objective material to indicate  that  the
      Sudanese authorities in this country do infiltrate the DUP  and  other
      anti-government organisations.  However, the correspondence  from  the
      two witnesses,  Mr  Tarik  Mohamed  and  Mr  Mirghani  which  we  have
      examined, both of whom are active and prominent  members  of  the  DUP
      organisation in London, assert generally that this infiltration  takes
      place but does  not  give  any  indication  that  they  are  aware  of
      infiltration in their  particular branches and particularly that  they
      are aware of infiltration  into  the  women's  section  to  which  the
      appellant belongs.   Major General Mirghani states that  he  is  aware
      that members of the Sudanese authority  attend  political  activities.
      Whether this attendance is  at  demonstrations  (which  is  more  than
      possible) or the actual committee or party meetings is not clear.   If
      the latter, it seems strange  that  those  attending  are  not  vetted
      before the meetings start. No evidence has been submitted that  either
      the demonstration in Downing Street or any other demonstrations  which
      the appellant claims she attended in London and in  respect  of  which
      she can give no details, were filmed  by the Sudanese authorities  and
      in particular  that,  were  they  filmed,  the  appellant  would  have
      appeared on that film.  Demonstrations against the Sudanese government
      in  London  generally  and  in  front  of  the  Sudanese  Embassy   in
      particular, would appear to be fairly common  occurrences.   There  is
      nothing before us which  would  indicate  that  the  position  of  the
      appellant is  such  that  her  activities  would  be  brought  to  the
      attention of the Sudanese authorities in this  country  and  therefore
      back in  Khartoum.   Assertions  made  by  the  appellant  are  purely
      speculation.  Although the  appellant  is  a  member  of  the  women's
      committee, we have no information as to the size  of  that  committee,
      and the appellant certainly does not claim to be an  officer  of  that
      committee or  indeed  hold  any  prominent  position  within  the  DUP
      organisation in the United Kingdom.

17.   As Brooke LJ rightly states 'Although his credibility is likely to  be
      low and his  claim  must  be  rigorously  scrutinised,   he  is  still
      entitled to the protection of the  Convention  --.'   The  appellant's
      credibility is low in this particular case.  She has been found to  be
      lacking in credibility in relation to  her  own  claim  to  have  been
      persecuted in the Sudan, her claim to fear persecution  by  reason  of
      her husband's activities has been rejected  by  the  adjudicator,  her
      husband's own claim in his own right to asylum has been  rejected  and
      leave to appeal refused. The appellant arrived  in  this  country  two
      years after her husband's claim had been  rejected.   The  appellant's
      credibility in such circumstances must  be  low.  Therefore,  we  must
      treat with circumspection  her  claim  that  her  activities  in  this
      country will lead to persecution upon return.  We take the  view  that
      they do not, for the reasons which we have  given.  And,  although  we
      accept that she was a member of the DUP in this country, by reason  of
      her low credibility we do not  consider  that  her  claim  that  those
      activities will of themselves lead to persecution can be justified.

18.   It is clear from  the  rejection  of  the  husband's  claim  that  the
      authorities in the Sudan have no interest in him.   It is  clear  from
      the adjudicator's determination in  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
      authorities have no interest in her.  We cannot see,  therefore,  that
      whatever activities she may have indulged in  in  this  country,  they
      would have any interest in her by reason of those activities.

19.   The appeal is dismissed.




                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


