
CH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX45636-2001      |
|On 1 August 2002           |        |WN (Risk -Kikuyu - Rift     |
|                           |        |Valley-Documentary Evidence)|
|                           |        |Kenya CG [2002] UKIAT 04138 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                    |Date Determination notified:|
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |.......03/09/2002...........|
|                                    |........                    |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MR P R MOULDEN (CHAIRMAN)                                         |
|MRS E MORTON                                                      |
|MRS S HUSSAIN JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|WINFRED WANJA NGANGA                                              |
|                                                                  |
|APPELLANT                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|RESPONDENT                                                        |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya who has been given leave to appeal
      the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr P  M  Kilty),  dismissing  her
      appeal against the Respondent's decision to give  directions  for  her
      removal from the United Kingdom and to refuse asylum.


   2. Miss M Riley-Poku, of Counsel,  instructed  by  Arona  Sarwar  &  Co.,
      Solicitors, appears for the Appellant.  Ms C  Cooper,  a  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, represents the Respondent.

   3. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  12  March  2000.   She
      applied for asylum  three  days  later.   The  notice  containing  the
      decision against which she appeals is dated  20  December  2000.   The
      Adjudicator heard the appeal on 20 December 2001 and leave  to  appeal
      was granted on 11 June 2002.

   4. We have the Appellant's bundle containing 82 pages and the Home Office
      Kenya Country Assessment for April 2002.

   5. Part way through her submissions, Miss Riley-Poku referred to a recent
      witness statement by the Appellant.  We queried  this  and  it  became
      apparent that copies had not been submitted to the Tribunal or to  the
      Respondent.  We  looked  at  the  witness  statement,  signed  by  the
      Appellant, and dated 27 July 2001.  There was no evidence to  indicate
      that it contained information which would have prevented it from being
      prepared and submitted much earlier, and certainly within the fourteen
      day  deadline  before  the  hearing  required  by  standard   practice
      directions.  Ms Cooper objected  to  the  submission  of  the  witness
      statement and we declined to accept  it.   It  was  out  of  time  and
      Ms Riley-Poku was not able to give any reason for its late submission.

   6. The Appellant claimed to fear  persecution  from  the  authorities  in
      Kenya for two reasons.  Firstly, her husband, a former policeman,  was
      accused of stealing guns and  other  weapons  to  be  used  in  tribal
      clashes.  He had disappeared and the police were interested in her  as
      a means of finding him.  Secondly, she and her husband  were  at  risk
      because they were Kikuyu.  It is now argued  that  these  matters  are
      interrelated and that the risk arising from the  husband's  activities
      is exacerbated because he and his wife are Kikuyu.  However, to  start
      with, the Appellant did not make clear that her claim was in  any  way
      based on her being a Kikuyu.

   7. The Adjudicator did not make a blanket  adverse  credibility  finding.
      He  accepted,  in  paragraph  16  of  the  determination,  that,  "the
      Appellant may have been the subject of attention from the  police  and
      that as a result she may have  been  ill-treated".   However,  in  the
      light of the country reports and the particular facts, he  found  that
      she would not be  at  risk  if  she  were  to  return.   She  had  not
      established a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
      or that her human rights  would  be  infringed,  in  particular  under
      Article 3.

   8. Leave to appeal was granted in respect of all the grounds  of  appeal.
      It  is  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not   understood   the
      Appellant's claim.  She was at risk from the  police  because  of  her
      husband's activities  and  her  ethnicity.   The  Appellant  has  also
      submitted three documents which are referred to as warrants but  which
      we prefer to call by the title shown on them, that is "Bond to  Attend
      Court", which we will abbreviate to "bond".  These were not before the
      Adjudicator.  The three are on the same form,  entitled  "Republic  of
      Kenya, the Kenya Police, Bond to Attend  Court".   In  the  form,  the
      named individual binds herself to attend a Court at a particular  time
      in the matter of a particular charge on pain of forfeiting a specified
      sum.  Each is dated, signed by a  police  officer,  and  witnessed  by
      another police officer.  They have not been signed by  the  Appellant.
      They are dated 1 January 2001, 28 June 2001 and 14 January 2002.   The
      Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 March 2000.

   9. Miss Riley-Poku submitted that the determination  was  flawed  because
      the  Adjudicator  said,  "I  find  it  difficult  to  understand   the
      Appellant's story".  Obviously, there was a failure of  understanding.
      She submitted that the basis of the claim was clear.  In reply to  our
      question, Miss Riley-Poku confirmed that the Appellant only claimed to
      have been detained by the police on one occasion, as set  out  in  the
      answers to questions 27 and 30 of her interview.  This refers  to  one
      period of detention for three weeks in February 2001.

  10. Miss Riley-Poku emphasised  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  made  an
      adverse credibility finding.  Paragraphs 5.5 to 5.57  of  the  country
      assessment showed that  Kikuyu  were  persecuted  by  the  government,
      dominated  by  the  ruling  Kalenjin  tribe.   This  contradicted  the
      Adjudicator's conclusion that  there  was  no  objective  evidence  of
      persecution.  We were also referred to the State Department report  at
      page 79.

  11. Miss Riley-Poku submits that the Appellant's statement that  she  last
      saw her husband when he was arrested was  not  inconsistent  with  her
      statement that she last saw him when he disappeared.  Too  precise  an
      interpretation should not be placed on the exact wording.  She was not
      able to explain why, as the bonds are designed for  signature  by  the
      individual concerned, they were used as they could not  be  signed  by
      the Appellant at a time when she was out of  the  country.   She  also
      conceded that there was no indication of who the bonds were  given  to
      after they had been issued.  We were asked to allow the appeal.

  12. Ms Cooper referred us to the country assessment and submitted that the
      clashes between Kalenjin and Kikuyu in the Rift Valley took  place  in
      1992 to 1993 and 1997.  There was no proof that  the  government  were
      involved against the Kikuyu.  We were referred to a number of passages
      in the country assessment and,  in  particular,  those  at  paragraphs
      5.14, 5.46, 5.49, 5.52, 5.53 and 5.54.  There was no evidence  of  the
      current  persecution  of  Kikuyu  because  of  their  ethnicity.   She
      submitted that the Adjudicator was correct to  find  that  the  Kikuyu
      were not persecuted by the Kalenjin, the government, or  anyone  else.
      The fact that the Appellant was a policeman supported  the  conclusion
      that Kikuyu were not persecuted.  The authorities were not  likely  to
      allow a Kikuyu to become a policeman if they were persecuting Kikuyu.

  13. In relation to the bonds, Miss Cooper submitted that they should  have
      been signed by the Appellant, but all were dated at a  time  when  she
      was in the United  Kingdom.   She  had  never  said  that  the  police
      suspected her of being involved  with  "clashes"  or  "clashes/tribal"
      which were the reasons  given  on  the  bonds.   The  bonds  had  been
      completed with incorrect spelling and the  dates  were  in  the  wrong
      places.  Applying Tanveer Ahmed principles, we should give  little  or
      no weight to these documents.  It was submitted that  the  Adjudicator
      was correct  in  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
      persecuted because of her ethnicity.  There was no evidence  that  the
      authorities would still be interested in her or her husband.
  14. We find that the Appellant is not now at risk  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason or infringement of her human rights.  It is accepted
      that she was arrested, detained and ill-treated for one  period  only,
      in February 2001, for three weeks.  She does not claim that the police
      were interested in her because of her own  activities.   It  is  clear
      that the police were interested in her, detained, questioned and  ill-
      treated her to try and obtain information which would enable  them  to
      find her husband.  It is not  likely  that  she  was  of  any  greater
      interest to the  authorities  because  she  is  Kikuyu.   The  country
      information does not support the contention that the police are likely
      to persecute Kikuyu purely because they are Kikuyu, absent  any  other
      reason.

  15. The police have never  accused  the  Appellant  of  stealing  guns  or
      involvement  with  her  husband's  criminal  activities.   Their  only
      interest in her was to try and find him.

  16. The country information  does  not  support  the  Appellant's  belated
      claims that she was harassed because she was Kikuyu.

  17. Applying Tanveer Ahmed principles and assessing the bonds in the light
      of the evidence as a whole, we place no weight on  them  as  evidence.
      The Appellant has not provided any country information  to  show  what
      forms are likely to be used and on what occasion.  In the  absence  of
      this information, the documents do not appear  to  suit  the  purpose.
      They appear to be designed for an individual to sign when he or she is
      bailed to appear at court.  The vaguely specified charges of "clashes"
      or "clashes/tribal" do not relate to the circumstances  in  which  the
      Appellant  claimed  and  the  Adjudicator  found  that  she  had  been
      detained.  The bonds refer to an existing charge,  yet  the  Appellant
      never claimed to have been charged with anything.

  18. The country information shows that in the past there have been serious
      clashes between the Kalenjin and  Kikuyu  in  the  Rift  Valley.   The
      evidence does not show that these continue to any  serious  extent  or
      that individual Kikuyu are likely to suffer ill-treatment  because  of
      their tribal origin.

  19. We agree with the Adjudicator's conclusion and dismiss the appeal.




                                                                 P R Moulden
                                                              Vice President
