
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

  Decision no. AH (Medical Facilities) Serbia and Montenegro CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       07478
                                                      Appeal no. HX 41531-01
Heard:      31.01.2003
Typed:      31.01.2003
Sent out:   28/03/2003


                     IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-99



Before:
                       John Freeman (chairman)
                             and
                       Mrs ML Roe

Between:
                                Agron HASANI,
                                  appellant

and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent



                             DECISION ON APPEAL

Mr J Melvin (counsel instructed by  Howe & Co, N22) for the appellant
Mr J Morris for the respondent

   This is an appeal from a decision of  an  adjudicator  (Mrs  EB  Grant),
   sitting at Taylor House on 20 February 2002, dismissing  an  asylum  and
   human rights appeal by an Albanian citizen  of  the  Pre?evo  valley  in
   Serbia. Leave was given on the basis that  the  adjudicator  might  have
   been wrong in  expecting  the  appellant  to  be  able  to  get  medical
   treatment on return by crossing over to Kosovo; and Mr  Morris  did  not
   argue that she was right about that.


2. The question remains as to whether  the  appellant  could  now  get  the
   treatment he needs in Serbia itself. He has produced a good report  from
   a GP, which shows exactly what he is suffering from, and what  treatment
   he is now getting. What it does not show is the prognosis, because since
   this appeal last came before the Tribunal on 25 July 2002, he  has  been
   waiting to see a consultant in gastro-enterology.  The  solicitors  have
   tried several times, through the GP, to bring that forward;  but  to  no
   avail. We were asked to adjourn the hearing  once  more;  but  there  is
   still no appointment date, and it is high time this case was heard.


3. This is what the GP said on 2 September 2002:


   In a previous medical report dated 21st  January  2002  [the  appellant]
   identified as suffering form persistent epigastric  pain,  resistant  to
   two levels of antacid treatment. He also suffers  from  depression  with
   sleep disturbance. He was initially treated with triple therapy for  one
   week  for  the  eradication  of  Helicobacter  infection  of  his  upper
   intestine. As this failed he was on review in May 2002  commenced  on  a
   two week course of Heliclear (triple therapy consisting  of  Amoxycillin
   19m twice daily,  Lansoprazole  30mgs  twice  daily  and  Clarithromycin
   500mgs twice daily. This time for two weeks.

   His symptoms persisted in spite of this he was referred in June 2002 the
   Gastro-enterologist at the  North  Middlesex  Hospital.  The  consultant
   assessment is awaited, but meanwhile  he  continues  on  treatment  with
   Lansoprazole 30mgs  daily.  Anxiety  and  sleep  disturbance  were  more
   prominent features of his depression and his  anti-depressant  treatment
   was revised to Trimipramine 50 mgs  one  at  night,  which  remains  his
   current treatment.


4. It follows that the appellant is getting treated for his depression, for
   which no further investigation has been advised. That  has  been  sought
   for his gastric problem; but so far to  no  avail,  and  he  is  getting
   Lansoprazole meanwhile to deal with the symptoms. As neither side  could
   tell us what kind of drug that was, we consulted  the  British  National
   Formulary, and showed them what it said. It is recommended for ulcers of
   various   types,   and   specifically   "gastritis    associated    with
   H[elicobacter] pylori".

5. The evidence before us about medical treatment available in Serbia is to
   be found in the current [October 2002] CIPU report, and in  an  exchange
   of e-mails between the Home Office and the British Embassy in  Belgrade.
   The CIPU report says:



   Medical Services


24. A recent UNICEF report  concluded  that  the  public  health  system  in
   Serbia does not meet the minimum needs of the population. Although  Serb
   citizens are legally entitled to free health treatment, years of neglect
   and corruption under the Milosevic regime  have  seriously  damaged  the
   health service.
   5.25 A comprehensive survey of  Serbia's  health  service  in  2001  was
       undertaken by the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia.  The
       report observed that "Hospitals are -  ruined,  doctors  impoverished
       and corrupt and patients are compelled to pay for  all  services  and
       medicines." [7g] In hospitals, as well as  paying  for  the  bed  and
       food, patients usually have to pay for everything else they need  for
       their treatment. Most hospitals are very old,  some  lacking  running
       hot water and heating. The ratio of hospital beds to patients is very
       low (1 bed for 184 patients) and yet  they-are  under-utilised  (70%)
       because of inefficiency.
   5.26 When the new  government  took  over  in  October  2000,  it  found
       widespread abuses  and  misappropriation  of  funds,  describing  the
       situation in the health service as  "critical".  In  late  2000,  the
       entire health system subsisted on foreign aid  in  kind.  The  health
       services in  2001  remained  characterised  by  an  extreme  lack  of
       resources at all levels and spheres  of  work;  an  urgent  need  for
       restructuring; poor organisation  and  chronic  inefficiency;  and  a
       heavy reliance upon foreign donor support-to  enable  the  system  to
       function even at the low level  that  it  does.  The  pay  of  health
       workers is very low and the quality of services suffered because some
       employees were reduced to moonlighting to earn a minimum subsistence.


   5.27 The state of the health service in  Serbia  is  paralleled  by  the
       deterioration in the health of its population. As well as  inadequate
       treatment,  likely  causes  are  stress,  poverty  and  poor   living
       conditions. The 1999 statistics indicate the highest death rate,  the
       highest. suicide rate (among the highest in the world) and the lowest
       birth rate since 1945. [54b] Infant mortality is up by 3% in the last
       ten years. Cases of tuberculosis, heart  disease and cancer have also
       increased in recent years, with numbers of cancer cases in 2000 up by
       63%  from  1991.  The  mental  health  of  the  population  has  also
       deteriorated.  Massive  consumption  of  Bensadine,  Bromazepam   and
       Diazepam suggests that one in every two people in Serbia are  reliant
       on sedatives.


   The e-mail, dated 7 June 2002, gives details of numerous drugs available
   in Serbia both for depression and for gastric ulcers (said  also  to  be
   common there).


6. The position in which the  appellant  is  likely  to  find  himself,  if
   returned, is one where he will continue to suffer depression of a fairly
   ordinary kind, not amenable to further investigation or  treatment;  and
   unexplained gastric pain, which should be investigated, which  might  or
   might not raise a possibility of further treatment. There can be, and is
   no suggestion that the sort of "out-patient drugs" required to  palliate
   both conditions are now available in Serbia. While gastric investigation
   would be desirable, it has not been given a high priority by the medical
   authorities in this country. We cannot say that the likely lack of it in
   Serbia would make  sending  the  appellant  there  an  invasion  of  his
   "physical and moral integrity", contrary  to  art.  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights, let alone "inhuman or  degrading  treatment"
   contrary to article  3.  So  far  as  his  recurrent  symptoms  of  both
   conditions are concerned, he is likely to receive appropriate  treatment
   there.


Appeal dismissed



                                                     John Freeman (chairman)
