
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC02801-2002      |
|On 27 November 2002        |        |MH (Safe Route-Presevo      |
|                           |        |Valley via Belgrade) Serbia |
|                           |        |CG [2002] UKIAT 06398       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.....04.02.2003...                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)                                          |
|Mrs L H S Verity                                                  |
|Mr P Rogers, JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Meritan Hasani                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr P Anim-Addo of Counsel
                       Representing Develmi & Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia
      (FRY) and is of ethnic Albanian background, has just  turned  18-years
      of age and comes from the Presevo Valley  district  which  is  in  the
      province of Serbia but close to the border with Kosovo.  At the outset
      Mr McGirr made available to us the Home Office Country Information and
      Policy Unit (CIPU) Country Assessment Bulletin for April 2002 for  FRY
      and also Bulletin 1/2002 for FRY and also Bulletin  1/2002,  dated  16
      September 2002 also  from  CIPU  "Returns  to  Serbia  and  Montenegro
      (excluding Kosovo)", a bulletin that replaces  Bulletin  1/2001  which
      has now been withdrawn.

   2. The Vice President, Mr Fox, in granting leave to appeal in this matter
      stated:

           "The applicant comes from the Presevo Valley and the Tribunal is
           of the view that the grounds of appeal are arguable particularly
           in relation to the question of the safety of return via  Baghdad
           and the respondent must be prepared to address this issue at the
           hearing."

   3. It is apparent that Mr Fox spelt out this issue in the grant of leave,
      indeed in a further hearing that immediately followed this matter Beti
      (HX/13117/2002) the same issue of the safety of return via Baghdad and
      through Serbia to the Presevo Valley was also considered.  The  reason
      for this was that over the past 18 months or more several decisions of
      the Tribunal have addressed the issue of the safety of return  to  the
      Presevo Valley by Albanian Serbs.  These included determinations  such
      as Gjemali  (01/TH/2883)  heard  on  9  October  2001,  Osmani  [2002]
      UKIAT00136 (heard 2 January 2002), Motoshi [2002] UKIAT01175 (heard on
      14 March 2002, Rexhepi [2002] UKIAT02460 (heard on  1  May  2002)  and
      Gashi  [2002]  UKIAT03850,  heard  on  9  August  2002.    All   these
      determinations considered the issue of safety of return to the Presevo
      Valley by ethnic Albanians.  In all of these no in-depth consideration
      was given to the safety of the actual route that  would  be  taken  by
      such returnees, if they are declined asylum or that there would be  no
      breach of the ECHR.  The respondent has advised that the return  route
      would be to Belgrade and then across Serbia  to  the  Presevo  Valley.
      The issue therefore which needed consideration and  is  undertaken  in
      these two determinations  is  not  only  is  there  a  risk  to  these
      appellants in returning them to the Presevo Valley but also would they
      be at risk to the extent that their claims would be well-founded  when
      they are returned to Belgrade and then make their way across Serbia to
      the Presevo Valley.  The prima facie concern in addressing this  issue
      is of course that in the Presevo Valley ethnic Albanians  are  in  the
      majority (see CIPU report April 2002 at 5.50) whereas in the  rest  of
      Serbia they are very much in the  minority.

   4.  Both  parties  agreed  that  these  were  the  principal  issues  and
      concentrated their submissions in that area.

   5. Mr Anim-Addo submitted that we should regard carefully the letter from
      the UNHCR, London, dated 5 September 2002 which forms part of Bulletin
      1/2002 CIPU.  It is useful to set this out in full.  It states:

           "With regards to returns via  Belgrade,  our  branch  office  in
           Belgrade have informed us that individuals  from  Presevo  being
           returned through Belgrade should  not face any undue  hardships.
           This is provided that the persons concerned have  the  necessary
           travel documents and adequate arrangements are  made  for  their
           safe travel to their place of origin.


           On the security situation, reports  indicate  that  over  recent
           months there has been a cessation of  open  conflict,  and  that
           only few reports of serious violations  by  security  forces  in
           southern Serbia.


           It is however to be  borne  in  mind  that  the  area  is  still
           characterised by tensions between the ethnic Albanian  community
           and the large Serb police and military presence.  The UN  Inter-
           Agency Report and Recommendations on the Situation  in  Southern
           Serbia, FRY, January 2002, provides an overview  inter  alia  of
           the security situation in Southern Serbia.  This report  can  be
           found at www.undp.aug.yu/files/reports/un-reports-ss-200201.pdf.

           Given the prevailing inter-ethnic  situation,  UNHCR  recommends
           that returns to the Presevo via Belgrade should  be  implemented
           with caution."

      It is signed by the Deputy  Representative in London.

   6. Mr Anim-Addo stressed that this appellant had just turned 18,  he  had
      lost contact with his mother and his father was dead, thus the caution
      advised in the UNHCR letter should be very  much  applicable  in  this
      appellant's case.  He was a young ethnic Albanian and because of  this
      and the contents of the UNHCR letter it could be seen that there was a
      real risk of a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR should  this  appellant
      be returned to the Presevo Valley via  Belgrade.   He  also  submitted
      that the comments of the UNHCR that the area was  still  characterised
      by ethnic tensions should be noted.

   7. Mr McGirr reminded us that the appeal before us was  on  human  rights
      grounds  only.   He  submitted  that  the  issue  of  sufficiency   of
      protection for this appellant on return to the Presevo Valley had been
      correctly   assessed   along   the   lines   of   previous    Tribunal
      determinations.  He also noted that human rights issues had  not  been
      presented as part of the appellant's case before the respondent or the
      Adjudicator which meant that only  Article  3  ECHR  issues  could  be
      considered at this  time.   In  this  regard  he  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had correctly applied the "starred" determination  of  the
      Tribunal in Kacaj in the final section of her determination.

   8. In relation to the safety of return via Belgrade he firstly  asked  us
      to note the objective evidence set out in the  CIPU  report  at  5.48,
      5.49 and 5.50 which  indicates  that  there  are  some  70,000  ethnic
      Albanians living as a majority in the Presevo Valley.  Thus there was,
      in his submission, considerable safety assured to ethnic Albanians  in
      that area merely through their majority.  He also  asked  us  to  note
      that some 5,000 Albanian Serbs lived in  Belgrade  and  there  was  no
      evidence or indication that they were at any  risk  because  of  their
      ethnic background.  We were also  referred  to  the  letter  from  the
      Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO) dated 3  September  2002  (Eastern
      Adriatic Department) states that:

           "Neither the FCO nor British Embassy in Belgrade have  seen  any
           evidence to suggest that ethnic Albanians in Serbia are unfairly
           discriminated against or persecuted, either  by  authorities  or
           local Serbs, to the extent that travel  to  the  Presevo  Valley
           from elsewhere in Serbia is made unduly  difficult  or  rendered
           impossible.


           The current FCO assessment is that  the  situation  in  Southern
           Serbia (Presevo Valley) has been transformed beyond  recognition
           in recent months.  Following local elections in July and August,
           the Presevo Valley now has a political framework for integrating
           the ethnic Albanian community (and other local minorities)  into
           local democratic  structures,  as  foreseen  under  the  Serbian
           Government "Covic Plan" launched in 2001.  Ethnic Albanians  now
           have their own elected representatives who are  working  closely
           with the Serbian Government and international organisations such
           as the OSCE to restore long-term peace, stability  and  economic
           progress to the area.  More generally during the past year, both
           the  FRY  and  Serbian  Governments  have  made   progress    in
           establishing  a  basis  for  improving  inter-ethnic   relations
           throughout Serbia.  The passage of the  Federal  Law  on  Ethnic
           Minorities  earlier  this  year  was  widely  praised   by   the
           international community as an example to the region."

   9. He submitted therefore that this indicated there  was  no  significant
      risk and that the recent changes proved a  sufficiency  of  protection
      would be  available  for  persons  such  as  the  appellant  on  being
      returned.  He also noted that the UNHCR letter  of  5  September  2002
      indicated there were no undue hardships in  returning  appellants  via
      Belgrade although of course it must be undertaken  with  caution.   In
      this regard he submitted that there was no evidence to  say  that  the
      respondent would not be cautious in the procedures  and  methods  used
      for return.

  10. Finally we were asked to note the Bulletin itself  at  paragraph  4  -
      "Documentation", which  states  that  for  individuals  without  valid
      national passport/travel document the  FRY  will  accept  applications
      lodged on behalf of the United  Kingdom  Immigration  Service  by  the
      Immigration Service Documentation Unit.  In order to obtain issue of a
      travel  document  the  FRY  authorities  will  require  some  original
      supporting documentation such as an expired passport, identity card or
      driving licence.  For applications made without supporting documentary
      evidence the FRY authorities can verify identity  and  nationality  by
      referring back to official records held in Serbia.  This requires  the
      applicant's full name, place of birth,  date  of  birth,  address  and
      photograph.  The process takes 2 - 8 weeks to complete.

  11. In summary therefore he submitted that ethnic Albanians were not being
      mistreated in Serbia and that there was no risk to this  appellant  on
      return, thus the appeal should be dismissed.
      Decision
  12. After careful consideration of the determination  of  the  Adjudicator
      and the submissions presented before us by both  parties  we  conclude
      that the appeal must be dismissed.  Firstly we consider that there are
      no substantial grounds for considering that there is a real risk  that
      there would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR should this appellant
      be returned to the Presevo Valley.  The objective Country  Information
      set out not only in the CIPU report but now in the additional  reports
      and letters from the FCO and UNHCR quote  the  security  situation  is
      vastly improved and continuing to improve with only a few  reports  of
      serious violations taking place.  We have  also  noted  the  improving
      situation for ethnic Albanians in the rest of Serbia which is  clearly
      indicated from the objective information also.  The UNHCR letter of  5
      September 2002 which it is  self-evident,  must  be  treated  as  more
      objective than the FCO information,  itself  states  that  individuals
      returned through Belgrade should not  face  undue  hardships  provided
      they have the necessary travel  documentation.   Part  4  of  Bulletin
      1/2002 (CIPU) indicates to us that there should not be any substantive
      difficulty in obtaining appropriate documentation for this  appellant.
      Thus while we would not  conclude  that  there  is  no  risk  to  this
      appellant, we are satisfied that the level of any risk will be  remote
      or speculative and well below that of a  real  risk.   The  conditions
      that  may  have  led  to  a  heightened  risk  have  been   improving,
      particularly since 2001.  Accordingly there are  now  clearly  changed
      conditions from those that were in existence one or two  year's  back.
      Our assessment of course is made on  the  prospective  risks  to  this
      appellant on return to Presevo Valley via Belgrade in Serbia  at  this
      time.

  13. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.



                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President



