
H-AMP-V2
                                                Appeal Number: CC/13255/2002

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  27 September 2002                       |                             |
|Dictated : 27 September 2002                  |BN (MDC) Zimbabwe CG [2002]  |
|                                              |UKIAT 05518.                 |


                                   Before:


                          Mr A R Mackey - Chairman
                                Mr M L James
                         Prof. B L Gomes Da Costa JP


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Busisiwe NKANGALA

                                                       Respondent (Claimant)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representation


For the appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent (Claimant):    Mr Mark Symes, representing Refugee Law
                            Centre (London)

1.    The Secretary of State appeals, with leave, against the  determination
    of an Adjudicator, Mr M J Malone, wherein he allowed an appeal  by  the
    claimant against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  under  human
    rights grounds.


The Adjudicator's determination


2.    The Adjudicator found that the claimant was a 22-year old young  woman
    from Zimbabwe  who  had  been  born  and  lived  in  Gweru,  which  the
    Adjudicator wrongly stated was on the edge of the Midlands Province (it
    is indeed the administrative headquarters of the province and  seat  of
    the Governor).  The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  January
    2002 and sought leave to enter as a visitor to see his  stepsister  who
    had just had a baby.  During the interview at the  airport  she  sought
    asylum.  The Secretary of State gave notice of refusal  on  9  February
    2002 certifying the claim under both Conventions.   Both  parties  were
    represented before the appellant  and  considerable  objective  country
    information was submitted.

3.    The appellant claimed that  she  had  worked  for  a  refuse  disposal
    company from some time in  2000  and  that  it  had  been  involved  in
    smuggling materials from Botswana to Zimbabwe.   She  claimed  she  had
    made three such trips assisting the smuggling operation.  She  did  not
    know what were in the boxes that were being smuggled but considered  it
    was material being smuggling in for the MDC.  She  claimed  that  after
    fourteen days of arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  she  had  rang  her
    stepfather in Zimbabwe who had told her that some of  the  people  with
    whom she had been smuggling had been arrested.  She states it was  that
    news that caused her to claim asylum.  The claimant also stated she was
    a supporter of the MDC but not a member and had put up  posters,  in  a
    village where she stayed with her uncle, in support of the MDC in 2000.
     She feared that on return to Zimbabwe she would be exposed as a failed
    asylum seeker and treated as a traitor by the ZANU-PF.  She also feared
    harassment from her previous MDC support.

4.    The Adjudicator found many aspects of her claim to  be  unsatisfactory
    and inconsistent.   After  considering  her  evidence  the  Adjudicator
    stated that he was unable to accept  her  account  that  she  had  been
    smuggling on behalf of the MDC and that she had been a supporter of the
    MDC.  He therefore refused her  asylum  claim.   He  then  went  on  to
    consider the ECHR claim noting that he had been unable  to  accept  the
    account that she had been  smuggling  for  the  MDC  and  been  an  MDC
    supporter.  He did not consider that there was a reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood the appellant would be in danger on return and thus  Article
    2 of the ECHR would not be infringed.  However, in respect of Article 3
    he allowed the appeal, finding that  there  was  a  real  risk  to  the
    appellant as a failed asylum  seeker  and  traitor  to  Zimbabwe.   The
    Adjudicator noted a number  of  documents  in  the  appellant's  bundle
    including articles in the "Observer" and "Guardian" (24 March 2002,  28
    March 2002).  These articles indicate a widespread use  of  torture  in
    Zimbabwe by State agents and that this torture  is  not  only  directed
    against MDC supporters but also people who are regarded as opponents of
    the State or just people who, in the opinion of the  torturers,  should
    be taught a lesson.  He noted that it  was  not  directed  at  specific
    individuals but against the population of the Midlands Province,  which
    historically had proved troublesome with the ruling ZANU-PF.   He  also
    noted the type of torture and degrading treatment forced  on  both  men
    and women in the Midlands Province.


The Secretary of State's submissions


5.    Mr Saunders adopted the grounds of appeal  submitted  with  the  leave
    application.  These contend that  as  the  Adjudicator  had  found  the
    claimant to be incredible that the Article 3 claim should  have  fallen
    away in the same manner as  the  asylum  claim.   The  Adjudicator  had
    failed  to  link  the  respondent's  circumstances  with  that  of  the
    background information and could not ignore the lack of credibility  of
    the appellant in assessing her  risk  on  return.   The  question  that
    should have been asked by the Adjudicator was  "bearing  in  mind  this
    claimant's circumstances, would she face a real risk  of  ill-treatment
    if she were returned to Zimbabwe?"

6.    Mr Saunders also addressed the issue of the appellant returning  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and noted  that  the  appellant  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom on a valid passport seeking leave as a  family  visitor.
    She was thus in a situation where there was no need to expose the  fact
    that she was a failed asylum seeker and could simply return on her  own
    passport.  Unfortunately neither he nor Mr Symes was able was  able  to
    provide us with a copy of the claimant's passport, although Mr Saunders
    presumed it was on their files.  We were thus given no evidence of  the
    expiry date of the passport.

7.    Mr Saunders took us to the expert report which had been  submitted  to
    us in the claimant's bundle.  This report from Dr Terence Ranger, dated
    31 August 2002, was not before the Adjudicator.  He submitted  that  as
    this appellant was returning on her own passport the risks set  out  in
    page 3 of that report for a failed asylum seeker would not  apply.   In
    addition he submitted that the comments by Dr  Ranger  that  there  was
    great pressure on young people to join the militias and those returning
    to their home areas were often placed under pressure would  not  appear
    to be a risk to this appellant given that she had moved in  an  out  of
    Zimbabwe in the past and there was no indication  of  her  encountering
    problems on return to her home district.

8.    Thus, on her return, he submitted there was  no  indication  that  she
    was "pro-United Kingdom" and she would be considered as  a  person  who
    had visited her stepsister in the United Kingdom and nothing  more  and
    thus there was no risk to her.

9.    Finally he submitted that the analysis of the Adjudicator at  pages  9
    and 10 of the determination did not  set  out  a  linkage  between  the
    maltreatment referred to in the various articles that were  before  the
    Adjudicator and this appellant.  He urged us to retain the findings  of
    the Adjudicator but to allow the appeal on the basis that  there  would
    not be breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.


The claimant's submissions


10.   As stated, Mr Symes  put  before  us  a  considerable  amount  of  new
    material.  He submitted that from an analysis of  that  material  there
    was a real chance or risk of a breach of Article 3 for  this  appellant
    as a young woman returning to the Midlands  Province  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  In addition to the newspaper  articles  referred  to  by  the
    Adjudicator he also referred us to an Amnesty International  Report  of
    June 2002 "Zimbabwe: the Toll of Impunity".  At page 10 of that  report
    there is reference to a case study and it states:

           "Case study: the case of "A" in Matanga village


           In the run-up to the 2000 parliamentary elections, the Mberengwa
           area of Midlands Province became a "no-go"  zone  controlled  by
           ZANU-PF and State-sponsored "militia".  Roadblocks were  set  up
           and access to the area was  restricted.   Those  without  ruling
           party membership cards were beaten up.  During the weeks  before
           the parliamentary election, more than 150 cases of  torture  and
           assault - including incidents of rape and genital  mutilation  -
           were reported to the police in Matanga town,  according  to  the
           MDC, but there  were  no  arrested.   It  appeared  to  visiting
           journalists  that  police  officers  had  close  ties  with  the
           "militias", one foreign journalist was threatened by a "militia"
           member who was then seen conferring with the commanding  officer
           of Matanga police station ..."


11.   He then took  us  to  the  expert  report  of  Professor  Ranger.   He
      submitted that he  was an eminent  authority  on  Zimbabwe  given  his
      clearly illustrious qualifications and background which are set out in
      the report.  Several paragraphs  of  that  report  were  submitted  as
      relevant:

           "2.   ...


                 Between  the  June  2000  elections  and  the  presidential
                 elections of March 2002 there has been a  violent  counter-
                 attack on MDC supporters and suspected supporters in Nkayi.
                  Headmen and others have been murdered and the district has
                 been terrorised by the ZANU/PF youth  militia.   Her  uncle
                 has probably been at risk and I am in  doubt  that  if  she
                 were to return to the district  she  would  herself  be  at
                 risk.


           3.    Gweru is not "near" the Midlands Province as  is  surmised
                 in  [the   Adjudicator's   determination].    It   is   the
                 administrative headquarters of the province and the seat of
                 its governor, Cephas Msipa.


                 ...


                 It voted for Nkomo's ZAPU in 1980  and  great  efforts  and
                 much force was employed to win  the  area  for  ZANU/PF  in
                 subsequent elections.  It is not clear where Nkangala lives
                 in Gweru.  Should it be the high density township of Mkoba,
                 of which we heard a lot during the conference [a conference
                 Professor Ranger had recently attended] there is  no  doubt
                 that it is politically a very turbulent area.


           4.    The current political situation in Zimbabwe more generally
                 has become increasingly polarised.  People do not  need  to
                 be office-holders in the  MDC,  nor  even  members  of  the
                 party, in order to  fall  under  suspicion  or  to  be  the
                 victims of persecution and attack.  When I was in  Zimbabwe
                 this August, many people complained to me that there was no
                 room "in the middle"; no  possibility  of  neutrality.   To
                 adopt a neutral  position  is  to  be  characterised  as  a
                 supporter of the opposition.  The politburo member, Didymus
                 Mutasa, said two weeks ago that it would be better  if  all
                 MDC voters and "neutrals" vanished  from  Zimbabwe  leaving
                 only those were "loyal  to  the  revolution".   In  such  a
                 situation it is impossible to predict exactly who  will  be
                 at risk.  In Zimbabwe in August I met a very wide range  of
                 people who had been assaulted or threatened and forced from
                 their jobs.  In this context Busisiwe Nkangala  might  well
                 be the object of attack.


                 ...


           5.    Failed asylum seekers returning to Zimbabwe and identified
                 as such are inevitably  regarded  as  disloyal.   They  are
                 people who have tried to throw in their low  with  the  old
                 colonial "enemy", Britain.  There is an accumulating "case-
                 law", regularly reported at the Zimbabwe asylum circle,  of
                 returned asylum seekers being taken aside and identified at
                 Harare airport; of some arrests;  and  of  some  subsequent
                 attacks on family houses.  I could not go so far as to  say
                 that every returned asylum seeker would by definition be at
                 risk, but the risk grows as the situation becomes more  and
                 more polarised.


           6.    ... the risk to Ms Busisiwe Nkangala and to  others  in  a
                 similar position is of extra-legal punishment and  assault.
                 On return to the country and at the airport, the agents  of
                 the Central Intelligence Organisation  represent  the  main
                 threat.  In the country as a whole the  main  threat  comes
                 from members of the youth militias  under  the  command  of
                 some of the ex-combatants.  It should be  noted  that  this
                 make young asylum seekers particularly  vulnerable.   There
                 is great pressure on young people to join the militias  and
                 those  who  refuse  to  do  so  are   stigmatised.    (Many
                 university students, returning to their home areas for  the
                 vacation, found themselves in this position ...)."


      Mr Symes submitted that in addition to the strong  body  of  objective
      country of origin information, including that contained  in  the  CIPU
      Report of April 2002, that the Home  Office  itself  acknowledged  the
      deteriorating situation in an exchange of correspondence  between  the
      Refugee Law Centre and the Home Office.  He referred us to letters  in
      this regard in his bundle and in particular a  letter  from  the  Home
      Office dated 10 June 2002 which states:


           "There was no evidence  of  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers  being
           routinely or systematically detained or ill-treated on return to
           Zimbabwe.  However, the  political  and  security  situation  in
           Zimbabwe was deteriorating rapidly in the run-up  to  the  March
           presidential  election,  so  the  Home  Secretary   decided   to
           temporarily suspend removals so that we may take  stock  of  the
           situation,  in  particular  the  risk  to  returnees,  once  the
           election has taken place."


      He also referred us to a UNHCR letter of 12  June  2002,  relating  to
      returns to Zimbabwe, which included a statement that:


           "Real or perceived members and supporters  of  the  MDC  or  any
           other opposition party or movement continue to be the target  of
           human  rights  violations,  including  ill-treatment,   torture,
           arbitrary arrest and detention.  Likewise, persons who,  because
           of their background, might be considered to be critical  of  the
           current regime are also reported to  suffer  similar  treatment.
           There  have  been  credible  reports   of   further   population
           displacement, especially in Matabeleland, the stronghold of  the
           opposition MDC, due to continuing political violence.


           In the light of these observations, UNHCR reiterates its opinion
           that it is premature to reconsider  the  policy  of  removal  of
           unsuccessful asylum seekers to  Zimbabwe,  and  that  under  the
           present  circumstances  the  suspension  of  removal  should  be
           maintained."


12.   Mr Symes referred  us  to  a  map  of  Zimbabwe  and  illustrated  the
    position of Gweru and the proximity to Matabeleland.

13.   He submitted that if this appellant returns  with  her  own  passport,
    having been in the United Kingdom since January 2002, there was a  real
    risk to her not only at the airport but after that if at any  time  she
    was held in a roadblock and identity was called for.  There would be  a
    real risk that her time in the United Kingdom would come to  light  and
    there would then be an attribution of sympathy by  her  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He also referred us to reports  from  the  International  Bar
    Association and an  article  in  the  "Telegraph",  contained  in  this
    bundle,  showing  evidence  of  risks  to  those  perceived  as  having
    political sympathies with the United Kingdom.

14.   In his reply Mr Saunders confirmed that the suspension of  returns  to
    Zimbabwe was still continuing  at  the  present  time.   He  added  the
    additional submission that this appellant could have available  to  her
    an internal flight alternative within Zimbabwe  and  that  she  had  no
    particular reason to return to any specific part of the country.   Thus
    she could relocate outside the Midlands Province area  and  not  be  at
    risk.


The issue


15.   We found the only issue before us to be whether the  determination  of
    the Adjudicator was  a  safe  one  on  the  basis  of  the  submissions
    presented by the  Secretary  of  State  and  taking  into  account  the
    additional objective information submitted to us by Mr Symes?


Assessment


16.   At the outset we note  the  additional  information  provided  in  the
    bundle and in particular the expert report of Dr Ranger can be accepted
    by us as it is made in support of an Article 3 ECHR claim where we  are
    bound to consider information up to the  date  of  decision.   From  an
    analysis of all of that material and an acceptance of this  appellant's
    situation, as a failed asylum seeker returning to Midlands Province  in
    Zimbabwe, that there are substantial reasons for  concluding  that  she
    would be at a real risk of maltreatment in breach of Article 3.

17.   On the basis of the evidence that was before the Adjudicator  we  were
    left in some doubt as to whether this appellant, would  be  at  a  real
    risk of maltreatment  given  the  possibility  of  her  using  her  own
    passport to return to Zimbabwe.  However, particularly on the basis  of
    the expert report of Professor Ranger and the lack of  evidence  as  to
    whether the appellant's passport is still a valid one, we are satisfied
    that the benefit of any doubt must be given in favour of the  claimant.
    This conclusion is very much reached  on  the  basis  of  the  personal
    situation of this appellant  as  a  quite  young  woman  who  would  be
    returning from the United Kingdom having spent almost a  year  in  this
    country and that she comes from  what  appears  to  be  a  "high  risk"
    province of Zimbabwe.  We do not consider that an IFA is  available  to
    her as at the age of 22 she  does  not  appear  to  have  any  apparent
    support systems available to her in other parts of Zimbabwe,  with  the
    possible exception of her uncle and he appears to live  in  an  at-risk
    area.  We consider it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable  to  expect
    her to relocate given all thecircumstances including her relative youth
    and lack of family or male support.

18.   We reject the submission of the Secretary of State that  because  this
    appellant was found to lack credibility the Article 3 claim  must  fall
    away with the refugee claim.  The lack  of  credibility  was  found  in
    respect of  the  smuggling  operations  and  the  appellant's  possible
    association with the MDC.  This does not take away the situation of her
    being a young woman from the Midlands Province who would  be  returning
    as a failed asylum seeker having spent almost a year in this country.


Decision


19.   We are satisfied that there is a real risk of a breach  of  Article  3
    of the ECHR if this appellant were returned to Zimbabwe.   Accordingly,
    the appeal is dismissed.



                                                                  A R MACKEY

                                                              Vice President

