
                                                                   Appeal
No:   HX/27083/2001
      | |                         DH (IFA - Albanian) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       07056



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 19th December 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           ..06 March 2002..

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr J Barnes
                                Mr D K Allen

Between:




                                 DRINI HYSI


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.   He
     appeals to the Tribunal against the determination of  an  Adjudicator,
     Mrs S Charlton-Brown, in which she dismissed his  appeal  against  the
     Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  18th  September  2000,   issuing
     directions for his removal from the United Kingdom, asylum having been
     refused.

  2. As can be seen from the previous paragraph, the date  of  decision  in
     this case is prior to the commencement of October 2000  and  therefore
     Mr Graham, who appeared for the Secretary of State before us, conceded
     that human rights issues did not arise and the appeal proceeded on the
     basis of an asylum  claim  only.   Ms  Ahmad,  instructed  by  Hopkins
     Reynolds & Co appeared on behalf of the Appellant.

  3. The Appellant was born on 16th February 1983 and came  to  the  United
     Kingdom in January 2000.  He  claims  to  be  from  Mitrovica  and  he
     adopted before the Adjudicator his self-completion  questionnaire  and
     statement.  He said that he had no remaining family in Kosovo and that
     his father had been killed during the war in a  bomb  blast,  and  his
     mother  died  shortly  afterwards.    The   Adjudicator   found   some
     difficulties with the Appellant's credibility.  She noted that in  the
     SEF form, he did not appear to refer to the death of his  parents,  or
     indeed any specific problems that he himself had.  She contrasted this
     with the latest statement about the death of his  father  and  mother.
     One of the grounds of appeal before us is a lack of clear  credibility
     findings on the Appellant's claim.  This is a matter to which we shall
     return shortly.

  4. He claimed before the Adjudicator  that  after  his  parents  died  he
     stayed in the village until May and then  went  to  Albania  where  he
     remained for some six months, and then went back to Kosovo for a week,
     going firstly to Pristina and then to Mitrovica, but decided to  leave
     as people were being killed,  his  house  was  destroyed  and  he  had
     nowhere to stay.  He did not approach KFOR or UNMIK for assistance, as
     he did not feel safe.

  5.  Returning  to  the  Adjudicator's  determination  and  the  issue  of
     credibility, we think it is right to say that the Adjudicator did  not
     make clear credibility findings as to her views of the truthfulness of
     the Appellant's account.  She noted, as we have said, the contrast  in
     his evidence about the death of his parents, and went on to query why,
     when his parents died at the beginning  of  2000,  he  did  not  leave
     sooner.   She  went  on  to  say,  at  paragraph  8.5,  however,  that
     irrespective of credibility the real issue was  whether  even  if  one
     accepted his account, the country situation had now changed to make it
     safe for him to return there.  She stated  that,  despite  her  doubts
     about his credibility, in view of the change in the  country  and  the
     radical change as she saw it in Kosovo, that he did not face any  real
     risk on return.  She noted  aspects  of  the  objective  evidence  and
     mentioned various relevant cases at paragraph 8.6.

  6. Ms Ahmad has produced a helpful skeleton argument, which deals firstly
     with a point concerning a document that  was  not  made  available  to
     Counsel for the Appellant at the hearing, although it  seems  to  have
     been taken into account by the Adjudicator.  It seems that we  do  not
     have that document before us, although Counsel for  the  Appellant  at
     the hearing before the Adjudicator managed to persuade the Adjudicator
     to provide a copy subsequent to the hearing.  There is no  indication,
     however, in our view, that this document, which seems to relate to the
     situation concerning returnability  of  vulnerable  persons,  had  any
     material effect on the Adjudicator's reasoning or conclusions.

  7. The Adjudicator noted, at paragraph 8.8 of the determination, that she
     agreed with the Respondent's comment in the refusal  letter  that  the
     Appellant appeared to be a young, single man in good health, and  that
     it would not be unduly harsh to expect  him  to  relocate.   She  also
     noted  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  to  substantiate   the
     contention that the Appellant was traumatised.

  8. We consider that there is  no  material  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
     determination in  this  regard,  although  we  would  like  to  remind
     Adjudicators of the importance of ensuring that relevant documents are
     seen  by  representatives.   We  make  no  comment  adverse  to   this
     Adjudicator in this regard since this claim has not  been  put  before
     her and she has not had the opportunity to comment.

  9. Ms Ahmed went on to deal with the issue  of  internal  flight  in  her
     skeleton argument.  In essence, her conclusions are  to  be  found  at
     paragraph 5 of the skeleton concerning the reasons why internal flight
     is not an option.  This, we should say, is premised on the basis that,
     taken at its highest, the Appellant's claim is that  he  has  a  well-
     founded fear in Mitrovica.  We did not understand Mr Graham to dissent
     from this as a proper way of dealing with this appeal  and  therefore,
     although we note the problems that there are  with  the  Adjudicator's
     findings, we consider that she can be taken to have accepted the claim
     at its highest in paragraph 8.5, after which she went on  to  consider
     issues of internal flight.

 10. The essential points of Ms Ahmed's argument in  this  regard  are  the
     Appellant's age, noting that he left Kosovo when he was  sixteen,  and
     it is the case now that he is nineteen and will be twenty in some  two
     months.  She also makes the point that he has spent important years of
     his life in the United Kingdom, growing up  and  making  friends,  and
     before us emphasised the fact of his  absence  from  Kosovo  for  some
     three years as a relevant factor to difficulties on return.  She  also
     makes the point that he has no close family remaining in Kosovo, given
     that his parents, on his claim taken at its highest, have been  killed
     and his house has been destroyed.  She also makes the  point  that  he
     suffers trauma as  a  result  of  his  parents  being  killed  in  the
     atrocities associated with war, and she reminded us that at  paragraph
     6.5 of the  Adjudicator's  determination,  his  evidence  is  recorded
     concerning the problems that he saw  when  he  returned  to  Mitrovica
     after his trip to Albania, where people  were  being  killed  and  his
     house was destroyed, and he had nowhere to stay.  She also reminded us
     at paragraph 6 of her skeleton  argument,  that  the  issue  of  undue
     harshness must be  considered,  taking  into  account  the  cumulative
     effect of a whole range of disparate considerations as referred to  by
     Brooke LJ in Karanakaran.

 11. Taking the case at its highest, and accepting that the Appellant has a
     well-founded fear on return to  Mitrovica,  the  question  is  one  of
     whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to return to Kosovo and
     to go elsewhere than Mitrovica.  He  would  be  likely  to  return  to
     Pristina and Mr Graham reminded us that he had spent at  least  a  few
     days there on his return from Albania, and therefore is presumably not
     totally unacquainted with that town.  There is no indication  that  he
     suffers from health problems.  He is a young man who,  as  of  today's
     date, is nineteen and indeed nearly twenty.  He would be returning  to
     a situation in Kosovo radically different from the situation  when  he
     left.  No doubt he would experience difficulties, as indeed very many,
     if not most, of the people in Kosovo are  likely  to  be  experiencing
     difficulties, but he would be returning into a situation where,  as  a
     young Albanian man, he could reasonably be expected to play  his  part
     in seeking to rebuild the area and he would not be at risk from  Serbs
     in the areas to which he would return and we consider that, bearing in
     mind the factors put before us by  Ms  Ahmad,  and  the  situation  in
     Kosovo generally at this time,  returning  to  Kosovo  elsewhere  than
     Mitrovica would not be unduly harsh for him.

 12. We therefore dismiss this appeal.











                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
