

|Appeal No:  |hx/   |17516/2001     |
|            |cc/   |12439/2001     |
|STARRED     |AE FE (PTSD-Internal |
|            |Relocation) Sri Lanka|
|            |* [2002] UKIAT 05237 |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:            |10 July 2002    |
|Date Determination notified:|12 November 2002|



                                   Before:

                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                             Mr. C.M.G. Ockelton
                                Mr. K. Drabu




|Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|And                                           |             |
|A.E. and F.E.                                 |Respondents  |


|For the Appellant:    |Ms Lisa Giovannetti            |
|For the Respondents:  |Mr Raza Husain                 |




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The respondents in this case are husband and  wife,  aged  51  and  41
      respectively.   They  are  Tamils  from  Sri  Lanka.    They   arrived
      separately in the United Kingdom, the wife and their four children  in
      early 1999 and the husband in July 1999.  Each  claimed  asylum.   The
      wife was interviewed on 20 February 2000 and her claim was refused  on
      29 March 2000, about a year after she had made it.  Her  husband  made
      his claim on 6 July 1999 but failed albeit  by  only  a  few  days  to
      submit the required SEF.  For some reason, it took until 15  September
      2000 for his claim to be rejected on  the  grounds  of  non-compliance
      with his obligation to submit a SEF.

   2. Each respondent appealed to an  adjudicator.   The  two  appeals  were
      separate.  However, they were heard together pursuant to  Rule  42  of
      the  Procedure  Rules  and  the  adjudicator  (Richard   McKee)   gave
      determinations which were identical (save for the heading)  for  each.
      The appeals, which  related  only  to  the  asylum  claims  since  the
      refusals had in each case  been  made  before  1  October  2000,  were
      allowed.  The adjudicator's determinations were promulgated on 26 June
      2001.  On 9 August 2001 the  appellant  was  given  leave  to  appeal.
      Unfortunately   for   various   reasons   including   a   change    of
      representatives and illness which required an earlier hearing date  to
      be vacated the appeals could not be heard until 10 July 2002.  Further
      delay has resulted from the incidence of the  long  vacation  and  the
      President's involvement with SIAC hearings.  It is regretted.


   3. The adjudicator allowed the appeals on the basis that the husband  had
      a well-founded fear of persecution in the north of Sri Lanka where the
      family had lived because of his involvement with the LTTE and evidence
      which the adjudicator accepted that when he left Sri  Lanka  the  army
      was looking for him.  He had been detained and tortured in  1998.   He
      was released  following  the  payment  of  a  bribe  but  resumed  his
      activities on behalf of the LTTE.  These were at a low level involving
      provision of transport (he had a small  transport  business)  but  the
      army got to know what he was doing and came looking for him.  The wife
      had no well-founded fear  of  persecution  herself.   The  adjudicator
      allowed the appeals on the basis that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
      expect the family to relocate to Colombo even though  neither  husband
      nor wife were reasonably likely to  be  persecuted  there.   This  was
      because of psychiatric evidence that the wife was suffering from major
      depression and post traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD)  resulting  from
      her experiences with the army in Sri Lanka.  We shall  in  due  course
      set out the relevant circumstances in greater detail.


   4. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant sought to rely on  a  tribunal
      determination Antonipillai  (16588:  12  July  1998)  to  support  his
      contention that the wife's mental condition was not such as  justified
      the adjudicator's conclusions.   In  granting  leave  to  appeal,  the
      President indicated that  that  determination  needed  reconsideration
      since it might be unduly restrictive.  Accordingly, it was anticipated
      that this decision would be starred.


   5. We must now set out the salient facts as  found  by  the  adjudicator.
      Since 1987 the husband had been assisting the LTTE on and off  by  the
      provision of transport and the wife had done some  occasional  cooking
      for them.  In January 1998 he was arrested by the army and was kept in
      detention until June 1998 when he was released following  the  payment
      by his wife of a bribe of 50,000 rupees.  Whilst in detention, he  was
      severely ill-treated, being punched, kicked and  beaten  with  plastic
      pipes.  A medical report from a Dr Nandi recounted  that  the  husband
      had said that his hands had been placed  on  a  table  and  repeatedly
      struck with a sand-filled pipe and on one occasion his left  hand  had
      been cut by a bayonet.  He had scars consistent with  his  account  of
      the  treatment  he  had  suffered.   Following  his  release,  he  was
      reluctant to assist the LTTE any further, but  in  September  1998  he
      resumed his activities because he feared  that  otherwise  his  eldest
      son, by now 16, would be recruited instead.  In January 1999 the  army
      came looking for him but he had gone into hiding.  The  army  molested
      and assaulted his children and, according to  his  wife's  answers  in
      interview, 'tried to be funny and had sexual harassment' to her.   She
      did not then allege that she had been raped.  Fear of  further  visits
      by the army led to the decision to leave Sri Lanka.  The  family  went
      to Colombo, managing to avoid  road  blocks,  and  with  the  help  of
      agents, made their separate ways to the United Kingdom.   The  husband
      had to remain in Colombo after his wife and  children  had  left.   He
      stayed with and was assisted to find an agent by a cousin.


   6. The adjudicator was considering the situation in Sri Lanka  as  at  31
      May 2001.  It has changed since then following the recent  cease  fire
      which seems still to be holding.  The adjudicator's conclusion is  set
      out in these words: -

          "There is a serious possibility that the Security  forces  in  the
          Jaffna area will remember him if he returns, even after a  gap  of
          more than 2 years.  He has a  current  well-founded  fear  in  the
          north of the island".

      That conclusion is now unlikely to be correct.  However, the appellant
      did not seek to challenge it before us and  the  respondents'  counsel
      was not required  to  consider  it.   In  the  circumstances,  we  are
      prepared to accept the adjudicator's conclusion and to  approach  this
      appeal on the basis that  the  husband  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in his home area, namely the north of Sri Lanka.  But,  as
      we have already  noted,  the  adjudicator  made  no  such  finding  in
      relation to the wife and decided that neither was reasonably likely to
      be persecuted in Colombo.  The husband's scars, though  visible,  were
      not likely to be material since his age was such as not to put him  at
      risk of being rounded up nor would he be likely to be interrogated  on
      return.   These  findings  have  not  been  challenged  and  they  are
      undoubtedly correct in the light  of  the  present  situation  in  Sri
      Lanka.


   7. What led the adjudicator to allow  the  appeals  was  the  psychiatric
      condition of the wife.  He relied on a report  by  Dr.  Stuart  Turner
      dated 21 November 2000.  This was based on an  interview  "which  took
      place on 17 October 2000 and lasted for about an  hour".   Dr.  Turner
      had a copy of the wife's asylum interview and there was an interpreter
      present.  He has considerable expertise in dealing with  patients  who
      have suffered reactions to traumatic stress, being a consultant in the
      Traumatic Stress Clinic which is a national referral centre in the NHS
      for traumatic stress  reactions.   He  has  an  impressive  curriculum
      vitae.  The adjudicator's comment that he is an acknowledged expert in
      the field  may well be correct.


   8. However, his expertise and qualifications do not necessarily mean that
      his views must be accepted without question.  The I.A.A. is accustomed
      to receiving reports from psychiatrists which indicate that the asylum
      seeker in question is suffering from depression or PTSD or both.  That
      there should be a large incidence of PTSD in asylum  seekers  may  not
      perhaps be altogether surprising, although we  are  bound  to  comment
      that what used to be considered a relatively rare condition  seems  to
      have become remarkably common.  Asylum seekers may be found not to  be
      refugees and in many cases accounts when  tested  before  adjudicators
      are found to lack credibility.  But many  who  try  to  come  to  this
      country have suffered at least deprivation and poverty  and  may  well
      have suffered ill-treatment or discrimination which does not amount to
      persecution or persecution for a  Convention  reason.   They  are  all
      desperately anxious not to have to return to their country  of  origin
      and may well have spent large sums of money they and  their  relations
      can ill afford to get here.  It is hardly surprising that they  should
      suffer at least depression so long as their situation is  not  settled
      and there is a  real  chance  that  they  may  be  refused  entry  and
      returned.  In this case, Dr. Turner notes that  PTSD  can  be  treated
      effectively but that such treatment may  not  be  effective  when  the
      individual feels insecure and there is a risk of return.  He  suggests
      that the wife be given exceptional leave to remain  so  that  she  can
      have treatment, but that will not resolve the uncertainty or the  risk
      of eventual return.


   9. The adjudicator refers to Dr. Turner's 'long and careful examination'.
       We are far from persuaded that that  is  an  apt  description  of  an
      examination which lasted for about an hour and which was not  assisted
      or followed up by a sight of her General  Practitioner's  notes.   Dr.
      Turner says: -


           "She told me  that  she  gets  some  tablets  from  her  general
           practitioner but hadn't got these with her".

      He examined her in October 2000.  The hearing before  the  adjudicator
      was in May 2001 and before us was in July 2002.   No  further  medical
      evidence was forthcoming and in particular  no  indication  was  given
      that any treatment had been sought or provided.  Dr. Turner  does  not
      seem to have been asked to pursue the matter any further.


  10. Doctors generally accept the account given by a patient  unless  there
      are good reasons for rejecting it or any material part of it.  That is
      not and is not intended to be a criticism.  There is no reason  why  a
      doctor should necessarily probe the history or approach his  patient's
      account in a spirit of  scepticism.   But  this  does  mean  that  the
      doctor's conclusions will  sometimes  be  seen  to  be  flawed  if  it
      transpires that the account is not credible.  That is not the position
      here, but it illustrates the  danger  of  uncritical  reliance  on  in
      particular psychiatric reports.  In this case, Dr. Turner records that
      he did ask why she had not  disclosed  the  rape  in  interview.   Her
      explanation  that  there  was  an  interpreter  present   was   hardly
      persuasive since there was an interpreter present when she  was  being
      seen by Dr. Turner.  Nor does her explanation that her  solicitor  had
      told her  to  tell  the  truth  carry  great  weight:  she  must  have
      appreciated the need to tell the truth  at  all  stages.   Dr.  Turner
      comments  that  her  mental  state  was  such  that  it  was  entirely
      understandable that she should not have mentioned the rape  and  added
      to this were the cultural inhibitions.  This reasoning  has  not  been
      tested.  However, she did, it seems, break down  when  the  issue  was
      raised before the adjudicator (see Paragraph 8 of his  determination).
      The adjudicator accepted that she  had  been  raped  and  in  all  the
      circumstances we do not believe that we should do  other  than  accept
      that finding.


  11. Dr. Turner recommended that she should undergo treatment.  He says: -

           "She seems to be on some form of medication, although  this  was
           not available to me.  It may be that much more could be done  to
           improve her drug treatment regime".

      There is no evidence that anything has been done  to  follow  up  this
      recommendation or the alternative psychiatric treatment.   It is  true
      that Dr. Turner thinks that there is  a  need  for  security  in  this
      country, but the refusal  of  asylum  meant  that  that  was  not  the
      position and exceptional leave to remain would  not  provide  security
      since it would only last for a limited period.  We are  bound  to  say
      that we are not impressed by Dr. Turner's report.  It is  based  on  a
      relatively short interview and there has been no attempt  to  discover
      what treatment she was receiving.  We are not ourselves experts and it
      might be said that we are not in a position to reject the opinions  of
      those who are.  But we are accustomed to  seeing  a  large  number  of
      psychiatric reports in  these  cases  and  the  same  conclusions  are
      reached in very many of them.  We know that PTSD  is  something  which
      needs careful  diagnosis  and  detailed  consideration  of  individual
      cases.  We know too that the process of seeking to make a new life  in
      the United Kingdom and the circumstances which triggered that  process
      may well lead to depression or worse if obstacles seem to be arising.


  12. The adjudicator's reasons for allowing the  appeals  are  set  out  in
      Paragraph 13 of his determination.  He says: -

           "However, I find it  unduly  harsh  to  expect  this  family  to
           relocate to Colombo.  Two of the sons are now 18  and  17  years
           old, certainly of an age when they could be  rounded  up.   This
           will add to the distress which the wife will undoubtedly  suffer
           if she has to go back to Sri Lanka.  Dr. Turner's  prognosis  is
           that psychotherapy and counselling will be of no avail to her as
           long as she remains in fear and uncertainty about  returning  to
           Sri Lanka.  The consequences of actually going  back  while  she
           remains in an acutely traumatised state are too serious to  make
           a reasonable outcome in this case.  The  appeals  are  therefore
           allowed".

      Nowhere does the adjudicator consider whether the wife  could  receive
      the necessary treatment in  Colombo  in  the  light  of  his  positive
      finding that neither of the appellants  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
      persecuted in Colombo.  The possibility of the sons being  rounded  up
      is in the light of the current state of affairs  remote.   Nor  is  it
      clear to us what are the consequences of  going  back  which  make  it
      unreasonable to expect the appellants to do so and thus to  justify  a
      conclusion that they are refugees.


  13. It seems to us that the adjudicator  has  not  properly  analysed  the
      cases before him.  There were two  separate  appeals  which  for  good
      reason were heard together.  The adjudicator has  given  two  separate
      decisions, albeit each is in identical terms.  The wife has  no  well-
      founded fear of persecution and is not a refugee from any part of  Sri
      Lanka.  Her mental condition  and  any  hardship  involved  in  return
      cannot make her a refugee.  It may  be  relevant  in  a  human  rights
      claim, but that does not arise in the present case.  Thus  her  appeal
      could not properly be allowed.

  14. As well as having a claim in her own right, she is a dependent of  her
      husband.  He does have a well-founded fear of persecution in his  home
      area.  Thus in his case the question whether there exists a safe area,
      which we shall call internal relocation (IR) is relevant.  There is no
      suggestion that it would be unduly harsh to expect him or his children
      to remain in Colombo.  The adjudicator has decided that it  would  not
      be reasonable to expect her to return to Colombo and so, it  would  be
      unreasonable to expect the family to return.   This  conclusion  could
      only properly have been reached if the adjudicator was persuaded  that
      it would be unduly harsh to require the husband to return  to  Colombo
      because his wife should not be required  to  go  there.   The  'unduly
      harsh' test is established by the Court of Appeal in R v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department ex p. Robinson [1998] QB  929  which  is
      binding on us.


  15. The adjudicator has accepted that the wife's condition is such that it
      would not be reasonable to expect her to return to Sri Lanka.  That we
      suppose reflects the language of Paragraph 91 of  the  UNHCR  Handbook
      which, in dealing with a fear of persecution in a part of the  country
      of nationality, provides:-

           "In such circumstances, a  person  will  not  be  excluded  from
           refugee status merely because he could  have  sought  refuge  in
           another part of the same country, if under all the circumstances
           it would not have been reasonable to expect him to do so".

      If his wife cannot be expected to return,  it  is  not  reasonable  to
      expect him to return since the family should remain together.  That we
      must assume reflects the adjudicator's reasoning.


  16. The  concept  of  IR  is  based  on  the  recognition  that  surrogate
      protection is only required if there is no  part  of  the  country  of
      nationality which can be regarded as safe in that no well-founded fear
      of persecution exists there and to which it would not be  unreasonable
      to expect the claimant to relocate.  At p.935F in Robinson, Lord Woolf
      M.R. said, after citing La Forest J in A.G. of Canada  v  Ward  (1993)
      103 D.L.R. (4th) 1, as follows:-

           ."It follows  that  if  the  home  state  can  afford  what  has
          variously  been  described  as  'a  safe   haven',   'relocation',
          'internal protection' or 'an internal  flight  alternative'  where
          the claimant could not have a well-founded fear of persecution for
          a  Convention  reason,  then  international  protection   is   not
          necessary.  But it must be reasonable to expect him to go  to  and
          stay in that safe haven...".


          In determining whether it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
          claimant to relocate internally, a  decision-maker  will  have  to
          consider all the circumstances of the case, against the  backcloth
          that the issue is whether the claimant is entitled to  the  status
          of refugee".

      It must be borne in mind that he will only be entitled to that  status
      if he shows that he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.  Lord Woolf  summarises  the  correct  approach  at
      p.943B in these words:-


          "In our  judgment,  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  appellate
          authorities would do well in future to adopt the approach which is
          so conveniently set out in Paragraph 8  of  the  European  Union's
          Joint Position.  Where it appears that persecution is confined  to
          a specific part of a country's territory the decision-maker should
          ask: can the claimant find effective protection in another part of
          his own territory to which he or she may reasonably be expected to
          move?  We have set out, ante, pp.939H-940B, appropriate factors to
          be taken into account in  deciding  what  is  reasonable  in  this
          context.  We consider the test suggested by  Linden  J.A.  in  the
          Thirunavukkarasu case, 109 D.L.R. (4th) 682,  687,  "would  it  be
          unduly harsh to expect this person ... to  move  to  another  less
          hostile part of the country?" to be a  particularly  helpful  one.
          The use of the words "unduly harsh" fairly reflects that  what  is
          in issue is whether a person claiming  asylum  can  reasonably  be
          expected to move to a particular part of the country".


  17. It is important to note what factors the Court  considered  to  be  of
      relevance in deciding whether it would be unduly harsh to require  IR.
      These are set out at p.940B where Lord Woolf says: -

          . "Various tests have been suggested.  For example, (a)  if  as  a
          practical matter (whether for financial, logistical or other  good
          reason)  the  "safe"  part  of  the  country  is  not   reasonably
          accessible; (b) if the claimant is  required  to  encounter  great
          physical danger in travelling there or staying there; (c) if he or
          she is required to undergo undue hardship in travelling  there  or
          staying there; (d) if the quality of the internal protection fails
          to meet basic norms of civil, political and  socio-economic  human
          rights.  So far as the last of these considerations is  concerned,
          the preamble to the Convention shows that the contracting  parties
          were concerned to uphold the principle that  human  beings  should
          enjoy fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimination.   In
          the Thirunavukkarasu case, 109 D.L.R. (4th) 682, 687, Linden J.A.,
          giving judgment of the Federal Court of Canada, said:

              "Stated another way for clarity ... would it be unduly  harsh
              to expect this person, who is being persecuted in one part of
              his country, to move to another  less  hostile  part  of  the
              country before seeking refugee status abroad?"

          He went on to observe that while claimants should not be compelled
          to cross battle lines or hide out in an isolated region  of  their
          country, like a cave in the mountains, a desert or jungle, it will
          not be enough for them to say that they do not like the weather in
          a safe area, or that they have no friends or relatives  there,  or
          that they may not be able to find suitable work there".

      Lord Woolf there lays emphasis on the preamble to the Convention.  The
      first paragraph of this reads: -

          "Considering that the  Charter  of  the  United  nations  and  the
          Universal Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December 1948
          by the General Assembly have affirmed  the  principle  that  human
          being  shall  enjoy  fundamental  rights  and   freedoms   without
          discrimination".

      The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is proclaimed  as  a  common
      standard of achievement for all people and all  nations.   The  rights
      set out  in  it  are  similar  to  those  contained  in  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights and in the International Covenant on  Civil
      and Political Rights (ICCPR).


  18. If an individual is not afforded basic human rights, he may  often  be
      properly said to be persecuted.  If he is subjected to  discrimination
      for a Convention reason, he may  be  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  a
      refugee.  But if he is not within the Convention, the fact (if  it  be
      the case) that the country of his nationality does  not  maintain  the
      standards of the Universal Declaration will not make  him  a  refugee.
      The Refugee Convention does not apply merely because persons  have  to
      exist in miserable conditions or there is economic  deprivation.   And
      the conditions on return cannot create a person a  refugee  unless  he
      has a well-founded fear  of  persecution.   Equally,  the  absence  of
      medical or welfare facilities cannot  of  themselves  make  someone  a
      refugee even though his health or his life would be in danger.


  19. It follows  that  logic  might  suggest  that,  however  wretched  the
      conditions in what we shall call the safe area if  IR  is  applicable,
      they cannot in the absence  of  a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason prevent return. But in the light of Robinson and the
      conclusion that a failure to meet the basic norms of human rights is a
      relevant factor, that cannot be a correct approach for  us  to  adopt.
      It is in our view important to remember at all times that what  is  in
      issue is the need for surrogate protection.  If the  circumstances  in
      the so-called safe area are such as Lord Woolf has referred to,  there
      may be a real risk that the claimant will be compelled  to  return  to
      his home area where he faces persecution.  There is  an  analogy  with
      refoulement.  Thus if, persecution apart,  the  conditions  are  worse
      than those in the home area, it may be easier to conclude that it  was
      unduly harsh to expect IR.  In addition, if there is in the safe  area
      a real risk that the conditions would expose the claimant to a serious
      breach of basic human rights, he should not be expected to  go  there.
      It may be said that there is a degree of illogicality in this  if  the
      risk of breaches of basic human rights are no worse than in  his  home
      area.  It is perhaps possible to criticise the  Robinson  approach  on
      the basis that the preamble to the Refugee Convention  emphasises,  as
      might be expected, the need for fundamental rights and freedoms to  be
      enjoyed without  discrimination.   It  is  discrimination  which  will
      engage the Refugee Convention.  However, it is not open to us to limit
      the issue of unreasonableness or undue harshness in this way since  we
      are bound by Robinson.  However it is in our view right that for IR to
      be regarded as unduly harsh any breach of fundamental rights  must  be
      established to be serious.


  20. In Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000]  3
      All ER 449,  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  further  the  correct
      approach to IR.  At p.456F Brooke LJ said this: -

           "The argument turns on the correct interpretation of a few words
           contained in the definition of 'refugee' in Article 1A(2) of the
           Convention, being any person who:



                "... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted  [for  a
                Convention reason] is outside the country of his nationality
                and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to  avail
                himself of the protection of that country" (My emphasis).

           The words I have italicised have not been interpreted literally.
            In theory it might be possible  for  someone  to  return  to  a
           desert region of his former country, populated only  but  camels
           and nomads, but the rigidity of the words 'is  unable  to  avail
           himself of the protection of that country' has been tempered  by
           a small amount of humanity.   In  the  leading  case  of  Ex  p.
           Robinson this court followed an earlier decision of the  Federal
           Court of Canada and suggested that a person should  be  regarded
           as unable to avail himself of the protection of his home country
           if it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to  live  there.
           Although this is not  the  language  of  'inability',  with  its
           connotation of impossibility, it is still a very rigorous  test.
           It is not sufficient for the applicant to show that it would  be
           unpleasant for him to live there, or indeed harsh to expect  him
           to live there.  He must show that it would be unduly harsh".

    This shows that the threshold is a high one but the  'small  amount  of
    humanity' will apply to enable regard to be had to the situation in the
    safe area and if it will not afford basic human rights IR will  not  be
    reasonable.  Nonetheless, the risk of compulsion to go to his home area
    is likely to be in many cases a helpful test.  And the  height  of  the
    threshold is illustrated by the decision of  the  EctHR  in  Bensaid  v
    United Kingdom.  In reality, the application of the preamble will  mean
    that where IR is in issue  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights will march together.  That in  our  view  is
    justified because the individual in question has  shown  that  he  does
    have a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area and  may  well
    have left the country of his nationality because of that fear.  To send
    him back to suffer treatment that fails to afford
    him his basic human rights can properly be regarded as unduly harsh and
    unreasonable.


21. The absence of proper medical  facilities  to  deal  with  a  particular
   individual's problems will not  normally  be  determinative  unless  his
   right to life is thereby put in  jeopardy.   If  proper  facilities  are
   available, a person's medical condition however serious cannot make  him
   a refugee.   In  Antonipillai  at  pp.32-33  of  the  determination  the
   Tribunal said this: -



           "This is the first  occasion  where  we  have  had  to  consider
           whether or not a medical or mental condition is an aspect  which
           has to be considered when considering whether it would be unduly
           harsh for a person to seek internal flight.  It is our view, and
           one to which we have given considerable thought, that within the
           context of that expression "unduly harsh"  it  would  be  unduly
           harsh to insist on internal flight or return to Colombo,  as  in
           the instant cases, where the option being exercised  is  a  case
           where  a  person  is  suffering  from  an  terminal  illness  or
           suffering from a physical or mental disability of such a  nature
           as to render constant or almost constant attention of a  medical
           or nursing nature, or whether, in the long term, such mental  or
           physical condition is  such  as  to  preclude  the  person  from
           obtaining employment, accommodation and generally  acclimatising
           to the social conditions of the area to which internal flight is
           sought".


   Far from being unduly restrictive, we think that what is there  said  is
   too wide.  It is only if adequate facilities are not available  that  IR
   may be said to be unduly harsh.  There may be compassionate reasons  for
   not returning but not on the basis that the individual is a refugee.


22. We have already recited the facts of this case.  There  is  no  evidence
   that treatment for depression or  PTSD  is  unavailable  in  Sri  Lanka.
   There is no real risk of persecution or indeed that  the  sons  will  be
   rounded up.  We do not regard Dr. Turner's report as supporting the



   adjudicator's conclusion that the distress of the wife at  the  prospect
   of return will make it unduly harsh for the husband to be returned since
   there is no real impediment to his wife and family returning with him.


23. It follows that these appeals must be allowed.









                                                 MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                                                        PRESIDENT
