
JH
|                           |        |APPEAL NO  HX01938-2002     |
|                           |        |GA (Umma-Reconciliation with|
|                           |        |Government) Sudan CG [2002] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 04605                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.3 October 2002                                                   |
|Heard at Field House by video link with Glasgow                   |
|On 30 August 2002          |        |                            |
|Dictated 5 September 2002  |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (Chairman)                                        |
|MR F T JAMIESON                                                   |
|MR A A LLOYD, JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Gazi Ahmed Abdallah                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:


For the appellant:           Mr D Govier of Counsel

                       instructed by Skene Edwards solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr B Dryden, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by Gazi Ahmed Abdallah, a citizen of Sudan,  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator (Professor Rebecca  M  M  Wallace)
      who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision made on  24
      July 2001 giving directions for his removal following the  refusal  of
      his claim for asylum.

   2. The appellant has based his claim on a fear of  persecution  from  the
      Sudanese authorities because of his activities on behalf of  the  UMMA
      Party.  His family still lives in Sudan.  His father is a nurse  in  a
      medical centre and  an  employee  of  the  Ministry  of  Health.   The
      appellant attended primary and intermediate school  leaving  in  1995.
      From January 1996 to August 1997 he was  a  government  employee.   He
      says that he has been a member of the UMMA Party since  10  June  1995
      and his primary activity within the party was to distribute  leaflets.
      His problems started in May 1996 when he was approached by  three  men
      in civilian clothes and taken from his place of  work  by  car  to  an
      unknown destination.  He was blindfolded and  taken  to  a  dark  room
      where he was left for an hour.  He was then taken  to  an  office  and
      questioned.  He was  accused  of  being  against  the  regime  and  of
      distributing  leaflets.   He  was  told  he   had   been   put   under
      surveillance.  He was punched, kicked and  beaten.   He  was  detained
      until 1 June 1996 and then released.

   3. He returned to work and  to  live  with  his  parents.   He  told  his
      superiors and work colleagues that he had taken a break and apparently
      this  was  accepted.   The  appellant  then  resumed   his   political
      activities about a month later and managed to  avoid  the  authorities
      until September 1997 when he was  again  apprehended  by  two  men  in
      civilian clothes.  He was detained with five other people  in  a  room
      without sanitation and with inadequate food.   He  says  that  he  was
      interrogated and beaten.  He escaped detention by bribing an attendant
      who brought him food.  On 22 September 1997  the  attendant  took  the
      appellant to  the  perimeter  gate,  opened  it  and  from  there  the
      appellant managed to get  to  an  inhabited  area  where  he  asked  a
      stranger for directions.  He got to Khartoum and found  a  friend  who
      said he would help him get out of Sudan.

   4. The appellant's friend and two of his associates  drove  him  to  Port
      Sudan from where he sailed on 30 September 1997.  He managed to  leave
      the ship somewhere on the Scottish coast.  He presented himself to the
      Refugee Council on 22 October  1997  and  then  claimed  asylum.   The
      Secretary of State's reasons for refusing his claim are set out  in  a
      letter dated 24  July  2001.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  this
      decision was heard by the Adjudicator on 3 April 2002.  She heard oral
      evidence from the appellant.  He said that his father  had  also  been
      involved in the UMMA Party.  He confirmed his periods of detention  as
      having started on 15 May 1996 and 5 September 1996.  The bribe to  the
      prison guard had been paid by friends from party  funds.   When  asked
      about his lack of involvement  with  the  UMMA  Party  in  the  United
      Kingdom, the appellant said that he did not know anyone in  the  party
      and the party was located in London whereas he lived in Edinburgh.

   5. The Adjudicator's assessment of the evidence is set out in paragraph 9
      of her determination.  The Adjudicator clearly had considerable doubts
      about the appellant's evidence.  She noted his claim that  his  father
      was a member of the party yet his father had continued to  work  as  a
      nurse in a government run medical centre.  He had not had any  contact
      with the UMMA party in the United Kingdom.  The Adjudicator noted that
      the medical report described the scars on the appellant's  lower  legs
      as consistent with the injuries described by him and his detention was
      consistent with detention in ghost houses in Sudan as referred  to  in
      the CIPU report at paragraph 5.63.

   6. The Adjudicator said that even accepting the  appellant's  account  of
      the two instances of alleged ill treatment, the real issue was whether
      the appellant would be at risk of persecution if  returned  to  Sudan.
      She accepted that leaders  and  high  ranking  members  of  opposition
      political parties might encounter problems with the security forces on
      return but this would not apply to members of the UMMA  party  as  the
      leader and leading  members  had  returned  recently  (CIPU  paragraph
      5.51).  A number  of  conciliatory  gestures  had  been  made  by  the
      authorities to the UMMA Party and in  November  1999  a  peace  accord
      between the Government and the UMMA Party was signed.  In  March  2000
      the UMMA Party left the National Democratic Alliance  which  comprised
      opposition political groups and rebel groups.  The appellant was not a
      key political figure and if returned as a member of the UMMA Party  he
      would be unlikely to encounter  problems  with  the  security  forces.
      Because of his low-key political activities he did  not  fall  into  a
      vulnerable category.  On the totality of the evidence the  Adjudicator
      did not believe that there was a real likelihood  that  the  appellant
      would be at risk of persecution or a breach of his human  rights  such
      as to engage the United Kingdom's obligations if he returned to Sudan.

   7. Mr Govier submitted that the  Adjudicator had made no specific finding
      on the general credibility of the  account  given  by  the  appellant.
      There was evidence before her which she had not specifically  accepted
      or rejected. She was wrong to assume that just because  party  leaders
      were not arrested that ordinary members would  not  be  at  risk.   He
      referred to a report entitled "Report on the Fact Finding  Mission  to
      Cairo (Egypt and Geneva)  Switzerland"  which  dealt  with  the  human
      rights situation in Sudan.  This is a report prepared  by  the  Danish
      Immigration Service carried out in  January-February  2000  and  March
      2000.   Mr Govier referred in particular to page 20,  B1.1  and  to  a
      report that Sudanese nationals who have been abroad for over one  year
      would be detained on return and transferred to  the  Security  Service
      Headquarters in Khartoum for questioning.   Anyone  suspected  by  the
      security police on the basis of such questioning of having engaged  in
      political activities for the opposition risked ill treatment including
      torture.

   8. Mr Dryden  submitted  that  this  report  added  very  little  to  the
      information which was before the Adjudicator.  The appellant  had  not
      been a prominent activist on behalf of UMMA.  His role was limited  to
      distributing leaflets.  In his submission the  Adjudicator's  findings
      and conclusions were correct.

   9. At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr Govier  quite  rightly  did  not
      pursue a number of the grounds in his grounds of  appeal.   Grounds  1
      and 3 raise issues of credibility  which  were  for  the  Adjudicator.
      Grounds 4 and 5 argue there has been a  change  of  circumstances  and
      there was therefore a burden of proof on the respondent to  show  that
      it was safe for the  appellant  to  return.   This  assertion  has  no
      substance.  The change of circumstances if anything has been  for  the
      better.  The change relied on is the return of the leader of the  UMMA
      Party to Sudan.  It is argued that this is no  indication  as  to  the
      safety of the return of ordinary party members.  This is an  issue  of
      fact and in the view of the Tribunal does not place a burden of  proof
      on the respondent to show that it is safe for the appellant to  return
      to Sudan as ground 5 appears to argue.

  10. The two arguable points which were pursued by Mr Govier were that  the
      Adjudicator  had  failed  to  make  an  adequate  assessment  of   the
      credibility of the account given  by  the  appellant  and  had  failed
      properly to assess the risk  on  return.   He  relied  on  the  report
      prepared by the Danish  Immigration  Service  and  on  the  fact  that
      ordinary rank and file members of opposition parties who  are  engaged
      in  political  activities  abroad  would  be  questioned  about  their
      situation and activities and  they  risked  lengthy  detention.   More
      prominent members of the opposition do no face  lengthy  detention  as
      the authorities are more concerned about the reaction in  the  outside
      world when detainees are known abroad.

  11. So far as the point relating to credibility is concerned, in the  view
      of the Tribunal this has no substance.  The  Adjudicator  clearly  had
      her doubts about some aspects of the applicant's account but proceeded
      to assess his claim on the basis that his account might be  true.   In
      the view of the Tribunal the Adjudicator has followed the guidance  of
      the Court of Appeal in Karanakaran [2000]  Imm  AR271.   She  was  not
      prepared to discount this evidence and has therefore proceeded on  the
      basis that it might be true.

  12. Her conclusion was that the appellant would not  longer  be  at  risk.
      This is because his fear is based on his membership of the UMMA Party.
       The background evidence shows that there has been a degree  at  least
      of reconciliation between  the  governing  authorities  and  the  UMMA
      Party.  A peace accord has been signed in March 2000 and the leader of
      the party has returned.  It is argued on behalf of the appellant  that
      he as an ordinary member would be at risk in a way that the leader  of
      the party would not be.  Reliance is placed on the report cited above.
       However the passage cited is the view of one particular source and in
      any event those at risk of detention are said to be  people  who  have
      engaged in political  activities  abroad.   On  his  own  account  the
      appellant has not done so.  It  is  members  of  the  SPLM/A  who  are
      highlighted as being at particular risk:  see page 21  B1.2.   In  the
      report at page 22 a source at the Royal Netherlands Embassy  in  Cairo
      said that the Sudanese authorities were  not  interested  in  ordinary
      members of Sudanese opposition parties.  It was only prominent  active
      members  of  such  parties  who  might  risk  the  attention  of   the
      authorities on re-entering Sudan.  There is also a reference  in  this
      report to the UMMA Party as having representatives living in Khartoum:
       page 28.  All the party's political leaders are now at liberty having
      been released in December 1999.  It is recorded  that  none  of  those
      released enjoy any political rights and so they cannot publicly engage
      in normal kinds of political activity.  However, that would not be  an
      undue constraint on the appellant as his activities have been very low
      level and non-existent since he left Sudan.

  13. In our view the Adjudicator's findings and conclusions  were  properly
      open to her on the evidence.  The additional evidence put  before  the
      Tribunal does not satisfy  us  that  it  is  even  arguable  that  her
      findings are wrong.  Having reviewed the  evidence  for  ourselves  we
      agree with her conclusions that the appellant fails to show  there  is
      any reasonable degree of likelihood  that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution or a breach of his rights under Article  3  on  return  to
      Sudan.

  14. In these circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President







