

|Heard at Field House                                                  |
|Appeal No: HX36821-2001                                               |
|On 7 August 2002                                          LM (MDC)    |
|Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 03916                                        |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                        Date Determination notified:
                                       21ST AUGUST 2002


                                   Before:

                       Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Chairman)
                                Mr R Baines JP
                               Mr A F Sheward


Between:


                               MR LUZANI MOYO


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



     1. The appellant, Mr Luzani  Moyo,  appeals  with  leave  against  the
        determination of an Adjudicator (Mr C G Blake),  promulgated  on  6
        December 2001.  He is a  national  of  Zimbabwe.   The  Adjudicator
        dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent  on  10
        July 2001, setting removal directions after refusal of asylum.

     2. At the hearing, Miss E Storey of Refugee Legal Centre appeared  for
        the appellant.  Ms  M  Banwait,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
        represented the respondent.

     3. The Adjudicator in his determination accepted that there  had  been
        some ill-treatment of the appellant  in  the  past,  but  leave  to
        appeal was granted on the basis that arguably he had  not  provided
        any clear reasoning for rejecting parts of the  appellant's  claim,
        and further had not considered the background evidence.

     4. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was a journalist, which
        appeared to be of relevance in the light of  present  circumstances
        in Zimbabwe.

     5. The determination  records  that  the  appellant  was  a  cameraman
        working for the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corp (ZBC) and that  in  1999
        he began to support the MDC (Movement for Democratic  Change).   He
        was detained in June 2001 and questioned at police headquarters  in
        Harare for 2 days, then released unharmed on  the  basis  that  his
        arrest had been  an  error.   During  his  absence,  his  home  was
        burgled; his identity card, educational records,  some  MDC  papers
        and an MDC t-shirt were taken.  The appellant was not  afraid.   He
        reported the burglary to the police.

     6. On attending at  the  Police  Station  he  was  arrested,  detained
        overnight, punched, kicked and made to sleep on a cold  floor,  and
        was interrogated about the items found in his house.  He  was  also
        asked about his coverage of an MDC  meeting,  which  he  filmed  in
        October 2000.  Three police officers interrogated him,  asking  why
        he worked for a ZANU-PF company if he supported the MDC.

     7. On 21 June, he covered another MDC meeting,  and  was  arrested  at
        home the same evening.  He was assaulted, beaten and urinated upon.
         He was released after four days of ill-treatment, and his home was
        searched again.  His cat was killed.  His rural MDC  mp  would  not
        help him.  The Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant  had  some
        problems  with  the  authorities,  but  found  the  account  to  be
        exaggerated.  In the light  of  paragraphs  5.9-5.19  of  the  CIPU
        Country Report for April 2001, which reports very similar treatment
        of other journalists in the appellant's position, and the  lack  of
        reasoning for the Adjudicator's disbelief, that approach is hard to
        sustain.   The  Adjudicator  did  find  that  the   Appellant   had
        established a limited subjective  fear  of  difficulties  with  the
        ruling party.

     8. Given those findings, we began  by  inviting  Ms  Banwait  for  the
        respondent to make submissions on  the  present  position  and  the
        position of  the  respondent.   There  was  no  objection  to  this
        approach.  Ms Banwait indicated that in her view the appeal  should
        be remitted.  The Vice-President who granted  leave  had  suggested
        remittal, and it  was  the  appellant's  representatives  who  were
        unwilling to proceed on that basis.

     9. The Home Office was in discussions with  the  UNHCR,  which  should
        shortly lead to guidance on the current  position  in  Zimbabwe  in
        relation to MDC sympathies and activities.

    10. For the appellant, Miss storey asked that  the  appeal  be  allowed
        outright.   The  determination  was  not   clearly   expressed   at
        paragraphs 18 and 19, and on the face  of  the  determination,  the
        appellant was a journalist who  had  been  employed  by  the  State
        authorities and had problems  in  2001.   Given  the  deteriorating
        situation,  and  following  Ravichandran  she  submitted  that  the
        appellant would also have  problems  on  return.   The  appellant's
        account  had  been  consistent  throughout  except  for  two  minor
        matters, and was clear on the documents and from the  determination
        that the Tribunal could reach different conclusions on the evidence
        from those  of  the  Adjudicator.   She  set  out  the  appellant's
        explanation for the two remaining  discrepancies.   They  were  not
        sufficient to invalidate the determination as a whole

    11. The determination showed that the Adjudicator  had  considered  the
        background material, but given the present situation as set out  at
        paragraphs  5.87-5.88  of  the  CIPU  report,  disbelief   of   the
        appellant's account was not sustainable  against  the  respondent's
        own assessment of the factual position in Zimbabwe -

        "POLITICAL ACTIVISTS
        5.87  Opposition political activists, particularly those  belonging
        to  the  MDC,  have  been  targeted  and  attacked  by   Government
        supporters and war veterans since the  parliamentary  elections  in
        June 2000. Although the Constitution allows for multiple  political
        parties, Government supporters  and  security  force  members  have
        subjected opposition  activists  to  significant  intimidation  and
        violence. There were  reports  in  2001  of  a  growing  number  of
        abductions of MDC activists  committed  by  Government  supporters,
        especially in rural areas where loyalty top ZANU-PF  is  strongest.
        Some abductees were tortured and others later  were  found  killed.
        Members of the security forces  also  participated  in  attacks  on
        opposition activists and suspected supporters. [2b][1]

        JOURNALISTS
        5.88  Although the Constitution provides for freedom of expression,
        the Government restricts this right in  practice.  Security  forces
        have arbitrarily detained journalists and refused to investigate or
        punish  security  force  members  who,  with  ZANU-PF   supporters,
        tortured and harassed journalists. (See  Sections  5.5  -  5.28  on
        freedom of speech and  the media for  further  information  on  the
        position of journalists) [2b]"

    12. The respondent was still not returning people to  Zimbabwe  because
        of the deterioration in the situation  there.   The  appellant  was
        plainly at risk and the appeal should be allowed.

    13. In reply, Ms Banwait also referred the Tribunal to paragraph  5.88,
        and then  took  us  to  paragraph  5.5-5.28.   Paragraph  5.24  was
        particularly relevant.  Independent journalists were at high  risk,
        but not ZANU-PF journalists such as this  appellant  (at  paragraph
        5.20).  We set out at some length extracts  from  the  respondent's
        CIPU report.  Paragraphs 5.9-19, which are not reproduced,  show  a
        pattern of abuses against journalists who wish to report opposition
        views and the appellant's account fits precisely into  the  pattern
        of detention, beating, and release, which those paragraphs  reflect
        over a two-year period.  The following  passages  are  particularly
        relevant to the consideration of the situation as it is today  -

           "FREEDOM OF SPEECH & THE MEDIA


           General

           5.5   Although  the  Constitution  provides   for   freedom   of
           expression, legislation limits this freedom on grounds  such  as
           defence and public order. The Government continues  to  restrict
           press freedom and monopolises  radio  broadcasting.  Journalists
           have faced increasing difficulties as the Government has  sought
           to extend its control over the news in  the  face  of  political
           crises.  The  Government  enforces  restrictive   laws   against
           journalists  and  intimidates   them.   Security   forces   have
           arbitrarily detained journalists  and  have  refused  to  punish
           security force members who have tortured journalists...
           5.6  The Government restricts  the  freedom  of  speech  of  its
           political opponents and those making public comments critical of
           President Mugabe. Sections 44  and  50  of  the  Law  and  Order
           Maintenance Act (LOMA) criminalise and allow the  Government  to
           suppress  the  publication  of  any  statement  deemed   to   be
           subversive or  likely  to  cause  "alarm  and  despondency".  In
           addition, anti-defamation laws criminalise libel of both  public
           and private persons. Legislation passed in early 2002, ahead  of
           the  presidential  election  in  March  2002,  placed  stringent
           Government controls on journalists and the media.


           Newspapers

           ...5.20  The International Press Institute wrote to President
           Mugabe in November 2001 asking him to repudiate his Government's
           accusation that local and foreign journalists were colluding
           with terrorists. The pro-ZANU-PF Herald newspaper had quoted a
           Government spokesman as saying that six foreign journalists were
           "assisting terrorists" after they had reported on attacks on
           whites and opposition activists in Bulawayo. The journalists
           report for British newspapers the Independent, the Guardian, the
           Times and the Daily Telegraph, US news agency Associated Press
           and the South African Business Day. One of the journalists also
           reports for the Zimbabwean paper Financial Gazette. Since the
           terrorist attacks in the USA on 11 September 2001, President
           Mugabe has repeatedly referred to his opponents as
           'terrorists'...
           5.21  The controversial Access to Information and Privacy Act,
           passed by Parliament on 31 January 2002, barred foreign
           journalists from working in Zimbabwe except for short periods to
           cover specific events and compelled local journalists to apply
           for a one-year renewable licence issued by the government-
           appointed Statutory Media Commission or face two years in
           prison. Other provisions of the bill include a ban on publishing
           "unauthorised" reports of Cabinet deliberations or releasing
           information about intergovernmental relations or their financial
           and economic interests. Journalists' unions pledged to fight the
           new law and defy its strict rules...


           Radio and Television
           5.24   Radio  is   the   most   important   medium   of   public
           communication,  especially  for  people  in  rural  areas.   The
           government controls all  domestic  radio  stations  through  the
           State-owned Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation (ZBC),  supervised
           by the Minister for Information and Publicity in the President's
           Office. Ministers are reported to routinely review ZBC news  and
           delete reports on the activities of political opponents.
           5.25   In  September  2000  the  Supreme  Court   declared   the
           government's  broadcasting  monopoly  to  be   unconstitutional.
           Despite a statement by the Information Minister that no  private
           radio  stations  would  be  allowed  to  broadcast   until   the
           Government had set up a proper regulatory framework for  private
           operators, a private radio station called  Capital  Radio  began
           operating. In October 2000 police shut down  Capital  Radio  and
           seized its equipment,  despite  the  issue  by  the  High  Court
           earlier the same day of a  decision  barring  the  seizure.  The
           police also searched the homes of the  station's  co-owners  and
           others associated with the station, including  MDC  MPs  Michael
           Auret and David Coltart. The High Court ordered  the  return  of
           the seized equipment and directed  the  Government  to  issue  a
           licence within ten days. Most of the equipment was returned  but
           a licence was not issued and, that same  day,  President  Mugabe
           issued by decree temporary regulations  giving  the  Information
           Minister the power to  issue  and  deny  broadcasting  licences.
           Later in October 2000, a legal committee of Parliament, in a non-
           binding    resolution,    declared    the    new     regulations
           unconstitutional. At the end of 2001, Capital Radio was awaiting
           Parliament's final report on the regulations  before  proceeding
           with a planned appeal to the Supreme Court.
           5.26  In 1999 the Supreme  Court  ruled  that  the  Government's
           monopoly on telecommunications was unconstitutional  because  it
           interfered  with  the  right  to  freedom  of  expression.   The
           Government subsequently granted  a  broadcasting  licence  to  a
           private television station, Joy  TV.  However,  the  President's
           nephew, Leo Mugabe, is reported to have financial ties with  Joy
           TV and the ZBC reportedly exercises editorial control  over  the
           station's programming. International television  broadcasts  are
           freely available through private cable and satellite firms.
           5.27  In  April  2001  Parliament  passed  a  sweeping  new  law
           establishing the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe  and  giving
           the government  control  of  broadcasting.  The  new  law  gives
           Jonathan Moyo's Information  Ministry  the  final  authority  to
           issue broadcast licences and the right to withdraw licences from
           independent broadcasters. It also  stipulates  that  independent
           broadcasters should give the government one-hour a week  to  air
           its policies. The law  prohibits  foreigners  and  non-residents
           from  owning  shares  in  broadcasting  companies   and   limits
           individuals to a maximum of 10% in station  ownership.  The  MDC
           criticised the new law as a crackdown on free  speech  ahead  of
           presidential elections due to be held in 2002."

    14. Ms Storey did not wish to exercise a right of reply to Ms Banwait's
        final observations.  The Tribunal reserved  its  determination  for
        postal delivery, which we now give.   We  note  that  there  is  no
        suggestion of  any  blood  link  between  this  appellant  and  the
        Information Minister, Jonathan Moyo.

    15. We then considered the position.  We do find that  the  appellant's
        account  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  background  evidence  in
        relation to the treatment of journalists in 2001.  Given the  grave
        nature of the subsequent deterioration, we accept that the risk  to
        the appellant if returned to Zimbabwe as a known MDC supporter  and
        former ZBC cameraman now is of sufficient gravity and likelihood to
        engage both the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of
        Refugees 1951, as amended by the New York Protocol of 1967 and  the
        European Convention on Human Rights.

    16. This appeal is accordingly allowed.








                                             J A J C Gleeson
                                             Vice-President




-----------------------
[1] The bracketed reference [2b] refers to the United States  Department  of
State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 2001 Country  Report  on
Zimbabwe, issued in March 2002

