

               RM (Military Service - RCD-FIS) Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT 04232
                                                                HX26189-2001



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                    Date heard: 25 June 2002
                                            Date notified:.18 September 2002

                                  Before: -

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MR C THURSBY





                                                       Between

                              MR  RACHID MAZARI


                                              Appellant



                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Algeria, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr S S  Chohan,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State giving  directions
for removal from the United Kingdom, having refused asylum.  Ms  S  Naik  of
Counsel instructed by Tyndallwoods Solicitors appeared  for  the  appellant.
Mr  M Davidson appeared for the respondent.

2.The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3.The appellant claimed he was an active member of RCD  (Rally  for  Culture
and Democracy) who during the last Presidential elections had been  arrested
and detained for a short period. He had  spoken  out  against  FIS  and  the
government. He feared that if returned to Algeria he would  face  risk  both
from the authorities, as a failed asylum seeker with  liability  to  perform
military service, and from FIS because he had spoken out against them.

4.The adjudicator said he was prepared to  accept  the  centrepiece  of  the
appellant`s account as true. However,  he  did  not  think  the  appellant's
account feel under any of the exceptions to  the  general  rule  that  draft
evasion or desertion does not ground refugee status. As  regards  the  claim
to fear FIS, the adjudicator  concluded  that,  since  the  authorities  had
released him from detention after either one or seven  days,  there  was  no
reason why they would not protect him.

5. The  grounds  challenged  the  adjudicator's  findings  on  a  number  of
grounds.

6. One ground was that the adjudicator did not make clear what  evidence  he
accepted and what evidence he rejected. Whilst we would  agree  that  having
stated he  accepted  the  "centrepiece"  of  the  appellant`s  account,  the
adjudicator should have made clearer precisely what he accepted and what  he
rejected. However, it is clear  enough  that  he  effectively  accepted  the
entirety of the appellant's account save for the appellant's claim  to  have
strong views against performing his military service.

7. In regard to the adjudicator's findings as to the appellant`s  objections
to military service, we think they were sustainable. The adjudicator  relied
on the fact that the appellant's evidence was vague and lacked  clarity.  We
note that all the appellant had been able to say in describing  his  beliefs
was that he did not want to do military service because he did not  want  to
carry out arrests or kill people. Given that the  appellant  had  failed  to
elaborate his beliefs beyond this bare assertion and  that  the  adjudicator
saw and heard the appellant we are not persuaded there was any error here.

8. Another ground relied on was that the adjudicator had dealt  inadequately
with the expert evidence. At paragraph 27 he wrote:

      "Finally, I shall deal very concisely with Mr Joffe`s report  and  the
      Canadian report. Mr Joffe is a respected expert and according  to  him
      the appellant "would have a very uncomfortable reception, were  he  to
      be returned to Algiers". However, this is a personal opinion and  must
      be seen as such. According to the objective material, his  view,  with
      respect, does not stand up. It is worth noting that  the  Tribunal  in
      the case of  Foughali  considered  Mr  Joffe`s  various  reports  (not
      submitted in this case) but was not prepared to accept his opinions."

9. At paragraph 27 he went on to place no reliance on  the  Canadian  report
because there was no indication as to the qualifications of  the  author  or
whether he is to be regarded as an expert.

10. We would agree with Miss Naik that the adjudicator  erred  in  rejecting
Mr Joffe`s evidence as mere  "personal  opinion".  As  the  evidence  of  an
accepted expert on Algeria and an expert to boot whose evidence  dealt  with
the appellant's case in particular, it merited  careful  consideration.  The
adjudicator also erred in treating the findings of fact of the  Tribunal  in
Foughali (00/TH/01514) as conclusive of the facts he had to decide.  Plainly
the findings of fact in Foughali were not intended to be  binding  on  other
adjudicators, although  they  did  set  out  the  Tribunal's  views  of  the
materials placed before it in that case (and in many other Algerian  cases).


11. However, as the Tribunal clarified in Slimani  (01/TH/  00092)  starred,
it is ultimately for an adjudicator to assess what weight to attach  to  the
evidence of an expert so long as he gives clear reasons.  In  this  case  we
think there were sound reasons for concluding that  Mr  Joffe`s  report  did
not establish the appellant would face a real risk of persecution.

12. The principal point raised in the  grounds  is  that  in  assessing  the
appellant's claim  the  adjudicator  failed  to  consider  his  difficulties
cumulatively. The grounds are perfectly correct  to  reiterate  the  general
point that in cases raising issue of military service, it  is  crucial  that
adjudicators consider the appellant's overall  situation  so  as  to  ensure
they  assess  any  harms  cumulatively.  We  would  also  accept  that  this
adjudicator  (despite  extensively  citing  Foughali  where  this  point  is
forcibly made) nowhere  sets  out  that  he  has  assessed  the  appellant's
difficulties  cumulatively.  However,  even  considering   the   appellant's
difficulties cumulatively, we do not consider they  justified  coming  to  a
conclusion different from that reached by the adjudicator.

13.  As  regards  the  military  service  issue,  even  assuming  that   the
adjudicator was  wrong  to  assume,  as  he  did  in  paragraph  25  of  his
determination, that the appellant as a  deserter  and  not  simply  a  draft
evader could take advantage of the current exemption from  military  service
for men over the age of 27, the furthest this takes the appellant's case  is
that on return he would face punishment as a deserter.  The adjudicator  had
only relied on  the  exemption  point  in  the  alternative:  he  began  the
paragraph with  the  words,  "[i]n  any  event".  At  paragraph  24  he  had
summarised the conclusion reached about punishment for military  service  in
Algeria in Foughali to the effect that a penalty in the  2-10  year  bracket
is  not  a  disproportionate  penalty.  We  consider  that  this  conclusion
continues to reflect the correct position.

14. At paragraph 21 the adjudicator gave reasons why he did not  think  that
the appellant came within any of the other exceptions to  the  general  rule
that draft evasion or desertion does not ground  refugee  status.  Again  we
think his conclusions were fully justified. On the  evidence  in  this  case
the appellant could not show he would face persecution due to conditions  of
life in the military during his period of conscription. Nor  could  he  show
that performance  of  his  military  service  duties  would  expose  him  to
participation in an armed conflict  contrary  to  international  law.  As  a
result of the Court of Appeal judgment in Sepet and  Bulbul  [2001]  Imm  AR
452, the adjudicator was not obliged to consider the exception  relating  to
partial or absolute conscientious objection and, in any  event,  as  already
noted, the appellant had singularly failed to show that his beliefs  opposed
to military service were sincere.

15. As regards the appellant's fear of the authorities, on his  own  account
he had experienced one short period of  arrest  during  the  height  of  the
presidential elections and he had not  been  charged  as  a  result  of  the
detention. Nothing submitted in the grounds leads us to  conclude  that  the
adjudicator was wrong in consequence to conclude that the authorities  would
not have any adverse interest in him as a result of  either  his  arrest  or
his RCD membership. The objective materials do not  document  that  ordinary
RCD members face any particular difficulties from the authorities.

16. As regards the  appellant's  fear  of  FIS,  we  would  agree  that  the
adjudicator did not deal with this as  fully  as  he  should  have.  On  the
appellant's evidence, accepted by the  adjudicator,  the  RCD  had  problems
with FIS and in 1996/7 an article had appeared in  a  newspaper  called  The
Horizon, which had his picture holding a placard. He further claimed that  "
I speak out all the time against FIS and my opinions are known to  everyone,
which puts me in danger, both from FIS and from the government".

17. We must say that on the evidence in  this  case  we  do  not  think  the
adjudicator had sufficient  before  him  to  conclude  the  appellant  would
indeed be targeted by FIS. On the appellant's  own  account  he  was  not  a
prominent member of RCD.  The article which had appeared of  him  holding  a
placard was not one which linked him as such with opposition to FIS. He  did
not claim that members of FIS had targeted him previously. He had failed  to
furnish an account which gave any real substance or detail to his  claim  to
be at real risk from FIS.

18. Even assuming however,  that  the  appellant  had  established  a  well-
founded fear of serious harm  at  the  hands  of  FIS,  we  agree  with  the
adjudicator that he failed to show that the authorities would  not  be  able
to effectively protect him  against  such  harm.  Given  that  the  RCD  was
opposed to FIS, the government would have no reasons not to consider him  as
someone they were willing to protect in the normal way. Given  too  that  he
was not a prominent member of RCD and that  he  had  not  had  any  previous
experiences of being targeted by FIS members, we consider that,  should  any
difficulties arise from FIS members targeting him, he would  not  fall  into
the category of someone  whom  they  would  find  difficulty  in  adequately
protecting.

19. Miss Naik urged the Tribunal to reassess the appellant's  claim  in  the
light of two recent judgments in the Court of Appeal that of  Ahmed  Djebari
[2002] EWCA Civ 813, judgment of 13 May 2002 and that of Mohammed Hasan  Es-
Eldin C/2000/2681, judgment of 29 November 2000. However,  having  carefully
studied these judgments we do not think they take matters  as  far  as  Miss
Naik contends.

20. Insofar as both judgement emphasise the importance of giving due  weight
to expert reports written by specialist  with  respectable  credentials,  we
have already indicated we entirely agree.

21. So far as these judgments, the Djerbari judgment in particular,  contain
evidence based on expert opinions concerning risk to failed  asylum-seekers,
we would agree that such evidence requires careful  assessment,  albeit  the
adjudicator cannot be blamed for ignoring the  report  of  Professor  Seddon
since it was not before him. On the evidence that was before  him,  however,
we are satisfied he was correct in concluding  that  it  did  not  establish
that being a failed asylum seeker liable for punishment as a  deserter  gave
rise to a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to the  appellant's
human rights.

22.  Before  concluding  we  need  to  say  something  in  particular  about
Professor Seddon`s report. The text of his report was  not  produced  before
us, despite our grant of a further 7 days after  the  hearing  in  which  to
produce it and despite our having waited for  a  further  5  weeks  in  case
papers enclosing it had not found their way  to  our  file.  Accordingly  we
must decide this case without having this report before us.

23. Given the principle  established  in  Ravichandran  that  the  appellate
authorities must assess risk as at the date  of  hearing,  the  position  we
have found  ourselves  in  over  Professor  Seddon`s  report  illustrates  a
dilemma which is not uncommon. On  one  reading,  this  principle  could  be
taken to mean all evidence that comes to hand late should  be  admitted  and
considered. However, since there will quite often be some  report  or  other
which has only just become available, that reading could totally defeat  any
finality of litigation. On another reading the appellate  authorities  could
always rely on the powers given them by the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals
(procedure) Rules 2000 to refuse production of any evidence  not  served  in
time before the hearing. But too strict reliance on such powers  could  lead
to injustice. Ensuring that there is a just  disposal  of  an  appeal  often
means, therefore, balancing these two opposite approaches.

24. We would emphasise that in  this  case  not  only  did  the  appellant's
representatives fail to avail themselves of the opportunity to  adduce  this
evidence in accordance  with  Tribunal  rules  of  procedure  prior  to  the
hearing. They also failed to avail themselves of the  opportunity  given  to
them of adducing it after the completion of the hearing. In  our  view  they
can scarcely complain as a result that we have failed  to  consider  it.  If
they imagine that the Tribunal is obliged to seek out  evidence  for  itself
in this way, they are wrong.  However, there are two further  reasons,  why,
in addition to lack of compliance with procedural rules, which  lead  us  to
think that no injustice to the appellant has resulted  from  our  course  of
action. Although production of this report would  doubtless  have  benefited
our deliberations, we note that  the  Court  of  Appeal  did  not  make  any
definitive findings on this report: it simply ruled that the  production  of
it which had been made in that case was sufficient to require  the  Tribunal
not to have refused an application for leave  to  appeal.  But  it  goes  no
further than that.

25. The other reason we have for determining this appeal without looking  at
the text of Professor Seddon`s report is that there is a  considerable  body
of materials which deal with the issue of failed asylum  seekers,  including
those produced by  Dr Joffe. That we did have before us.  It  did  not  lead
us to take a different view from that taken by the adjudicator.

26. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




DR H H STOREY
VICE-PRESIDENT



