
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX52873-2001
On 22 July 2002          MU  (Documentation-Nufus  Card)  Turkey  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 03528



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             06/08/02

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                Mrs W Jordan
                               Dr A U Chaudhry



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                                 MIRBEY UZAR


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen of  Turkey.  The  Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Miss  M  E  Lewis,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 24 July 2001 to refuse leave to enter and refuse asylum

  2. Mr  P  Deller,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
     Appellant. Mr P Richmond represented the Respondent.

  3. This appeal is against the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  but  her  basic
     findings of fact about the Respondent's claim have not been challenged.
     As to the facts, she held that
           "He comes from an area [Bingol province  in  South-East  Turkey]
           where the PKK have been very active.  His  support  was  general
           rather than specific.  He did no more than many other  villagers
           did.  He himself was not particularly targeted.  He was taken in
           for questioning in 1993 and 1994, but again this appears to have
           been part  of  the  general  and  very  harsh  regime  that  was
           operating at the time by the Turkish authorities.   He  did  his
           military service......  The [Respondent's] record of  detentions
           was  no  doubt  similar  to  many  other  young  men  from   his
           region......  His  family  appear  to  have  suffered  from  the
           authorities. Again he is not claiming that their support for the
           PKK was very specific.....  [His] case is really based  on  what
           happened in 1998.  I find that his account of the way the  young
           men were recruited into the village guards, which was in fact  a
           divide and rule policy by the authorities, fits  well  with  the
           background  evidence.....  Refusal  by  individuals  or   entire
           villages to participate in the system is usually  considered  by
           the local forces as an indication of active or  passive  support
           for the guerrillas. Evacuation of the village and its subsequent
           complete or partial destruction on security grounds can follow a
           refusal to join....  Since 1991 over  3000  villages  have  been
           emptied.  However the rate of  evacuations  is  now  reduced  to
           almost nil....... Voluntary and assisted  settlements  have  now
           begun..... Therefore it appears that the harsh  regime  has  now
           ended.  The Respondent's evidence was that there does not appear
           to have been a serious fallout from his action  in  refusing  to
           join, or that of the other 10 young men in the  village  all  of
           whom also left."

  4. She then analysed the risk on return and it is at the  point  that  the
     Appellant's challenge arises. She concluded that
           "On the basis of material put before me and my positive findings
           of credibility, it appears to me to present a picture of someone
           whose family has a history of being dealt with  by  the  Turkish
           authorities.  There is a reasonable likelihood that there  is  a
           record of his detentions and past interest in him....... Were he
           to return there is a reasonable  likelihood  that  he  would  be
           identified by reference to past records and subject to detention
           with a serious risk of  mistreatment.   On  the  evidence  I  am
           satisfied that although his support for the PKK was only general
           and common to many other villagers,  his  refusal  to  join  the
           village guards put him in a higher risk category."

  5. Leave to appeal was granted to the Appellant on three grounds.

  6. The first was that as the Adjudicator had accepted that there  did  not
     appear to have been a serious fallout from his action  in  refusing  to
     join the village guards and based her decision only on his treatment on
     return,  she  erred  in  assessing  that  risk  by  treating   him   an
     undocumented returnee when he would in fact have his own genuine  Nufus
     card with him.

  7. Mr Deller argued that because the Respondent would return with his  own
     Nufus card he  would  not  be  stopped  at  the  airport  and  detailed
     enquiries by the Turkish border guards into  his  identity  and  record
     would not be triggered.  Mr  Richmond  responded  by  saying  that  the
     Adjudicator was aware that the Respondent had his Nufus  card  and  she
     recorded the evidence and submissions to this effect.   In  any  event,
     even if she had overlooked this point in her  conclusions  it  did  not
     undermine the determination for two reasons.  The first  was  that  the
     Adjudicator examined the risk on return to the Respondent  holistically
     in paragraph 11.6 of the determination and documentation was  only  one
     factor. The second was that on return  the  Nufus  card  would  be  put
     through  the  computer  and  the  Respondent's  history  would   become
     immediately apparent.

  8. The Tribunal considers that whilst the Adjudicator  did  indeed  record
     the fact that the Respondent had his Nufus card, she did not appear  to
     take on board its significance when assessing the risk on  return.  The
     paragraphs  of  the  CIPU  report  cited  by  the  Adjudicator  in  her
     assessment relate to returnees without their own documents and are  not
     therefore directly relevant to  the  Respondent.  She  was  not  merely
     undertaking a tour d'horizon as Mr Richmond suggested. If she were  she
     would have mentioned a number of other important factors, which  emerge
     from the objective material, which should have formed the  context  for
     informing her decision. The most relevant passages in the current  CIPU
     report are from 5.80 to 5.84 and are as follows.
           5.80 There is no organisation or  government  that  consistently
           and  formally   monitors   the   treatment   of   returnees   to
           Turkey......... in principle the Turkish police can  questioning
           any deported citizen upon their arrival at  the  airport.   This
           interrogation aims to establish the identity of  the  individual
           and also to check whether  they  have  been  implicated  in  any
           common-law case.  In general there is no  follow-up  unless  the
           individual is the subject of legal proceedings.  If the returnee
           is known to the police for  whatever  reasons,  he  is  possibly
           taken into custody for more interviews.   Amnesty  International
           in Germany takes the view that while it is still true that  most
           asylum seekers all returnees  are  released  after  the  routine
           interview, there has  been  increasing  number  of  cases  where
           returned asylum seekers were picked up later by unknown men  and
           beaten up or arrested  by  the  police  and  taken  into  police
           custody.  The report goes on to say that  this  mistreatment  is
           carried out  in  order  to  obtain  confessions  from  suspected
           persons.

           5.81 The German immigration authorities state  that  in  general
           rejected  asylum  seekers  returning  to  Turkey  do  not   risk
           persecution.  A rejected asylum seeker returning voluntarily can
           pass through entry control unhindered provided that he/she is in
           possession of a valid Turkish travel document.   The  fact  that
           the returnee  is  a  failed  asylum  seeker  does  not  lead  to
           different treatment.  The Turkish authorities are well aware  of
           the fact that many Turkish nationals apply for asylum  only  for
           the purpose of getting  temporary  authorisation  to  remain  in
           Germany......The Turkish  government  now  recognised  that  the
           overwhelming majority of Turkish nationals who had  applied  for
           asylum overseas had done so purely for economic  reasons.   They
           were of no interest to  Turkish  government  and  would  not  be
           imprisoned on return.

           5.83  Returnees without documents will be questioned.   This  is
           likely to be an  in-depth  questioning  by  the  Turkish  border
           police and is to be  distinguished  from  the  routine  identity
           check on arrival.  The German authorities state that, as a rule,
           the questions refer to personal data, date and the  reasons  for
           departing  Turkey,  possible  criminal  record  in  Germany  and
           contacts with illegal  Turkish  organisations.   In  some  cases
           further  enquiries  will  be  made  via  other   offices   (e.g.
           prosecutor's office, registrar's  office  at  the  last  Turkish
           residence of the returnee) in order to find out if the  returnee
           is  liable  to  prosecution  for  a  criminal  offence.    These
           enquiries can take from several hours to  several  days,  during
           which time the returnee will  be  kept  in  custody.   Currently
           available  information  indicates  that  undocumented  returnees
           generally are not ill  treated  while  being  kept  in  custody.
           However ill  treatment  cannot  be  ruled  out  in  cases  where
           returnees are suspected separatists.

           5.84 Amnesty International in Germany  states,  in  relation  to
           returns from Germany, that  the  Turkish  authorities  are  more
           likely to be suspicious in cases where  a  person  returning  to
           Turkey  is  not  carrying  any  valid  personal   documents   in
           accordance with regulations, or is carrying documents indicating
           asylum proceedings abroad.

           5.85 Being of Kurdish origin does not  in  itself  constitute  a
           higher risk of inhuman treatment.   Everything  depends  on  the
           individual and his activities in Turkey and abroad.   The  Dutch
           Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  notes  that  PKK  activist   and
           sympathisers who are thought to be  of  great  interest  to  the
           Turkish authorities risk being insulted, threatened,  maltreated
           or tortured during the questioning.   A  representative  of  the
           Turkish Human Rights Foundation stated that a clear  shift  from
           physical  to  more  psychological  pressure  on  detainees   had
           recently been observed

  9. This summary of the objective material is a useful starting  point  for
     assessing the level of risk on return for an individual  failed  asylum
     seeker.  It identifies a  very  sharp  distinction  in  terms  of  risk
     between a person returning undocumented and one with proper and genuine
     papers.  The  latter  will  be  able  to  pass  through  entry  control
     unhindered.  The former will face in-depth questioning by  the  Turkish
     border police, during which enquiries will be made of  other  databases
     in order to establish their identity and history.  It follows therefore
     that as the Respondent will return with a Nufus card and, in the  event
     of the refusal of  his  asylum  claim,  has  the  option  of  returning
     voluntarily, the risk to him is very much reduced  and  the  reasonable
     likelihood is that he will  be  able  to  pass  through  entry  control
     unhindered, without facing the in-depth investigation  by  the  Turkish
     border police.  We accept that if a person is wanted  actively  by  the
     Turkish authorities, then his return  even  on  his  own  papers  could
     trigger his arrest. But that is not the Respondent's case. On the facts
     as established, Mr Richmond's submission that  return  with  the  Nufus
     card would trigger a full inquiry into the Respondent's  background  in
     the same way as an undocumented return, is simply not born out  by  the
     objective material. We consider the  Adjudicator  erred  materially  in
     failing to appreciate the significance of the Nufus card  to  the  risk
     profile when making her assessment.  We shall deal with  Mr  Richmond's
     other point about the  holistic  assessment  of  risk,  after  we  have
     considered the other issues raised.

 10. We should mention at this point that we have focused in our  quotations
     on  the  current  CIPU  report  because  in  our  view  it   offers   a
     proportionate and balanced  overview  drawn  from  a  wide  variety  of
     sources, sometimes offering conflicting views, but  all  of  which  are
     properly cited. There is other objective material before us,  which  we
     have considered. Some of it  supplies  source  material  for  the  CIPU
     report itself and some  we  shall  refer  to  specifically  later.   We
     consider however that the  CIPU  report  offers  a  fair  and  balanced
     picture of the situation as a whole.

 11. The second ground of appeal is that the Adjudicator's finding that  the
     Respondent's support of the PKK was only general  and  common  to  many
     other villagers but that his refusal to join the village guards put him
     in a higher risk category, contradicts her earlier findings of fact and
     is not borne out by the objective material.

 12. Mr Deller argued this in terms that the Adjudicator erred, in the light
     of her findings of fact, to conclude  that  the  Respondent  was  at  a
     higher risk than ordinary returnees as a consequence of his refusal  to
     be a village guard.  This contradicted her previous  finding  that  his
     refusal to be a village guard did not cause any serious fallout.   This
     contradiction further undermined her assessment of risk.   Mr  Richmond
     argued that the refusal to act as a village  guard  was  not  the  only
     reason for allowing the appeal  and  referred  again  to  the  holistic
     approach  adopted  by  the  Adjudicator  in  paragraph  11.6   of   the
     determination.  He also argued that there was in fact no  contradiction
     as described by Mr Deller.  The fact that there was no serious  fallout
     from the refusal in the short  time  before  the  Respondent  left  the
     country and whilst he was avoiding the authorities, did not mean  there
     would not be a risk on return as a consequence.  He relied on an Asylum
     Aid Report and also on Tribunal decisions  in  Mehmet  00/TH/02493  and
     Zengin [2002] UKIAT 00417.

 13. The Tribunal considers that the Adjudicator made a  fair  and  balanced
     assessment of the background material relating to village guards, which
     we have quoted above in paragraph 3. It shows that the scheme, and  the
     view taken by the authorities of those who  did  not  participate,  may
     well have been applied oppressively in the past, but it  is  now  being
     run down and may well soon be ended altogether. We agree  however  with
     Mr Deller that there is a sharp inconsistency between the Adjudicator's
     further finding that the refusal by the Respondent  and  the  other  10
     young men in his village to participate did not appear to have resulted
     in a serious fallout, and her conclusion in paragraph  11.6  that  "his
     refusal to join the village guards puts him in a higher risk category."
     The Adjudicator offered no specific reasoning to explain this  apparent
     inconsistency and Mr Richmond's explanation  that  there  was  no  time
     between the Respondent's refusal and his leaving the country for  there
     to be any fallout, is not persuasive. Such a fall-out would  have  been
     felt in the village itself in the  context  of  the  policy  of  forced
     evacuation to which the Adjudicator referred. That there  was  no  such
     fallout suggests that the authorities did not draw any serious  adverse
     conclusions on this occasion and that consequently  little  risk  would
     now attach to the Respondent therefrom. The findings  of  fact  by  the
     Adjudicator simply do not bear out her conclusion that the Respondent's
     refusal to join the village guards was in itself a matter, which raised
     him to a higher risk category.

 14. We have reached this  conclusion  after  considering  page  131  of  Mr
     Richmond's objective bundle, to which he referred us. It is an  extract
     about the village guards from a report prepared by three  people  as  a
     result of a visit to Turkey, which was then published  by  Asylum  Aid.
     The three people were Navita Atreya, a  barrister  who  specialises  in
     representing asylum seekers and appears  before  us  frequently,  David
     McDowall, a writer on Kurdish affairs with  a  distinct  viewpoint  who
     frequently writes reports to support  claims  by  asylum  seekers,  and
     Perihan Ozbolat, herself a Kurdish emigrant from Turkey  who  currently
     works  with  Kurdish  immigrants  in  London.   In   describing   their
     backgrounds we do not mean to undermine their personal  credentials  or
     to suggest that they would not report accurately what was said to  them
     during their visit.  However when they express personal opinions, as on
     occasion they do in this report, those opinions have to be evaluated in
     the context of their own  viewpoints  and  whether  the  evidence  they
     produce properly supports their opinions. We mention this  because  the
     passage to which we have been referred first offers an analysis of  the
     village guards' scheme, which is in the main in line with the situation
     described the CIPU report  and  repeated  by  the  Adjudicator  in  the
     determination. However, it then goes on to state that
           "Those who enrolled and those villagers and villages that refuse
           to enrol were duly listed by gendarmerie intelligence. According
           to  Dr  Akin  of  TIHV  Istanbul   [a   Turkish   human   rights
           organisation] these lists are available to the national security
           organisation.  This means that all those who  desert  or  refuse
           service in the village guards  are  supposedly  on  record.   We
           believe this has clear implications when considering the  return
           of a refused asylum seeker in one of these categories."

 15. The latter sentence about the  risk  on  return  is  an  expression  of
     opinion by the writers rather than the expressed opinion of Dr Akin. It
     does not say clearly what the writers believe  those  implications  may
     be. It does not offer any proportionate analysis of any  risk.  We  are
     left to guess and evaluate their meaning. We  agree  with  Mr  Richmond
     that all the evidence has to be assessed holistically to  arrive  at  a
     risk assessment in each case, and  we  shall  come  to  that  later  in
     respect of  the  Respondent.  However  we  do  not  consider  that  the
     objective material as a whole offers  support  for  the  view  that  to
     refuse to be  a  village  guard  would  per  se  elevate  an  otherwise
     unmeritorious asylum claim into a higher risk  category.  Yet  this  is
     what the Adjudicator appears to have concluded in paragraph  11.6  when
     she finished her assessment with the words
           "On the evidence I am satisfied that although his support of the
           PKK was only general and common to  many  other  villagers,  his
           refusal to join the village guards puts him  in  a  higher  risk
           category."

 16. We therefore consider that the Adjudicator's conclusion on  this  point
     is inconsistent with her other  findings  of  fact  and  the  objective
     material as a whole, and is undermined by that inconsistency.  The  two
     decisions of the Tribunal cited by Mr Richmond do not really  take  the
     matter any further.

 17. The third ground is that the Adjudicator took into account the evidence
     of the leading human rights organisations in Turkey who recommend  that
     failed asylum seekers should not be returned but failed to consider the
     contrary position of UNHCR which is that they have no objection to  the
     return the Turkish asylum seekers  who,  after  a  fair  and  efficient
     procedure, had been found not be refugees.

 18. Mr Deller relied on the ground as stated above. Mr Richmond argued that
     the UNHCR report was irrelevant as it related to failed asylum  seekers
     per se rather than those with additional risk  factors  involved.  With
     respect to Mr Richmond the UNHCR advice and the advice of  the  Turkish
     human rights organisations are on the same point  and  should  together
     have been taken into account by the Adjudicator.  The failure to do  so
     further undermines her conclusions.

 19. As we have described above, and we consider that there is merit in  all
     three grounds of appeal upon which leave was granted. The Adjudicator's
     assessment of risk is consequently unsound and cannot  stand.  However,
     because there is no dispute as to the basic facts, we are in a position
     to be able to cure the errors and make our own risk assessment,  rather
     than remit the appeal for a fresh hearing

 20. We agree with Mr Richmond that a holistic approach must be adopted  and
     all the material factors should be taken into account. However, we must
     start from the proposition that as the Respondent  has  his  own  Nufus
     card, and is not wanted by the Turkish authorities, there  is  no  real
     risk that he will face an in  depth  interrogation  on  return  by  the
     Turkish border police. As it is essentially in the context of  such  an
     interrogation that risk of  ill  treatment  on  return  can  arise,  it
     follows that the Respondent's likely exposure  to  any  risk  would  be
     negligible, if it exists at all.

 21. However, on the facts as established, we can go further.   We  conclude
     that the Respondent would still not face any real risk  of  persecution
     or ill-treatment in breach of Article 3 even if he were  identified  on
     return as a failed asylum seeker and faced an in-depth investigation by
     the Turkish border guards.

 22. The evidential basis for the existence of risk on return is  summarised
     in the statement at paragraph 5.83 of the CIPU report, which says that;
           "Currently available  information  indicates  that  undocumented
           returnees generally are not ill  treated  while  being  kept  in
           custody. However ill treatment cannot  be  ruled  out  in  cases
           where returnees are suspected separatists."

 23. However, the expression "cannot be ruled out,"  is  significantly  more
     stringent than the applicable standard of proof of whether there  is  a
     "real risk" of persecution or a breach of protected human rights, which
     as the Tribunal stated in Kacaj 01/TH/0634*, must be more than  a  mere
     possibility. This objective evidence does not justify  the  conclusion,
     as is sometimes advanced, that everybody  who  may  have  come  to  the
     attention of the Turkish authorities in the  context  of  the  conflict
     with the PKK will as a consequence be entitled to asylum. A qualitative
     analysis of the likelihood and level of suspicion on  a  case  by  case
     basis is necessary in order to reach a valid assessment of the risk  on
     return.

 24. The Adjudicator  found  that  the  Respondent  had  been  detained  for
     questioning and was ill-treated in 1993 and 1994 but this was  part  of
     the general and harsh regime operating at that time.  He  did  no  more
     than many other villagers did. Most significantly she found that he was
     not particularly targeted himself. Whilst some members  of  his  family
     had problems thereafter the  Respondent  had  no  further  difficulties
     himself until 1998, even though, apart  from  his  period  of  military
     service, he continued to live in his  village  in  an  area  where  PKK
     activity was intense. If there were any continuing adverse interest  in
     him it would have  manifested  itself  in  this  period.  There  is  no
     credible reason to believe that such records as might  have  been  kept
     about the Respondent would show anything other than that  he  had  been
     detained for questioning on two occasions long  ago,  but  he  was  not
     targeted specifically, and the authorities had  no  continuing  adverse
     interest in him.

 25. We find he would not be at real risk of ill-treatment on  return  as  a
     consequence of this record.  To this must be added any additional  risk
     arising from his refusal to be a village guard.  However the  facts  as
     established show that there was no serious fallout from his refusal and
     those of other young men in the village to serve as  guards.  If  there
     had been it would have been manifested not just  against  him  but  the
     village as a whole. This  implies  that  the  authorities  did  not  in
     reality suspect the village or its members of being separatists to  any
     material degree. This reinforces the view  we  have  reached  that  the
     Respondent's refusal, even if known to the Turkish border guards, would
     not be a sufficiently material factor as to elevate his  otherwise  low
     risk status, and entitle him to international protection.

 26. In summary we find that the Respondent can return to  Turkey  with  his
     own Nufus card and will not therefore be an undocumented failed  asylum
     seeker. As he is not wanted by the authorities, there is little  or  no
     risk attaching to his return.  Even if  the  authorities  become  aware
     that he is a failed asylum seeker and he were to be  detained  for  in-
     depth investigation by the Turkish border guards, his record would  not
     be sufficient to create the suspicion that he is a separatist,  and  he
     would not be at real risk of any material ill-treatment

 27. For the reasons given above, we conclude that the determination by  the
     Adjudicator is  unsound  and  cannot  stand.  The  Respondent  has  not
     established any entitlement to the protection of either the 1950 or the
     1951 Conventions.  This appeal is allowed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
