

                                                     APPEAL No.  HX/15098/02
                            ZG (Catholic-Woman-Kidnapping-Prostitution)
                            Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT 06307

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of hearing: 15 November 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                              29th January 2003
                                   .........................................

                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)

                             Mr A. K. Lloyd J.P.


Between


                                 ZINA GJONI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR

                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia  and
      an ethnic Albanian Catholic from Kosovo.  She has been given leave  to
      appeal the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mrs  A.  K.  Simpson)
      dismissing her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  give
      directions for her removal from  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse
      asylum.


   2. Ms A. Weston, of  Counsel  instructed  by  Norton  &  Co,  Solicitors,
      appeared for the Appellant.  Mr M. Davidson, a Home Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the Respondent.


   3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 October  2001.   She
      claimed asylum  on  16  November  2001.   The  notice  containing  the
      decision against which she appeals is  dated  8  February  2002.   The
      Adjudicator heard the appeal on 6 June 2002 and leave  to  appeal  was
      granted on 27 September 2002.

   4. The Appellant is a single woman from  the  Prizren  area.   She  is  a
      Catholic.  On 24 October 2001 two  Kosovan  Muslims  abducted  her  at
      gunpoint from her village home in  the  presence  of  her  mother  and
      younger sister.  They were threatened that they would be shot if  they
      intervened.  The Appellant's mother did not report the matter  to  the
      police because there was  no  telephone  or  police  presence  in  the
      village. The Appellant was taken to a nightclub in Macedonia where she
      was punched in the face and raped twice by each  man.   She  was  kept
      there overnight before being taken  with  another  girl  in  lorry  to
      Belgium, where they arrived three days later. Up  to  this  point  the
      Adjudicator found she was a credible witness and believed her  account
      of events.  He did not believe that she had managed to escape from the
      men in a shopping district of a Belgian city, hide from them in a shop
      for an hour, hear a woman speaking  Albanian,  approach  her  and  her
      husband and ask for help, obtain their help, which included sheltering
      her in their home in making arrangements for her to travel in a  lorry
      to the United Kingdom where they gave her the telephone  number  of  a
      man in London who helped her before travelling with her  to  Liverpool
      by coach.


   5. After reviewing the country information the Adjudicator concluded that
      the Appellant belonged to a particular  social  group,  consisting  of
      women in Kosovo who were forced into prostitution against their  will.
      Those who abducted and raped her were criminals unconnected  with  the
      authorities.  They were non-state agents. In  the  circumstances,  the
      Adjudicator considered whether, in the light of the Horvath test,  the
      authorities  in  Kosovo  would  provide  her  with  a  sufficiency  of
      protection.   She  concluded,  in  paragraph  31,  "In  light  of  the
      objective evidence, I find that effective protection is  available  to
      the Appellant, as a result of which there are no  substantial  grounds
      to believe that she would be at risk of further ill-treatment  by  the
      Kosovan criminals that abducted her".  She also found  that  the  same
      authorities, particularly the international  peacekeeping  force,  had
      removed the general risk of  persecution  on  purely  ethnic  grounds.
      Having dismissed the Refugee Convention claim,  the  Adjudicator  also
      dismissed the Appellant's human rights claims under Articles 2 and  3,
      in line with the Refugee Convention conclusion.


   6. The grounds of appeal are unnecessarily long, complicated and at times
      unclear.  In the circumstances we  invited  Ms  Weston  to  make  full
      submissions and informed her that we intended to rely on these.


   7. We have before us the Appellant's bundle, the judgment of the Court of
      Appeal in Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100, the  Tribunal  determinations
      in Thaqi [2002] UKIAT 03520 and Asani  [2002]  UKIAT  01122,  and  the
      Respondent's bundle.


   8. There has been a misunderstanding as to  the  date  of  hearing.   The
      Appellant was present with a male friend before 10am,  but  Ms  Weston
      arrived late.  Clearly this was not her fault.  We gave her time  with
      her client, after which she told us she was ready to proceed.


   9. Ms Weston  submitted  that,  having  accepted  what  happened  to  the
      Appellant  in  Kosovo  and  Macedonia,  the  Adjudicator  should  have
      accepted her account of events in Belgium and on arrival in the United
      Kingdom.  Her conclusion was based on a subjective and erroneous  view
      of the reasonableness of the Appellant's conduct.  We  were  asked  to
      reject the Adjudicator's conclusions relating to these events and  the
      timing of her arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  all  of  which  were
      credible.  The most important matter was to look at  the  risk  facing
      her in Kosovo and particularly her home area.   She  belonged  to  the
      Catholic minority.  Her attachment to her home  area  was  significant
      and the Adjudicator did not give this sufficient weight.   She  was  a
      girl from a rural area approximately two hours from Prizren  where  it
      was difficult to access protection.  She would be  at  risk  from  her
      former abductors.  They knew who she was and where  she  lived,  which
      put her at risk of repeated rape  and  abduction.   A  local  man  had
      identified her to her abductors.  She was more  at  risk  because  she
      belonged to the Catholic minority.


  10. Ms Weston submitted that the Adjudicator had not  considered  all  the
      relevant factors in  relation  to  internal  relocation.   She  listed
      these.


               1.  As a  member  of  the  Catholic  minority  it  would  be
               difficult for her to relocate.


               2.  She was suffering from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder
               and was vulnerable.  We were referred to the medical report,
               which recommended counselling.   Ms  Weston  said  that  the
               Appellant was receiving counselling, but conceded there  was
               no evidence before us about this.  She was not able to  tell
               us the results of the genito-urinary tests  referred  to  in
               paragraph   10   of   the   determination.    However,   her
               instructions were that,  "there  were  no  ongoing  physical
               health issues".


               3.   If  relocated  the  Appellant  would  not  have  family
               support.


               4.  She would lack a sense of personal security.


               5.   She  lacked  educational  qualifications.   There  were
               educational support systems in the United Kingdom.  In reply
               to our question Ms Weston accepted that the Appellant  spoke
               little English.


               6.  In the light of the medical evidence she would not  have
               the strength of will to cope on return.


               7.  She would have no home or shelter outside her village.


               8.  She would suffer social stigma as a rape victim.


               9.  She required ongoing counselling.


  11. Ms Weston adopted the Adjudicator's conclusion that the Appellant came
      within a particular social group.  Ms Weston relied on Articles  2,  3
      and  8  and  submitted  that,   even   after   taking   into   account
      proportionality, the Appellant should succeed under Article 8.


  12. In reply to our questions Ms Weston submitted that the Appellant would
      be at risk on return to her home  area  because  she  had  information
      about a crime.  Those who abducted  her  would  fear  that  she  would
      complain or give evidence against  them.  In  the  circumstances  they
      would again treat her in the same way.  They were not more  likely  to
      leave her alone.  Ms Weston was not able to point us  to  any  country
      information in support of these submissions, although she argued  that
      the country information might not have caught up with the situation on
      the ground.


  13. Mr Davidson conceded that the Appellant's claims as to  what  happened
      to her in Belgium and on arrival in the United Kingdom did, if nothing
      else, fit the chronology.  In making her assessment  in  paragraph  27
      the  Adjudicator  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  whole  of  the
      Appellant's account  was  credible.   He  questioned  whether  in  the
      circumstances it would be necessary for us to  remit  for  hearing  by
      another Adjudicator.  In relation to internal relocation  he  referred
      us to the Country Assessment, which did not suggest that in  accessing
      protection Catholics had any greater  difficulty  than  Muslims.   The
      Prizren report showed that there were a number of Catholic churches in
      the area.  A doctor who was neither a psychiatrist nor a  psychologist
      prepared the medical report.  There was no detailed assessment of  the
      usual post-traumatic stress disorder criteria.  He submitted that  the
      diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder  lacked  weight.   It  was
      difficult to reconcile the evidence in the  medical  report  that  she
      attended college with the claim that she  was  not  able  to  function
      normally.  There was no indication that she suffered from a severe  or
      chronic mental illness.  He relied on the tribunal  determinations  in
      Thaqi.  There were women's organisations in Kosovo who could help  the
      Appellant and it was likely that the  authorities  would  provide  her
      with  effective  protection.   As   to   her   lack   of   educational
      qualifications she would be in no worse position  in  other  parts  of
      Kosovo when compared  with  her  home  area.   It  would  be  no  more
      difficult for her to relocate to  another  part  of  Kosovo  than  the
      United Kingdom.


  14. Mr Davidson submitted that there was no evidence before us to  suggest
      that traffickers in women sought revenge  against  those  who  escaped
      them.  To do so could draw further attention to them and imperil their
      activities.  The Adjudicator  had  already  looked  at  the  level  of
      prosecutions against such traffickers and concluded that there  was  a
      sufficient level of protection.  The  Horvath  test  did  not  require
      round-the-clock protection.  As to Article 8, on  all  the  facts,  it
      would be proportional for the Appellant to return.


  15. In reply Ms Weston submitted that Horvath protection had to be against
      the specific risk feared by the individual concerned.  Women's  groups
      in Kosovo provided structural rather  than  direct  assistance.   They
      promoted  women's  issues.   The  organisations  referred  to  in  the
      determination would not provide the Appellant with direct  protection.
      She relied on Kinuthia.


  16. We find that, on all the evidence, it was open to the  Adjudicator  to
      reject the Appellant's account of how she escaped from her captors  in
      Belgium, how the arrangement were made for her journey to  the  United
      Kingdom and what happened to her on arrival.  Incredible  stories  can
      be true, but we agree with the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator  has  not
      made  a  subjective  assessment  without  taking  into   account   the
      Appellant's  particular  circumstances  or  the  country  information.
      Nevertheless, the Adjudicator reached her  conclusions  on  the  basis
      that the Appellant's account of events was wholly credible  (paragraph
      27 of the determination) and we will do likewise.


  17. We agree with the Adjudicator's conclusion that the Appellant  is  not
      at risk on return to her home area.   In  the  light  of  the  country
      information it is clear that  she  is  not  at  risk  because  of  her
      Catholic faith, although we have considered whether this is a material
      factor in relation to her fear of her abductors.


  18. There are crucial differences between what happened to  the  Appellant
      when she was first abducted and now.  Then she  and  her  family  were
      taken by surprise.  She was abducted and her family were threatened in
      circumstances where it was not possible to contact the police  quickly
      enough to obtain assistance.  All of them must have been very shocked.
      On return the situation would be very different.  It would be open  to
      the Appellant to go to the authorities and make  a  complaint  against
      her abductors and the local man who identified  her  with  a  view  to
      possible prosecution and to seek future protection.   On  the  country
      information it is not likely that the authorities  would  be  able  to
      provide round-the-clock protection in her home area.  However,  it  is
      reasonably likely that if not her abductors then at  least  the  local
      man who identified her, if he is still in the area, would get to  know
      that she had complained and sought protection.  If her  abductors  did
      not come from the area, and there is no evidence that they  did,  then
      they are not likely to get to  know  of  her  return  except  possibly
      through the man who identified her to in the first place. There is  no
      country information to show that those who abducted the  Appellant  or
      traffickers generally are likely to seek revenge because  she  escaped
      from them, or to discourage others.   The  country  information  shows
      that those who traffic in women  do  so  as  a  business,  albeit  the
      business of organised crime.  An  attempt  to  abduct  the  Appellant,
      forewarned and suspicious, where the authorities have been informed of
      what happened in the past and  the  Appellant's  fear  of  what  could
      happen in the future, is  likely  to  be  regarded  as  dangerous  and
      unnecessarily risky.  We  accept  that  there  must  be  a  degree  of
      speculation as to  the  likely  actions  of  those  who  abducted  the
      Appellant.  Essentially, in addition to this, we rely on the  lack  of
      country  information   to   support   the   Appellant's   fears.    In
      circumstances where there is country information about the  activities
      of those who traffic in women it is likely that there would be reports
      of any action taken  against  those  who  escape  them.   The  country
      information referred to in paragraph 13  of  the  determination  shows
      that there is legislation in place to prosecute, convict and  penalise
      those who traffic in women.  Paragraph 14 shows  that  UNMIK  actively
      investigates cases of trafficking  although  there  are  obstacles  to
      conviction.  The Adjudicator has made a balanced assessment of country
      conditions.  We distinguish this case from Kinuthia.  That related  to
      remedies after  ill-treatment  on  return.   This  Appellant  has  not
      established that what happened to her in the past is likely to  happen
      again, whether or not the authorities can and will  provide  effective
      protection. Any risks there may be can be reduced yet further  if  she
      goes to the authorities, reports what happened in the past  and  seeks
      protection for the future.   The  protection  cannot  be  and  is  not
      required to be absolute.  If the Appellant were to need protection the
      particular  circumstances  of  her  case   would   ensure   sufficient
      protection.


  19. Where we agree with the Adjudicator that the Appellant is not at  risk
      of Refugee Convention persecution or infringement of her human  rights
      on return to her home area it is not necessary for us to consider  the
      reasonableness of internal relocation.  Had it been necessary to do so
      we would have concluded that, on all the evidence,  it  would  not  be
      unreasonable to expect her to relocate to another part of Kosovo,  for
      example to Prizren, the nearest town to her home village.


  20. Article 8 does not appear to have been argued before the  Adjudicator.
      There is no reference to  it  in  the  skeleton  argument  before  the
      Adjudicator.  However, Ms  Weston  has  raised  the  issue,  which  is
      covered, in the broadest of terms, in the grounds of appeal  from  the
      Respondent's decision.  It is not suggested that the Appellant  has  a
      family life in the United Kingdom with anyone in particular.  She  may
      nevertheless have a private life.  Her Counsel confirms that she  does
      not suffer from any physical ill health.  The doctor who provided  the
      medical   report   does   not   have   any   specialist    psychiatric
      qualifications.   His  conclusion   that   she   is   suffering   from
      posttraumatic stress disorder is not specifically related to the usual
      criteria.  The conclusion  that  she  has  difficulty  in  functioning
      normally is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  her  claim  that  she  is
      receiving some sort of further education in the United  Kingdom.   Her
      statement provides little support for  the  contention  that  she  has
      difficulty in functioning normally.  Her Counsel informs us, doubtless
      on instructions, that she is receiving counselling.  However, we  have
      no evidence as to the  regularity,  effectiveness  or  any  continuing
      requirement for this.  In the circumstances we are unable to find that
      the Appellant is in need of medical or psychiatric treatment in Kosovo
      and even less that she requires treatment which is not  obtainable  in
      that country.  Accepting that to return her would interfere  with  her
      right to private life under Article 8, on all the  facts  we  have  no
      difficulty in concluding that the interference would be proportionate.


  21. We dismiss this appeal.








   ...........................................
   P. R. Moulden - Vice President

