
H-AMP-V1
                    AK (Threats from Salafists) Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT06424
                                                                  HX10735-02

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  20 September 2002                       |                             |
|Dictated: 30 September 2002                   |.....07.02.2003...           |


                                   Before:


                           Miss K Eshun - Chairman
                                Mr C Thursby


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                            Abdenour KHALDOUN +3

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter of H B M Sayers, Solicitors


1.    The  appellant  appeals  with  leave  of  the  Tribunal  against   the
    determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs F M Kempton) promulgated on 7 June
    2002 in which she allowed the respondent's appeal against the  decision
    of the appellant of 17 September 2001 refusing to grant him asylum.

2.   In this case the respondent, together with his wife and  two  dependent
    children, arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  13  July  2001  on  valid
    passports and visas.  They claimed asylum on 2 August 2001.  The  claim
    was refused by letter from the respondent dated 17 September 2001.

3.   The respondent's claim to asylum was on the basis that he was a  farmer
    in Dellys in a  village  called  Sobaoi.   He  was  not  a  member  any
    political party.  He and his family moved to Algiers in about  the  end
    of November 2000 due to problems in Dellys.   There  were  no  problems
    before August 2000.  In August  2000,  terrorists,  namely  the  Salafi
    group who are Muslim fundamentalists, came to his village and asked him
    for 200,000 Dinars.  He reported this to the police but  they  did  not
    take it seriously.  When the terrorists returned  for  payment  a  week
    later, his wife was so upset that she dropped the baby,  the  dependent
    child Omar, on  the  floor.   Shortly  thereafter,  in  September,  the
    terrorists came to the respondent's house and took his father.  On  the
    following day, the respondent found his father dead, having  died  from
    injuries inflicted upon him.  This was reported to the police who  said
    this had happened to many others and that no  money  should  be  handed
    over as such  support  for  them  would  be  treated  negatively.   The
    terrorists then threatened the respondent that he would have  the  same
    fate and then received a threatening letter.  Then  all  his  land  was
    burned in September.  After that he moved his family to Algiers  as  he
    had other family members there.

4.   In Algiers he operated a stall in the marketplace and sold  vegetables.
     In May 2001 his problems began.  The terrorists came to his stall  and
    demanded 200,000 Dinars which he did not have.   They  took  the  day's
    takings of 1,500 Dinars.  The respondent reported this to  the  police,
    who then detained him.  They ill-treated him in detention  by  beating,
    kicking  and  punching  him,  depriving  him  of  food  and  water  and
    smothering him with a water-filled sponge.  They  did  not  inform  his
    family of his whereabouts.  His family believed him to have been  taken
    by the terrorists.  On release from  the  police,  the  respondent  was
    accused by the police of helping the terrorists by giving  them  money.
    He was warned not to do so again.  His family  had  been  told  by  the
    police that they knew nothing of him or his whereabouts.

5.   The respondent received threatening letters  from  the  same  terrorist
    group, the Salafi group, after he moved  to  Algiers.   The  respondent
    believes that the group has informers everywhere who informed  them  of
    his new address.  After being detained by the  police,  the  respondent
    decided to sell everything and buy a visa through  unofficial  channels
    in order to leave the country.  He already  had  a  passport  which  he
    renewed in September 2001 and he was given his passport with  the  visa
    in it on 10 June 2001.  He and his family then left Algeria on 13  July
    2001.

6.   His wife gave evidence before the Adjudicator.   She  referred  in  her
    statement to her husband's problems with terrorists starting  in  about
    1992, when they demanded money from her husband as they knew  he  owned
    land.  They wanted 20,000,000 Dinars from him.  She thought  that  some
    of the terrorists may have been from their community as they seemed  to
    know a lot about the people who had lived there.  She repeated much  of
    what her husband had said in relation to his father having  been  taken
    away and shot and the family moving to Algiers and her husband  setting
    up a market stall.  She said that about a month  later  the  terrorists
    began to threaten her husband again.  They demanded money from  him  at
    the stall and he paid 15,000 Dinar.  The respondent reported the matter
    to the police who jailed  him  for  helping  the  terrorists.   He  was
    assaulted during questioning.

7.   In her oral evidence, Mrs Khaldoun referred to the reasons for  leaving
    as being,  firstly,  what  happened  to  her  husband  in  Algeria  and
    secondly, her son Omar's health.  She explained that Omar  cannot  walk
    although he is almost two  years  old.   He  suffers  from  asthma  and
    gastric  reflux.   He  receives  treatment  at   a   specialist   child
    development centre.  He explained that the treatment for her son to the
    same standard would not be  available  in  Algeria.   If  he  does  not
    receive the treatment,  he  will  not  be  able  to  walk  or  function
    properly.

8.   The Adjudicator accepted all of the  respondent's  evidence.   Although
    she found that there were a few discrepancies in the evidence given  by
    the respondent and his wife, she found that these were not significant.

9.   The Adjudicator  found  that  the  respondent  has  been  subjected  to
    persecution.  The terrorists are not State actors, but the  authorities
    were quite clearly not able to  control  the  situation  at  all.   The
    respondent tried to exercise internal flight  option  but  was  clearly
    unable to do so as the terrorists caught up with him and started  their
    extortion racket once again, coupled  with  death  threats.   When  the
    respondent reported the matter to the police in Algiers, they not  only
    refused to help him but tortured and persecuted him.  Accordingly there
    was no State protection for the respondent in Algiers.  The  respondent
    had already been persecuted by the authorities for an imputed political
    opinion, namely that by implication because the terrorists had obtained
    money from him, he must have sympathised  with  them.   The  respondent
    therefore cannot expect protection from the authorities in  Algeria  as
    the authorities  are  unable  and  unwilling  to  offer  him  effective
    protection.  She therefore allowed the  respondent's  claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

10.  In relation to the  claims  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights,  the  Adjudicator   considered   the   child   Omar's   medical
    difficulties.  In relation to the medical help  available  in  Algeria,
    the Adjudicator had regard to the Home Office Country Assessment  which
    said that the upheavals of the last decade have had a  negative  effect
    upon public health, especially child  health.   Although  some  reports
    said that there are signs of recovery, and others said that there is  a
    fall in standards, and medicines are provided free  for  children,  the
    Adjudicator found  that  this  would  not  assist  Omar,  who  requires
    physiotherapy and other treatment.  It was implicit in  the  background
    information that the care available in Algeria will not  be  comparable
    to that available in the United Kingdom and  will  be  substandard  and
    unlikely to meet Omar's specific needs.  She  therefore  believed  that
    there would be a breach of Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights to return Omar to Algeria and also allowed the  appeal  on
    this basis.

11.  The grounds of appeal  submitted  by  the  appellant  stated  that  the
    Adjudicator erred in law by ignoring the case of Fadil, CA  [2001]  Imm
    AR 392 of November 2000, in which  the  Tribunal  found  that  fear  of
    Islamic fundamentalists did not constitute a fear of persecution  under
    the Convention.  The respondent's claim, which is based on the criminal
    extortion of money, does not give rise to a  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

12.  The grounds of appeal also submitted that the issue of  sufficiency  of
    protection must now also be addressed.

13.  It was also submitted that the Adjudicator erred in her  assessment  of
    the ECHR. The Adjudicator says that  no mention is made in the  medical
    reports of the availability of treatment in Algeria".  It  is  for  the
    respondent to show that medical treatment is not available  in  Algeria
    and cited the case of Bensaid v United Kingdom ECHR  6  February  2001.
    Bensaid was a serious schizophrenic in need of regular drug  treatment,
    and had spent 11 years in the UK and yet the European  Court  of  Human
    Rights found that there was no breach of Articles 3 and  8  if  Bensaid
    was returned to Algeria.

14.  At the  outset  of  the  hearing,  the  Tribunal  put  to  flagged  the
    following issues:

15.  In respect of the asylum appeal, if  there  is  no  Convention  reason,
    should the issue of sufficiency of protection  be  considered  at  all,
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's decision in Skenderaj.

16.  In respect of the human rights appeal, the Adjudicator appears to  have
    allowed the appeal under Article 3 on issues relating to the health  of
    Omar, a  dependent  child,  without  giving  any  consideration  to  Mr
    Khaldoun's own human  rights  claim.   The  question  was  whether  the
    Adjudicator was legally right to do this, given that Mr Khaldoun is the
    only member of the family  who  has  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

17.   Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  the  respondent's  main  fear  was   from
    terrorists  and  therefore  the  fear  did  not  engage   the   Refugee
    Convention.  As regards the issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection,  Mr
    Mullen submitted that there is no evidence to support the Adjudicator's
    finding that the police action of mistreating the respondent meant that
    they imputed a  political  opinion  to  him  because  he  was  seen  as
    supporting the terrorists.  He would submit that in general there is  a
    sufficiency of protection in Algeria notwithstanding any allegation  of
    mistreatment.  The October 2001 Home Office CIPU Report was before  the
    Adjudicator.   In  there  it  states  that  as  a  matter   of   policy
    disciplinary action is taken against members of security forces who are
    guilty of  violating  human  rights.   Several  such  cases  have  been
    reported. There was no attempt by the respondent to  seek  redress  for
    alleged mistreatment when it was open to him to do so.  Therefore,  the
    Adjudicator's finding of insufficiency of protection was deficient. Mr.
    Mullen did not address us as to whether this  issue  should  have  been
    considered at all by the Adjudicator in the light of Skenderaj.

18.  With regard to Article 3, Mr Mullen submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's
    treatment of this issue was entirely wrong.  The fact that the  medical
    facilities in Algeria are not as good as those in the  United  Kingdom,
    does not go to support a breach of the child's Article 3  rights.   The
    Adjudicator did not consider the Article 3 rights of the respondent  or
    his wife.  Mr Mullen asked that the Tribunal allow  the  Home  Office's
    appeal  outright  because  of  the   defects   in   the   Adjudicator's
    determination.  Alternatively, he would not be averse to a remittal.

19.  Mr Winter relied on his written legal submissions.  In respect  of  the
    argument that there is no Convention reason to the respondent's  claim,
    Mr Winter referred to the Adjudicator's determination in paragraph  33,
    where she found that the respondent had already been persecuted by  the
    authorities  for  the  Convention  reason  of  "an  imputed   political
    opinion".  Mr Winter citied the case of Mardi [2002] UK  IAT  01327  at
    page 59 of the respondent's bundle.  Mardi was an Algerian  businessman
    who owned a  garage  in  a  suburb  of  Algiers.   He  was  approached,
    threatened and assaulted  by  members  of  the  GIA  who  were  seeking
    extortion money from. The president of the IAT,  Mr.  Justice  Collins,
    thought that this amounted to a Convention reason

20.  As regards the issue of sufficiency of protection, Mr Winter said  that
    he had lodged recent cases in which there  has  been  found  to  be  no
    sufficiency of protection in Algeria.  In this case the respondent went
    to the authorities to  report  the  matter  to  them  and  they  rather
    persecuted  him  for  his  imputed  political  opinion  for   allegedly
    assisting terrorists.

21.  As regards the respondent's human rights  claim,  Mr  Winter  submitted
    that it is implicit in  the  determination  that  the  Adjudicator  has
    decided that the respondent is entitled to refugee status and therefore
    she did not have to consider the human  rights  claim.   If  an  asylum
    seeker is  granted  refugee  status,  there  is  no  obligation  on  an
    Adjudicator to consider the human rights  issue.   Mr  Winter  accepted
    that he had no authority to support this argument.

22.   As  to  whether  the  human  rights  of  the  child  can  support  the
    respondent's claim, Mr Winter said that he could add nothing further to
    the Adjudicator's approach other than to rely on grounds 3 and 4 of his
    written submissions.  He submitted that childcare facilities in Algeria
    have been severely affected by the civil war.  It  would  be  degrading
    for the child to be sent back to substandard medical care.   The  child
    was one year old when the family arrived in the United Kingdom.  He did
    not really receive any treatment in Algeria.

23.  Mr Winter said that if the Tribunal is of the view  that  a  Convention
    reason exists, then there is no reason to remit the appeal.   He  would
    not oppose a remittal if the court feels that the human rights claim of
    the respondent should be dealt with.

24.  Mr Mullen referred us to  paragraph  4.10  of  the  October  2001  Home
    Office CIPU Assessment which reports on the medical system  in  Algeria
    and gives a list of regional  and  specialist  hospitals.   The  report
    states that medicines are sold through the State monopoly at subsidised
    prices and are provided free to  children  and  the  elderly,  although
    there have been some cutbacks.   Mr  Mullen  also  submitted  that  the
    report on Omar from York Hill Trust NHS hospital, gives  no  indication
    that the return of the child would result in the deterioration  of  his
    health or complete absence of medical treatment.  Furthermore he  would
    submit that even if they are not living in Algiers, they should be able
    to travel to Algiers for medical treatment for the child.

25.  Mr Winter submitted that the respondent moved to  Algiers  to  exercise
    an internal flight alternative.  It would be unduly harsh to  send  him
    back to Algiers.  The Adjudicator said that he will suffer  persecution
    for his imputed political opinion.

26.  The Tribunal is proposing to deal with this  appeal  in  three  stages.
    The first, is in respect of the  asylum  appeal;  whether  there  is  a
    Convention reason and whether the issue of  sufficiency  of  protection
    should have been considered by the Adjudicator.  Secondly, whether  the
    Adjudicator should have considered the respondent's  own  human  rights
    claim.  Thirdly, whether the human rights of the  dependent  child  can
    support the respondent's human rights claim.

27.   Re:  The  asylum  claim.   The  Tribunal  is  of  the  view  that  the
    respondent's fear of the Salafi terrorist group does not  constitute  a
    fear of persecution under the Convention.  We  rely  on  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Fadil which was cited in the  grounds  of  appeal.
    In Fadil the appellant was a citizen of Algeria.  He claimed that if he
    were to be conscripted into the Algerian army he would be persecuted by
    the Islamic fundamentalists.  The Court of  Appeal  held  therein  that
    fear  of  Islamic  fundamentalists  did  not  constitute  a   fear   of
    persecution under the Convention.  Mr Winter referred to the Tribunal's
    decision in Mardi, where he thought that  Mr  Justice  Collins  thought
    that extortion of money from a businessman  amounted  to  a  Convention
    reason.  On a closer reading of Mardi we do not find that this is  what
    Mr Justice Collins decided.  In paragraph 5 of Mardi, the Tribunal said
    that it was in their judgment fanciful to suggest that Mardi  would  be
    perceived as being an opponent of the GIA and thus there  would  be  an
    imputed political opinion which would be the  basis  for  a  conclusion
    that the persecution was for a Convention reason.  In a  case  such  as
    this the suggestion that there is imputed political opinion simply will
    not  run.   In  this  appellant's  case,  the  argument  is  that   the
    authorities mistreated him because, having reported  the  extortion  to
    the police, they then accused  him  of  assisting  the  terrorists  and
    thereby imputed a political opinion to him.  Whilst we accept that  the
    police mistreated the respondent, we are not of the  opinion  that  the
    mistreatment was on account  of  his  imputed  political  opinion.   At
    paragraph 19 of the determination, it is recorded that  the  respondent
    said that he was accused by the police of  helping  the  terrorists  by
    giving them money.  He was warned not to do so again.  As far as we are
    concerned this evidence tells us the reason why the  police  mistreated
    him.  It was not because they were of  the  view  that  the  respondent
    sympathised with the cause of the terrorists, but simply because he had
    assisted them by giving them money.  In the circumstances, and applying
    the judgment in Mardi, we do not support the Adjudicator's finding that
    the respondent was persecuted by  the  authorities  by  reason  of  his
    imputed political opinion.  Accordingly, we find that  the  appellant's
    claim does not engage the Refugee Convention.

28.  As regards the issue of sufficiency  of  protection,  we  rely  on  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Skenderaj [2000] INLR 232   in  which  it
    was held:

         "On the issue of protection, as the Adjudicator had found  and  the
         Tribunal had accepted that, whatever the appellant's reason for not
         seeking protection, the State could not have  provided  it  anyway,
         his  claim  fell  within  the  first  alternative  in  the  refugee
         definition in  Article  1A(2)  of  the  United  Nations  Convention
         relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 and  Protocol  of  1967  of
         "inability" to provide protection.   However,  and  notwithstanding
         the Tribunal's inadequate treatment of this  issue,  this  did  not
         assist him as he had failed to show a fear  of  persecution  for  a
         Convention reason."

    It is our understanding of this decision that as the respondent had not
    established that he had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason, he could not take advantage of the  second  limb  of
    the definition in Article 1A(2), by claiming that the authorities would
    be unwilling and unable to provide him  with  protection.   If  we  are
    correct in our interpretation of that judgment, then it means that  the
    issue of protection was not a matter that needed to  be  considered  by
    the Adjudicator.

29.  Re: Respondent's human rights claim.   It  is  our  considered  opinion
    that the Adjudicator was under a legal obligation to make a finding  on
    this aspect of the respondent's claim regardless of her finding in  the
    asylum claim.  Although Counsel argued that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
    have to because she had allowed the asylum appeal,  he  could  find  no
    authority to support his argument.  Considering that the respondent had
    also appealed on this ground, the Adjudicator erred in not  considering
    it.

30.  Re: Can the human rights of a dependent child support the  respondent's
    human rights claim?  In this case the child,  Omar,  does  not  have  a
    human rights claim in his own right.  He is a dependant of his  father,
    the respondent.  It is his father who has a right of appeal against the
    decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   As  Omar  is  part  of   the
    respondent's family, his medical condition will have a bearing  on  the
    respondent's human rights appeal.  As the Adjudicator did not  consider
    the respondent's own human rights  claim,  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 solely on consideration of Omar's medical condition was wrong
    in law.

  31. Furthermore, the test with regard to Article 3 of the ECHR,  does  not
      lie with the comparability of the medical facilities in Algeria to the
      medical facilities in the UK.  The test in Article 3 is whether  there
      is a real  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to  inhuman  and  degrading
      treatment.  The threshold in Article  3  is  high.   In  Bensaid,  his
      removal from the UK even  though  he  was  in  need  of  regular  drug
      treatment was found not to breach Article 3.  While it may be that the
      medical treatment Omar will receive in Algeria may be substandard,  in
      our opinion, that the treatment  affects  the  quality  of  his  life.
      There is no evidence to suggest that that treatment will pose a threat
      to Omar's life.  Therefore,  we  disagree  with  the  Adjudicator  and
      overturn her decision on this issue.

  32. We therefore allow the Home Office appeal.

  33. We however, remit the appeal back to Mrs. F M Kempton to consider  the
      respondent's Article 3 claim and  any  issues  that  may  arise  under
      Article 8 as a result of the child's medical condition.






                                                 Miss K. Eshun
                                                 Chairman

