

       AHMED (Documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date of hearing: 20/12/2001
                                    Date Determination notified:  19/02/2002



                                   Before

                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                  Mr. C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                      Mr. P. R. Moulden (Vice-President)



                                   Between


                                TANVEER AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, who is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appeals  with  leave
      against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr. P. Digney) dismissing
      his appeal against the Respondent's decision to  give  directions  for
      his removal from the United Kingdom and to refuse him asylum.

   2. Ms S Panagiotopoulou of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Adams,  Solicitors,
      appeared for the Appellant. Mr. C. Trent,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the Respondent.

   3. This is a starred case which is  intended  to  give  guidance  on  the
      questions raised and should be followed in  preference  to  any  other
      Tribunal decisions which touch on these issues.  This decision  should
      therefore  be  regarded  as  authoritative  and  is  binding  on   all
      Adjudicators and Tribunal Chairman.

   4. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 May 2000.  He claimed
      asylum on 4 May 2000.  The Respondent's decision  is  dated  23  April
      2001.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal  on  9  August  2001  and  his
      determination was promulgated on 14 August 2001.  Leave to appeal  was
      granted on 12 November 2001.

   5. The Appellant claimed to fear  persecution  from  the  authorities  in
      Pakistan because of his membership of the  MQM,  which  he  joined  in
      1997.  He had attended rallies since 1993.   In  1998  he  became  the
      general secretary of the party in his area after his brother, who held
      the same post  before  him,  was  killed.   His  father  was  an  area
      controller in Karachi.  In December 1999  unknown  people  murdered  a
      member of the MQM breakaway group, MQM (Haqiqi).   The  Appellant  was
      named as one of four suspects.  He was arrested and detained for three
      days before being released because of lack of evidence.   In  February
      2000 two further suspects were arrested and one  was  reported  killed
      attempting to escape.  Subsequently the Appellant was  arrested  on  a
      number of occasions, for a few hours only each time.  He was  arrested
      again, in connection with the murder, granted bail but  after  another
      suspect was killed he was advised to flee.  His party arranged for him
      to leave the country. He said that the police still wanted  to  arrest
      him for the suspected murder.  He produced a FIR, an arrest warrant, a
      letter from his party, the MQM, dated 27 February 2001  and  newspaper
      cuttings.


   6. The Adjudicator found that the arrest warrant and  the  FIR  were  not
      likely to be genuine. He gave no weight to the letter from the MQM. It
      was unlikely that the Appellant's  friend  would  have  been  able  to
      obtain them so easily or at all.  His account of how  he  did  so  was
      vague.  The Appellant said  that  his  family  received  a  number  of
      warrants, but he did not produce any of them.  There was no reason why
      a warrant should have been issued on 3 January 2001.  If it had  been,
      it was difficult to see how the Appellant's friend could have heard of
      it.  If the FIR was genuine it was not likely that the Appellant would
      have been released so easily.  The Adjudicator said that  it  was  for
      the Appellant to persuade him that the documents were genuine, to  the
      usual low standard, and he had not done so.


   7. The Adjudicator went on to consider whether the Appellant's account of
      events could be true even if the documents were false.  Quite properly
      he considered whether the Appellant used false documents to strengthen
      a genuine case.


   8. On the country evidence before him  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      police arrested active members of the MQM arbitrarily  and  many  were
      killed, particularly in the period before the coup  of  October  1999.
      After that date ill-treatment  and  killings  decreased.   Whilst  MQM
      activists were ill treated and held for long periods  the  Adjudicator
      found that the Appellant was not an activist.  Furthermore,  if  there
      had been a murder charge against him, even a false one, he  would  not
      have been released so easily.  This would also indicate  that  he  was
      not perceived to be a MQM activist.  The Adjudicator accepted that the
      Appellant had been arrested  on  two  occasions  but  concluded  that,
      because of his speedy release, the authorities had no serious interest
      in him.  If he were suspected of murdering a member  of  the  opposing
      group it was most unlikely he would have escaped unscathed.


   9. The Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant, who was  twice  arrested
      and twice released speedily and  without  charge,  did  not  have  any
      outstanding warrants for his arrest.  His political involvement was at
      the lowest end of the scale.  There was no reason to suppose  that  he
      was now of any interest to  the  authorities.   The  country  evidence
      showed that, following the coup, the  position  of  MQM  members  more
      active than the Appellant had  actually  improved.   Somebody  in  the
      Appellant's position would not be at risk.


  10. The Adjudicator went on to find that, even if he were wrong  in  these
      conclusions, an individual such as the Appellant, who  was  not  "high
      profile", would be safe  if  he  relocated  to  another  part  of  the
      country.  The Appellant had not established either a well-founded fear
      of persecution for a Convention reason or that his human rights  would
      be infringed.


  11. The grant of  leave  to  appeal  records  grounds  alleging  that  the
      Adjudicator's rejection of the authenticity of the  warrant  and  FIRs
      was based on an approach which incorrectly placed the  burden  on  the
      Appellant.  The parties' attention was drawn to the  apparent  tension
      between the approach in ex parte Shen [2000] INLR 389 QBD (CO-3808-98)
      and that in ex parte Mukhtar Shala Mohammed [2001] Imm AR 162.


  12. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the Adjudicator erred in law when he
      said that it was for the Appellant to persuade him that the  documents
      were genuine to the usual low standard.  What he should have done,  as
      soon as the Respondent alleged that they were forgeries, was  to  hold
      that it was for the Respondent to establish this to the  higher  civil
      standard.  Ms Panagiotopoulou appeared for the  Appellant  before  the
      Adjudicator and informed us that, even though it was not  recorded  in
      the determination, Counsel who appeared  for  the  Respondent  alleged
      that the documents were  forgeries.   Mr.  Trent  confirmed  that  his
      papers said that the authenticity of the documents was challenged.  Ms
      Panagiotopoulou submitted that the Adjudicator allowed his findings in
      respect of the documents to cloud his other findings.   The  documents
      were submitted to the Home Office on 23  July  2001  and,  before  the
      hearing, Ms  Panagiotopoulou  asked  the  Presenting  Officer  if  the
      Respondent wanted more time to consider the documents.  The offer  was
      not taken up.  Mr. Trent accepted that often the  Respondent  did  not
      arrange for  documents  to  be  checked  in  the  country  where  they
      purported to have been issued.

  13. In reply  to  our  questions  Ms  Panagiotopoulou  accepted  that  the
      Appellant had to establish prima facie evidence that a document  could
      be relied on.   However,  the  Appellant  was  not  present  when  the
      documents were obtained  and  in  the  circumstances  could  not  give
      details of how this was done.  Although she could not direct us to the
      evidence to support the contention Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted  that,
      even though the arrest warrant was against an individual  whose  names
      were not identical to the Appellant's, this was likely to have been an
      error by whoever translated the document. It  was  accepted  that  the
      Appellant had not absconded from official custody,  but  was  released
      unconditionally.  There was no explanation for the fact  that  one  of
      the documents indicated a  payment  of  50,000  rupees  (approximately
      �500).  Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the country evidence  showed
      that bribes and/or influence could persuade the police to bring  false
      charges.  An individual's release could be procured in the  same  way.
      The Appellant's  case  was  that  the  MQM  (Haqiqi)  were  acting  in
      conjunction with the authorities and in  particular  the  police.  The
      Appellant feared what the police would do to him if he returned.   The
      Adjudicator had not made clear findings as to  what  happened  to  the
      Appellant in custody, although he accepted that the Appellant had been
      arrested and detained.  We were asked  to  allow  the  appeal  to  the
      extent of remitting it for hearing afresh before another Adjudicator.


  14. Mr. Trent submitted that there were four possible  scenarios  for  the
      documents in question.  1.  The documents  and  the  information  they
      contained were genuine.  2.  Both the  documents  and  their  contents
      were false.  3.  The document  was  genuine  but  the  information  it
      contained was false.  4.  The information was genuine but the document
      was false.  Even if the Respondent had carried out investigations  the
      information he obtained was not likely to be conclusive.  Often it was
      not possible for the Respondent to  verify  documents.   Even  if  the
      Respondent did not allege that the documents were forgeries it did not
      mean he accepted they were genuine.  There was nothing in this warrant
      to say that it was a re-issue of an original warrant.   The  Appellant
      had ample time within which to obtain evidence to back up the warrant.
       For example he could have obtained an affidavit, perhaps from a local
      lawyer.  He had not done so.


  15. Mr. Trent submitted that the Adjudicator's conclusions  were  open  to
      him on the evidence. Unless there was a clear  allegation  of  forgery
      the burden of proof did not transfer to the Respondent.  We were asked
      to dismiss the appeal.

  16. The Appellant's bundle contains reports of


              i. Ex parte Shen (see ante) heard in May 2000 and
             ii. Ex parte Mukhtar Shala Mohammed (see ante), heard  in  July
                 2000, to which we have already referred, together with
            iii. A, B, C, and D v Secretary of State for the Home Department
                 (HX/61156/96), heard in July 1999.
             iv. Fodjo v Secretary of State for the Home Department (C-2000-
                 220), heard in September 2000.
              v. Thaukumar Vijeyaratnam v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
                 Department (HX/76028/97), heard in February 2000 and
             vi. Sait Findik, Hatim Findik v Secretary of State for the Home
                 Department (TH/26021/92), heard in April 1998.
            vii. Makozo (20033) heard in December 1998.

  17. Our researches led to two other reports;

              i. Ex parte Nasim  Quyyum Khan (CO/107/1999),  heard  in  July
                 2000 and
             ii. Ex parte Jose Vincente Davila-Puga (C/2000/3119), heard  in
                 May 2001.


  18. Both representatives were provided with copies during the hearing  and
      given leave to make written submissions no later than 11 January 2002.
       No such submissions have  been  received  from  the  Respondent.   Ms
      Panagiotopoulou has made further  written  submissions  in  which  she
      argues that this appeal should be distinguished from  Davila-Puga  and
      Khan.  In those cases the Respondent did not  make  an  allegation  of
      forgery.   In  this  appeal  the  Respondent  expressly  alleged  that
      documents were forgeries.  This was not based on an examination of the
      documents and was unsubstantiated.  In these circumstances the  burden
      fell on him to prove that  the  documents  were  forgeries,  following
      Shen.  The position would  have  been  different  had  the  Respondent
      simply invited the Adjudicator to consider the documents  as  part  of
      the Appellant's case and attach as much weight to them  as  he  deemed
      appropriate.  Ms Panagiotopoulou accepts that  in  such  circumstances
      the burden of proof would have remained on the  Appellant,  "to  prove
      his case (including the authenticity of the documents) to the required
      standard".


  19. In A, B, C, and D (paragraph 39) the Tribunal said,


               "It is our view that the burden of proof is on the Secretary
               of State to show that  the  blacklists  are  not  authentic,
               rather than on the Appellant to  prove  (on  the  reasonable
               likelihood test) that they are authentic."


  20. In A, B, C, and D (paragraph 39) the Tribunal quoted from two  earlier
      Tribunal determinations (Findik and Makozo).

  21. In Findik the Tribunal said,

               "We have to say that  these  documents  are  not  free  from
               doubt, but in our view the Secretary of State does  need  to
               show exactly why he considers  they  are  not  genuine.   We
               think it right to give the benefit  of  the  doubt  that  we
               accept exists surrounding these documents in favour  of  the
               first Appellant."

  22. In Makozo the Tribunal said,

               "It has long been a practice, and we think it is now settled
               as law, that if the Home  Office  specifically  challenge  a
               document as being forged the burden lies on them to prove it
               to be so."

  23. In A, B, C, and D the Tribunal went on to consider the question of the
      standard of proof by which the Secretary of  State  had  to  establish
      that a document was not authentic.  In paragraph 42 they said,

               "Standard of proof issues have plagued status  determination
               in the area and asylum, and we do  not  feel  it  is  either
               necessary or advisable  to  construct  another  standard  of
               proof for these questions.  We would rather  deal  with  the
               matter by saying, as was said in Findik and Makozo, that the
               burden is on the Secretary  of  State  and  insofar  as  the
               decision maker has reasonable doubts as to the  authenticity
               of the document, he should exercise those doubts  in  favour
               of the Appellant.  To put it another way, the  Secretary  of
               State would simply not have come up to proof".



  24. In Shen Mr. Justice Dyson said;

               "20.  Mr. Kadri submitted that, as a matter  of  law,  since
               the Secretary of State was contending that  these  documents
               were forgeries, the burden  of  proving  this  fell  on  the
               Secretary of State.  Mr. Ward, for whose helpful submissions
               on behalf of the Secretary of State I am grateful, does  not
               take issue with that.  There are now three decisions of  the
               Immigration Appeal Tribunal which support that  proposition,
               which is plainly right as a  matter  of  general  principle.
               Perhaps the most  authoritative  one  is  A,  B,  C,  and  D
               promulgated on 16th July 1999.  That, in turn,  referred  to
               earlier decisions which made the same point."

  25. In Mukhtar Shala Mohammed Mr. Justice Newman said,

               "6.  Miss Richards for the Respondent  pointed  out,  in  my
               judgment correctly, that these cases could  not  provided  a
               good ground of challenge unless  Miss  Baruah  could  submit
               that a particular rule of evidence applied in  asylum  cases
               in connection with the validity of documents which  did  not
               apply in all other cases.  In my judgment, again  correctly,
               she submitted:


                    1. That the passages from  the  cases  relied  upon  did
                                 not support such a general principle; and


                    2. If they did, there  was  no  foundation  in  law  for
                       special rules to apply.


               7. In Makozo the Tribunal, so far as it referred  to  clear,
               settled law, followed the principle that the  burden  of  an
               issue of forgery lies upon the  Home  Office.   In  stating,
               "they must produce some evidence to show why", the  Tribunal
               was not laying down that only if evidence were  produced  by
               the Home Office would a Special Adjudicator be  entitled  to
               conclude that a document is forged.  The requirement is that
               there must be some evidence,  whatever  its  source,  and  a
               source is the document itself."

  26. In Khan, an application for judicial review, Mr. Justice Langley said;



               "In that context, Mr. Gill was particularly critical of  the
               rejection  of  the  documents  produced  on  behalf  of  the
               applicant.  He submitted, relying on dicta in A, B, C, and D
               V Secretary of State for the Home Department, a decision  of
               the Immigration Appeal Tribunal notified on  July  16  1999,
               that if documents are to be rejected as bogus the  onus  was
               on the Secretary of State to prove them to be so.   In  this
               case the special Adjudicator had taken on himself  the  task
               of assessing the authenticity of the documents and had  done
               so without giving the applicant or  his  representatives  an
               opportunity to comment on the matters he relied on.

               I cannot accept that the  authorities  cited  (or  those  to
               which the Tribunal in A, B, C, and D and Mr. Gill  referred)
               justify a general principle on the burden of  proof  of  the
               breadth submitted by Mr. Gill.  There can be  no  doubt  the
               burden of proof on the right to asylum itself lies  upon  an
               applicant.  If he chooses to  produce  documents  which  are
               relied upon in support of that right, they  may  range  from
               documents which are original, apparently authentic, and from
               recognisable government or official sources, to those  which
               are  poor  photo  copies,   raise   obvious   questions   of
               authenticity and purport to emanate from sources which would
               make  official  verification  of  them  difficult   if   not
               impossible.   Moreover,  the  circumstances  in  which   the
               documents are produced  may  make  inquiries  into  them  on
               behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State   impossible   without
               adjournment of the proceedings.  In my judgment  the  matter
               is not sensibly addressed in terms of  burden  of  proof  in
               isolation  from  the  material  under  consideration.    The
               documents relied upon in this case fall  very  much  at  the
               doubtful and unverifiable end of the  range  and  they  were
               only produced after two adjournments and the long time after
               the events to which they purport to relate."  He went on  to
               say, in connection  with  the  documents  before  him,  "the
               documents are of a  doubtful  nature  and  set  against  the
               alleged grant of bail and the passport application there was
               nothing irrational in the special Adjudicator's  conclusion,
               [viz. That they added nothing to the applicant's case]."

  27. In Davila-Puga, the Court  of  Appeal,  hearing  an  appeal  from  Mr.
      Justice Elias, quoted from his judgment in the following terms;

               "28. What Mr. Fripp also says is that if one  looks  at  the
               documentation in this case, it  was  very  powerful.   There
               were far more relevant documents than one normally finds  in
               an  asylum  application;  they  were   ostensibly   strongly
               supporting the applicant's case and were, on the face of it,
               cogent and authentic documents.   Very  broadly,  they  fell
               into  three  categories:   the   documentation   which   was
               evidencing complaints made to the police and the judges; the
               documentation from certain doctors evidencing the fact  that
               the applicant and his wife had sustained in some cases quite
               serious injuries and evidence that the applicant was  wanted
               by the police.


               29. Some of this documentation, as  Mr.  Underwood  for  the
               Respondent pointed out, is self-serving in  the  sense  that
               the complaints to  the  police  and  the  judiciary  are  of
               course, documents which the applicant has produced.  Some of
               them do not fall into that category, namely, in  particular,
               the documentation relating to the injuries sustained by  the
               applicant and his wife.

               30. Mr. Fricke went so far as to submit that where there  is
               apparently objective evidence of that kind, then  really  it
               is not open to the Adjudicator to go  behind  it  in  asylum
               cases.  With respect,  that  cannot  be  right.   There  are
               various ways in which documents may be obtained and  may  be
               presented to the authorities which are not genuine.   Either
               they may be forgeries or it may  be  that  individuals  have
               been persuaded  to  produce  these  documents  to  represent
               something which is other than true.


               31. In this case it is plain that the  Adjudicator  was  not
               persuaded  that   these   documents   were   sufficient   to
               demonstrate the credibility of  the  account  given  by  the
               applicant.  It must be said that  when  interviewed  on  the
               first  occasion  the  applicant  had  told  the  immigration
               officer that he was not a member  of  the  FIE  and  he  had
               produced the certificate - which he  had  formerly  produced
               for the government itself  -  to  persuade  the  immigration
               officer that he was not a member of  the  FIE,  and  had  no
               links with it.


               32. So, unfortunately, he had been  willing  on  a  previous
               occasion to rely  upon  a  document  which  he  subsequently
               accepted had been  fraudulently  obtained,  albeit  for  the
               understandable reasons of wanting to preserve his  job,  and
               he had sought to rely upon that as part of his claim  before
               the immigration officer.


               33. It is true that the Adjudicator does  not  form  a  view
               about these documents, in the sense that  he  has  not  said
               which he considers to be authentic, or why he does not  give
               these documents the weight Mr. Fripp says they deserve.  But
               it seems to me that it is very difficult for him to do that;
               he will not know whether, for example, the medical documents
               are forgeries,  or  whether  they  are  misrepresenting  the
               facts, or whether there were  injuries  but  they  were  not
               sustained for the reasons given by the applicant.   What  he
               was clearly satisfied about was that looking at the evidence
               in the round (and he does say on two occasions that  he  has
               done that) he was not persuaded by the  credibility  of  the
               applicant's case.  It seems to me impossible for him to form
               a concluded view about individual documents or how they were
               obtained.  But he plainly was not satisfied, looking at  all
               these matters, that they were  sufficient  to  lead  him  to
               conclude  that   the   evidence   of   the   applicant   was
               substantially credible."

  28. In commenting on these passages the Court of Appeal said, at paragraph
      11,

               "In my judgment this reasoning is correct.  All these  cases
               have to be considered  in  the  light  of  their  individual
               circumstances.  This is not a case,  as  sometimes  happens,
               where the documents  are  essentially  self-proving  or  are
               positively demonstrated to  be  authentic  by  reference  to
               material, including expert evidence, that is independent  of
               the Appellant himself.  It  is  a  case  where  the  Special
               Adjudicator entertained substantial objective reasons, which
               he explained at length, for doubting the truthfulness of the
               Appellant's account.  In  those  circumstances  the  Special
               Adjudicator cannot in my judgment be  said  to  have  fallen
               into error by compartmentalising the evidence or failing  to
               look at issues of credibility in the round.  The short truth
               of the matter is  that  the  special  Adjudicator  here  was
               simply not prepared to accept that the Appellant was  to  be
               believed in the light of the whole case and  notwithstanding
               the contents of the documents relied on.  Having  regard  to
               the factual history as it was recounted by the judge  below,
               in my judgment this is wholly unsurprising."

  29. With the exception of the Tribunal determination in A, B, C, and D and
      to some extent Findik, we find no inconsistency between what have been
      regarded as the leading authorities in this area.  In Shen Mr. Justice
      Dyson stated the principle, not in terms of the words used in A, B, C,
      and D, but by adopting Counsel's submission that if the  Secretary  of
      State contended that documents were forgeries, the burden  of  proving
      this fell on him.   However,  he  failed,  no  doubt  because  of  the
      concession of Counsel for the Secretary of State, to consider  whether
      apparent reliability had been established.  Only if it had been  could
      a need to  establish  forgery  arise.  This  is  consistent  with  the
      statement in Makozo that, "It has long been a practice, and  we  think
      it is now settled  as  law,  that  if  the  Home  Office  specifically
      challenge a document as being forged the burden lies on them to  prove
      it to be so".  We do not agree with the statement in Findik that it is
      for the Home Office to show exactly why they consider that a  document
      is not genuine. This goes too far.  Furthermore, it is not clear  what
      is meant by "not genuine".  It  does  not  differentiate  between  the
      document and the information it contains.

  30. The statement in A, B, C, and D, that the burden of proof  is  on  the
      Secretary of State to show that a document is "not authentic",  rather
      than on the Appellant to prove (on  the  reasonable  likelihood  test)
      that it is "authentic", is not consistent with  Rule  39  (2)  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum (Procedure) Rules 2000 (to which we will refer:
      at the time A, B, C, and D was decided the Rule in force was 31 (2) of
      the 1996 Rules, of which the wording is identical).  There will  be  a
      burden on the Secretary of State only in those rare cases where it  is
      necessary to establish that the document is not merely unreliable  but
      actually a forgery.  The standard of proof in such cases is the higher
      civil standard.

  31. It is trite immigration and asylum law that we must not judge what  is
      or is not likely to happen in other  countries  by  reference  to  our
      perception of what is normal within the United Kingdom.  The principle
      applies as much to documents as to any other form of evidence. We know
      from experience and country information that there are countries where
      it is  easy  and  often  relatively  inexpensive  to  obtain  "forged"
      documents.  Some of them are false  in  that  they  are  not  made  by
      whoever purports to be the author and the information they contain  is
      wholly or partially untrue.  Some are "genuine"  to  the  extent  that
      they emanate from a proper source, in the proper form, on  the  proper
      paper, with the proper seals, but  the  information  they  contain  is
      wholly or partially untrue.  Examples are birth,  death  and  marriage
      certificates from certain countries, which can be  obtained  from  the
      proper source for a "fee", but contain information which is wholly  or
      partially untrue.  The permutations of truth,  untruth,  validity  and
      "genuineness" are enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate
      between form and content; that  is  whether  a  document  is  properly
      issued by the purported author and whether the contents are true. They
      are separate questions.  It is a dangerous  oversimplification  merely
      to ask whether a document is "forged" or even "not  genuine".   It  is
      necessary  to  shake  off  any  preconception  that  official  looking
      documents are genuine, based on experience of documents in the  United
      Kingdom, and to approach them with an open mind.

  32. Rule 39 (2) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  (Procedure)  Rules  2000
      provides;


               "If in any proceedings  before  the  appellate  authority  a
               party asserts any fact of a kind that, if the assertion were
               made to the Secretary  of  State  or  any  officer  for  the
               purposes of any  statutory  provisions  or  any  immigration
               rules, he would by virtue of those provisions  or  rules  be
               for him to satisfy the Secretary of State or officer of  the
               truth thereof, it shall lie on that party to prove that  the
               assertion is true."


  33. It is for the individual claimant to show that a document is  reliable
      in the same way as any other piece of evidence which he  puts  forward
      and on which he seeks to rely.

  34. It is sometimes argued before Adjudicators or the Tribunal that if the
      Home Office alleges  that  a  document  relied  on  by  an  individual
      claimant is a forgery and the Home Office fails to establish  this  on
      the balance of probabilities, or even to the higher criminal standard,
      then the individual claimant has established the validity and truth of
      the document and its contents. There is  no  legal  justification  for
      such an argument, which is manifestly incorrect,  given  that  whether
      the document is a forgery is not  the  question  at  issue.   In  only
      question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance  should
      properly be placed.

  35. In almost all cases it would be an error to concentrate on  whether  a
      document is a forgery.  In most cases where forgery is alleged it will
      be of no great importance whether this is or is not made  out  to  the
      required higher civil  standard.   In  all  cases  where  there  is  a
      material document it should be assessed in the same way as  any  other
      piece of evidence. A document should not be viewed in isolation.   The
      decision maker should look at the evidence as a whole or in the  round
      (which is the same thing).


  36. There is no obligation on the Home Office to make  detailed  enquiries
      about documents produced by individual claimants.  Doubtless there are
      cost and logistical  difficulties  in  the  light  of  the  number  of
      documents submitted by many asylum claimants.  In  the  absence  of  a
      particular reason on the facts of an individual case a decision by the
      Home  Office  not  to  make  inquiries,  produce  in-country  evidence
      relating to a particular document or scientific  evidence  should  not
      give rise to any presumption in favour of an  individual  claimant  or
      against the Home Office.

  37. We accept Ms Panagiotopoulou's  statement that the Respondent  alleged
      that the documents produced by the Appellant were  forgeries.   It  is
      not clear whether  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the  documents  were
      forgeries.  He did not state in terms that they were. This is  a  case
      in which it was not necessary for the Adjudicator to make  a  specific
      finding as to whether the documents were forgeries.  The Adjudicator's
      finding about two of the documents was in the following terms,  "I  do
      not accept that there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  either  the
      warrant or the FIR is genuine". He went further  and  found  that  the
      documents had been "manufactured". It is clear  that  the  Adjudicator
      gave little or no weight to these documents. He could have  been  even
      more specific, as was the case when he said that he gave no weight  to
      the  letter  from  the  MQM  in  Pakistan.   On  the  evidence   these
      conclusions were open to him, as were his conclusions in  relation  to
      the country evidence.  It is clear that he looked at  the  documentary
      and oral evidence in the round.   Very  properly,  he  considered  the
      question of whether, even if the documents were false, the Appellant's
      story could be true.  On the evidence the Adjudicator was entitled  to
      reach his conclusions in relation to the documents and the evidence as
      a whole.  This  evidence  supports  the  final  conclusions  that  the
      Appellant  has  not  established  either  a   well-founded   fear   of
      persecution for a Convention reason or that his human rights would  be
      infringed.

  38. In summary the principles set out in this determination are:

        1. In asylum and  human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
           claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to  rely  can
           be relied on.


        2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
           which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
           the evidence in the round.

        3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation of
           forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it. The allegation
           should not be made without such evidence. Failure  to  establish
           the allegation on the balance of  probabilities  to  the  higher
           civil standard does not show that a document is  reliable.   The
           decision maker still needs to apply principles 1 and 2.

  39. For the reasons we have given we dismiss this appeal.






........................................
P. R. Moulden
Vice-President.
