
Heard at Field House
           Appeal No:  HX50211-2001 | |
|On 13 August 2002                                      KH             |
|(Risk-Maoist) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 03945                             |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                        Date Determination notified:
                                       22ND AUGUST 2002


                                   Before:

                       Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Chairman)
                                Mr R Hamilton
                                Mrs S Hewitt

Between:


                       MR KRISHNA BAHADUR LAMICH HANE


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department



                                                                  RESPONDENT





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



     1. The appellant, Mr Krishna Bahadur Lamich Hane, appeals  with  leave
        against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  A   Talbot),
        promulgated on 21 May 2002.   He  is  a  national  of  Nepal.   The
        Adjudicator found that he was a member of the Maoist  Party,  which
        is a violent terrorist organisation. The respondent  dismissed  his
        appeal against the decision of the respondent  on  1  August  2001,
        setting removal directions after refusal of asylum.

     2. At the hearing, Ms S Folkes of Counsel appeared for the  appellant.
        Mr  S  Bilbe,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
        respondent.

     3. The Adjudicator's determination accepts that  the  appellant  is  a
        Maoist party member in Nepal,  and  is  a  combatant,  having  been
        involved in an armed raid on a police station as a result of  which
        two policemen were injured.  The  Adjudicator  also  accepted  that
        when the appellant came to the United Kingdom he was  'wanted'  and
        that the police were still  interested  in  his  whereabouts.   The
        Adjudicator's core findings of fact are that -

        "31.           It is clear from the [U.S. State  Department  Report
        p1] that the police and state authorities are responsible for human
        rights abuses, albeit in the context of a  campaign  against  armed
        opponents  who  commit  what  could  reasonably  be  described   as
        terrorist activities.

        32.             Relating  the  above  to  the  situation   of   the
        appellant;  the  evidence  indicates  that  he  is  wanted  by  the
        authorities on suspicion of having been involved in an armed attack
        on a police post during  which  two  policemen  were  described  as
        having  been  badly  injured.   Clearly  the  authorities  have   a
        legitimate interest in finding the culprits for this attack and  if
        the appellant was returned to Nepal, there is a clear risk  to  him
        that he would be arrested for this."

     4. The Adjudicator considered that to be prosecution  not  persecution
        and outwith the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of
        Refugees 1951, as amended by the New York  Protocol  of  1967.   He
        does not seem to  have  been  taken  to  the  exclusion  clause  at
        paragraph 1F of that Convention.  His consideration of Article 3 of
        the European Convention on Human Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms
        1950 is disposed of on the same  basis  as  that  for  the  Refugee
        Convention, without making any distinction of breadth  in  relation
        to terrorists such as the appellant.

     5. Ms Folkes on  behalf  of  the  appellant  accepted  that  the  only
        relevant issue was whether there was a risk on return which engaged
        Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   Given  the
        provisions of article 1F,  the  appellant  was  excluded  from  the
        Refugee Convention on the facts found.  She also accepted  that  as
        Nepal was currently in a formal  state  of  emergency,  only  those
        Articles of the human rights convention which were unqualified were
        applicable, but sought to rely only on Articles  2  and  3  in  any
        event.

     6. Ms Folkes took the Tribunal to an Amnesty International report of 7
        May 2002 entitled 'Nepal:  Unlawful Killings must be prevented' -

        "Amnesty   International   today   called   for   an    independent
        investigation in response to reports that more than 500 members  of
        the Communist Party of Nepal  (Maoist)  have  been  killed  by  the
        security forces at Lisne Lek in Rolpa district since  3  May.   The
        organisation warned there could be more killings  as  the  security
        forces' operation is continuing and  several  hundred  Maoists  are
        reportedly being surrounded.

        The official figures are:  548  Maoists,  three  soldiers  and  one
        policeman killed.  "So far, no figs have  been  released  with  the
        number of Maoists wounded or arrested.  That could be an indication
        that the security forces went out to deliberately kill rather  than
        arrest, a common practice in Nepal: Amnesty International said...

        Since the start of the 'people's war', there  has  been  increasing
        concern  that  the  authorities  have  failed  to   impose   strict
        limitations on the use of force and firearms by the security forces
        or to take appropriate actions against abuses.   This  concern  has
        heightened after the army was called out and the state of emergency
        imposed in late November 2001.  Since then, the number  of  alleged
        unlawful  killings  have  increased  dramatically.   The   reported
        incidents have included killings of civilians in reprisal  for  the
        killing of  police  and  army  personnel  by  members  of  the  CPN
        (Maoist);  killings  of  armed  members  of  the  CPN  (Maoist)  in
        circumstances where they could have  been  taken  into  custody  or
        where they already had been taken prisoner; and the  avoidable  use
        of lethal force."

     7. The appellant also relied upon the U.S.  State  Department  Report,
        and  in  particular:   in  Section  1(a),  (Arbitrary  or  unlawful
        deprivation of life) the confirmation that extra-judicial  killings
        continued, mostly during efforts to control violent demonstrations,
        or  while  suspects  were  in  police  custody;  in  Section   1(b)
        (Disappearance) which indicates that the disappearance  of  persons
        in police custody was a problem; and in Section 1(c)  (Torture  and
        other cruel, inhuman or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment)  the
        observations that the Government has begun human  rights  education
        for the police force, who were often unwilling  to  investigate  or
        discipline fellow officers, with those abused afraid to bring cases
        against the police for fear of reprisals.   Prison conditions  were
        reportedly poor.

     8. Ms Folkes relied upon the Tribunal determination in  Rajesh  Gurung
        [01/TH/1371],  which  approved  an  Adjudicator  determination   in
        Chhetri [HX/11502/2001].  Both decisions find that since the  state
        of emergency, the risk to perceived Maoist combatants has increased
        above the standard necessary for 1950  and  1951  Conventions.   In
        Gurung, the Tribunal found that -

        "Not only would there be a real risk of  ill-treatment  during  the
        pre-trial process  and  of  judicial  susceptibility  to  political
        influence during the trial itself, there would be a risk that after
        conviction the appellant would also face further ill-treatment."

     9. In Prakesh Sharma [2002] UKIAT 02943,  the  Tribunal  approved  the
        Gurung decision and said this -

        "8...it is plain that the situation in Nepal is  tense.   Since  26
           November 2001 it appears that the  security  forces  had  killed
           over 2000 Maoists while the Maoists for their  part  had  killed
           106 soldiers, 291  policemen,  54  political  party  members,  6
           students and 100 civilians. ...

       12. The appellant would be  returned  to  a  country  in  which  the
           authorities are to a high degree mobilised in their  prosecution
           of a campaign against Maoists..."

    10. For the respondent, Mr Bilbe made no submissions in  the  light  of
        the Adjudicator's findings and the Article 3 point.

    11. The Tribunal reserved its determination, which we now give.  In the
        light of the very plain findings by the Adjudicator, but  with  the
        benefit of the documentary evidence now before us, we do not uphold
        his conclusion.  We find that this appellant is indeed at  risk  of
        prosecution, and that such a risk engages the  greater  breadth  of
        Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights,  which  makes
        no distinction between prosecution  and  persecution,  and  is  not
        limited by an exclusion clause such as that in article  1F  of  the
        1951 convention.

    12. We further find that the appellant is very likely to be  killed  or
        to be treated in an inhuman or degrading manner either  during  his
        arrest, during lengthy pre-trial detention,  or  after  conviction.
        As  the  likelihood  of  unlawful  killing  does  not  reach  'near
        certainty', we do not consider that the appeal engages Article 2 of
        the European Convention on Human Rights.

    13. The evidence is that  the  Nepalese  authorities  are  operating  a
        'shoot to kill' policy and we have no hesitation in finding on  the
        facts of this particular appeal that this appellant is at  risk  of
        treatment contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
        Rights.

    14. For these reasons, the appeal is allowed on human  rights  grounds.
        We direct that the respondent grant the appellant appropriate leave
        to remain.





                                             J A J C Gleeson
                                             Vice-President



