
CH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC51653-1999      |
|On 8 July 2002             |        |IS (Risk-Conviction-Fine    |
|                           |        |Paid-Release) Sri Lanka CG  |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 04230          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                    |Date Determination notified:|
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |.18 September 2002          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|PROFESSOR D C JACKSON (CHAIRMAN)                                  |
|MR C A N EDINBORO                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|IYATHURAI SHELVARAAJAH                                            |
|                                                                  |
|APPELLANT                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|RESPONDENT                                                        |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals against the decision of
      an Adjudicator (Mr  L  V  Waumsley),  dismissing  his  appeal  against
      removal directions following the refusal of an application for asylum.
       As the decision was taken on 30 May 1999, there is  no  human  rights
      issue in this appeal.


   2. Before us, the Appellant was represented by Mr A  Morgan  of  Counsel,
      instructed by Theva & Co. Solicitors of London, and the  Secretary  of
      State by Mr M Pichamuthu.

   3. The case had been in the appellate process for some time.   An  appeal
      from a decision was dismissed on 21 September 1999, leave to appeal to
      the Tribunal being refused.  That refusal  was  quashed  by  the  High
      Court in a consent order and the Appellant was then granted  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal on 16 August 2001.  By  determination  notified
      on 14 November 2001, the appeal was allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      matter was remitted for rehearing.  It is from that rehearing that the
      appeal before us is brought.

      The Appellant's Case

   4. The Appellant was born on 23 February 1966.  He is a Tamil from Jaffna
      and his case is based on the fear of actions of the authorities in the
      light of his connections and perceived connections with the LTTE.

   5. The Appellant assisted  the  LTTE  from  1987  until  1992  -  digging
      bunkers, putting up posters and transporting  food  and  weapons.   In
      1988 he was  detained  by  the  Indian  peacekeeping  force  on  three
      occasions, questioned and  ill-treated  during  the  questioning.   He
      denied any connection with the LTTE and on  the  three  occasions  was
      released without charge.  After the Indian force left Sri  Lanka,  the
      Appellant's involvement with the LTTE became less.

   6. In August 1993 he was sent by his father to Colombo  to  buy  supplies
      for the family farm.  While  there,  he  was  taken  with  others  for
      questioning after a routine security roundup.  A hooded informer, whom
      the Appellant believed to be a man called Jacob from his home village,
      identified him and two other Tamils as being involved with  the  LTTE.
      After ill-treatment he confessed to having assisted the  LTTE  and  he
      was held in detention for some eleven months.  On 27 June 1994 he  was
      convicted by the High Court in Colombo of having assisted the LTTE and
      sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment suspended for five  years
      and a fine of 1,000 rupees.  On payment of the fine on 15 July 1994 he
      was released from detention.  He returned to his  father's  farm  and,
      when asked by the LTTE to assist them, refused to do so.

   7. In 1995 when the Sri Lankan army launched a  major  offensive  in  his
      home area, the Appellant's family  (save  for  his  father)  moved  to
      Puthukuddyiruppu.  There he started a business selling  foodstuffs  in
      partnership with a friend called Maniam from his  home  village.   The
      Appellant remained in the shop to sell the goods and Maniam  travelled
      to Mannar and Vavuniya to buy stock.

   8. No event of significance happened until April  1998.   At  that  time,
      Mannar  was  under  the  control  of   the   Sri   Lankan   army   and
      Puthukuddyiruppu was still in an area under the control of  the  LTTE.
      When Maniam went to Mannar to buy stock he was arrested by members  of
      the security forces and accused of buying supplies for the LTTE.  When
      the Appellant heard of this, he was worried that Maniam might  say  he
      was LTTE and might even make  up  stories  to  secure  his  (Maniam's)
      release.

   9. In his witness statement, the Appellant said that Maniam's  wife  went
      to see him in Mannar.  On return to the village she said that  if  the
      Appellant handed himself over  to  the  Sri  Lankan  army  they  would
      release her husband.  He  felt  under  pressure  and,  acting  on  his
      father's idea, he fled the country.  With the advice  and  aid  of  an
      agent he went by air, ship and road to the United Kingdom.
  10. In his asylum interview the Appellant said that Maniam was arrested en
      route to Mannar, but in his witness statement he said  that  the  army
      arrested him in a store.  Further, in  the  interview,  there  was  no
      mention of Maniam's wife and her conversation with the Appellant.

  11. In his oral evidence the Appellant confirmed that he did not know what
      had happened to Maniam or whether  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  came
      looking for him after he left Puthukuddyiruppu in May 1998.  He feared
      that  if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  he  would  be  questioned  by  the
      authorities and ill-treated and might be killed.

      The Adjudicator's Approach

  12. At the hearing, the Appellant showed the Adjudicator a number of scars
      which he said were the result of ill-treatment in 1988 and 1993.   The
      written evidence included a medical report concerning  the  scars  and
      also a "substantial amount of background material".

  13. The Adjudicator found the  Appellant  to  be  a  "reasonably  credible
      witness" and accepted that any failure to remember events was  due  to
      the lapse of time rather  than  any  untruth  in  his  evidence.   The
      Adjudicator commented that the period of the  suspended  sentence  had
      now ended and  that  the  Appellant,  on  his  own  evidence,  had  no
      knowledge as to what Maniam may  have  said  during  the  questioning.
      Further, he did not know whether Maniam had been charged  or  released
      and he did not know whether any authorities came looking for him.  The
      Adjudicator  concluded  that  in  these  aspects  of  the   case   the
      Appellant's evidence amounted to no more than  speculation.   Further,
      on the Appellant's own  evidence  the  authorities  were  prepared  to
      release Maniam if the Appellant reported to them for questioning  and,
      said the Adjudicator, it was clear from  this  that  the  authorities'
      interest in Maniam was minimal.  In the light of  these  factors,  the
      assessment by the Adjudicator was that there was  no  likelihood  that
      scars would expose the Appellant to persecution and as it  was  almost
      four years since Maniam was detained, there was no real risk that  the
      Appellant would be detained and ill-treated.


  14. Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that the Adjudicator did  not
      appear to have taken into account the Appellant's background  and  the
      implications from the fact that the business  with  Maniam  was  being
      conducted in an LTTE-controlled area, and that interest was  expressed
      in the Appellant after the detention of his partner to  a  government-
      controlled area when assessing the present risk of persecution.

  15. At the first hearing before a differently  constituted  Tribunal,  the
      Appellant was granted leave to give further evidence  as  to  Maniam's
      arrest, the communication of that arrest to him and the effect  of  it
      upon him.

      The Appellant's Evidence before Us and Its Effect

  16. Mr Morgan produced a witness statement which covered  the  Appellant's
      story as a whole but agreed that the focus of the evidence  before  us
      was to be as directed at the previous Tribunal hearing, the arrest  of
      Maniam.  In relation to that arrest, in his  statement  the  Appellant
      said that the arrest had been in a store and that he  (the  Appellant)
      had learnt of the arrest from other shopkeepers from the village.   As
      he had said earlier he was frightened that Maniam would say  that  he,
      the Appellant, was LTTE.  After the  meeting  with  Maniam's  wife  he
      locked up the shop and handed the keys to her.

  17. With one exception, other aspects of  the  statement  were  consistent
      with the evidence considered and assessed by the  Adjudicator.   There
      is one statement which did not appear at least  in  the  determination
      and which is directly relevant to  the  Appellant's  case,  i.e.  that
      Maniam and he helped the LTTE.  They came looking for  money  and  the
      Appellant remembered one donation of 10,000 rupees.  He did  not  know
      if Maniam had paid regularly.


  18. In response to the questions in examination in  chief,  the  Appellant
      said that Maniam knew of the Appellant's arrest and  imprisonment  and
      his attitude had been very compassionate.   As  to  the  meeting  with
      Maniam's wife the Appellant said that it was at her house.  When asked
      whose idea was it for him to go for Maniam to be freed, the  Appellant
      responded that it could have been Maniam's because he was aware of the
      Appellant's history.

  19. In cross-examination, the Appellant confirmed that he did not know  of
      any other donation to the LTTE made by Maniam save that of the  10,000
      rupees.  Asked if he knew the authorities would be interested  in  him
      if he returned, the Appellant replied that, having been captured once,
      if he was caught again the authorities  would  be  interested  and  he
      would be ill-treated.  He said that Maniam's wife had  told  him  that
      Maniam had briefed the authorities and that it was Maniam's  wife  who
      wanted him to turn himself in so that her husband could be freed.   He
      said that he had met Maniam's wife at his house.

  20. In response to further questioning and references to  other  evidence,
      the Appellant said that he did not know whether Maniam was arrested in
      the store or not, but that Maniam's wife had told him that he was.  In
      his asylum interview he might have said absent mindedly  that  he  was
      arrested on the way to the store.

  21. When asked why the Sri Lankan army would  want  to  trade  Maniam  for
      himself, the Appellant replied that the authorities would know of  his
      record because Maniam told them.  He had no informed opinion as to why
      the authorities would trade Maniam for him when Maniam was accused  of
      buying supplies for the LTTE, save that he (the  Appellant)  was  more
      committed  and  connected  with  helping  the  LTTE.    Further,   the
      authorities may not have released Maniam even if he  surrendered.   As
      to the donation of the LTTE, this had not been  mentioned  before  the
      witness statement because he had not been asked.

  22. In reply to further questions from Mr Morgan  and  the  Tribunal,  the
      Appellant said that when Maniam was arrested he had  been  accompanied
      by assistants from their shop and they told him of the arrest  in  the
      store.  He confirmed that the meeting between Maniam and his wife  had
      been at his house.

      Objective Evidence before the Tribunal

  23. In addition to the evidence before the Adjudicator, the  Tribunal  had
      before it (on behalf of the Secretary of State) the CIPU report on Sri
      Lanka  dated  April  2002,  a  supplementary  bundle  for  Sri   Lanka
      containing the Tribunal determination in Brinston [2002] UKIAT  01547,
      a report on a visit to Sri Lanka by a Home Office delegation and three
      news items from the BBC concerning the effect of the ceasefire  agreed
      between the LTTE and the  Sri  Lankan  government  in  February  2002.
      There was submitted by and on behalf of the Appellant a number of news
      items also concerning the effect of the  ceasefire  and  the  Tribunal
      decision in Jeychandran [2002] UKIAT 01869.

      Submissions

  24. Mr Morgan relied on the Adjudicator's determination and  his  findings
      of fact.  The donation to the LTTE by Maniam was  simply  due  to  the
      need to coexist.  As regards Maniam, the evidence focused on  Maniam's
      wife and the other villagers who were  present  in  the  shop  at  his
      arrest.  On his return, the Appellant would  be  in  possession  of  a
      travel document which would be an invitation to be  investigated,  and
      would be identified and liable  to  be  detained  and  therefore  ill-
      treated.  The Appellant's fear was of his business partner implicating
      him in order to achieve freedom.  It may well be that the  authorities
      were willing to  exchange  Maniam  for  the  Appellant,  thinking  the
      Appellant to be the real terrorist and might well  keep  him  detained
      longer than his suspended  sentence.   The  Appellant's  evidence  was
      consistent and there was nothing there to say that  he  was  a  person
      looking for a story.  As to returnability, Mr  Morgan  pointed  to  an
      item in the report of a fact finding mission of the Home Office to Sri
      Lanka of July 2001 that the Attorney  General  had  pointed  out  that
      leaving Sri Lanka without a valid passport was a serious  offence  and
      should be investigated.  As to the effect of a  ceasefire,  Mr  Morgan
      relied on the objective evidence  he  had  adduced  and  the  Tribunal
      decision in Jeychandran showing  that  its  effect  was  by  no  means
      certain.

  25. Mr Pichamutu accepted that the Appellant would be identified as having
      a record, but only as having a spent conviction.   He  contended  that
      the Appellant could not get his story straight in his evidence  before
      us and that there was no  sense  in  the  suggested  exchange  of  the
      Appellant for Maniam.

      Conclusions

      Credibility of the Appellant's Evidence

  26. The Adjudicator accepted the Appellant as a credible  witness  and  we
      have heard evidence going to only part (although a critical  part)  of
      that evidence.  We see no reason  to  divert  from  the  Adjudicator's
      general view on credibility.  Although there are discrepancies  as  to
      where Maniam was arrested and possibly as to where the  Appellant  met
      Maniam's wife, it  seems  to  us  that  the  story  has  been  broadly
      consistent. Further, as the Adjudicator said, the Appellant was  asked
      to recall events occurring some time ago.


  27. We further broadly agree with the Adjudicator as to the conclusions to
      be drawn from the evidence.  However, the Adjudicator said that it was
      clear from the willingness of the authorities to release  Maniam  that
      their interest in Maniam was minimal.   That  is,  in  our  view,  not
      necessarily so but in  any  event  it  may  well  go  to  support  the
      Appellant's case, for his case is that they were interested in him and
      were using Maniam as a way to obtain his own  reporting  and  possible
      detention.

  28. The further evidence added little to the uncertainties which  surround
      the effect of Maniam's arrest on the Appellant.   As  the  Adjudicator
      accepted the credibility of the Appellant's evidence, it  is  implicit
      that he accepted the Appellant's statement that  he  was  in  fear  of
      being rearrested.  We see no reason to come to a different  conclusion
      and, indeed, looking at the evidence as a whole, it seems to  us  that
      that was precisely the reason why the Appellant  fled.   But,  as  the
      Adjudicator said, this was a fear based on the  thought  of  what  may
      happen or may have happened.

  29. The inevitable conclusion from the Appellant's evidence,  despite  one
      statement before us that  Maniam  had  told  the  authorities  of  the
      Appellant's history, is that the Appellant was acting on the fear that
      that had occurred and not on any knowledge  that  it  had.   There  is
      further uncertainty as to the knowledge of Maniam's wife and as to the
      source of the idea that the Appellant should go and be  exchanged  for
      Maniam.  When he was asked by his Counsel whose idea it was for him to
      go so that Maniam could be freed he replied that it  could  have  been
      Maniam's.  There is  no  other  evidence  that  the  authorities  were
      seeking the Appellant in any exchange and we agree with Mr  Pichamuthu
      that such an exchange was somewhat unlikely, given  the  circumstances
      surrounding Maniam's arrest.  So we conclude  that  the  fear  of  the
      Appellant of implication was based on possibility rather than any hard
      evidence that he was about to be sought by the authorities, or  indeed
      had been invited by the authorities to put himself  in  the  place  of
      Maniam.
      The Returnability of the Appellant

  30. We have not ruled out the possibility that  the  Appellant's  fear  of
      rearrest and possible ill-treatment  was  founded  on  fact,  but  the
      possibility is low on the scale.  It is that possibility which we must
      bear  in  mind  when  considering  the  factual  foundation  for   the
      Appellant's expressed fear of returning to Sri Lanka in 2002.


  31. In considering whether any such fear is well-founded (i.e. there is  a
      serious possibility of the consequences feared), we take into account,
      first, that the suspended sentence no longer has any  impact,  second,
      that the Appellant has been away from Sri Lanka for  some  four  years
      and, third, the effect of the ceasefire on the circumstances in  which
      a returnee may meet.

      The Effect of the Ceasefire

  32. As to the effect  of  the  ceasefire,  we  entirely  accept  that  the
      situation remains fluid but, on the  other  hand,  there  is  positive
      evidence of some change in the reception which a returnee might  meet.
      These circumstances were considered in some detail in  the  Tribunal's
      determinations in Brinston (heard on 1 May) and Jeychandran (heard  on
      21 May).  There is no reference to Brinston in  Jeychandran,  but  the
      two cases adopt a somewhat different approach.  The  cases  should  be
      taken into account because of  the  attention  paid  to  the  evidence
      relating to the effect of the ceasefire, but we should  bear  in  mind
      any developments which were not overtly considered in those cases  and
      that their application to any other particular  case  depends  on  the
      facts of that case.

  33.  In  Brinston,  the  Tribunal  was  particularly  concerned  with  the
      consistency and effect of two views of the UNHCR, the first  expressed
      by the  Senior  Protection  Officer  in  Sri  Lanka  and  other  views
      expressed on other later occasions by the Deputy Representative of the
      UNHCR in London.  The first view emphasises that many rejected  asylum
      seekers are simply "waved through" when they return in contrast to the
      situation  prior  to  the  first  ceasefire  in  December  2001   when
      "basically every returnee was referred to CID and  thereafter  to  the
      Magistrate in Colombo".  The second view focuses on the remaining risk
      to young male Tamils founded on various factual elements  relating  to
      the individual concerned such as the lack of identity documents,  lack
      of proper authorisation for  residence  and  travel  or  close  family
      members who have been involved with the LTTE.

  34. In Brinston, the Tribunal took the view that the first view was one of
      fact and the second simply expressed caution.  No  doubt,  because  of
      the facts of the case the Tribunal did not  further  analyse  the  two
      views.  We see the two  views  (as  the  Brinston  Tribunal  said)  as
      compatible  and  taken  together  as  showing  that  the   change   in
      circumstances affects  those  whose  appearance  or  documentation  or
      record gives no cause for any further investigation.  Where  there  is
      any element in the case which triggers the need for  investigation,  a
      further view agreed by the representatives before us to be relevant is
      that expressed to the Home Office delegation  in  March  2002  by  the
      Director of the Criminal Investigation Department.

  35. The Director is recorded as saying that when the CID was certain  that
      the individual had been committed or been convicted of an offence they
      would be stopped and that the computer holds the name, address and age
      of a wanted person.  As has been said in other cases,  the  foundation
      for such a statement must be an initial check and it would  indeed  be
      surprising if such a check were not  mounted  as  regular  immigration
      practice.

  36. The Tribunal in Jeychandran took a somewhat different line to that  of
      Brinston, emphasising the early  stages  of  the  ceasefire  but  also
      saying that in the present situation  it  was  only  "the  exceptional
      cases that will not be able to return in safety".  It seems to us that
      if one accepts the views of the UNHCR,  the  question  remains  as  to
      whether there is an element  in  the  case  which  would  trigger  the
      suspicion as to which the later views of the UNHCR relate.

      Conclusion

  37. In this case (as Mr Pichamuthu agreed) there seems no doubt  that  the
      Appellant would be identified on return  as  a  person  who  had  been
      convicted.  The question, therefore, is whether that would  place  him
      in a category which would attract a risk of detention and further ill-
      treatment.  As regards that, we agree with Mr Pichamuthu that  as  the
      record would show that the conviction had been spent, of  itself  that
      would not create a serious possibility of further investigation to  an
      extent which would render the Appellant liable to  ill-treatment.   It
      follows therefore that the  case  must  turn  on  whether  the  record
      combined with the incident as to Maniam creates such a risk.

  38. In our view, the evidence relating to the implication of the Appellant
      through Maniam's arrest and any effect of such  an  arrest  must  have
      diminished greatly over the four years while the  Appellant  has  been
      away.  We have no evidence of the authorities' continued  interest  in
      the Appellant, or of any actions taken against or in relation  to  any
      members of the family nor of any enquiries made of them or of what has
      happened (if anything) to the Appellant's business.

  39. It is for the Appellant to show that there is a serious possibility of
      persecution, should he be returned to Sri Lanka.  The lack of evidence
      that the Appellant's concerns which led to his  flight  were  anything
      but unfounded fears, the four year absence  from  Sri  Lanka  and  the
      limited consequences (as we find) of  the  record  of  conviction  all
      militate against such a possibility.

  40. In our opinion, none of the circumstances of  the  Appellant's  story,
      whether taken separately or cumulatively, amount to a foundation for a
      conclusion that such a possibility exists.  The appeal is dismissed.





                                                                 D C Jackson

                                                                    Chairman
