


Appeal No. HX12876-2002
AH (Midgan-Disabled  Woman-Relocation-Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
07343
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                              Date heard:   4 February  2003

                      Date notified.: 20...03.2003.....

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                         RT HON THE COUNTESS OF MAR
                               MR A A LLOYD JP

                                                       Between

                           MRS ASHA MOHAMED HIRSI

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Somalia, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  J  G   Macdonald,
dismissing the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  giving
directions  for  removal  having  refused  asylum.  Mr  A  Miah  of  Counsel
instructed by Gadwah and Co Solicitors appeared for the  appellant.  Miss  M
Banwait appeared for the respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3.The adjudicator accepted that the appellant  was  a  member  of  the  sub-
minority Midgan tribe who had experienced several attacks at  the  hands  of
Hawiye militias in particular in 1991 in Mogadishu and in 1999 Balhad  where
two of her children died. She was registered disabled, having a  left  femur
fracture.  A medical report described her  as  traumatised  both  physically
and psychologically by Hawiye tribesmen.

4.The adjudicator did not  accept,  however,  that  the  appellant  faced  a
current risk of persecution. He referred to the CIPU Country Assessment  for
Somalia for April 2002 which in his view did not indicate  that  members  of
the Midgan tribe remained at risk either in Mogadishu or  in  Somaliland  or
Puntiland. He did not think, following the House of Lords judgement  in  the
case of Adan [1998] Imm AR 338,  that  the  appellant  had  established  she
faced a current fear of risks over and above those facing civilians  exposed
to a civil war situation. Nor did he accept that the appellant`s  disability
meant she would be exposed to a real risk of treatment contrary to  Articles
2 or 3 since there were hospitals in Mogadishu and indeed she  had  received
treatment in one in Mogadishu after her 1991 injury.

5. The grounds  contended  that  the  adjudicator  wrongly  interpreted  the
objective country materials. In support they cited  paragraph  5.44  of  the
CIPU report. However that  passage  does  not  in  our  view  make  out  the
appellant`s case: It states:


      "Although minorities have usually been able to  avoid  involvement  in
      clan disputes they have sometimes come under pressure  to  participate
      in fighting in areas of conflict.  This  happened  to  the  Midgan  in
      Mogadishu following the collapse of the Barre administration, although
      Midgan and other minority groups who may  risk  harassment  by  Somali
      clans in  rural  areas  do  not  necessarily  find  themselves  facing
      difficulties in Mogadishu now".


6. That does not in our view indicate that the Midgan remain  at  real  risk
of difficulties in Mogadishu now. It must also be  borne  in  mind  that  at
5.45 the same report continues:

"...Although Midgan may have been easy prey for  clan  militias  during  the
civil war, their situation improved and Midgan do not  face  depredation  at
the hands of militias or face persecution merely  because  of  their  ethnic
origin".

7. We consider that the adjudicator was fully justified in  concluding  that
the objective country  materials  did  not  indicate  that  the  appellant`s
position as a member of the Midgan tribe would be at risk  in  Somalia  upon
return to Mogadishu. Notwithstanding his  acceptance  of  past  difficulties
she had suffered he was fully justified in concluding  she  had  no  current
well-founded fear of persecution or treatment contrary to her human  rights.


8. The grounds further contend that the adjudicator was  wrong  to  conclude
that the appellant did not also come  within  the  threshold  of  Art  3  by
virtue of the lack of medical facilities in Mogadishu. Mr  Miah  pointed  to
additional evidence in the form of a letter from  a  Specialist  Orthopaedic
Registrar dated 30 January 2003 stating that she had been put on a  list  to
have surgery to her leg:

      "...she has a bone which has not joined in her left  thigh  which  not
      surprisingly causes her pain  and  restriction  of  movement.  We  are
      planning to straighten the bone with an operation by  placing  a  nail
      down the entire length of her thigh. She will need  an  operation  for
      this and there will be a period of recovery with rehabilitation for  a
      number of months, possibly six to eight as a guess until she  is  able
      to be independent".

9. Mr Miah submitted that  similar  treatment  would  not  be  available  in
Mogadishu or elsewhere in Somalia. Her age (d.o.b. 1960) and the  fact  that
she had no relatives to return to were also, he added, relevant  factors  In
submissions He cited in support the European Court of Human Rights  judgment
in Bensaid v UK.

10. We cannot agree that the appellant`s personal and medical  circumstances
demonstrate that to return her would violate her Art  3  or  Art  8  rights.
Although the letter produced at the hearing does refer to the need for  some
recovery period, it does not detail any particular course of  rehabilitative
treatment nor does it say that rehabilitation has to take place in  the  UK.
Although  the  CIPU  report  considers  that  medical  care  in  Somalia  is
rudimentary  in  general,  there  is  mention  of  a  well-run  hospital  in
Mogadishu.

11. Even if we were wrong  about  the  feasibility  of  appropriate  medical
treatment for this appellant upon return to Somalia, there was  no  evidence
that she currently faced any real risk of  losing  her  left  leg  or  of  a
drastic loss of mobility as a result. The recent letter refers to "pain  and
restriction  of  movement",  nothing  more.   We  have  sympathy  with   the
appellant`s disability, but our task, like that of the  adjudicator,  is  to
assess whether the result of return to Somalia, even if it entailed  missing
out on the operation to her leg, would expose the appellant to a  real  risk
of  serious  harm  or  significant  detriment  to  her  physical  and  moral
integrity. The medical evidence falls well short of establishing this.

12. The grounds also take issue with  the  adjudicator's  finding  that  the
appellant would be able to avail herself of  a  viable  internal  relocation
alternative in Somaliland or  Puntiland.  Given  that  the  appellant  still
viewed herself as from Mogadishu and in relation to that city  she  had  not
established a real risk of serious harm or treatment contrary to  her  human
rights, there was no necessity for the adjudicator  to  go  on  to  consider
relocation to these two areas. However, for completeness, we would add  that
we do not see, had we ruled out  return  to  Mogadishu,  that  it  would  be
unduly  harsh  for   her   to   relocate   to   Puntiland   or   Somaliland,
notwithstanding her disability and the fact  that  she  would  return  as  a
woman on her own. The objective country materials do not establish that  she
would experience undue hardship in either of those areas.

 13. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




