


Appeal No. HX56528-2001
         MM (Ahmadi-Internal Relocation) Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT 05714
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                            Date heard:  16 September   2002
                 Date notified:......10 December 2002.......................

                                  Before: -

                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                               MRS S I HEWITT
                                 MRS M L ROE



                                                       Between

                      MR MAHMOOD ALI MIRZA + DEPENDANTS

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.The appellant, a national of Pakistan, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Miss A D Baker,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State giving  directions
for removal having refused asylum.  Ms M Phelan  of  Counsel  instructed  by
Thompson & Co. Solicitors appeared for the appellant. Mr S  Walker  appeared
for the respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3.The adjudicator found that  the  appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution in his home area of Lahore on the basis of his  being  a  member
of the Ahmadi  sect.  He  had  become  the  target  of  a  group  of  Muslim
extremists known as Khatme Nabuwat  (sometimes  spelt  Nabuwwat).  She  also
concluded  that  the  background  evidence  suggested  that  in  Lahore  the
appellant would not find effective protection from the authorities  who  are
sometimes complicit in such persecutory activity.  She  noted  that  in  the
appellant's case the police had detained him after he had made  a  compliant
of harassment.

4. However the  adjudicator  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  because  she
considered the appellant had a viable  internal  relocation  alternative  in
Rabwah (now known as Chenab Nagar) where he and his family could return  and
live  safely.  In  reaching  this  decision  she  took  into   account   the
appellant's intention to devote his son to the Ahmadi faith.  She noted:

      "Although Rabwah does sometimes suffer staged  marches  from  militant
      Sunni mullahs, crowds of 100 to 200 people,  and  this  can  sometimes
      lead to  violence  there  is  not  established  on  the  background  a
      reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  he  would  suffer  treatment
      amounting to persecution for his religious faith."

5. As regards the appellant`s human rights grounds of appeal, she  concluded
that the appellant`s Art 3 claim failed for the  same  reasons  as  did  his
asylum claim. Regarding Art  8,  she  noted  that  the  appellant  would  be
returning with his own close family unit and that in the UK he had only  had
a brother in law and his family. He noted there was  no  evidence  that  the
relationship  with  the  brother  in  law  was  particularly  close  or   of
significant duration.

6. The grounds, ably amplified by Ms Phelan, contended that the  adjudicator
was  wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  would  have  a  viable  internal
relocation alternative  in  Rabwah.  The  appellant  had  already  relocated
within Lahore in order to evade his persecutors. The adjudicator  failed  to
appreciate that in Rabwah the appellant would be targeted by the same  group
of Muslim extremists who had targeted him in his home  area.  She  had  also
failed to consider factors relevant to undue hardship, speaking  only  about
security and "safety".  The grounds further contended  that  the  background
evidence, including the April 2002 CIPU report at paragraph 5.3. 20 and  the
US State Department report for 2001  did  not  demonstrate  that  Rabwah  is
safe. The US State Department report stated that is has often  been  a  site
of violence against Ahmadis. It could not be said that there  would  be  any
effective state protection against such harm because  the  authorities  were
actively  complicit  in  legislating  against  Ahmadis  and  also  condoning
violence against  them.   The  situation  was  thus  analogous  to  that  of
Pakistani women subject to domestic violence as analysed  by  the  House  of
Lords in Shah and  Islam.  There  were  plans  afoot  to  gradually  buy  up
properties owned by Ahmadis in Rabwah and to "Muslimise" Rabwah.  There  was
employment  discrimination  practised  against  teachers,  police  etc.  The
grounds also alleged  that  in  reaching  her  conclusions  the  adjudicator
wrongly viewed the appellant as someone who was not  actively  proselytising
his faith.

7. Mr Walker for the respondent  maintained  that  on  the  appellant`s  own
evidence he had not sought  to  actively  proselytise.  In  view  of  recent
developments in Pakistan politics in the wake of September  11th,  it  could
not be assumed the authorities would encourage or  condone  the  actions  of
extreme fundamentalist groups, no matter who they targeted.  There had  been
arrests made by the police after an attack on an Ahmadi mosque.

8. We are not persuaded by the grounds of appeal that  it  would  be  unduly
harsh for this appellant and his family to relocate to Rabwah.

9. We would  accept  that  the  adjudicator's  treatment  of  the  issue  of
internal relocation was incomplete. She wrongly appeared to assume that  the
alternative site of  protection  being  safe  or  secure  for  an  appellant
sufficed for it to be a viable option. Whereas it is well  established  that
there will be no viable  internal  flight/relocation/protection  alternative
if return to live in the alternative site of protection  is  not  only  safe
for the claimant but is also not unduly harsh in any respect.

10.  However,  we  do  not  see  that  this  flaw   in   the   adjudicator's
determination was fatal. We are able to consider the  matter  for  ourselves
and to do so in the light of the further sources of evidence which  are  now
before us, including  the  Amnesty  International  materials  which  largely
consist of documented individual cases. Our consideration leads us to  reach
similar conclusions to those of the adjudicator.

11. As regards the security of Ahmadis in general in  Rabwah,  the  Tribunal
continues to take the view that this area is in general  safe  for  Ahmadis.
Ms Phelan is quite right to point to materials highlighting  the  fact  that
the area is not trouble-free.  It  has  often  been  the  site  of  violence
against Ahmadis. However, the background evidence equally makes  clear  that
there are a very considerable number of Ahmadis who live in Rabwah  who  are
able to live normal lives without significant difficulties.  There  is  some
evidence of discrimination in the form of employment but  equally  there  is
evidence  indicating  that  Ahmadis  make  up  the  bulk  of  the   employed
population of Rabwah.

12. As regards the appellant`s security position in particular, however,  we
would accept that in one respect he would be in a less happy situation  than
the generality of Ahmadis in Rabwah. We would  accept  that  in  Rabwah  the
appellant might well come to the notice of members  of  the  Khatme  Nabuwat
who we know from the background evidence have a presence in  Rabwah  itself.
We accept this for two reasons. One is that, assuming  he  again  sought  to
operate as a shopkeeper, the appellant would be likely once  again  to  make
information available about the Ahmadi faith,  albeit  within  Rabwah  there
would plainly be much less reason for trying to spread that religion,  since
around 90% of the population there are of the Ahmadi  faith.  The  other  is
that the appellant had decided to devote his son to the Ahmadi  faith  which
would mean that his family would become known  as  one  actively  committing
themselves to support for active proselysation of the Ahmadi faith.  We  are
prepared to accept, therefore, the existence of a real risk that members  of
this same organisation would again target the appellant  and/or  his  family
for serious harm.

13. But, in our view, the protection situation in Rabwah  is  and  would  be
markedly different from that which  the  appellant  experienced  in  Lahore.
Plainly inside Rabwah the authorities at all  levels  include  many  persons
who are themselves of the Ahmadi faith,  including  members  of  the  police
force. In effect, Rabwah is an Ahmadi stronghold.  It is not credible  that,
if or when Khatme Nabuwat sought to inflict serious harm on this  appellant,
effective protection would be unavailable. We recognise that the  background
materials do show that incidents of violence against  Ahmadis  do  occur  in
Rabwah. The US State Department report states in Part v:

      "Ahmadis often are targets of religious intolerance, much of which  is
      instigated by organised religious extremists.  Ahmadi  leaders  charge
      that militant  Sunni  mullahs  and  their  followers  sometimes  stage
      marches through the streets of Rabwah, a predominantly Ahmadi town and
      spiritual center in central Punjab. Backed by crowds  of  100  to  200
      persons, the mullahs purportedly denounce Ahmadis and their founder, a
      situation that sometimes leads to violence..."


14. However, it is plain from this account that the  incidents  of  violence
in Rabwah are not  large-scale  or  endemic  and  it  falls  well  short  of
demonstrating that the authorities there are generally unable and  unwilling
to afford local Ahmadis effective protection.

15. Ms Phelan appears to submit in this regard that  the  focus  has  to  be
always on the system of protection available in the country as a  whole  and
she has pointed very properly to the fact of  state-sponsored  and  societal
discrimination against Ahmadis in Pakistan in general.  She  is  right  that
the  protection  with  which  the  Refugee  Convention   is   concerned   is
essentially protection within the country as  a  whole.  However,  it  is  a
question of fact whether the authorities who operate in any particular  area
- be they just local officials or a mixture of local and national  officials
- can deliver effective protection or not. Just because  protection  is  not
available in some or most parts of a country does not necessarily mean  that
it is not available somewhere within that country.

16. In the particular circumstances of  this  case  we  are  satisfied  that
local protection would be available in Rabwah. Because  of  the  density  of
the population of Ahmadis there, the greater difficulties faced  by  Ahmadis
elsewhere in seeking to obtain effective  protection  from  the  authorities
against attacks on them and their faith, are  not  replicated.  Even  taking
account of the continuing difficulties the appellant would  face  in  Rabwah
from members of the Khatme Nabuwat, we consider  that  the  adjudicator  was
correct to conclude he and his family would  find  safety  and  security  in
Rabwah.

17. Turning to the issue of whether  the  appellant  and  his  family  might
nevertheless find conditions in Rabwah unduly harsh in  other  respects,  we
would conclude that they would not. Although in  addition  to  the  fact  of
likely targeting by members of the Khatme Nabuwat, we can expect  that  they
would experience some level of discrimination, the appellant  in  this  case
had experience as a self-employed shopkeeper. There was no reason  to  think
he could not work as a shopkeeper in Rabwah. There was no evidence that  the
appellant or any member so of his family were  in  ill  health  or  had  any
special extraneous reasons for being unable to return to Rabwah.

18. As for the  human  rights  grounds  of  appeal,  we  consider  that  the
adjudicator was right to treat the Art 3 grounds as falling along  with  the
asylum grounds. For  similar  reasons  we  consider  there  was  clearly  no
violation of Art 9 involved. In Rabwah the  appellant  would  be  relatively
free to manifest his religion openly and in safety.

19. Turning to Art 8, there was  plainly  an  existent  family  and  private
life. However, even accepting that the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant
constituted an interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for  family  and
private life, we cannot  see  that  it  was  disproportionate.  Despite  the
brother in law giving evidence, there was a singular  lack  of  evidence  to
show that the appellant and his family enjoyed particularly close ties  with
this man and his family. On the other hand, the  appellant  and  his  family
faced return to Pakistan together and so there would  be  no  disruption  of
their family life. The appellant had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  4
September 2001 and so by 18 October 2001 (the date  of  decision)  had  only
been in the UK just over one year. Plainly he  was  aware  when  he  arrived
that his immigration status was precarious and that he and  his  family  had
no basis on which to remain in the UK other than through the  making  of  an
asylum claim.

20. Accordingly, we are satisfied the  adjudicator  was  right  to  conclude
that there was no violation of the appellant`s human rights.

21. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed on both asylum and  human
rights grounds.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




