

                                                    APPEAL No.  HX56280-2001
 FD (Suffiency of Protection - Police Officer) Albania CG [2002] UKIAT 05778


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of hearing: 14 November 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                17/12/2002..

                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)

                               Mrs S. I Hewitt


                              Mr D. R. Bremmer


Between

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR

                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 FERIT DANAJ


                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State.  The Respondent is a  citizen
      of Albania.  The Appellant  has  been  granted  leave  to  appeal  the
      determination of an Adjudicator  (Miss  D.  A.  Thomas)  allowing  the
      Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Appellant's   decision   to   give
      directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse
      asylum.


   2. Miss G. Walker, a Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
      Appellant. Mr  H.  Davis  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Sultan  Lloyd,
      Solicitors appeared for the Respondent.


   3. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 February  2001  and
      claimed asylum the same day.  His  wife  and  two  daughters  are  his
      dependants for the purposes of this appeal.  The Appellant's  decision
      was taken on 24 April 2001.  The Adjudicator heard the  appeal  on  19
      April 2002 and leave to appeal was granted on 19 September 2002.


   4. The Adjudicator found that the Respondent was a credible witness.  She
      believed his account of events.  He was a  senior  police  officer  in
      Albania in charge of the "Ready Group  for  Rapid  Intervention".   In
      September 1998 he, and other police officers, attempted to stop a car.
       Criminals shot at them and a policeman was killed.  Later the car was
      stopped and the occupants arrested.  They  were  smuggling  drugs  and
      guns.  During the trial process they  were  released  on  bail.   They
      harassed  and  threatened  the  Respondent.   In   August   2000   the
      Respondent's  unit  stopped  a  lorry  containing   cigarettes.    The
      Respondent was able to name the criminals.  The  same  criminals  were
      involved  in  both  events.  Subsequently,  masked  men  shot  at  the
      Respondent who was injured and taken to hospital.  On his release  the
      threats intensified.  Fellow police colleagues  left  their  jobs  for
      fear of those who were making the threats.  The  group  tried  to  get
      into the Respondent's home and also went to his daughter's school.  He
      received a letter threatening his life and those  of  members  of  his
      family.  He fled Albania and later discovered that the  criminals  had
      killed his cousin, who had been living in his home, mistaking him  for
      the Respondent.  The  Respondent  said  that  between  1990  and  2000
      criminal gangs had killed approximately  200  members  of  the  police
      force in Albania. He did not believe that he would be safe in any part
      of Albania.  The criminals had contacts all over the country.


   5. The Adjudicator concluded that the Respondent did  not  have  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reasons.   It  is  clear
      from paragraph 25 of the determination that the reason  for  this  was
      that there was no Convention reason.  Police officers were not members
      of a particular social group.


   6. The Adjudicator went on to find that the  Respondent  had  established
      that were he to be returned  to  Albania  he  would  be  subjected  to
      criminal attacks and  face  ill-treatment  which  would  infringe  his
      Article 3 human rights.


   7.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  these   conclusions   would   be
      unimpeachable were it not for what the Adjudicator said  in  paragraph
      26 of the determination.  This  reads,  "In  light  of  the  objective
      evidence and applying the test in Horvath, I am satisfied  that  there
      is sufficiency of protection in Albania available to the Appellant.  I
      am therefore not satisfied that the Appellant's fear is well founded.


   8. Miss Walker submitted the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Dhima  [2002]
      EWHC 80 (Admin).   Mr  Davies  concedes  and  we  find  that  on  this
      authority the  Horvath  sufficiency  of  protection  principles  apply
      equally to Refugee Convention and human rights claims. If there  is  a
      sufficiency of protection for  the  Respondent  in  Albania  then  his
      Refugee Convention and human rights claims must both fail.   If  there
      is no sufficiency of  protection  then  the  human  rights  claim  can
      succeed.  In paragraph 28 of the determination the  Adjudicator  found
      that internal flight was not an option available  to  the  Respondent.
      He would not be safe in any part  of  the  country.   The  grounds  of
      appeal argue  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  sufficiency  of
      protection conclusion in paragraph 26.


   9. Both representatives agreed that we were in as good a position as  the
      Adjudicator to resolve the question of whether there was a sufficiency
      of protection for the Respondent in Albania.  It was not necessary  to
      remit to the same or another Adjudicator to determine  this.   It  was
      not necessary to call further evidence from the Respondent.  The issue
      could be determined on the Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact  and  the
      country information.  Miss Walker relied on exactly the  same  country
      information is that put  before  the  Adjudicator  by  the  Appellant,
      namely the Albania Country Assessment of April 2002.


  10. Miss Walker pointed out that the Adjudicator  correctly  set  out  the
      burden and standard proof in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination.
       In paragraph 7 she set out the documents before her.   It  was  clear
      that she had taken these into  account  in  reaching  her  conclusion.
      Miss Walker submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  correctly  applied  the
      Horvath test and that paragraph 26 contained a sound  conclusion  that
      there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  Respondent.   She
      referred us to a number of passages in the Country Assessment  between
      paragraphs 4.23 and 4.31, 4.81 and 4.19 and 5.104 and  5.108,  on  the
      strength of which she submitted that the Adjudicator was  entitled  to
      reach the paragraph 26 conclusion.


  11. In reaching our conclusion as to sufficiency  of  protection  we  must
      take into account both the country information  and  the  Respondent's
      evidence, particularly as the Adjudicator found him to be  a  credible
      witness, appearing to accept not only his factual account but also his
      opinions.  As a senior police officer the Respondent  was  in  a  good
      position to judge that the criminals he feared would have contacts and
      be in a position to track him down and cause him harm wherever he went
      in Albania.  He had approached a superior  officer  in  an  effort  to
      obtain protection when he received threats, but without  success.   He
      said that criminal gangs had killed approximately 200 members  of  the
      police between 1990 and 2000, which we find to be consistent with  the
      country information.  His evidence that the gang  members  killed  his
      cousin, mistaking him for the Respondent, supports the view  that  the
      criminals consider that they can act with impunity.


  12. The country  information  shows  that  despite  strenuous  efforts  to
      improve the situation, which are beginning to succeed, the police  are
      largely untrained, ill paid and often unreliable.  There  is  a  great
      deal of unprofessional behaviour and corruption, which  is  widespread
      throughout public institutions in Albania.  Large  numbers  of  police
      officers have been dismissed for involvement  in  illegal  activities.
      The Council of Europe is concerned that  complaints  of  police  abuse
      have not always adequately  investigated  and  perpetrators  often  go
      unpunished.  There are similar problems with  the  judiciary.   It  is
      apparent that, although there has been a crackdown and some  reduction
      in numbers, there are still armed gangs at large in  Albania.  Corrupt
      policemen and criminals are still working together.  Taking  all  this
      country information with the Respondent's own evidence we can find  no
      support for the Adjudicator's conclusion  that  the  Respondent  would
      obtain a sufficiency of protection in Albania.  Indeed, we  reach  the
      opposite conclusion.  It is difficult to see how the Adjudicator could
      have concluded, in paragraph 26,  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
      protection, whilst going on to find, in paragraph 28,  that  he  would
      not be safe in another part of Albania.


  13. In circumstances where the Respondent would not be able  to  obtain  a
      sufficiency of protection there is no impediment to the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion, with which we agree, that he is at risk of infringement of
      his Article 3 human rights if he returned to Albania.


  14. For these reasons we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.












   ...........................................
   P. R. Moulden

   Vice President




