
KH

|                           |        |APPEAL NO  HX12488-2002     |
|                           |        |IJ (Risk-Midgan) Somalia CG |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 06314          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|                                                                  |
|On  20 November 2002                                              |
|Dictated 20 November 2002                                         |
|Determination notified:Date                                       |
|                                                                  |
|.....29.01.2003..                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr A A LLoyd                                                      |
|Rt. Hon The Countess of Mar                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|Ibrahim  Abdi  Jama                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For the appellant       Mr A Deve of the Refugee Legal Centre.
For the respondent      Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by Ibrahim Abdi Jama, a citizen of Somalia,  against
      the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  Malcolm  Rothwell)   who
      dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  made  on
      28 January 2002 refusing to grant him asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  August  2001.   He
      claimed asylum on arrival but his claim was refused  for  the  reasons
      set out by the Secretary of State in his reasons  for  refusal  letter
      dated 25 January 2002.  The appellant was granted  limited  leave  to
      enter until 25 January 2003.  He appeals against the refusal of asylum
      under the provisions of Section 69(3) of the 1999 Act.

3.    The basis of the claim has  been  summarised  by  the  Adjudicator  in
      paragraph 3.4 of his determination.  The  appellant  claims  to  be  a
      member of the minority Midgan clan who lived in Mogadishu until  1991.
      He left the city after experiencing physical and verbal harassment and
      abuse from the  Hawiye  clan.   He  travelled  to  various  places  in
      southern Somalia before returning to Mogadishu in 1994.   In  1998  he
      was kidnapped by members of the  Hawiye  clan  who  detained  him  for
      twelve days. In 1999 he was again kidnapped  by  Hawiye  clansman  and
      held for approximately 50 days.  He persuaded one of  his  captors  to
      get him released.  At the end  of  December  2000  he  claims  he  saw
      another group of Hawiye who he felt were looking for him  so  he  took
      his savings and left the  city.   He  went  to  central  and  northern
      Somalia.  He then stayed there for approximately six months.  He  went
      to Ethiopia where he found an agent who helped him travel to  Austria,
      then Holland and then finally to the United Kingdom.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was a citizen  of  Somalia
      and was from the Midgan clan.  However, he did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had left Mogadishu because he  was  in  fear  of  a  further
      kidnap.  He did not believe  the  account  of  the  second  period  of
      detention.  He also noted that the appellant did not claim  asylum  in
      Ethiopia, Austria or Holland.  The appellant has also  given  evidence
      about his marriage to Faduma Hussain.  He says  that  the  purpose  of
      coming to the United Kingdom was to join his wife but the  Adjudicator
      was not satisfied that a marriage ever occurred.

5.    In the light of his findings the Adjudicator was  not  satisfied  that
      the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution nor that he would
      be at risk of a breach of his rights under Article 3.  The Adjudicator
      went on to consider what the position would be even if his  story  was
      true.  On this basis the appellant  had  experienced  random  acts  of
      kidnapping for money.  He would not be  fleeing  persecution  but  the
      uncertainties of a country that had been in a state of perpetual civil
      war.  He would not be able to show a risk of  adverse  treatment  over
      and above the risk associated with civil war or civil  disorder.   The
      Adjudicator was satisfied that the appellant would be able to live  in
      safety in Somalia as did other members of his clan.

6.    Leave to appeal was granted on two grounds. It is argued firstly  that
      the Adjudicator failed to consider human rights in the  light  of  his
      findings and  secondly  that  he  failed  to  consider  the  issue  of
      sufficiency of protection.  In support of his appeal Mr Deve  produced
      a copy of the Tribunal determination in Maghdeed [2002] UKIAT03631 and
      a bundle of documents (A) indexed  and  paginated  1-107.   Mr  Ekagha
      produced the Somalia Country Assessment, April 2002.

7.    Mr Deve submitted that the Adjudicator  had  failed  to  consider  the
      human rights claim adequately.  The  appellant  was  from  a  minority
      clan.  He would be at risk for this reason and  also  because  of  the
      previous history of kidnapping.  He referred to the report  at  A15-68
      and in particular to the risks faced by minority groups (para 93)  and
      in particular  the Midgan (para 296).  He also referred to the reports
      on the situation in Mogadishu in paras 179-200.

8.    He submitted that the Adjudicator had failed to consider the risks  to
      the appellant on return.  He would not be able to exercise the  option
      of internal flight.  The Adjudicator did not  consider  the  issue  of
      sufficiency of protection.  He referred the Tribunal to  Maghdeed  and
      submitted that the situation in Somalia was analogous to that  in  the
      KAA.  As a question of fact the appellant could not look  to  majority
      tribes for protection nor in law would that amount  to  protection  as
      envisaged in either the Refugee or Human Rights Conventions.

9.    Mr Ekagha submitted that the  Adjudicator  had  rejected  the  account
      given by the appellant. He now sought to rely on a generalised risk of
      harm but he failed  to  show  that  the  risk  crossed  the  necessary
      threshold for a claim to succeed under Article 3.

10.   The appellant was not  given  leave  to  challenge  the  Adjudicator's
      findings on credibility and indeed it is difficult to  see  how  there
      could be a successful challenge.  The Adjudicator made clear  findings
      of fact having reviewed the evidence with care.  He was satisfied that
      the appellant was from the Midgan clan but for the reasons he gave  he
      was not satisfied he had a well-founded fear of persecution on return.
       Mr Deve submitted to the Tribunal that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed
      properly to consider the claim under the Human Rights Convention.   In
      paragraph 5.3 of his determination the Adjudicator  found  that  there
      were no substantial grounds for believing that there was areal risk of
      ill-treatment in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the
      evidence as a whole.  Mr Deve submits that there is a serious risk of
      harm in the light of the situation in Somalia and the  fact  that  the
      appellant has  been  the  victim  of  previous  kidnap  attempts.  The
      Adjudicator was certainly not satisfied that there was an  attempt  to
      kidnap the appellant in December 2000 and he rejected the evidence  of
      the 1999 kidnap.  Even assuming that the  first  incident  might  have
      taken place,  the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant was at risk from random acts of criminal behaviour.  In  our
      view the Adjudicator's comment that  the  appellant  was  fleeing  not
      persecution but the uncertainty of a  country  where  there  had  been
      civil war and where law and order had broken down was properly open to
      him.

11.   The background evidence to which we were  referred  does  not  support
      the contention that there is any risk of persecution  to  the  Midgan.
      Paragraph 296 of the report on minority groups says that this clan had
      been placed at the lower end of  Somali  society  but  their  position
      improved at times of stability and  recovery.   In  some  areas  their
      position can even be slightly better than the  "noble"  Somali  clans.
      Midgan can trade freely  although  they  are  usually  unable  to  own
      property and  livestock.   At  A29  there  is  a  report  that  people
      returning to their home areas should  not  face  any  difficulties  in
      Somalia but minority groups living in areas controlled by  others  may
      still face some difficulties.  The Tribunal are not satisfied that the
      generalised risk arising from  living  in  Somalia  in  the  country's
      current conditions is such that it can properly be argued  that  there
      is a real risk of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3.   In  our  view
      there is nothing in the appellant's own particular circumstances which
      put him at real risk.  The fact that he is a Midgan does not do so nor
      is there anything about his personal background to put  him  at  risk.
      The fact that he may have been the victim of a kidnap in the past does
      not indicate to the Tribunal that there is a real risk of  that  being
      repeated in the future.

12.   It  was  also  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  properly  to
      consider the issue of sufficiency of protection. Mr Deve submits  that
      as a matter of fact there would be no protection in Somalia and  as  a
      matter of law he cannot be required  to  look  to  majority  clans  to
      provide him with protection.

13.   In the view of the Tribunal this appeal initially fails on the  facts.
       The  Adjudicator  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  of
      persecution nor was he at a real risk of treatment contrary to Article
      3.  In our view these findings were properly based on the evidence and
      are not susceptible to a successful challenge. In these  circumstances
      the issue of sufficiency of protection does not arise.   In  Maghdeed,
      the Tribunal was not satisfied that the KAA was  a  state-like  entity
      capable of providing  protection  meeting  the  "protection  test"  of
      Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.  It  was  accepted  that  the
      claimant in that appeal would be at risk of persecution  in  areas  of
      Iraq controlled by the Saddam Hussain government and it  was  proposed
      that he could relocate in safety  within  the  KAA.   In  the  present
      appeal there is no issue of relocation or of the appellant needing  to
      look to any particular authority or organisation for  protection.   In
      the circumstances of this appeal, the Tribunal do  not  need  to  deal
      with the legal issues considered by the Tribunal in Maghdeed.

14.   In summary, on the basis of the Adjudicator's findings,  the  Tribunal
      are satisfied that his conclusions were properly open to him.   Having
      reviewed the evidence for ourselves we agree with  both  his  findings
      and conclusions.

15.   Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
