

                                                    APPEAL No.  HX03344-2002
PK (Article 8-Return-Family ) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2002] UKIAT
05220


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of hearing: 27 September 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                   .............13 November 2002............................

                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)

                              Mrs S. Hussain JP


Between


                             PLACIDE MUSA KILALA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR

                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).
      He has been given leave to appeal the determination of an  Adjudicator
      (Mr K. St.J Wiseman) dismissing his appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision to give directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom
      and to refuse asylum.


   2. Ms M. Canavan, of RLC, appeared for the Appellant. Mr G. Elks, a  Home
      Office Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.


   3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 September  2001  and
      applied for asylum.  The notice containing the decision against  which
      he appeals is dated 19 October 2001.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal
      on 3 April 2002 and leave to appeal was granted on 20 June 2002.


   4. The Appellant claimed to fear persecution from the authorities and the
      population at large because he was part Rwandan.  Although his  father
      was  Zairean  his  mother  was  a  Zairean  of  Rwandan  origin.   The
      Adjudicator did not find the Appellant's evidence  credible.   He  had
      not established a well-founded fear of persecution or that his Article
      2 and 3 human rights would be infringed.  The Appellant  also  claimed
      that his Article 8 human rights  would  be  infringed  if  he  had  to
      return.  He had a family life in the United Kingdom with his wife  and
      their infant child.  The Adjudicator's Article 8 conclusion is  brief,
      set out in paragraph 11.1 in the following terms, "whichever  way  one
      looks at his marriage, his immigration status was known to his wife at
      the time of their marriage and his removal would have to  be  regarded
      as proportionate in the context of immigration policy generally".


   5. The main thrust of the grounds of appeal is that the Adjudicator  made
      errors of law regarding the proper  application  of  Article  8.   The
      second ground of appeal argued that the Adjudicator had made an  error
      in his assessment of future risk because  of  the  Appellant  mother's
      ethnic origin.  Leave to appeal was granted because it  was  "arguable
      that the Adjudicator did not consider all  the  relevant  evidence  in
      relation to his Article 8 claim".  Leave to appeal was not granted  in
      respect of the other ground of appeal and Ms Canavan did not  seek  to
      reopen this.


   6. We have the Appellant's bundle and skeleton argument.  The  Respondent
      submitted the April 2002 Country Assessment.  Although the hearing was
      adjourned on a previous  occasion  because  an  interpreter  had  been
      requested but was not present, neither the Appellant nor his wife gave
      evidence.  His representatives submitted additional witness statements
      and Mr Elks informed us that he did not wish to cross-examine.


   7. Ms Canavan relied on her grounds of appeal and in particular the three
      bullet points outlined in paragraph 1.1.  These are that  there  is  a
      genuine  and  subsisting  marriage,  the  Appellant's  wife  has  been
      recognised as a refugee, and she is due to  have  a  baby.   In  fact,
      since the grounds of appeal were prepared, the  Appellant's  wife  has
      given birth to their child, Raymond Brian Kilala Dunia born on 24  May
      2002.  He accompanied his parents to the hearing.


   8. Ms Canavan submitted that the Appellant and his wife  had  a  six-year
      relationship in Zaire.  We suggested to Ms Canavan  that  the  witness
      statements of the Appellant and his wife and his evidence as  recorded
      by the Adjudicator, did not bear this out.  We asked her  whether  she
      wished to make any submissions on this point.  She did  not,  but  did
      not withdraw  the  submission.   She  submitted  that  the  subsequent
      marriage in the United Kingdom legitimised an  existing  relationship.
      Removing the Appellant from the United Kingdom  would  interfere  with
      his right to a private and family life.  Our attention  was  drawn  to
      the judgment of Lord Phillips MR in Mahmood v SSHD [2001]  INLR  1  at
      pages 76 and 77 of the Appellant's bundle and in  particular  the  six
      general conclusions.  The Appellant's wife could not accompany him  to
      the DRC because she has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  that
      country.  We asked Ms Canavan whether there was any evidence that this
      was still the case, notwithstanding  that  the  Appellant's  wife  was
      granted refugee status on 27 March 2001.  Ms Canavan  submitted  there
      was a strong presumption that she was still a refugee.   It  would  be
      too onerous to expect her to re-litigate  her  status.  In  any  event
      there was no evidence that the situation in the DRC  had  changed  and
      improved  since  March  2001.  We  were  referred  to   the   tribunal
      determination in Soloot v SSHD (01/TH/01366).


   9. In relation to the possibility of the Appellant returning and making a
      marriage  application  from  the  DRC,  Ms  Canavan  referred  us   to
      paragraphs 12  to  14  of  the  skeleton  argument  and  the  tribunal
      determination in SSHD v Sukhjit Gill  (01/TH/2884).   We  should  take
      into account not only the need for a firm and fair immigration  policy
      but all aspects of the Respondent's policies, including  discretionary
      policies.


  10. Ms Canavan  submitted  that  we  should  take  into  account  relevant
      discretionary policies applied by the Respondent to those in a similar
      position  to  the  Appellant  in  considering  whether  it  would   be
      proportionate to return him to the DRC.  These were  relevant  to  the
      questions of whether it would be proportionate to interfere  with  his
      right to family life and whether there was a pressing social  need  to
      return him.  Our attention was directed to a  printout  from  the  IND
      website relating to dependency claims.  Ms Canavan  accepted  that  we
      could not interfere with the Respondent's discretionary  policies  but
      submitted that we should take them into account.


  11. In relation to family reunion Ms Canavan submitted that,  because  the
      Appellant's wife was already in the United  Kingdom,  they  would  not
      need to meet the  accommodation  and  maintenance  requirements.   The
      existence of these policies showed that the Respondent did not  always
      require an individual to return to his own country and  make  a  claim
      from there.  His wife had a right to have  her  family  join  her  and
      establish a family life in the United Kingdom.  RLC had applied to the
      Respondent to grant the Appellant leave to remain  in  line  with  his
      wife, but he had declined to do so.  If he had to go back to  the  DRC
      the only option would be to make a marriage  application  from  there.
      If he was returned to Kinshasa he would be separated from his wife and
      child for a long time, if not permanently.  His wife would be left  to
      look after a young baby.  Both of them were dependent on public funds.
       If he had leave it was likely that she would continue to be dependent
      on public funds for longer; he would not be able to work and  earn  in
      the United Kingdom.  It was also likely that he would not qualify  for
      entry clearance because they would not  satisfy  the  maintenance  and
      accommodation requirements of the Immigration Rules.


  12. Ms Canavan  submitted  that,  on  balance,  it  would  be  unfair  and
      inconsistent to return an individual  who  should  qualify  under  the
      family reunion policy.  It was not correct to describe his actions  as
      "jumping the queue".  The United Kingdom did  not  have  quotas  or  a
      queue. All those who satisfied the Immigration Rules were entitled  to
      entry clearance.


  13. Ms Canavan asked us to take into account the effect on third  parties,
      that is their baby. Bequiri [2002] UKIAT 00725 made it clear  that  we
      were entitled to do this.  The Appellant's wife  had  no  other  close
      relations in the United Kingdom.  The evidence between pages 25 and 28
      of the Appellant's bundle emphasised the benefits that a father  could
      provide to a young child.  If the Appellant had to return there  would
      be a loss to the  public  purse.   This  would  involve  the  cost  of
      returning him, the fact that he would not be able to  provide  support
      for his wife, and the cost of administering his  marriage  application
      at the local Embassy.


  14. All in all we were asked to find that the balance tipped in favour  of
      allowing the Appellant to remain.  It  would  be  disproportionate  to
      require him to leave the United Kingdom.


  15. Mr Elks emphasised the provisions of Section 77 (4) of the Immigration
      and Asylum Act 1999.  At the date of the Respondent's  decision  there
      was no family life.  The Appellant and his wife had been together  for
      less than a month.  The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12
      September 2001 and the removal directions  were  made  on  19  October
      2001.  On  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  and  his  own  witness
      statement they did not start living together until 19 September  2001.
      He had not lived with her in the DRC.  Even though they said that  the
      relationship started in 1994 the Appellant  accepted  that  there  had
      been problems and he had fathered two children by other women.  He did
      not know when she left the DRC.


  16. Furthermore, Mr Elks submitted that it was not foreseeable  that  they
      would continue to cohabit, marry, or have children.


  17. However, if we were against him on this, and there was a  private  and
      family life, Mr Elks submitted  that  it  would  be  proportionate  to
      expect the Appellant to return and make a  marriage  application  from
      abroad.  If the application  took  some  time  this  was  a  situation
      contemplated by Mahmood.  In that case the Appellant had  a  wife  and
      two children.  There  was  no  evidence  to  support  the  Appellant's
      contention that his wife and child could not return to  the  DRC  with
      him.  Mr Elks emphasised that the  Respondent  would  not  attempt  to
      remove the Appellant's wife against her will.   It  was  a  matter  of
      choice for her.  She had  to  show  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
      return now.  She had not done so.


  18. Mr Elks informed us that the Respondent  had  considered  whether  the
      Appellant was entitled to remain as  a  result  of  any  discretionary
      policy, but had concluded that he was not.  In order to be his  wife's
      dependent for the purposes of family reunion he would have had to be a
      dependent under her Refugee Convention claim.  He  was  not.   In  any
      event there was no family unity before he came to the United  Kingdom.
      As to financial benefits to the state, costs had to be looked at in  a
      wider context.   It  was  not  just  the  costs  with  regard  to  the
      Appellant, but the costs of many others.


  19. In reply Ms Canavan relied on  Nhundu  and  Chiwera  (01/TH/00613)  in
      relation to the extent to  which  we  could  take  into  account  post
      decision matters.  It was not necessary for the Secretary of State  to
      have considered the evidence.  Giving the Appellant the benefit of the
      doubt, he had established that he had a family life at the date of the
      decision. It was not necessary for there to  be  a  marriage  or  even
      cohabitation for a family life to exist.  In circumstances  where  the
      Respondent had chosen not to cross-examine the Appellant or  his  wife
      we  should  accept  their  evidence  as  to  the   length   of   their
      relationship.  In reply to our question, Ms Canavan accepted  that  we
      would need to follow the Adjudicator's undisputed  findings  of  fact.
      She submitted that the Appellant  was  not  likely  to  succeed  on  a
      marriage application brought from abroad.  The grant of refugee status
      to the Appellant's wife brought with it a  right  to  family  reunion.
      This had not been considered in Mahmood.  We were asked to  allow  the
      appeal.


  20. None of  the  grounds  of  appeal  seek  to  call  into  question  the
      Adjudicator's findings  of  fact,  which  we  follow  with  additional
      findings arising from the  supplementary  witness  statements  of  the
      Appellant and his wife.


  21. The Adjudicator found (paragraph 10.15) that  within  a  week  of  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom on 12 September 2001 the  Appellant  was
      living with the woman who is now his wife and that she became pregnant
      almost immediately after his arrival.  The Adjudicator did  not  state
      in terms that he accepted that the Appellant had established a  family
      life in the United Kingdom but by implication he did  so,  because  he
      went on to consider the question of proportionality, which  would  not
      otherwise have arisen. To clarify this, we find that the Appellant has
      established a family and private life in the  United  Kingdom  at  the
      date of the Respondent's decision on 19 October 2001.  He and his wife
      to be were cohabiting at that date.  They did not have been married or
      to have a child or children for there to be a family life.


  22. We next consider the extent to which we  are  entitled  to  take  into
      account subsequent events.  Section 77 (4) provides that we  may  only
      take into account evidence, "(a) which was available to the  Secretary
      of State at the time when the decision appealed against was taken;  or
      (b) which relates to relevant facts  as  at  that  date."   We  follow
      Nhundu  and   Chiwera.    The   two   subsections   are   not   wholly
      interdependent.  They are separated by "or" not "and".  Relevant facts
      at the date of the decision include the fact that  the  Appellant  and
      his wife were cohabiting and she is likely to have been pregnant.   It
      was not necessary for these facts to have been known to the Respondent
      at the date of the decision.  In these circumstances we can take  into
      account, for example, the fact that they are now married, continue  to
      live together, and have a child.


  23. In his initial Asylum interview, recorded in paragraph  10.16  of  the
      determination, the Appellant said, referring to the woman who  is  now
      his wife, that he "remembered" that he had a friend from  Kinshasa  in
      London.  The Adjudicator found "that it has  been  his  intention  all
      along to join her in the United Kingdom and I believe that his  Asylum
      claim has been constructed with that in mind".  In his evidence to the
      Adjudicator the Appellant did not say anything about  a  long-standing
      relationship with the woman who is  now  his  wife.   He  referred  to
      having two young children by different women, and that  he  had  never
      married.  Ms Canavan submitted that the Appellant and the woman who is
      now his wife had a long-standing relationship in the DRC.  This is not
      born out by the evidence in their  supplementary  witness  statements.
      We accept that they are likely to have met in Kinshasa  in  1994  when
      she was a student.  She said that she continued to see him for a  long
      time, but has not said how long that was.  She said that  he  saw  him
      perhaps twice a week.  She said that she was in love with him  and  he
      loved her, but he makes no similar claim. There is no suggestion  that
      they cohabited, married, or that she became  pregnant.   Instead,  she
      admits that there were problems with  the  relationship,  because  the
      Appellant had children by other women.  Both of them  are  very  vague
      about the nature of the relationship, how long it lasted and  when  it
      came to an end.   We  find  that  there  is  likely  to  have  been  a
      relatively   short-term   relationship   in   around   1994,   without
      cohabitation, and they lost touch some time before she left the DRC in
      June 2000.  It is clear from the Appellant's own evidence that when he
      came to the United Kingdom he did not know where to find her  and  had
      to trace her.  We find that, when the Appellant arrived in the  United
      Kingdom, there was no subsisting relationship and no family life.  The
      Appellant knew little more than that she  was  likely  to  be  in  the
      United Kingdom.


  24. They are now  married,  having  decided  to  marry  after  she  became
      pregnant.  It was a difficult decision  whether  to  keep  the  child.
      Both parties knew that his immigration status was  not  certain.  They
      have a child, a continuing relationship and are cohabiting.  Both  are
      supported by public funds and neither is working.  She cares  for  the
      child most of the time but the Appellant helps, particularly at night.
       They do not have any relatives to help them.  This is her first child
      and, following the birth by caesarean section she is still recovering.


  25. The letter in the Appellant's bundle shows that his wife  was  granted
      refugee status on 27 March 2002 and has permission to remain  in  this
      country permanently.  We accept  that  this  indicates  that  she  had
      established a well-founded fear of persecution in  the  DRC  in  March
      2001.  However, absent any further evidence,  it  does  not  establish
      that she is still unable to  return  to  that  country.   We  are  not
      suggesting, as Ms Canavan imagined, that the  Secretary  of  State  or
      anyone else could compel her to return to the DRC.  It is for  him  to
      show, doubtless with her help, that there are still good  reasons  why
      she should not make a voluntary return, with her  husband  and  child.
      An individual who has been granted refugee status does  not,  on  that
      basis alone, establish that he or she can never be expected to  return
      to the country of origin.  In a  changing  world  circumstances  which
      gave rise to a well founded fear of persecution change, sometimes  for
      the better and to an extent  that  such  a  fear  no  longer  obtains.
      Recent examples are Kosovo and Afghanistan.   We  are  not  suggesting
      that an individual's claim has to be re-litigated.  Refugee status has
      been granted and consideration of current circumstances  does  nothing
      to jeopardise this.  Here we have hardly  any  information  about  her
      Asylum claim.  We do not have, for example, her witness  statement  or
      the determination of an Adjudicator.  Whilst we have  current  country
      information, particularly in the Respondent's Country  Assessment,  we
      do not know on what basis she made out her  claim.  Although  she  was
      granted  refugee  status  as  recently  as  March  2001  there  is  no
      presumption that the circumstances at that date still hold  good.   It
      would not have been too onerous a task for her and  the  Appellant  to
      provide the necessary information.  We are in  no  position  to  judge
      whether she  can  now  return.   In  the  circumstances  she  has  not
      established that she would not be able to return  with  the  Appellant
      and their child.


  26. We can find no merit in the submission that the Respondent should have
      considered the Appellant as the dependent of the woman who is now  his
      wife for the purpose of a possible discretionary grant of  exceptional
      leave to remain.  The Appellant has never been  her  dependent  within
      the terms of the policy, and  set  out  in  the  guidelines  which  Ms
      Canavan has put before us.   He  was  never  included  in  her  Asylum
      application.  She was never included in his Asylum application.  There
      is no basis on which it could be said that either was the dependent of
      the other.   There  was  no  pre-existing  family  unit  abroad.   The
      Appellant is not and has never been dependent on the woman who is  now
      his wife.  The discretionary policy for family reunion only applies to
      a spouse and minor children who formed part of the family  unit  prior
      to the time the sponsor fled to seek asylum.  There was no family unit
      comprising the Appellant and the woman who is now his  wife  when  she
      left the DRC.


  27.  The tribunal in SSHD v Sukhjit Gill said, "In  considering  the  firm
      and fair immigration policy all aspects of that policy must  be  taken
      into account.  So there is no policy of necessarily removing a  person
      in the Respondent's position.  Mr Gill is  right  to  point  out  that
      there are policies which permit persons in the  Respondent's  position
      to remain in this country.  Not only is the immigration  policy  which
      is such a strong  factor  based  on  executive  discretion,  but  that
      discretion insofar as it is expressed in a  policy  is  reviewable  at
      least to some extent by the Appellate Authorities and the courts".


  28. In Bequiri the tribunal said, "However it does not  seem  to  us  that
      these types of variation take matters very far, particularly when,  as
      here, the claimant in question does not even fall under the  terms  of
      some item of concessionary policy.  Such  variations  may  qualify  to
      some extent, but do not gainsay the interests of  the  state  and  the
      wider community in the maintenance of effective  immigration  control.
      Thus in our view it is  not  open  to  an  Adjudicator  to  treat  the
      interests of the state and  wider  community  in  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control as easily overridden ".


  29. This is a case where the Appellant cannot  bring  himself  within  the
      terms of any of the Respondent's concessionary policies.  They do  not
      assist him.


  30. Having concluded that the Appellant  has  established  a  private  and
      family life in the United Kingdom it is  clear  that  there  would  be
      interference with this if he had to return to the DRC.   There  is  no
      dispute that the Respondents decision was in accordance with  the  law
      and pursued a legitimate aim.


  31. In relation to  proportionality  we  take  into  account  the  matters
      already set out.  On the one hand  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  are
      married. They are living together in a continuing relationship,  which
      benefits both of them and their infant child.  It hardly requires  the
      documentary evidence submitted  by  the  Appellant  to  establish  the
      benefits of the presence of a caring father to  a  child  of  whatever
      age.  They do not have relatives to help them in the United Kingdom or
      in the DRC.  She is recovering from the birth and he  helps  her  both
      generally and with  their  child.   We  place  little  weight  on  the
      possibility of additional or continuing public expense if  he  returns
      to the DRC, she cannot work and the British government has to meet the
      cost of dealing with a marriage application from abroad.  In any event
      these have to be set against  what  the  Respondent  may  legitimately
      regard as the  broader  issues  and  the  far  greater  costs  of  not
      maintaining an effective immigration policy.


  32. It is not for us to prejudge the prospects of success of any  marriage
      application made by the Appellant from the DRC.  The likely success or
      failure should not enter into our assessment.  Likely  failure  should
      not entitle the Appellant to remain.  Likely success should not  weigh
      in favour of return.  The situation might be different  if  there  was
      any evidence to show that it would be excessively  difficult  or  even
      impossible for the Appellant to make  an  application  from  the  DRC.
      There is no such suggestion.  The length of time that  an  application
      is likely to take and the fact that the Appellant would  be  separated
      from his family in  the  meantime  are  factors  which  we  take  into
      account.


  33. On the  other  hand  what  we  cannot  escape  are  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions, with which we agree, that it was "his intention all along
      to join her in United Kingdom and I believe that his Asylum claim  has
      been constructing with that in mind" and "I have to be blunt  and  say
      that I believe the Appellant has effectively sought to "jump to queue"
      by claiming asylum but effectively seeking to remain here on the basis
      of his marriage.  That is an application that should  be  made  afresh
      from his home  country".   The  Appellant  and  his  wife  have  known
      throughout, as they admit, that his Asylum status and right to  remain
      in the United Kingdom is precarious.


  34. We have taken into account all the Mahmood  factors.   The  Respondent
      has the right to control the entry of non-nationals  into  the  United
      Kingdom.  Article 8 does not impose on the state a general  obligation
      to respect the choice of residence of a married  couple.   Removal  or
      exclusion of one family member from a state where other members of the
      family are lawfully resident will not necessarily infringe  Article  8
      providing that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
      living together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the  family  member
      excluded, even where this involves a degree of hardship  for  some  or
      all members of the family.  We have found that, for  lack  of  current
      evidence,  the  Appellant  has  not   established   that   there   are
      insurmountable obstacles to his wife returning to the DRC.  They  have
      not been long established in the United Kingdom.  Both  of  them  come
      from the DRC and it would not be unreasonable to expect her and  their
      child to return with him.  Throughout their relationship in the United
      Kingdom both  of  them  have  known  that  his  right  to  remain  was
      precarious.


  35. We find that there were reasonable grounds  for  the  conclusion  that
      removal of the Appellant is necessary in the interests of  an  orderly
      and fair control of immigration and that his right to respect for  his
      family life has not been violated.


  36. We dismiss this appeal.





   ...........................................
   P. R. Moulden

   Vice President

