
ar                                                            Appeal    No.
HX33863-01             OV (Persecution-PSG-Jews) Moldova  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
06886


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 20 December 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                        ..27 February 2003..

                                   Before:

                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby
                                Mrs E Morton



                               OLEG  VASHKALUP



                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Moldova, appeals the determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, (Mr P.R. de Haney) who dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
      against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his
      application for asylum.

2.    The appellant was represented before us by Mr R. O'Ryan,  of  counsel,
      while Miss C. Paddick appeared for the Secretary of State.

3.    The appellant is an ethnic Russian living in Moldova.  He  is  Jewish.
      Since Moldova became independent he had suffered at the hands  of  the
      National Front.  On 31 August 1995 he had been  attacked  by  National
      Front members and had been hospitalised for five  days  approximately.
      In 1996 he had moved to Tishenyov. He had traded as  a  market  trader
      there.  He had complained to  the  police  about  harassment  and  the
      police had arrested the perpetrators and detained them  although  they
      had been released because of  a  lack  of  evidence.  There  had  been
      threatening telephone calls and his front door had been burned and his
      car had been vandalised.  Again he had reported these matters  to  the
      police but they were unable to catch the persons responsible.

4.    He had travelled to Russia and remained there from the autumn of  1996
      until the spring of 1997. He complained of  having  been  detained  on
      several occasions and in April 1997 he had gone to Germany.

5.    He had been put in a refugee camp there but left after a week and  had
      travelled to Frankfurt.  In June 1997 he had been arrested because  he
      had not passport and he had been released in September 1997.  He tried
      to go to Romania but was arrested at the German border. He was told to
      go to the embassy of Moldova but instead went back to  Moldova  itself
      in November 1997.  He remained there until March  1998  when  he  went
      illegally to Germany until February 1999.  In February 1999 he went to
      Denmark and stayed there until August 1999. From Denmark he  travelled
      to Norway where he claimed asylum.  His application was refused and he
      was returned to Moldova on 20 December 2000.

6.    On 4 January 2001 the appellant said he was attacked  by  a  group  of
      Moldovan citizens and stabbed, following which  he  was  hospitalised.
      On 24 April 2001 he left Moldova and arrived in this country on 4  May
      2001.

7.    The Adjudicator found that the earlier incidents  did not form a  part
      of the appellant's asylum claim and the  chairman  who  granted  leave
      agreed.  The Adjudicator accepted the account of the appellant  having
      been injured by nationalistic citizens and having been  injured.   The
      Adjudicator  noted  that  the  appellant   had   not   described   the
      circumstances of the attack nor claimed that it was  based  on  either
      his Russian ethnicity or his Jewish faith.  The Adjudicator also  took
      into account that the attack had been reported to the police and  that
      the  appellant  appeared  not  to  have   followed   up   any   police
      investigation.

8.    The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's credibility although he  also
      found that he was prepared to exaggerate his account.  The Adjudicator
      did not accept that the appellant had been arrested for practising his
      religion.  He found that he had been subjected  to  assaults  and  had
      been the victim of a  protection  racket  but  that  on  each  of  the
      occasions the police had been involved and would appear to have  taken
      reasonable steps in an effort to protect the appellant.  The incidents
      involved  random  acts  by  individuals.   He  had  not  been  fleeing
      persecution.

9.    Leave was granted only on the point whether effective  protection  was
      available to the appellant. The chairman who granted leave stated that
      the Tribunal would expect  objective  material  to  be  filed  on  the
      question.

10.   Mr O'Ryan acknowledged that he  had  lodged  no  material  whatsoever.
      Leave had been granted on 8 January 2002 and accordingly  the  parties
      had had  nearly  a  year  to  prepare  for  the  hearing.   Mr  O'Ryan
      emphasised he had only been lately instructed.  He  was  not  applying
      for an adjournment.  He had had limited time to  research  the  matter
      and there was no evidence he was  in  a  position  to  submit  to  the
      Tribunal.  Miss Paddick pointed out that the Home Office had submitted
      the annual report on International Religious Freedom 2001 on 28  March
      2002 and had put in the October 2002 Country Assessment on 25 November
      2002.   Neither of these documents had reached Mr  O'Ryan.   Reference
      was made to paragraphs 6.38 and 6.39 of the October 2000 Assessment on
      Judaism and on extracts from  the  section  dealing  with  freedom  of
      religion.

11.   Miss Paddick submitted that the police had taken action in respect  of
      the appellant's  complains  and  there  was  no  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal that there was an absence of a sufficiency of protection  for
      the appellant. It was further not established that the  appellant  was
      fleeing from persecution.  The events that had happened were  sporadic
      and not targeted at him.  The appeal should be  dismissed.  Mr  O'Ryan
      did not desire to reply to these submissions.

12.   We reserved our determination.  The  Home  Office  Country  Assessment
      states that the constitution in Moldova provides for  the  freedom  of
      persons  to  practice  religion  and  that  the  government  generally
      respected this right in practice.  Apparently  the  Moldovan  Orthodox
      Church received some special treatment from the government. The Jewish
      community had had mixed results  in  recovering  property  confiscated
      during the Nazi and Soviet regimes.

13.   There are apparently two public schools and a kindergarten  open  only
      to Jewish students  which  receive  the  same  funding  as  the  state
      schools. Jewish students  are  not  restricted  to  the  schools  (see
      paragraph 6.26 of the Assessment).

14.   The paragraphs dealing with Judaism are as follows :

             '6.38  The Jewish community has approximately 31,000  members,
             with about 20,000 living  in  Chisinau,  3,100  in  Balti  and
             surrounding areas, 2,200 in Tiraspol, 2,000  in  Benderi,  and
             4,000 in small towns. These figures, provided  by  the  groups
             themselves, may only be rough approximations, as they  do  not
             appear to have been adjusted to take  into  recent  emigration
             trends. Since the 19970s, Jews  have  been  migrating  out  of
             Moldova. At first they emigrated almost exclusively to Israel,
             but as restrictions eased, they have  also  emigrated  to  the
             U.S., Canada, New Zealand, and Australia. Since  the  fall  of
             the former Soviet Union, Moldova Jews have emigrated to  other
             European countries, notably Germany.  There are  9  synagogues
             in Chisinau, Balti, Tiraspol, Rybnitsa,  and  Benedri;   about
             5,000 persons celebrate Rosh Hashanah.

             6.39 Dozens of graves in Chisinau's main Jewish cemetery  were
             desecrated in April 20002, and many of  the  gravestones  were
             destroyed. The Jewish Community received reports that a  group
             of teenagers confessed to the crime, but the   government  has
             not filed criminal  charges.  The Jewish  Community  requested
             that the city place full-time armed guards  at  the  cemetery,
             but the presence of the guards was reported  to  be  sporadic.
             Some desecration of  Jewish  cemeteries  in  Transnistria  has
             occurred.  Transnistrian authorities sent  workers  to  remove
             the graffiti.  Three youths were charged with vandalism in one
             such incident, but no verdict had been reached as of  30  June
             2002.'

15.   We agree with Miss Paddick's submission that  the  appellant  has  not
      established that there is not a sufficiency  of  protection  for  him.
      The police took action on his complaints insofar as they were able  to
      on all  of the occasions when he was attacked. The  Adjudicator  found
      that the police had taken reasonable steps to  protect  the  appellant
      and that the assaults on him had been random acts by individuals.

16.   There still appear to be a substantial  number  of  Jewish  people  in
      Moldova  despite  emigration  in  recent  years.  Although  there  are
      incidents where cemeteries have been desecrated, we are not  satisfied
      that  these  incidents  demonstrate  a  lack  of  protection  for  the
      community.  We note that the graffiti on the cemeteries was removed by
      the authorities and that three youths were charged in relation to  one
      of the incidents.  We also note that the government generally respects
      the right freely to  practice  religion.   There  is  no  satisfactory
      evidence before us of the Jewish community being  persecuted.   As  we
      have observed, the appellant has had nearly a year to  lodge  material
      and the opportunity has not been taken.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
      Home Office Country Assessment gives a fair and balanced  overview  of
      the position. We  see  no  reason  to  disturb  the  findings  of  the
      Adjudicator on the asylum and human rights  issues.   The  Adjudicator
      found there was sufficiency of protection for  the  appellant  and  we
      agree with his findings.   Consequently,  this  appeal  is  dismissed.



17.   Appeal dismissed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


