
Appeal No.HX13838-2001
                 AH (IAF-Jewish Activist-Bucharest) Romania CG [2002] UKIAT
                                    01086


                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL




                                               Heard at Field House:14
      January 2002
                                           Date Determination notified:
                                        11.04.2002

                                   Before
                           Mr R G Care (Chairman)
                                Mr J B Wilson
                                Mr G Brown JP




                              ANDREEA HAUSSMANN

                                  Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                             Respondent
_____________________________________________________________________

                         DETERMINATION  AND  REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Romania and  obtained  leave  to  appeal
      from the determination of Mrs J N Reid  in  which  she  dismissed  the
      appellant's claims to asylum and under  the  Human  Rights  Act  on  2
      November 2001.


Representation

   2. The appellant was represented by Mr.Taghavi of Counsel  instructed  by
      D J Webb and Co Solicitors and the respondent by Mr. Harper.


Decision

   3. The appeal is dismissed.


The Appeal

   4. Miss Haussmann is now aged 31 and arrived in the UK on 21 April  2000.
      She lived in Cluj in Romania where she was born and worked  there  for
      the local Council as an accountant.  She  is  Jewish  from  a  wealthy
      family. The adjudicator believed  her  story  so  we  can  relate  the
      salient facts from the evidence.

   5. There are two issues argued by Mr  Taghavi,  first,  given  that  Miss
      Haussmann had been persecuted could she not obtain protection  if  she
      went to live somewhere else in Romania?  Second whatever may happen is
      it likely to come up  that  level  of  seriousness  which  amounts  to
      persecution? It is  not  argued  that  the  persecution  was  levelled
      against the appellant simply by being a  Jewish  but  that  her  stand
      against the xenophobic  attitudes  she  says  obtain  in  Romania  was
      regarded as amounting to political opinion.

   6. In summary Miss Haussmann's evidence is that she eventually  lost  her
      job with the council in Cluj, that she make an enemy of the  Mayor  by
      her persistent and determined attacks on  the  discrimination  against
      Jews, that she had been threatened and abused verbally and  physically
      attacked. She had reported to  the  police  but  had  been  unable  to
      persuade them to investigate  the  incidents  or  make  an  effort  to
      protect her, let alone give some sympathetic attention. She  had  also
      written to the Minister in Bucharest but without response.

   7. She says she tried to move to another town but the situation would  be
      the same she was told. She claims she cannot move  freely  in  Romania
      for the regulations on a move may not stop her in law but identify her
      and removed any  chance  of  living  a  normal  life  like  any  other
      Romanian.


Submissions


   8. Mr Taghavi helpfully  submitted  a  skeleton  argument.  He  drew  our
      attention  to  the  salient  parts  of  the  background  material  and
      summarised the appellant's options as being

        i.  To live off her family (we are doubtful if her  parents  are  in
           Romania so she could not live with them in Romania if they  have
           left)
        ii.       To remain silent

      There was no realistic option to relocate and  no  material  had  been
      produced which challenged her evidence on this. She is not obliged  to
      live off her family nor to keep silent.

9.     In  addressing  whether  the  adjudicator  was  right  to  find  past
      persecution the  threshold  is  finally  (though  not  exclusively  we
      suppose) based on the physical attacks by or  on  behalf  of  a  state
      agent (the Mayor) from which, in the climate of Romania, there was not
      and was not likely to be any effective protection.

10.   Mr Harper, in addressing the issues of  relocation,  points  out  that
      other than the background information before us it was not possible to
      bring evidence to  show  that  something  would  not  happen  to  Miss
      Haussman, but that the regulations did not prevent her relocating.


Reasons for Decision


11.   We must we think accept that the  appellant  made  out  her  case  for
      persecution in Cluj.

12.   We are not happy however that it has been accepted that what  happened
      did so on account of Miss Haussmann's political opinion. It  seems  to
      us that it all happened because she is a Jew. The fact that there is a
      climate of anti-Semitism rife among some senior politicians and she is
      a vociferous member of an otherwise quiet minority does not  we  think
      convert the racial  or  ethnic  nature  of  the  persecution  into  an
      expression of opposition to the state and political  opinion,  imputed
      or otherwise.

13.   The Government as such has been trying to come away from  its  history
      of  anti-Semitism;  vide  the  resistance  to  any  commemoration   of
      Antonescu, the erection of a monument to the Holocaust, the commitment
      to compensation and the overt existence of the  Federation  of  Jewish
      Communities and its organ Realitatea Evreiasca. The Tribunal in  Gomez
      2000 INLR 549 said that 'political opinion  has  to  relate  to  major
      power transactions which  were  taking  place  in  the  government  or
      government-related sectors. It is not just what any non-state or  even
      state actor may think but in this case we do not think it is either.

14.   As we said accepting that she had been  persecuted  in  Cluj,  whether
      because of political opinion or being  a  Jew,  she  says  she  cannot
      without undue hardship live anywhere else in  Romania.  She  says  she
      tried to do so but  to  no  avail.  She  says  that  anti-Semitism  is
      widespread and she is not obliged to be quiet  nor  to  live  off  her
      parents.

15.   Firstly it is clearly necessary to remind  ourselves  that  protection
      under the Convention is a surrogate one. It  is  available  only  when
      Romania is unable or unwilling to discharge its own  duty  to  protect
      its own nationals.  In Horvath  [2000] INLR 239  the  House  of  Lords
      made this clear  and  also  that  the  standard  of  protection  is  a
      practical one.

16.   Turning to internal protection. The Court  of  Appeal  in  Karanakaran
      [2000] INLR 122 deals with the issue most carefully. First of  all  it
      is part and parcel of the issue whether Miss Haussmann is a Convention
      Refugee. We have accepted  that  she  left  because  of  her  fear  of
      persecution and now we must examine whether she can justify her  claim
      to be unable or unwilling because of such fear to avail herself of the
      duty of Romania to protect her.

17.   We must look at all the available information and  decide  whether  it
      is reasonable or would be unduly harsh, to expect  Miss  Haussmann  to
      return. Is she able  to  avail  herself  of  protection  somewhere  in
      Romania - which she can reach? In evaluating her claim it is  all  the
      facts which must be taken into account and that includes in our view a
      balancing of what  the  states  signing  the  Convention  were  really
      putting their names to and the commensurate limits to what the asylum-
      seeker was entitled to demand. The only real obstacle to  moving  from
      Cluj to Bucharest is the requirement of Law 105/1996. On its face  the
      law only requires registration on a move. The  nature  of  the  permit
      issued will depend upon the permanent nature of the accommodation.  In
      our view this is it all it says and it is not possible  to  read  into
      it, even against the background in Romania, any  incidental  limit  on
      the appellant's work or her ability to leave behind that part  of  her
      experience which gave rise to her flight in the first place. Paragraph
      6.22 of CIPU does not, as submitted by Mr Taghavi,  support  any  such
      view.

18.   Bucharest is not Cluj. Bucharest is the capital. She says  she  has  a
      right to be vocal and is not obliged to depend on  her  parents.  Both
      are indeed true, but in our view the Convention  is  not  intended  to
      provide a complete guarantee of one' fundamental human rights. If  she
      can live in Romania without undue harshness, even it means living  off
      her parents, she is not entitled to refuse to do so  and  still  claim
      the status of a refugee under the Convention.

19.   Looking at all the background material and taking what Miss  Haussmann
      says into account it is not possible to conclude it  would  be  unduly
      harsh to live in Bucharest - which is where she will be returned to.





R G Care
Chairman





                           -----------------------
      1


