
Heard at Field House         SS (Moslem - False Charges) India CG [2002]
UKIAT 03340
                                              Appeal No CC50101-2001
On 27 June 2002



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             1 August 2002

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                               Mr P Rogers JP


                                SHEZAD SHEIKH

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr B Andonian, dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent  on  12  August  2001  to  issue
     removal and refuse asylum

  2. Ms M Hodgson, instructed by Messrs Ashley Bean &  Co,  represented  the
     Appellant.  Mr  M  Pichamuthu,  a  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer,
     represented the Respondent.



                               The Proceedings


  3. The Appellant lived in Ratnagiri in Maharashtra State and claimed  that
     he was forced to leave India after the murder  of  his  wife's  brother
     because he was falsely accused of the murder. He was a Moslem  who  had
     worked for the Moslem League. For some years he had opposed a programme
     of forced religious conversion promoted by the RSS, a Hindu nationalist
     organisation, and he had been beaten five or six times by  people  from
     the RSS. When there was trouble between the Hindus and the Moslems, the
     police would arrest him. The RSS blamed him  for  his  brother-in-law's
     murder and there were charges pending against him.  However his brother-
     in-law had been murdered because he protested against the murder of the
     Appellant's father, who had died of a heart attack following a bombing.



  4.  The  Adjudicator  made  various  findings.  The  attacks  against  the
     Appellant were reported to the police and investigated by  them.  Their
     inability to apprehend the perpetrators could not in the  circumstances
     be construed as complicity in or support for such attacks. The  arrests
     of the Appellant  by  the  police  were  a  legitimate  part  of  their
     investigations into incidents of violence and unrest. If false  charges
     were  pending  against  the  Appellant,  the  judiciary  in  India   is
     independent and  the  Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  proper  legal
     representation. The Appellant also had a viable internal flight option.

  5. Leave to appeal was granted solely on  the  basis  of  the  outstanding
     charges against the  Appellant  in  relation  to  his  brother-in-law's
     murder.  It was submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  in  the  leave
     application that the objective country material shows that  torture  by
     police in detention throughout India is widespread  and  there  were  a
     number  of  cases  of  death  in  police  and  judicial  custody.   The
     Adjudicator failed to consider whether the Appellant would receive such
     treatment and whether this would be in breach of his human rights under
     Article 3.

  6. Ms Hodgson in fact argued wider points, though still arising  from  the
     murder charges.  She  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  not
     considering the risk of ill treatment that the Appellant  might  suffer
     in police and judicial custody, as a consequence of the charges brought
     against him. Nor did he consider whether the Appellant would receive  a
     fair trial and a  fair  sentence,  if  convicted,  on  account  of  his
     religion. She then took us in detail through  the  background  evidence
     concerning the situation in India. Those submissions are fully set  out
     in the record of proceedings but they may  be  summarised  as  follows.
     Police violence  is  widespread  and  endemic.   The  police  abuse  of
     prisoners with impunity.  Because there are murder charges against  the
     Appellant, which are serious, he is more likely to be at risk than as a
     political activist.  Prison conditions  are  very  poor.  There  are  a
     number of deaths in custody and extrajudicial killings by  the  police.
     Human  rights  safeguards  have  not  been  properly  implemented.  The
     governing party in India, the BJP, is an offshoot of RSS  and  many  of
     the senior members of the government, including the Prime Minister, are
     members. RSS seeks the Indianisation of Moslems and  Christians.  There
     is religious based conflict between India and Pakistan, which generates
     a serious inter-communal tensions  within  India.  The  police  do  not
     protect Moslems when they are attacked.  Moslems  are  more  likely  to
     suffer at the hands of the police and in prison  on  account  of  their
     religion. Internal flight was not relevant in  the  context  of  murder
     charges.  This was not a case concerning sufficiency of  protection  by
     the state because the  police  themselves  were  agents  of  the  state
     controlled by the State and acting  with  impunity.  She  cited  Svacas
     C/2000/1964 CA.

  7. The Tribunal invited Ms Hodgson to comment on  the  general  principles
     set out in the Tribunal decision of Fazilat  [2002]  UKIAT  00973.  She
     said that this was not a starred decision was not therefore in any  way
     binding.  It related to prison conditions in Iran but the situation  in
     India was worse because of the large number of deaths  in  custody  and
     the extrajudicial killings.  In any event each case had to turn on  its
     own facts.

  8. Mr  Pichamuthu argued that the issue in this appeal was about the  risk
     to the Appellant. If Ms Hodgson were right  then  any  of  India's  110
     million Moslems accused of a crime would be entitled  to  international
     protection. The reality was that the Appellant  would  be  returned  on
     temporary documentation and would not come  to  the  attention  of  the
     authorities at all.   If  he  were  arrested  then  there  would  be  a
     sufficiency of protection available to him  as  described  in  Horvath.
     There was an independent judiciary from which he could  expect  a  fair
     trial as he had in the past. The police  were  not  able  to  act  with
     impunity as the government was implementing human  rights  initiatives,
     which  were  resulting  in  the  prosecution  of  hundreds  of  abusive
     policemen. Human rights organisations were also increasingly active  in
     monitoring the situation in India. The main areas  of  inter-  communal
     violence in India were limited to Kashmir  and  Gujerat,  and  did  not
     include Maharashtra. The rest of India was  largely  untouched  by  the
     violence. There were  many  Moslem  organisations  represented  in  the
     Indian state Parliaments and these  included  the  Moslem  League  with
     which  the  Appellant  was  associated.  There  was  no   evidence   of
     discrimination against Moslems in the courts nor was there any evidence
     that Moslems would be more  severely  sentenced  on  account  of  their
     religion.

  9. The Tribunal reserved its decision.



                                 The Issues


 10. As we have described, the sole issue upon which  leave  to  appeal  has
     been granted is the risk to  the  Appellant  of  breach  of  his  human
     rights, arising from detention for the  charges  which  he  claims  are
     outstanding against him in respect of his  brother-in-law's  death.  We
     agree that the Adjudicator erred in not considering this matter at  all
     but all the necessary findings of fact and evidence are before us,  and
     we can cure the defect by making our  own  assessment.  The  issue  was
     originally argued in terms of Article 3. However as  the  argument  was
     developed by  Ms  Hodgson  to  include  the  possibility  of  death  in
     detention and also of  persecutory  treatment  as  a  Moslem  from  the
     police, the courts, and in judicial detention, we have included in  our
     consideration as well Articles 2 and 6 and the 1951 Convention.



                  Our Assessment of the Background Evidence


 11. The standards and indeed the objectives of policing,  detention,  trial
     and sentencing  may  vary  considerably  in  different  countries.  Our
     starting point therefore was to establish the minimum standard required
     by the 1951 and 1950 Conventions. In Fazilat [2002]  UKIAT  00973,  the
     Tribunal, whilst considering the situation in Iran,  made  observations
     about the proper tests to apply when assessing the risk of a breach  of
     Article 3 to a person facing criminal charges and detention in his  own
     country. It said
           "We do not doubt  that  [prison  conditions  in  Iran]  may  not
           measure up to what is expected in this country,  or  perhaps  in
           any country, which is a signatory to the European Convention  on
           Human Rights.  As the Court at Strasbourg has recognised, it  is
           not for signatories to the Convention to impose the standards of
           the Convention on all the world.  Recognition has to be  had  to
           the situation in individual countries and to the standards  that
           are accepted and expected in  those  countries.   Of  course  in
           relation to Article 3, there is a line below which the treatment
           cannot sink, if we may put it in that way.  That is to say  that
           is always possible that  the  sort  of  treatment  that  may  be
           routinely expected in prison in a particular  country  falls  so
           far below the standards that would be excepted  in  a  civilised
           country, that it could properly be said to amount to inhuman  or
           degrading treatment.  But, as again the court in Strasbourg  has
           indicated, the threshold has to be a high one because  otherwise
           it would be, as one recognises, quite impossible for any country
           to  return  to  a  non-signatory   an   individual   who   faces
           prosecution, rather than any sort of persecution.  ........   So
           far as the question of a fair trial is concerned, Article 6  can
           be engaged if an individual is to be removed from this  country.
           That is made clear by the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  Kajac,
           following the Court of Human Rights decision in Soering  v   UK.
           But it is only if the breach of Article  6  would  be  flagrant,
           that is to say there would clearly be a thoroughly unfair trial,
           that  Article  6  could  be  engaged.   Again  it  is  not   for
           signatories to the Convention to  impose  their  system  on  all
           world.  One has to consider whether, looking at it in the round,
           it can be said that the Respondent will be able to receive  what
           amounts to a reasonably fair trial."

 12. This is not a starred decision and of course each case turns on its own
     facts. We are presently concerned with India and not Iran.  However  we
     agree with the reasoning for  this  approach  to  the  requirements  of
     Articles 3 and 6, and consider that the same principles should apply to
     whether the  conduct  complained  of  could  cross  the  high  severity
     threshold required to constitute persecution under the 1951 Convention.
     We have applied this approach to the evidence in this appeal.

 13. India is a very large and diverse country with a  robust  parliamentary
     democracy. It has over 1 billion citizens, most of whom are  Hindu  but
     with a number of minorities of which the largest are Moslems. It has 26
     languages, 720 dialects and 23 tribal languages. It is divided into  28
     states and  6  territories.  The  responsibility  for  many  functions,
     including security, is divided between the federal government  and  the
     states. It has faced violent insurgency  and  separatist  movements  in
     various states  to  which  it  has  at  varying  times  responded  with
     violence. As a consequence many of the rather sweeping generalisations,
     which are made about policing  and  inter-community  violence  and  the
     reactions of the authorities, have relatively little value when one has
     to assess the risk for a specific individual in a particular state.  It
     is mainly in those states, which are subject to such violence that  the
     excesses of the security  forces  in  responding  to  them,  in  extra-
     judicial killings and otherwise, have been worst. Jammu and Kashmir  is
     the worst examples currently.  However  one  cannot  fairly  apply  the
     behaviour of the authorities there to Maharashtra, the Appellant's home
     state, which does not suffer from  insurgency.  Similarly  the  serious
     violence between Hindus and Moslems which erupted in Gujerat cannot  be
     taken as typical of the country as a whole. We do  not  accept,  as  Ms
     Hodgson at times implied, that we  should  apply  to  every  state  the
     standards of those beset by violent terrorism.

 14. With regard to the judiciary, the background material shows the  Indian
     Constitution provides for independence  and  the  government  generally
     respects this in practice. There are problems in Jammu and Kashmir  due
     to the high levels  of  violent  insurgency,  inter  alia  targeted  at
     judges, but we cannot find evidence that experiences there are of wider
     application  or  could  justify  a  complaint  under   Article   6   in
     Maharashtra. We invited Ms Hodgson identify specific material  evidence
     of unfairness or bias against Moslems by the judiciary in  the  conduct
     of cases or in their sentencing.  She was unable to do so  and  we  can
     find no significant evidence of such abuse  either.  She  asked  us  to
     infer such  bias  from  general  political  developments  such  as  the
     tensions between  India  and  Pakistan  but  we  can  see  no  reliable
     evidential basis for doing so.

 15. The ruling government party, BJP, is an offshoot of the RSS and many of
     its leading politicians, including the PM, are members of RSS.  However
     the constitutional guarantees for minorities, and other religions  than
     Hindu, remain in force. Inter-communal relations outside the flashpoint
     areas of violence such as Jammu and Kashmir and Gujerat are not as  bad
     as Ms Hodgson invited us to  believe.  The  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
     Religious Intolerance concluded that the situation in India relating to
     tolerance and non-discrimination remained  satisfactory.  A  report  on
     religious liberty around the world states  that  "India  is  a  secular
     state  in  which  all  faiths  generally  enjoy  freedom  of   worship;
     government policy does not favour any religious group. However tensions
     between Muslims and Hindus continue to pose a challenge to the concepts
     of secularism, tolerance and diversity on which the state was founded."



 16. We cannot infer from the evidence, as Ms Hodgson argued, that the  very
     specific and serious  violence  in  for  example  in  Gujerat,  or  the
     policies  advanced  by  the  RSS,  would  interfere  with  a   criminal
     investigation against a Moslem  in  Maharashtra,  or  lead  per  se  to
     problems in detention on account of his religion.

 17. The National Human Rights Commission, created by statute, monitors  and
     investigates human rights violations, advises the government and raises
     human rights awareness. Whilst it is inhibited from  investigating  the
     armed forces, it has the powers of a  civil  court  in  conducting  its
     investigations, including enquiries into the police and prisons. Deaths
     in custody have to be reported  to  it  within  24  hours,  though  the
     authorities in Jammu and Kashmir  have  not  complied.  The  background
     material about the issue of abuse of detainees in police  and  judicial
     custody tends to be  expressed  in  generalisations  by  a  variety  of
     organisations and media coverage of various specific serious incidents.
     There are articles by individuals in  which  the  finger  of  blame  is
     pointed at politicians and others, but  we  are  given  no  information
     about the viewpoints of the writers. There is much  material  on  Jammu
     and Kashmir and Punjab and on the recent violence in Gujerat.

 18. Having said that, the consensus of reports is that there is  widespread
     torture and rape by police and there is a problem of  custodial  abuse.
     This we accept in general terms. There are also deaths in  custody,  as
     there are in every country. But we have to make  a  realistic  estimate
     and quantification of the extent of the risk of  death  or  torture  in
     custody for the Appellant.  India has a large population  and  a  large
     prison population. Prisons are extremely overcrowded.  No-one  suggests
     that every detainee is tortured. Perspective is needed.

 19. The CIPU report shows at paragraph 4.34 that in  the  year  from  April
     1998 to March 1999, there was a nationwide prison population  of  about
     246,000. There were complaints to the National Human Rights  Commission
     of 1,297 deaths in custody of which 1,114 were in judicial custody  and
     183 in police custody. These figures are probably  reasonably  reliable
     as there is a statutory  obligation  to  report  deaths  and  rapes  in
     custody. A large proportion of the deaths in judicial custody were  due
     to natural causes, in some cases  aggravated  by  poor  conditions.  In
     respect of deaths in custody only, Maharashtra in 1999-2000 was amongst
     the worst in India, with  30  deaths  in  police  custody  and  126  in
     judicial custody. But it is also reported that most of these deaths  in
     custody result from natural causes, which  is  not  surprising  with  a
     prison population of about a quarter of a million. We cannot  therefore
     conclude from these bare  statistics  that  these  deaths  were  mainly
     caused by the abusive actions  of  the  authorities  or  of  individual
     police or security officers or were targeted at Moslems. Not can it  be
     inferred from these statistics that a detainee in any state  in  India,
     including Maharashtra, is at real risk of the near certainty of  death,
     which is the requirement for the engagement of Article 2, according  to
     the Tribunal decision in Minakovo 01/TH/1400, with  which  decision  we
     agree.

 20. We have accepted that torture is widespread in India. However  we  also
     note that 54 % of the 20,514 complaints nationwide made  in  1996/7  to
     the NHRC of police abuses, relate to Uttar  Pradesh  and  Bihar.  These
     figures must logically be treated with caution. It is likely  there  is
     underreporting of abuses, and also some  complaints  made  may  not  be
     justified. There is no detailed analysis before us  of  the  nature  of
     these complaints, or of their seriousness, or of what proportion of the
     complaints are upheld. However it would appear from the evidence before
     us that the worst excesses occur  in  the  states  such  as  Jammu  and
     Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Also, the police can  also  overreact
     when controlling large demonstrations and this accounts for a number of
     complaints. Ms Hodgson  has  urged  us  to  accept  that  human  rights
     organisations are weak and police abuse is  undertaken  with  impunity.
     Whatever may have been the position in the past, there is now  evidence
     of the prosecution of some hundreds of abusive police officers  and  of
     the growth and status of human rights  organisations  with  significant
     powers at national and state level. We note that Maharashtra is one  of
     a  number  of  states  that  has  established  its  own  human   rights
     organisation with investigative powers. We find that there is  progress
     being made and that police impunity cannot be assumed. As to  the  risk
     of ill-treatment in police custody or other custody, the most  relevant
     evidence relating to Maharashtra is that of the Appellant himself,   to
     which we shall turn shortly



                                Our Findings


 21. We conclude that we must assess the risk  to  the  Appellant  as  being
     related  to  Maharashtra  state,  where  the  charges  were  made.   Mr
     Pichamuthu invited us to conclude that it was  unlikely  the  Appellant
     would be identified on return to India with emergency travel papers  as
     being wanted in Maharashtra because the country was so large. There may
     be some force in this point, but  given  that  the  charges  relate  to
     murder we consider there must be a real risk that  his  name  is  on  a
     wanted register and if identified he will be returned to his home  area
     to face the charges. In this respect internal flight is  not  a  viable
     option, though as the Adjudicator found it may be  the  answer  to  his
     other problems.

 22. This appeal must be decided on its own facts. Actually this  makes  our
     task rather easier, because the Appellant has had repeated exposure  to
     police investigation and detention and the courts  in  his  home  area.
     This gives an additional dimension to our task in that it enables us to
     form a view of how they behave in practice rather than having  to  rely
     only on inferences based on evidential generalisations. We also note at
     this point that the evidence before us from the Appellant is  that  the
     charges against him are false and have been brought  on  the  basis  of
     complaints by his local opponents.

 23. The Appellant described himself in his written statement as a respected
     and well-known person in his area. He has long established  links  with
     local newspapers and journalists. He is  therefore  a  person  of  some
     visibility. He has been arrested on a number of occasions in  the  past
     by the police in the course of their investigations into inter-communal
     violence. In his written statement he said he was always able to obtain
     his release through the normal procedures by going to court and he  did
     not claim that he was ill-treated in custody. These incidents show that
     he has in the past in his home area not experienced  any  ill-treatment
     by the police, even though the  detentions  arose  from  inter-communal
     violence and he was involved by reason of his perceived activities  for
     the Moslem cause.  He  has  not  suffered  from  delays  in  the  court
     procedures. Indeed his willingness later to go to the police himself to
     seek redress when attacked by the RSS also indicates a lack of fear  on
     his  part  of  the  police,  and  the  expectation  that   they   would
     investigate, as they did.  The past  conduct  of  the  police  and  the
     courts in his home area towards the Appellant has not been abusive  and
     does not we find indicate any real risk that it would be in the future.



 24. Ms Hodgson argued that the murder charges increase the risk profile. We
     disagree. The evidence before us, and the Adjudicator, about the murder
     charges  is  vague,  though  it  was  accepted  as  credible   by   the
     Adjudicator. But what does it actually amount to?  He claims  that  the
     charges against him were false and brought by members of the RSS.  That
     may well be true. It is not an uncommon event for false FIRs to be made
     maliciously. But it is not for us to judge criminal issues  like  this.
     It is a matter for the relevant  courts.  The  evidence  given  by  the
     Appellant  in  his  statement  was  that  he  "understood   there   are
     outstanding police charges against me in India for murdering my brother-
     in-law and also for violence against the Hindu communities." This  does
     not necessarily imply anything more than that false  First  Information
     Reports about the murder were filed against him  by  the  RSS  and  the
     police are seeking him to investigate them. Insofar as any public order
     charges are outstanding, they have been found to lack any substance  in
     the past and there is no evidence that any new charges have any greater
     substance. In those investigations, the police will  be  aware  of  the
     past problems between the Appellant and the RSS and will take this into
     account.  If the charges are complete fabrications as claimed,  it  may
     be reasonably presumed that there will  be  little  valid  evidence  of
     significance against the Appellant. Also as he was able  to  deal  with
     his problems with the police in the past, through  the  usual  channels
     and the courts, there is no real reason to suppose that he could not do
     so again, even though the charges now relate to murder.

 25. We find there is no real risk, given his evidence that the  accusations
     are completely false, that he will  be  unable  to  rebut  them  fairly
     readily. Indeed, he may never be detained by  the  police  at  all,  if
     there is no adequate evidence against him. Even if he were detained, we
     find that there is no real chance in all the circumstances that he will
     face death in detention, or material ill-treatment  or  persecution  in
     the future, when he has not so suffered on several  separate  occasions
     in the past. Nor will his religion be a material adverse factor in what
     is a purely criminal matter.

 26. In summary we find that, arising from the outstanding  charges  against
     him, there is no real risk on return to India of  persecution  for  his
     religion contrary to the 1951 Convention, or of a breach of  his  human
     rights under Articles 2, 3 or 6  of  the  1950  Convention.  For  these
     reasons this appeal is dismissed.





                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
