
H-DMG-V2
                                                 Appeal Number :HX31973-2001
                  MZ (Rape - Stigma - UNHCR Advice) Kosovo
                            CG [2002] UKIAT 03012

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated:   |
|on :  17 May 2002                             |                             |
|Dictated : 21 May 2002                        |25 July 2002                 |


                                  Before:-


                         Mr H J E Latter - Chairman
                               Mr A A Lloyd JP
                               Mrs E Hurst JP


between
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               Milihate ZYMERI

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      For the Appellant:          Mr R Holmes, Home Office Presenting
Officer
      For the Respondent:    Miss C Record of Counsel instructed by
Chambers,                               Solicitors.

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of an Adjudicator (Mr K F Walters) who allowed the Respondent's  appeal
    on human rights grounds against the  decision  made  on  19  June  2001
    giving directions for her removal following the refusal of her claim to
    asylum.   In  this  determination  the  Tribunal  will  refer  to   the
    Respondent as the Applicant.

2.    The Applicant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  12
    January 2000 claiming asylum on arrival.  She married  on  10  February
    2000 and her daughter was born on 19 February 2001.

3.    The Applicant's claim for asylum was refused and she appealed on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds to an Adjudicator and  her  appeal  was
    heard at Hatton Cross on 31 January 2002.  Before the  Adjudicator  she
    gave evidence of what the Adjudicator describes in his determination as
    a horrific incident which he does not describe but has recorded in  his
    Record of Proceedings.  The incident was a rape by a  Serbian  soldier.
    This had not been raised before the hearing and judging from the Record
    of Proceedings it was raised at a late stage when at the  beginning  of
    submissions the Appellant interrupted and said that there was something
    else that she wanted to say.  The evidence must have  been  compelling.
    The Presenting Officer at the hearing conceded the credibility  of  the
    account and the Adjudicator made it clear that he accepted her  account
    in its entirety.

4.    The Adjudicator, for reasons which are not  challenged,  came  to  the
    view that the Applicant's claim could not  succeed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention but allowed the appeal under Article 8 on the basis that  to
    return the Applicant to Kosovo would be  in  breach  of  her  right  to
    respect for her physical and moral integrity and removal would  not  be
    proportionate to a legitimate aim.

5.    The Secretary of State applied for leave to appeal on the  basis  that
    the Adjudicator had failed properly  to  consider  the  extent  of  the
    Applicant's  claimed  medical  conditions.   The  case  of   M   [2001]
    (01/TH/03623) was properly distinguishable.   The  Applicant  would  be
    able to access appropriate treatment in Kosovo.  Leave  to  appeal  was
    granted  by  the  Tribunal  (Mr  M  W  Rapinet,  Vice-President)  in  a
    determination notified on 28 March 2002 on the basis that  the  grounds
    raised arguable issues in particular as to whether this case  could  be
    distinguished from that of M.

6.    Mr Holmes submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  given  adequate
    reasons  why  there  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8.   There  was
    insufficient medical evidence to justify his findings.  He referred  to
    the  Kosovo  Information  Project  Report  showing  that   there   were
    facilities available for those with mental or psychiatric problems.   A
    pilot project was being carried  out  in  the  Applicant's  home  area.
    There were facilities to provide treatment for anxiety and  depression.
    It was wrong to say that there was a breach of the Applicant's physical
    and moral integrity.  Insofar  as  her  fear  related  to  her  husband
    finding out about what had happened, if she  sought  treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom he was likely to discover the position.   There  was  no
    reason why if the  Applicant  returns  to  Kosovo  she  would  disclose
    anything to him there.

7.    Miss Record submitted that the Applicant had  been  the  victim  of  a
    violent and traumatic rape.  There was  a  real  risk  because  of  the
    cultural norms in Kosovo that if her husband found  out  about  it,  he
    would leave her.  She referred to a report from the BBC Homepage  dated
    17 April 2000 dealing with social taboos and the fact  that  women  who
    have been  identified  as  rape  victims  in  the  community  can  find
    themselves abandoned by family and friends.  The Adjudicator  had  been
    right to look at all the factors.  He had come to  a  conclusion  which
    was properly open to him.

8.    The Adjudicator accepted that to remove  the  Applicant  would  be  an
    interference with her private life.  He  adopted  the  definition  from
    Blake and Fransman's Immigration,  Nationality  and  Asylum  under  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 that private life includes a  right  to  personal
    development and to establish relationships....[and] includes a right to
    respect for one's physical and moral integrity.  The physical and moral
    integrity limb is a protection against a lesser level of harm  than  is
    required under Article 3 and  so  is  easier  to  establish.   However,
    interference with it may be justifiable under Article 8(2).  In M,  the
    Tribunal cited the following  passage  from  the  judgment  in  Bensaid
    (2002) INLR 325.  "Mental health must also be  regarded  as  a  crucial
    part of private life associated with the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.
    Article 8 protects a right to identity and personal development and the
    right to establish and develop relationships with other human beings in
    the outside world.  Preservation of mental stability is in that context
    an indispensable precondition to effective enjoyment of  the  right  to
    respect for private life."

9.    In the view of the Tribunal the Adjudicator was entitled  to  come  to
    the view that there would be an interference with the Applicant's right
    to physical and moral integrity.  He took into account  the  fact  that
    she was a young woman with one young child born in the  United  Kingdom
    and that she was pregnant.  He also had before him  a  letter  from  Dr
    Kumar dated 29 January 2002 that the Applicant was seeing a  counsellor
    for anxiety and depression which may be a result of trauma  experienced
    in Kosovo.  The situation confronting the Adjudicator was an  Applicant
    whose evidence he believed disclosing for effectively  the  first  time
    the rape.  He was entitled to come to the view that this was behind the
    anxiety and depression and to accept the doctor's  comments  that  they
    may be the result of a trauma experienced in Kosovo.  For the Appellant
    to be returned at that stage to the place  where  the  rape  had  taken
    place was clearly a factor to be  taken  into  account.   The  evidence
    before the Tribunal confirms that there is a risk that rape victims are
    effectively abandoned by their husbands and ostracised by  their  local
    community.  This is an emotional and  harsh  response  generating  more
    pain and suffering for the victim but there is no doubt that there is a
    risk of such a reaction.

10.   It is conceded that removal would have been  in  accordance  with  the
    law and would pursue a legitimate aim.  The issue  is  whether  removal
    would be proportionate to that legitimate  aim.   The  Adjudicator  was
    satisfied that removal would not be proportionate.  He cited  from  the
    UNHCR Position Paper 2001 where states are urged to continue to provide
    international protection for Kosovans who  have  suffered  particularly
    serious  and  traumatising   experiences.    The   paper   specifically
    identifies victims of sexual violence and comments  that  survivors  of
    this crime will remain traumatised, including those who because of  the
    sexual violence will be stigmatised and ostracised by the community  to
    which they would be expected to return.

11.   Mr Holmes submitted that there were facilities in  Kosovo  where  rape
    victims could receive help.  He referred to the Tribunal  determination
    in Qomile Gashi [2002] UKIAT 01053 where the Tribunal held on the facts
    of that  particular  case  that  removal  would  be  proportionate  and
    referred to the availability of a  centre  for  the  rehabilitation  of
    torture victims and for the protection of  women  and  children.   Both
    these centres are in Pristina and one has a self-help  group  for  rape
    survivors.  In that case the  Tribunal  commented  that  there  was  no
    evidence to support any contention that the Applicant would in fact  be
    ostracised by her husband or family.

12.   In general terms the Tribunal are satisfied that  adequate  facilities
    are available in Kosovo and  we  accept  that  the  Kosovo  Information
    Project  Report  accurately  describes  the  mental  health  programmes
    available in Kosovo.  To this extent Mr Holmes' submissions are correct
    but  it  is  the  Applicant's  personal  circumstances  which  must  be
    considered in the light of all the evidence.  She is a relatively young
    woman. She married in February 2000 and  had  a  daughter  in  February
    2001.  Another child is on the  way.   She  is  married  to  a  Kosovan
    Albanian and the Tribunal accepts that she is genuinely  fearful  that,
    if her husband becomes aware of what happened to her in Kosovo, he will
    leave her.  She clearly fears being abandoned and possibly her children
    taken away from her were this to come to light  after  she  returns  to
    Kosovo.  It could be argued that her husband might react  in  this  way
    even if he discovers the facts while  the  family  are  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  If the Applicant continues to seek counselling and  help,  it
    may be that at some stage this does come to light  but  nonetheless  it
    does seem to  the  Tribunal  that  it  is  far  less  likely  that  the
    Applicant's husband will ostracise her if he is living  in  the  United
    Kingdom as opposed to being in  Kosovo,  within  a  society  where  the
    cultural norms may be very different.

13.   Be that as it may, although the facts in B were arguably  stronger  as
    there were extensive medical and psychological reports, in our view  it
    is clear that the Adjudicator took the view that there was a real  risk
    of this Applicant being deeply traumatised and being in need of further
    counselling  or  treatment.   This  factor  must  be  taken  with   the
    Adjudicator's concerns about the stigma attaching to rape victims.   He
    referred to paragraph 19 dealing with this issue in M, and the possible
    effect on this young family of a return to Kosovo.   The  Tribunal  are
    satisfied that his finding that removal would not be proportionate to a
    legitimate aim was properly open to him.  The assessment of this  issue
    is essentially one of fact,  which  the  Adjudicator  is  in  the  best
    position to assess as he has had the advantage of hearing oral evidence
    and evaluating it in the light of all the  evidence  before  him.   The
    Tribunal is not satisfied that there is any proper basis for disturbing
    his findings in this respect.

14.   In these circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.







                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




