
      Appeal no. HX31197-2001
TM (Persecution-Christians- Individual-General) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 04849



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 15 July 2002
Determination promulgated:
15 October 2002

                                   Before:

                           Ms S M Ward (Chairman)
                                Mrs W Jordan



                                Teresa Muraa

                                  Appellant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                 Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sudan, was given  leave  in  a  determination
notified on  18  December  2001,  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  an
Adjudicator, Mr E F Cousins, promulgated on  14  November  2001,  dismissing
her appeal against the decision of the Respondent refusing asylum and  human
entitlements..

2.   At  the  hearing  before  us  the  Appellant  was  represented  by   Mr
Srinivasan, solicitor,  and the Respondent was represented  by  Mr   Sheikh,
Home Office Presenting Officer.

3. The Appellant's claim  is that she is a Roman  Catholic  and  subject  to
persecution in the Sudan.  Her  house  was  bombed  and  she  was  raped  by
soldiers. Her sister was also raped and killed.

4. On  12 July 2002 Mr Srinivasan sent a faxed request  for  an  adjournment
to the Tribunal. In his request he stated that an adjournment was  requested
because the Appellant had been in hospital for the last two months  "or  so"
and was only discharged on 10 July 2002. Mr Srinivasan renewed  his  request
orally to us on 15 July 2002. When asked why he  needed  an  adjournment  Mr
Srinivasan replied that he needed the adjournment in order to get a  medical
report as  the  Appellant  had  been  a  victim  of  rape.  We  informed  Mr
Srinivasan that this did not  appear to be  in  dispute  and  Mr  Srinivasan
confirmed that it was not.  Mr Srinivasan then informed us that he needed  a
medical report on the psychiatric condition of the Appellant  in  case  this
appeal were unsuccessful and the Respondent decided to give  effect  to  the
removal directions. We then inquired why this report  had  not  been  sought
earlier and we were told that the case had been handled by  a  colleague  of
Mr Srinivasan, the latter only having become involved  with  the  matter  of
Friday 12 July when he determined  that a medical report was  necessary,  he
said. Mr Sheikh for his part submitted that it was  not  clear  to  him  why
such a report was needed and why it had not been obtained previously.

5.  We  considered  Mr  Srinivasan's  request.  No   adequate   reason   for
adjourning the hearing had been provided. It appeared  that  he  wanted   to
obtain a  psychiatric  report  on  the  Appellant   for  submission  to  the
Respondent, and not for the purposes of  this  hearing.  In  any  event,  we
noted that his firm had acted for the Appellant at the  hearing  before  the
Adjudicator, and Mr Srinivasan confirmed  to  us  that  his  firm  had  been
acting for the Appellant since 25 September 2001. We were of the  view  that
the Appellant's representatives had had more than  enough  time  to  acquire
such a report for use at the hearing, if indeed such a  report  were  to  be
relevant to any matter under consideration by us. It was by no  means  clear
from Mr Srinivasan's submissions that it would assist the Appellant in  this
appeal. We therefore declined  to  grant  an  adjournment  and  informed  Mr
Srinivasan that we would hear this appeal as the last matter  in  the  list,
thus affording him further time to prepare, should he require it.

6. When we  later  began  the  hearing  of   this  appeal,  we  directed  Mr
Srinivasan's  attention to the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the  Appellant
had been an very  unfortunate  victim  of  war,  rather  than  a  victim  of
persecution for a Convention reason and we asked if he wished  to  challenge
this conclusion.  Mr  Srinivasan  said  that  he  did.  He  said   that  the
Appellant had been raped and her sister killed and she could  expect  to  be
the subject of  further  persecution  on  her  return  to  Sudan.   She  had
suffered in this way because she was a Roman  Catholic.  We  then  asked  Mr
Srinivasan to address us with regard to the  Appellant's  human  rights.  He
replied that he  relied  upon  Articles  3,5,  6,  8  and  10  of  the  1951
Convention, although he later decided to withdraw Article 10. We then  asked
him to address  us  with  respect  to  each  Article  with  his  submissions
regarding how the   Appellant's  human  rights  might  be  breached  by  her
removal to Sudan. Mr Srinivasan's submission with regard to  Article  3  was
that the Appellant  would suffer from psychological problems on  her  return
. She had been raped and that she would  face  the  same  treatment  on  her
return. As regards Article 5, Mr  Srinivasan  submitted  that,  because  the
country is predominantly Muslim,  the  Appellant  would  suffer  persecution
because of her religion. With respect to Article 6, he  submitted  that  the
Appellant would not get a fair trial if she reported the matter of her  rape
to the police. As for Article 8,  it was his submission that  the  Appellant
would be violated again if she  returned  to  her  country  and  this  would
constitute a breach of Article 8. Mr Srinivasan had not filed  (nor  did  he
seek to tender at the hearing)  any  background  material,  nor  indeed  any
evidence at all in support of his submissions.

7. Mr Sheikh submitted that the Adjudicator had approached  this  appeal  in
the correct manner. In paragraph 31 of  the  Determination  the  Adjudicator
had concluded that the Appellant had been caught up in  the  on-going  civil
war in Sudan and was a victim of war,  not  a  victim  of  persecution.  The
Adjudicator had not been satisfied that  there  was  any  link  between  the
bombing of the home of the Appellant (and  the  subsequent  rape)  with  any
Convention reason. Mr Sheikh pointed to page B2  of the appeal papers  where
the Appellant had described her claim to asylum. She  had  stated  that  her
home had been bombed by government forces. It was against the weight of  the
evidence to suggest that her home had been targeted for bombing because  she
was a Roman Catholic. The Appellant lived in East Equatoria  and  there  was
no evidence to show that the government had  targeted  Roman  Catholics  for
bombing at the relevant time.  Mr Sheikh also submitted that  the  Appellant
had not shown that there was a risk for her on  her  return.  There  was  no
real risk that the same  would  happen  again.  He  took   the  Tribunal  to
various references within the  Sudan Country Assessment ( CIPU  Report)   to
show that Christians make up 4 to 10% of the population of  the  Sudan  with
the Christians mainly found in the south and Nuba  Mountains,  although  the
civil war had displaced many Christians to the  north.  The  Christians  are
subject to discrimination and  harassment  but  there  is  no  evidence,  he
submitted, that as a group they are persecuted in Sudan. They  have  freedom
to worship and the religion is not banned.   Mr Sheikh  submitted  that  the
evidence did not show  that  discrimination  against  this  Appellant  as  a
Christian would amount to persecution in line with  the  Horvath  test.  The
Appellant had no criminal record and was not wanted for anything  in  Sudan.
She had been unfortunately caught up in a war situation but was not  herself
specifically targeted. She would not be  returned  to  the  warzone  but  to
Khartoum. There was no evidence of any  psychiatric  condition  although  it
had been suggested by Mr Srininvasan that she suffered with one.

8. In reply Mr Srinivasan highlighted some of the matters  set  out  in  the
CIPU Report and submitted that there is  discrimination  against  Christians
in Sudan and the Roman Catholic church had  not  been  given  permission  to
build churches. He pointed to paragraph 5.46 of  that  report  where  it  is
stated that persons in Sudan have been  the  subject  of  threats  from  the
security forces on  the  basis  of  religious  beliefs  and  that  they  are
routinely stopped and interrogated.

9. It is our conclusion that the Appellant has not demonstrated to  us  that
the Adjudicator fell into error in  his  conclusions  with  regard  to  what
happened to the  Appellant  in  Sudan.  It  has  not  been  shown  that  the
Appellant was the victim of this  appalling  treatment  on  account  of  her
religion, namely Roman Catholicism, or for any other Convention reason.  The
Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant had been a victim of the civil  war
in Sudan.  We agree.

10. We note from paragraph 5.3 of  the  CIPU  report  that  bombardments  of
civilian targets intensified in  certain  parts  of  the  country  in  2000,
including  East  Equatoria,  where  this  Appellant  lived.   Indiscriminate
bombings of civilians in the south of the country have continued,  according
to that evidence. But these activities are,  most  unfortunately  for  those
involved, part of the on-going civil war which has plagued this country  for
many years.

11. We also conclude that the evidence does  show  a  real  risk  that  this
Appellant would be persecuted for her religious beliefs  on  her  return  to
Sudan.  The evidence, such as  it is,  shows  that  Christians  account  for
between 4 and 10 per  cent of the population. Christianity in  modern  Sudan
is largely the result of the activities of  Christian  missionaries  in  the
19th century. Although the Christians have  been  traditionally  located  in
the south and in the Nuba mountains,    many  have  been  displaced  to  the
north  by  the  on-going  civil  war.   The  evidence  shows  that   foreign
missionaries are often harassed by the government and there are  reports  of
the security forces regularly  harassing  and  at  time  using  threats  and
violence against persons based on their religious  beliefs  and  activities.
Some  Catholic  priests  report  that  they  are   routinely   stopped   and
interrogated by the police.  However,  the  evidence  also  shows  that  the
practice  of  Christianity  is  not  banned  or  prohibited  in  Sudan   and
Christians are  allowed to practice their religion with some restrictions  -
 non-Muslims may not proselytize and permissions are required  for  building
churches.  The evidence does not show that Christians are  targeted  per  se
as a group for treatment amount to persecution, although we accept  that  at
times harassment and discrimination against individual  Christians  in  that
country may amount to persecution.

12.This Appellant may encounter incidents of discrimination  and  harassment
on account of her religion. But the evidence does not show that there  is  a
real risk that  she  will  suffer  treatment  amounting  to  persecution  on
account on her religion. We note that this lady  engaged  in   preaching  at
her church  but  the  evidence  does  not  how  that  this  is  forbidden  -
proselytizing is forbidden but  not  ordinary  preaching  within  one's  own
church.

13. With regard to the submissions of  Mr  Srinivasan  regarding  the  Human
Rights Convention, we feel obliged that comment they did little  to  further
his client's case. They lacked content  and  substance.    Nevertheless,  we
have considered the evidence in the light of the articles of the  Convention
to which he referred.

14. We note, with regard to Article 3, that the Appellant would be  returned
to Khartoum and there is no evidence before us to suggest that   bombing  of
civilian targets and fighting between rebel and government forces is  taking
place in that area, such as to place the Appellant at risk of  being  caught
up again in the appalling consequences of the  civil  war.  With  regard  to
Article 5,   we   found  ourselves  unable  to  understand  Mr  Srinivasan's
submission which was that there would be a breach of  this  Article  because
Sudan is pre-dominantly Muslim and this lady would not be protected  by  the
police if she were to be returned.  There is no  evidence  to  suggest  that
this lady will be subject to arrest or detention for  any  reason.  She  has
committed no crime nor is she sought by the security forces  in  Sudan.  The
evidence does not show that ordinary Christians are at  risk  of  detention,
although we note that priests may be.  The  same  must  also  be  said  with
regard to Article 6. Mr Srinivasan submitted that the  Appellant  would  not
get a fair trial if she went to the police in Sudan. However,  there  is  no
evidence that this lady is wanted for any offence or is at  risk  of  arrest
on her return.

15. Finally we turn to Article 8. Mr Srinivasan's submission was  that  this
Appellant had been raped,  and her sister had been  raped  and  killed,  and
that this was bound to re-occur if the Appellant were  to  be  returned.  We
point out that it is the decision to  return  the  Appellant  which  is  the
matter in issue.  The  question  for  us  is  whether  the  removal  of  the
Appellant will breach  Article 8. There is no evidence  before  us  to  show
what private and family life the Appellant enjoys  in  the  United  Kingdom,
nor has Mr Srinivasan sought to address us  on  this.  With  regard  to  the
situation in Sudan, there is a similar  dearth  of  evidence.  Clearly  this
Appellant has suffered in an appalling way from the civil war in Sudan.  She
has lost her sons and her sister and was the victim of rape.  She  has  lost
her home. But these events  ,  sad  and  distressing  though  they  may  be,
occurred in the past. It is our duty,  in  this  context,  to  consider  the
present and in particular, whether  the  removal  of  this  Appellant  would
result in a breach of this Appellant's right  to  respect  for  private  and
family life.   There is some limited evidence before us that  the  Appellant
suffers  from  certain  medical   problems,   including    "pyelenephritis",
migraine and hypertension. The Appellant herself stated in  her  application
for asylum that she suffered from bladder problems  too.  She  was  released
from hospital on 10  July  2002.  The  Discharge  Advice  Letter  which  was
tendered in evidence shows that the Appellant has  been  prescribed  certain
medication,  although  no   follow-up  services  are  indicated.  Compelling
health issues may, in certain circumstances, amount  to  real  obstacles  to
family life elsewhere However, there is no evidence before us to  show  that
this is the case here. We are unable to conclude that  the  removal  of  the
Appellant would result in a breach of her right to respect for  private  and
family life.

16. This appeal is dismissed

      Ms S Ward
