

                     MH (Risk-Return-Falun Gong) China CG [2002] UKIAT 04134

                                                                CC07467-2002



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                    Date heard: 25 July 2002
                                                    Date notified:03/09/2002
                                   Before:-

                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                                MRS J HARRIS
                             MS S S RAMSUMAIR JP





                                                               Between

                                                        MR MING HE

                                                       Appellant

                                                                  and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of  China,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr  A  W  Rose,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision by the respondent to refuse to  grant  leave
to enter on asylum grounds. Mrs H Gore of Counsel  instructed  by  Corbin  &
Hassan Solicitors represented the appellant. Ms M Banwait appeared  for  the
respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The adjudicator accepted that the applicant's  parents  were  Falun  Gong
(hereafter FG) practitioners. He accepted that after the banning  of  FG  in
July 1999, the appellant and his parents may in the course of a round-up  of
actual or suspected FG activists have been detained, his parents  as  actual
followers and the appellant as  a  suspected  follower  of  FG.  He  further
accepted that during this detention the appellant may  have  been  subjected
to ill treatment and some form of re-education, including having to  sign  a
written  recantation  abjuring  any  connection  with  or  practice  of  FG.
Because, however, he considered the applicant's account otherwise  contained
inconsistencies, vagueness  and  implausibilities,  he  concluded  that  the
appellant had not shown that this detention was for as long  as  claimed  or
that the  ill-treatment  went  beyond  being  struck  on  occasion  with  an
electric baton. He did not accept that the  appellant  had  ever  gone  into
hiding or that the police had been to his home  since  his  release.  Noting
that on his own account the appellant had not  left  China  until  nearly  5
months after his release from detention, he  concluded  that  the  appellant
had not shown a well-founded fear of persecution when he left China in  June
2000 nor that he had such a well-founded fear now.

4. The principal contention raised in the grounds of  appeal  was  that  the
adjudicator should have allowed the appeal since it  was  reasonably  likely
that upon being accosted as a  returnee  and  by  reference  to  the  signed
document, the authorities` suspicion about the appellant's connections  with
FG may be rekindled and any punishment he received for leaving  the  country
could be disproportionately severe.

5.  The  grounds  also  challenged  the  adjudicator's  adverse  credibility
findings. We must say straightaway that we were not at  all  persuaded  that
the adjudicator's adverse credibility findings  were  unsound.  Plainly  the
appellant had not give a consistent account  about  not  knowing  where  his
parents were after they were released,  or  about  police  visits  or  about
going into hiding. In our view the adjudicator  was  perfectly  entitled  to
reject as unsatisfactory the appellant's attempts at  explanation  of  these
inconsistencies on the grounds of nervousness

6. In amplifying the grounds Mrs Gore emphasised two points  in  particular.
One was that the adjudicator had accepted that the authorities had  targeted
the appellant and that  they  -   despite  the  appellant  not  being  a  FG
practitioner  - had perceived him as a FG member or  potential  member.   He
had  experienced  past  persecution  and  it  was  reasonably   likely   the
authorities upon return would view him  adversely.  In  both  respects,  she
said, the appellant's situation was different from that  considered  by  the
Tribunal in the cases of Ying He (an appellant who had  never  been  caught)
and Xu Fong Hu (whose claimed arrest was not believed). The other point  was
that the objective  country  materials  continued  to  demonstrate  that  FG
members faced a real risk of persecution in the form of  arrest,  detention,
ill treatment and compulsory re-education. Those risks had,  she  submitted,
to be considered cumulatively bearing in mind that the adjudicator had  also
accepted that the appellant would face a fine or short term of  imprisonment
for having left the country illegally. Mrs Banwait with  detailed  reference
to  the  objective  country  materials   argued   that   the   adjudicator's
conclusions were sustainable.

7. We must deal at the outset  with  one  other  contention  raised  in  the
grounds. It was argued that since the authorities in China  had  forced  the
appellant to sign a document preventing him from joining FG,  the  appellant
upon return would not have the freedom to decide whether or not to join  FG.
However,  on  the  appellant's  own  emphatic  evidence,  he   was   not   a
practitioner of FG and he has expressed no desire to become a FG  member  or
follower. Given therefore that he himself did not  manifest  any  desire  to
exercise any right to freedom  of  thought  or  conscience  or  religion  or
assembly or association in  connection  with  FG,  it  cannot  be  seriously
argued that upon return any of his civil and political rights of  this  kind
would be interfered with. Mrs Gore urged us to take a broader  view  of  the
appellant's beliefs, taking into account that he was still a young  man  who
may well change his mind and decide later on to become a FG  follower.  With
respect, she was at this point putting words into the appellant's mouth.  He
did not say that he was contemplating becoming  a  FG  follower  and,  given
that even whilst in the UK he has not shown any interest in FG,  we  see  no
valid reason to decide the case  on  the  basis  of  nothing  more  than  an
academic possibility.

8. We agree with Mrs Gore that the facts of the Tribunal cases  of  Xu  Fong
Hu [2002] UKIAT 01478 and Ying He (01TH02648) are very  different.  However,
we see no reason to differ from the conclusions drawn by the Tribunal in  Xu
Fong Hu  (after very careful analysis of the evidence relating to the  issue
of punishment for illegal departure) that "imprisonment is rare  and  if  it
happens it is for a very short period and that the normal  penalty  is  more
likely to be a fine". We also see no reason to differ  from  the  conclusion
reached by the Tribunal in Ying He, by reference to the CIPU  Assessment  at
paragraph 5.116  that  the  Chinese  authorities  have  made  a  distinction
between ordinary followers of FG and its leading figures.

9. The key question in this case is how  would  the  authorities  view  this
appellant upon return? First of all we accept that the  appellant  would  be
viewed as someone who had made an illegal departure and who therefore  stood
to be punished by  short-term  imprisonment  and/or  a  fine.  We  are  also
prepared to accept that  the  Chinese  authorities  would  identify  him  as
someone who had been previously  arrested  and  detained  for  suspected  FG
membership in 1999 and as someone who  had  signed  an  undertaking  not  to
practise FG. We are also prepared to accept that the same authorities  would
know that the appellant's parents were FG members or practitioners  who  had
also been arrested and detained in July 1999. However, on  the  evidence  in
this case they would have no reason to consider his  parents  had  continued
to be anything other than ordinary members of FG and no reason  to  consider
that he had done anything to breach the undertaking he gave in 1999  not  to
involve himself in FG.

10. We need to elaborate these reasons somewhat. It is true the  authorities
would in all likelihood view him as someone they had had previous  cause  to
arrest and detain as a  suspected  FG  practitioner  and  to  subject  to  a
recantation requirement. He would not therefore be in the same  position  as
an ordinary FG practitioner  who  had  no  previous  history  of  arrest  or
detention or harassment by the authorities.  We  accept  that.  However,  we
cannot see that that in itself would lead them to further harass him.  After
all, they had released him after a short period in July 1999 and  there  was
no good reason to conclude that  they  would  assume  that  he  had  in  the
intervening period breached his undertaking. It  seems  to  us  that  whilst
they might well maintain a record  on  him  noting  his  return  (and  might
possibly impose some renewed condition on him requiring him not  to  involve
himself in FG), they would have no reason to take matters  any  further.  We
bear in mind at this point that it was not accepted by the adjudicator  that
they had come looking  for  him  or  his  parents  after  their  arrest  and
detention in  July  1999.  We  reiterate  that  there  was  no  satisfactory
evidence that the appellant's parents had, since that arrest and  detention,
done anything further to concern the Chinese  authorities.  Nor,  given  the
appellant's own indifference to the FG philosophy,  do  we  think  that  any
condition imposed or re-imposed on him not to practise  FG  would  have  any
real effect on his daily life and his freedom to live his life and go  about
his business like any other Chinese citizen.

11. Ultimately, therefore, it seems to us  that,  notwithstanding  the  fact
that there was past persecution of him and his parents, the appellant  would
not face a real risk of persecution upon return. We bear  in  mind  at  this
point that although he and his parents had been arrested  and  detained  and
ill treated in July 1999 this was on the  appellant's  own  account  in  the
context of a mass round-up of FG practitioners in his  home  area.  Even  if
this could be described as targeting, it can clearly be  distinguished  from
the specific persecutory  treatment  accorded  to  leading  FG  members,  as
evidenced by the objective country materials. Thus  at  paragraph  5.142-143
of the CIPU Assessment October 2001  it  was  noted  that  there  have  been
arrests on criminal charges of 111 key  FG  activists  and  that  up  to  70
organisers have been imprisoned and have or are likely to  face  prosecution
on criminal charges. Whilst we entirely accept  that  it  is  equally  clear
from this  Assessment  and  from  other  materials  placed  before  us  that
ordinary FG practitioners have also on a  significant  number  of  occasions
been subjected to human rights abuses  of  various  kinds,  it  is  only  in
respect of FG activists that the scale and level of interference with  their
human rights has been sufficient to warrant a conclusion  that  upon  return
they would face a real risk, as opposed to a possible risk,  of  persecution
or serious harm.

12. Mrs Gore is right  to  say  that  the  risk  of  serious  harm  to  this
appellant has to be considered cumulatively, so that  the  real  possibility
of imprisonment and a fine is also weighed in  the  balance.  We  have  done
this. However, it does not alter our conclusion  that  the  adjudicator  was
correct to conclude the appellant  did  not  face  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution nor did he face a real risk of treatment contrary to  his  human
rights, whether considered under Article 3 or  any  other  articles  of  the
ECHR.


13. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




