
H-TH07-AB-V2
                                                 Appeal Number: HX52080-2000
      TD-K JK (Relocation of ex-President Bedie) Ivory Coast CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       03140


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on:  14 May 2002                              |                             |
|Dictated: 14 May 2002                         |........29.7.2002............|
|                                              |.......................      |


                                   Before:


                          Mr A R Mackey - Chairman
                                Mr R Hamilton


between
                          Tanya DIOMANDE-KANANGILA
                       Master Jonathan KANANGILA (son)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman of Counsel representing Christian
    Fisher Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    The Appellant and her  son,  are  citizens  of  the  Ivory  Coast  who
    appeal, with leave,  to  this  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  an
    Adjudicator, Mr W F Miles, who had  dismissed  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 14 February 2000 when leave to enter
    and an  asylum  claim  were  refused.   Leave  to  appeal  was  granted
    subsequent to a Judicial Review claim heard before Mr Jack Beaston  QC,
    Deputy High Court Judge on 19 December 2001.  The Judicial  Review  was
    allowed primarily on the basis that the Adjudicator had  relied  on  an
    Amnesty International Report completed only three days after  the  fall
    of the  regime  of  General  Guei  and  that  such  a  short  time  was
    insufficient to establish a change in country conditions to the  extent
    that the Appellant would no longer be at risk.


The Adjudicator's Determination

2.    This was  an  appeal  made  under  Section  8(4)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Appeal Act 1993 in respect of the Appellant who was born in
    February 1970 and her son,  born  in  July  1998.   The  Appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 January 2000 using a false  Ghanaian
    passport.  Her claim had been made on the basis that following marriage
    to her second husband in December 1997 she had  moved  from  the  Ivory
    Coast to Zaire to live with him.  Her husband was  a  Zairian  national
    and a member of the political group UDPS.  She also joined this  party.
    She claimed that she had been arrested and detained  on  two  occasions
    because of her political opinions and those of  her  husband.   At  the
    time of the second arrest in November 1999, when she was detained in  a
    hospital with her son, with assistance from her brother-in-law, she was
    able to bribe the guards and escape to Brazzaville and then  move  back
    to the Ivory Coast.  She claimed to be related to the wife of the  then
    president of the Ivory Coast  Henri  Bedie.   In  anticipation  of  the
    overthrow of President Bedie  the  Appellant  left  Ivory  Coast  on  1
    December 1999 and travelled to Ghana.   There she obtained  a  Ghanaian
    passport and ultimately was able to travel to the United Kingdom  on  2
    January 2000 with her  son.   Her  claim  was  based  on  her  fear  of
    persecution in Zaire and also her relationship with  the  wife  of  the
    former President Bedie.

3.    The Adjudicator heard  oral  evidence  and  cross-examination  of  the
    Appellant and found that the only possible risks to the Appellant  were
    in the event of her being returned to the Ivory Coast and that  as  she
    was not from Zaire there was no risk of her being returned there.   The
    Appellant's credibility was generally accepted  and  it  followed  from
    that that she was related to the wife  of  the  ex-President  Bedie  of
    Ivory Coast.  However he went on to find that the period of her absence
    from Ivory Coast made it less likely for her  to  be  recognised  as  a
    member of the ex-President's family and that her relationship  was  not
    an immediate or close one.   She was in  fact  the  niece  of  the  ex-
    President's wife.  This, the Adjudicator considered, decreased the risk
    of her being identified on return.

4.    In considering the  objective  evidence  the  Adjudicator  noted  that
    following the overthrow, on 24 December 1999, of the  former  President
    Bedie family members had been harassed and  tortured  in  a  period  of
    disorder that followed.   The  number  of  people  unlawfully  detained
    following  the  coup  was  sufficient  to  cause  concern  to   Amnesty
    International who sent a letter to President Guei on 21  January  2000.
    That letter specifically referred to persons  closely  associated  with
    the former President Bedie.

5.    The Adjudicator found however that the government of General Guei  had
    itself fallen when he had been deposed by President Laurent Gbagbo  who
    was invested as president on 26 October 2000.  He then went on to  rely
    on the Amnesty International Report of 29  October  2000  which  stated
    that the election of President  Gbagbo  had  resulted  in  some  street
    fighting including security forces but this was  followed  by  a  joint
    appearance on television by officials from both  parties  who  appealed
    for calm  and  announced  a  meeting  between  the  new  president  and
    opposition leader.  He  then  concluded  that  the  threats  to  family
    members of ex-President Bedie had been significantly  reduced,  if  not
    extinguished, by the removal of General Guei  and  thus  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk of persecution on return.

The Appellant's Submissions

6.    Firstly it was submitted that relying  on  the  Amnesty  International
    findings, which were published  only  three  days  after  the  fall  of
    General Guei, were flawed as insufficient time had elapsed to  indicate
    that changed conditions would be maintained.  Ms Chapman submitted that
    the issue that now should be addressed is the risk  of  persecution  on
    return at this time.  It was submitted that  even  after  the  fall  of
    General Guei family members of the ex-president could be seen as  being
    at risk.  The finding of the Adjudicator that the Appellant was  not  a
    member of  the  "close  family"  of  ex-President  Bedie  was  seen  as
    irrational given the manner in which extended families are  treated  in
    Ivory Coast.  She submitted that the Appellant would clearly be seen as
    part of the close family of the ex-president, even  though  she  was  a
    niece of the ex-president's wife.

7.    Turning to the current risk she submitted that regrettably  there  was
    no clear focus in country information on the family or entourage of ex-
    President Bedie, however the Human Rights Watch Report for 2001 and the
    United States, Department of State  Report  for  2001  (February  2002)
    should be referred to.  These indicated that some human  rights  abuses
    still continued and that there had been reports of  opposition  parties
    (RDR) supporters breaking into the homes of supporters of the party the
    Appellant  formerly  supported.  In  addition  to  this  there  was  an
    indication of impunity in the activities of  the  gendarmes  under  the
    control of the new President Gbagbo.  It was reported, after an inquiry
    had been made into the death of 57 people, that the gendarmes  involved
    had been acquitted and the new president had not acted.

8.    It was noted however that the PDCI (the Party the Appellant  had  been
    a supporter of) had recently won seats in the national assembly and was
    able to operate.  This, she  submitted,  must  be  balanced  against  a
    United  Nations  Report  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  which
    indicated that the situation in the Ivory Coast was still  fragile  and
    it was still a destabilised country.

9.    In summary she submitted that this  Appellant  was  not  just  a  PDCI
    supporter but she was also the niece of the former President Bedie  and
    thus part of his extended family.  Therefore she had a  fear  both  for
    political and membership of the family group reasons that she would  be
    persecuted on return and given the instability that risk should be seen
    to continue.

The Respondent's Submissions

10.   Mr Blundell  referred  us  to  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  in
    relation to family membership and also that this Appellant had not been
    previously maltreated.  In this regard he submitted  the  Adjudicator's
    findings  were  sustainable  and  that  the  Appellant  would  not   be
    identified as a distant relative of the ex-president.  He also referred
    us to paragraph 15 of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  S  and
    others v Secretary of State for the Home Department.  He submitted that
    the findings of the Court of Appeal had now  made  it  clear  that  the
    burden of proof in such situations where Applicants may have had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in the past (i.e. putative refugees)  still
    remained with the Appellant and that the decision in Arif  [1999]  INLR
    327 was not applicable and the burden did not shift to the Respondent.

11.   He then referred us to the US Department  of  State  Report  for  2001
    which stated at  page  2  that  the  President  Gbagbo  government  had
    organised a well attended ten week forum  of  national  reconciliation.
    This paragraph went on to state:-

             "Former President Bedie, former President Ouattara, and former
             Junta leader Guei who had left Abidjan in  self-imposed  exile
             in 2000 all returned to the  country  to  participate  in  the
             forum.  On December 18,  President  Gbagbo  closed  the  forum
             promising  to  continue  the  reconciliation  process  through
             ongoing negotiations with the other three recognised political
             leaders.  He called for a review of the inquiry of  the  human
             rights violations of October 2000."


    He submitted that there was  no  evidence  at  the  present  time  that
    members of the PDCI or family members of the ex-president Bedie were at
    risk.  The establishment of the "reconciliation forum"  contributed  in
    a significant way to establishing the Appellant's safety on return,  in
    his submission.   The  US  Department  of  State  Report  was,  in  his
    submission,  the  most  up-to-date  country  information   and   should
    therefore be relied on.

12.   In addition he submitted that references in  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report to attacks by the RDR had to be noted in context that these were
    attacks by another opposition party not by the government and  in  fact
    they had taken place in an RDR stronghold.  In addition  there  was  no
    suggestion that this Appellant on return would go to  an  area  of  the
    Ivory Coast where the RDR held a stronghold.

13.   In reply Ms Chapman submitted that closeness of  the  relationship  of
    this Appellant to the ex-President Bedie was the issue on which we must
    reach our own conclusions.  She submitted that in the round  there  was
    still a risk to this Appellant and  we  should  accordingly  allow  the
    appeal.

14.   We reserved our decision.

The Issues

15.   We found the issue before us to be:-

                 Whether, on the facts  as  found,  both  subjectively  and
                  objectively there is, at this time, a well-founded fear of
                  persecution of this Appellant  for  a  Refugee  Convention
                  reason or a risk of a breach of the ECHR  on  her  return?
                  If "yes" the appeal should be allowed.  If not  it  should
                  be dismissed.


Decision

16.   It is accepted from the evidence established by the  Adjudicator  that
    the Appellant is a niece of the wife of ex-President Bedie and she  was
    associated with the political party PCDI of whom the  ex-president  was
    the  leader.   However  the  current  country  of  origin  information,
    particularly that identified in  the  latest  US  Department  of  State
    Report for 2001 (published February 2002), indicates  that  substantial
    reconciliation has taken place under the regime  of  President  Gbagbo.
    Indeed the former presidents including Bedie  have  returned  to  Ivory
    Coast and are participating in the reconciliation.  It  is  also  noted
    that the government was party to the reconciliation forum and agreed to
    issue a general amnesty for all those responsible for violence relating
    to the various coup.

17.   Assessing this Appellant's  situation  against  the  relevant  country
    information and noting the profile of this Appellant and the fact  that
    she has spent little time in Ivory Coast over the past several years we
    consider that any risk to this Appellant on return either  for  reasons
    of political or family association is remote and highly speculative and
    certainly does not rise to the level of a real risk.

18.   The appeal is therefore dismissed.   We  do  not  consider  that  this
    Appellant can establish a well-founded fear of  persecution  under  the
    Refugee Convention nor would there be a breach of  any  obligations  on
    the United Kingdom under any Articles of the ECHR.






                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                                    CHAIRMAN

















