
ar                                                         Appeal No.
HX32040-2001                      GC (Relocation-Maoists) Nepal CG [2002]
UKIAT 05241


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 1 October 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                     13 November 2002.......................

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                                 Mr A Smith




                            GUNI  KHATRI  CHHETRI


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Ms M. Canavan of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the respondent :  Ms A. Green, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  who  appeals  by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal  against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mrs  E.S.
      Martins, dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse to grant asylum and to give removal directions to  Nepal.   The
      grounds of appeal are in the bundle before us.

   2. The appellant arrived in this country on 9 September 2000 and  claimed
      asylum on 21 December.  The basis of her claim is that she is a member
      of  the  Maoist  Party  and  was  involved   in   meetings,   rallies,
      demonstrations and the distribution of leaflets. She was  arrested  by
      the Nepalese Police in July 1998 and detained  for  three  months  and
      maltreated.  She was arrested again in December 1999 and detained  for
      twenty-one days and again maltreated. On her release she was told that
      if seen again she would be imprisoned for ever and could  possibly  be
      killed. The Adjudicator has rejected the whole basis of the claim  for
      the reasons  which  are  set  out  in  paragraphs  58  to  62  of  the
      determination.

   3. This is yet another case where unfortunately the  respondent  was  not
      represented. The grounds  of  appeal  allege  errors  of  law  and  in
      particular undue intervention by the Adjudicator. We have before us  a
      statement of Kofi Kuranchie dated 9 July this year.    Miss  Kuranchie
      is a caseworker with the RLC and she appeared before the  Adjudicator.
      At paragraph 3 of that statement  she  alleges  that  the  Adjudicator
      asked an excessive number of questions.

4.    Miss Canavan in her submissions maintained that  the  Adjudicator  has
      erred in law by failing to give due consideration to the evidence that
      the appellant  was  a  member  of  the  Maoist  Party.  This  evidence
      comprised a membership card which was in the bundle before us and  was
      before the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator makes no reference to this in
      her determination.  She also emphasised the  unnecessary  intervention
      by the Adjudicator and referred us to Miss Kuranchie's  statement  and
      also to Miss Kuranchie's record of  proceedings  which  indicates  the
      number of times the Adjudicator asked questions.   Miss  Canavan  also
      referred us to a supplementary statement of the appellant  and  relied
      upon her grounds of appeal.

5.    Miss Green in her submissions maintained that there was no  obligation
      upon the Adjudicator to take account of the membership card. It was an
      untranslated document  and  was  therefore  not  strictly  before  the
      Adjudicator.  Questions asked by the  Adjudicator  were  in  order  to
      clarify  the  nature  of  the  appellant's  claim,  in  Miss   Green's
      submission, these questions were not excessive and  did  not  infringe
      the guidelines set  out  by  the  Tribunal,  known  as  the  Surendran
      Guidelines,  to  which  the  Tribunal  refers  in  the  case  of   NNM
      (00/TH/02423). She submitted that the record of proceedings of the RLC
      should be compared with those of the  Adjudicator.  She  asked  us  to
      reject the supplementary statement of the appellant as this  postdates
      the hearing and  cannot  be  relied  upon.   The  conclusions  of  the
      Adjudicator are perfectly valid. The objective evidence shows that  if
      the appellant were to return to Nepal it would be safe for her to live
      in a large city such as Kathmandu. She had managed  to  attend  public
      meetings.  We were referred to a Belgian report  with  regard  to  the
      current position in Nepal.

6.    Dealing first with Miss Canavan's submission that the Adjudicator  had
      exceeded  the  guidelines  set  out  in  Surendran,  we  have  had  an
      opportunity of considering the Adjudicator's record of proceedings. We
      were referred to these at the hearing,  and  in  particular  drew  the
      attention of both parties to  a  discrepancy  between  the  record  of
      proceedings of the RLC and those of the Adjudicator in relation to how
      the alleged arrest warrants and come into the appellant's  possession.
      The  Adjudicator's  record  of  proceedings  gives  details   of   the
      examination-in-chief and these run to three pages.   The  record  then
      goes on to indicate the questions asked by the Adjudicator  and  these
      run to five pages. They appear to cover a number of matters which were
      not dealt with in the examination-in-chief and deal in particular with
      the nature of the  appellant's  activities  and  why  the  appellant's
      family did not follow her to this country for medical treatment  which
      the appellant maintains she receives after her maltreatment. They also
      deal with the manner in which the  appellant  left  the  country.  The
      remaining four pages of the record merely record the submissions  made
      by Miss Kuranchie.

7.    It is always very difficult for an Adjudicator where  no  Home  Office
      representative appears. We are aware of the fact that this Adjudicator
      is a very experienced Adjudicator, and having considered her record of
      proceedings we take the view that she has not exceeded the  guidelines
      set out in Surendran. Her questions were meant to clarify a number  of
      matters raised in the  appellant's  witness  statement.  We  therefore
      reject Miss Canavan's submissions in relation to this  aspect  of  the
      grounds of appeal.

   8. We accept that the Adjudicator has not dealt with the question of  the
      membership card and, technically, Miss Green  is  correct  in  stating
      that there was no obligation on the part of the Adjudicator to  do  so
      as this is an untranslated document. We have this document  before  us
      and it is not strictly correct to say that it is untranslated.  It  is
      an odd document in our view in that it is written in Nepalese  and  in
      English. We find it somewhat strange that the Communist Party of Nepal
      should issue membership  cards  in  such  a  manner,  particularly  as
      English is not, so far as we are  aware,  a  language  which  is  used
      extensively in that state.  Although it describes the appellant as  an
      executive member (in English and not in Nepalese) the dates of renewal
      are all in Nepalese.  Within the context of the Adjudicator's findings
      as to the credibility of the appellant, we would be inclined to reject
      this document as being an authentic document and in  doing  so  follow
      the guidelines  of  Ahmed.   In  our  view  the  Adjudicator  has  not
      transgressed those guidelines as is claimed  in  paragraph  4  of  the
      grounds of appeal.  She has made findings on credibility        but in
      fact has  made  no  specific  findings,  either  with  regard  to  the
      membership  card  or  the  arrest  warrant.   She  has  rejected   the
      appellant's claim to be a member of  the  Maoist  Party  but  has  not
      specifically dealt with the documents in support of  that  claim.   We
      would be inclined to give the benefit of the doubt  to  the  appellant
      and accept that she was a member of the Maoist Party.    However  with
      regard to the other documents,  namely  the  arrest  warrant  and  the
      judicial notice dated 17 July 2001 and 8 August 2001 respectively,  we
      take the view that these are not  valid  documents  so  far  as  their
      content is concerned.  They may well be issued on authentic paper. Our
      reason for so finding is that the appellant claims that she  was  last
      arrested in December 1999 and that she then  went  into  hiding  at  a
      Maoist camp, some distance from where her activities  originally  took
      place, until her departure from the country in  September  2000.   The
      only activities on behalf of  her  party  which  she  claims  to  have
      undertaken  is  arranging  meetings  and  demonstrations  and  herself
      attending demonstrations. The Adjudicator has rejected her claim  that
      she attended demonstrations after her 1999 arrest  for  reasons  which
      are set out in paragraph 59, and  we  consider  those  reasons  to  be
      perfectly valid.  Why, two  years  after  her  arrest  she  should  be
      charged with acts of treason lacks a reasonable explanation.   If  she
      had carried out any treasonable activity  the  authorities  had  every
      opportunity to detain her on such a charge in December when she was in
      their custody but they failed to do so and in fact they  released  her
      with a warning accompanied by a threat.  We do not consider that to be
      the action of a police force that is concerned with somebody  who  has
      committed a treasonable offence. If the appellant's claimed attendance
      at the demonstration before she left the  country  is  sustainable  we
      must ask ourselves why she was not arrested then if she was considered
      a suspect on a treason charge.  Taken over all, we are inclined to the
      view that these documents are not court documents  containing  a  full
      record.

9.    Whilst accepting therefore for the purposes of this  appeal  that  the
      appellant may be a member of the Maoist Party, we  find  ourselves  in
      complete  agreement  with  the  Adjudicator's  findings  as   to   the
      credibility of the appellant's evidence in relation to  the  incidents
      which she claim give rise to  her  leaving  the  country  in  need  of
      international protection.

10.   We turn now to consider the question of  the  risk  to  the  appellant
      upon return and in doing so we have considered  the  report  from  the
      Ministry of Interior Affairs for Belgium dated March  this  year.   In
      this report (page 17) certain districts are highlighted as being areas
      where there is a greater degree of activity between the  Maoist  Party
      and the police. These are  referred  to  as  stricken  districts.   We
      observe that the  appellant  who  comes  from  Bhatakpur  (which  Miss
      Canavan informed us is close to Kathmandu) is not known as one of  the
      most stricken districts.  Neither does it come within a secondary tier
      of stricken districts referred to in  the  same  paragraph.   As  Miss
      Green points out, the degree of Maoist activities is at  its  greatest
      in the provincial areas and least strong in the urban areas,  and  the
      appellant comes from an urban area, namely Kathmandu and its environs.
      We also observe that at page 20 when dealing with Maoist members it is
      stated:

              'During its mission, the Office of the  Commissioner  General
             came to the conclusion that not all the ranks of  the  Maoists
             are targeted to the same extent, at least not until the  state
             of emergency had been proclaimed  on  the  26  November  2001.
             When we asked our contacts which group of Maobadi  would  fear
             persecution by the Nepalese government, at the most,  most  of
             the contacts answered that it mainly involves prominent and/or
             local leaders and militants but not common members.'

11.   The basis of the Adjudicator's findings which we  have  accepted,  and
      although we accept that the appellant is a member of the Maoist Party,
      we do not consider that she would come within the  category  of  those
      who are prominent and/or local leaders and  militants.  The  following
      paragraph on page 21 reads:

              'We have already indicated that low profile Maobadi  who  are
             in fact members  of  the  party  but  who  do  not  occupy  an
             important function, not participate in armed actions (militant
             activities) should not have well-founded fears for persecution
             on a national level.   The  same  goes  for  the  sympathisers
             according to the contacts.'

12.   Having considered the objective  evidence  and  bearing  in  mind  the
      Adjudicator's findings, which we accept, that the  appellant  has  not
      been detained on two occasions as claimed, neither has her husband and
      child been taken by the authorities we are of the view that  there  is
      no reasonable likelihood that this the appellant would  be  persecuted
      were she to be returned and the appeal is accordingly dismissed.



                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


