
H-HB-V1
                                                Appeal Number : HX19031-2002
                    MC (Persecution - Police -Roma) Latvia CG [2002] UKIAT
                                    06480

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House (with video link to    |Determination Promulgated    |
|Birmingham)                                   |                             |
|on :  4th December 2002                       |                             |
|Dictated : 6th December 2002                  |12 February 2003             |


                                   Before:


                          MR A R MACKEY - Chairman
                               MR R BAINES JP


between
                            Mr Mihails CUBREVICS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, who is a citizen of Latvia, of Roma ethnicity,  appeals
    with leave against the determination of an Adjudicator, Dr  S  S  Juss,
    promulgated 28th June 2002 wherein he dismissed an appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent who had issued removal directions  following
    refusal of asylum and human rights claims.

2.     Leave  was  granted  after  the  Vice  President  noted,  with   some
    hesitation, that the accepted  past  ill-treatment  of  the  Appellant,
    particularly at the hands of the police, could raise  arguable  issues.
    Reference is also made to the Court of Appeal decision in Svazas [2002]
    EWCA Civ 74 (CA).

3.    The Appellant had claimed  a  fear  of  persecution  or  serious  mal-
    treatment from "racketeers" and/or the police in Latvia  should  he  be
    returned to that country.

4.    At the outset, we  asked  Mr  Mahmood  whether  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant, at any point in his application or appeal, explained who the
    "racketeers" were, what they were  engaged  in,  their  numbers,  their
    geographic spread in Latvia and  any  other  background  to  them.   He
    stated that the Appellant had at all times stated that his fear was  of
    "racketeers" and they appeared to be a criminal  group  who  wished  to
    extort money from the Appellant  and  had  some  association  with  the
    police.  He did not have instructions  as  to  the  number,  geographic
    spread or other information about these "racketeers".

5.    The Adjudicator noted that the Appellant was  a  Latvian  citizen  who
    had arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2002 on his own passport and
    claimed asylum.  He claimed that he had been paying money to racketeers
    since 2000 because of his Roma ethnicity.  The racketeers had  harassed
    him and beaten him up on two occasions in 2000.  He had  complained  to
    the police about this but when he complained he was beaten  up  by  the
    police and shot in the hand (with what appears to have  been  a  pellet
    from an airgun) the  police  offered  him  no  assistance  against  his
    tormentors.  The Appellant's evidence was that the  police  were  drunk
    when they were beating him up and  shot  him  in  the  hand.   He  also
    explained that when he did report the matter to the police he had  been
    asked to "eat" his report.  To avoid  the  "racketeers"  the  Appellant
    stated that he had moved address (it appears to a street that was close
    by).  The Appellant also explained that he had complained to an elected
    Roma representative "the Roma president"  but  he  also  did  not  give
    assistance.

6.    The Appellant stated that he  had  been  quite  badly  beaten  by  the
    "racketeers" and on one occasion had coughed blood and passed blood  in
    his urine.  He also confirmed that he had never been formally  arrested
    or charged by the police and had not encountered any  problems  in  his
    Roma  area  within  Latvia.   After  referring  to  objective   country
    information on  Latvia  the  Adjudicator  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible both as to how he was beaten up by the "racketeers"  and  shot
    by the police when he endeavoured to complain about his  ill-treatment.
    He concluded however that the Appellant did  not  qualify  for  refugee
    status.  He noted that it was  significant  that  the  Appellant's  own
    account stated that the police had been drinking when they  abused  him
    and that they were drunk at the time.  The Adjudicator considered these
    to be failures of discipline and supervision were not an example  of  a
    concerted policy on the part of the Latvian  authorities  to  persecute
    the Appellant for being a gypsy.  He went on to state that even  if  he
    accepted that:

         "While the Latvian authorities have established a range of laws  to
         protect the population living in the country, the authorities  have
         struggled with unlawful elements in the country and the police have
         frequently been unable to protect the populace in  the  most  basic
         ways."

    He did not consider it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to another part of Latvia where it would  be  possible  to  be
    safe from the "racketeers" and among the company of other  Romany.   He
    considered the human rights appeal as well but did not  consider  there
    was a real risk of a breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR.   He  dismissed
    both appeals.

The Appellant's Submissions

7.    Mr Mahmood  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  presented  with  the
    application for leave submitting that inadequate consideration  to  the
    factual situation in Latvia had been given by the  Adjudicator.   There
    was evidence of past persecution from the  bullet  in  the  Appellant's
    hand  and  the  several  occasions  he  had  been  beaten  up  by   the
    "racketeers".  He submitted that the objective evidence indicated  that
    the Appellant could not obtain protection  from  unlawful  elements  in
    Latvian society.

8.    The human rights assessment of the Adjudicator he considered  was  not
    properly dealt with at all.  The findings were weak and  not  reasoned.
    Therefore that while the findings of  the  Adjudicator  were  not  well
    reasoned, and  this  may  have  indicated  a  basis  for  remittal,  he
    submitted that this would be disadvantageous  to  the  Appellant  given
    that he had favourable findings  on  the  facts  made  by  the  current
    Adjudicator.  Accordingly, he submitted that the  Tribunal  should  use
    these fact findings and go on to allow the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and/or Article 3 of the ECHR.  He submitted that there was a
    real risk of persecution from either the "racketeers" or the police and
    that the evidence indicated they worked in  cahoots  with  each  other.
    The objective evidence indicated that the Roma  ethnic  minority  could
    not get protection in Latvia.  He noted the determination in Svazas but
    submitted that the acts of the police against this Appellant were  more
    than just those of ill-discipline by one drunk  policeman.   There  was
    therefore a failure of protection.  He refers to page 502 of  MacDonald
    as support for his contention.

9      This was a case where not only had the Appellant gone to  the  police
    but he had also tried to make complaints to the president of  the  Roma
    Association but had been unable to actually speak with  him  and  lodge
    his  complaint.   He  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
    suggesting that an internal flight alternative was available.  The CIPU
    report notes that Latvia has a population  of  2.65  million  and  that
    there are only some 9,000 Roma in the country.  In this  situation  the
    Appellant would be identifiable as a Roma wherever  he  went  and  thus
    would again sustain problems from "racketeers".

10.    Finally,  he  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not   carefully
    considered the Article  3  claim  as  he  should  have  and  again  the
    objective country information indicated that the  Appellant  could  not
    relocate nor could he obtain protection from the Latvian authorities.

The Respondent's Submissions

11.   Mr Deller submitted that it appeared the Appellant was  claiming  fear
    from both "racketeers" and the police.   He  initially  suggested  that
    there was no Convention reason behind this but acknowledged that at  A8
    and A10 of the Appellant's SEF statement  reference  was  made  by  the
    Appellant to his being maltreated because he was a Gypsy.

12.   Mr Deller also submitted that the actions taken by the police  against
    him did not amount to persecution because there  was  no  sustained  or
    systemic nature in the treatment of the Appellant by  the  police.   He
    had been involved in one incident only when the police were  drunk  and
    had shot at him with an air gun.  He submitted  that  this  could  have
    happened to anyone, whether Roma or not in Latvia.  It should  be  seen
    as a one-off incident by rogue police.

13.   He referred us to the Svazas a Lithuanian  case  where  the  Appellant
    had claimed he could not obtain protection from the Lithuanian  police.
    In that case the court held that within the category of persecution  by
    state agents there was an important distinction to make  between  abuse
    that was authorised or tolerated  by  the  state  and  cases  of  rogue
    officials who, from time to time, may abuse their  authority.   Between
    those  two  extremes  were  cases  where  the   state   officials   may
    systemically or endemically abuse their power despite the law and  will
    of the government to stop it.   The  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that  a
    practical  standard  of  application  was  required  from  fact-finding
    Tribunals.This required that in  such  cases  a  fact-finding  Tribunal
    should have convincing evidence  that  the  state  not  only  possesses
    mechanisms for controlling its officials, but operates them  with  real
    effect.  He submitted that in this case the  Latvian  authorities  were
    providing a sufficiency  of  protection  and  the  Appellant  had  been
    involved in an unfortunate one-off incident with a drunk policeman.  He
    further submitted  that  it  was  possible  the  Appellant  could  have
    reported the matter to higher authorities.  He referred us to paragraph
    4.17 of the Home Office "Latvia Bulletin 1/02" which states:

         "There were some reported incidents of police misconduct, including
         cases involving mistreatment of persons or use of excessive  force,
         in 1999,  2000  and  2001.   In  most  cases  the  government  took
         disciplinary measures, or brought  criminal  prosecutions,  against
         those responsible.  Under  clauses  317  and  318  of  the  Latvian
         criminal code (also applied in conjunction with other  clauses)  it
         is a criminal offence for a police officer to abuse  his  power  or
         position through illegal application of physical force  inhuman  or
         debasing treatment, or other activities violating human rights.  In
         1999, eleven police officers were convicted for  criminal  offences
         under clauses 317, 318 and the preceding clause 162: four of  these
         were for abuse of power or position.  In conjunction with the Soros
         Foundation and National Human Rights Office (NHRO) the Ministry  of
         the Interior has been educating police officers about human  rights
         issues."

14.   He noted that the numbers were small but this  had  to  be  recognised
    against the size of the country.  It indicated however that police  did
    not act with impunity.

15.   Under the human rights claim he submitted that  the  determination  of
    the Adjudicator was somewhat brief but however,  as  with  persecution,
    the threshold was a high one and that again the issue of sufficiency of
    protection and the actions of the rogue police officers  in  this  case
    had to be taken into account.

16.    He  acknowledged  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  give   sufficient
    reasoning in his conclusions relating to relocation or internal  flight
    but submitted that this was not particularly relevant in this  case  as
    the  sufficiency  of  protection  was  available   from   the   Latvian
    authorities.  In summary therefore he submitted that the  Adjudicator's
    determination was a sustainable one and the appeal should be dismissed.

17.   In reply Mr Mahmood submitted that  there  clearly  was  a  Convention
    reason based on the Appellant's ethnicity  or  in  the  alternative  it
    could be stated that he was  targeted  because  he  was  an  underclass
    Latvian, which amounted to a particular social group.

18.   He summarised the  Appellant's  situation  stating  that  he  had  had
    problems with "racketeers".  This he had attempted to address by paying
    their protection money.  He then went to the police and complained  but
    this resulted in him  being  abused  and  shot  at  himself.   He  then
    complained to the president of the Roma Association but this proved  to
    be of no assistance.  He submitted that to suggest the Appellant should
    have then gone to higher authorities  was  illogical  as  it  would  be
    difficult for him to make such a complaint when he had already been  to
    the police who had not offered him protection.  He submitted that  this
    Appellant was in the situation where he was unable to avail himself  of
    the  protection  of  the  Latvian  authorities  and  there  was  not  a
    sufficiency of protection offered.  Such situations, he submitted, were
    envisaged within the sufficiency of protection jurisprudence set out in
    Horvath.  Finally he submitted that it was not just one  policeman  who
    was involved but there appeared  to  be  others  from  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

The Issues

19.   We found the issues before us to be:

         (a)      From the findings  of  the  Adjudicator  and  all  of  the
             evidence  presented  by  this  Appellant,  did  the  Appellant
             identify the "racketeers" who he feared as  non-state  parties
             from whom there was a real risk of him being persecuted on his
             return to Latvia?


         (b)      If the answer to the first issue is  "Yes"  then,  because
             they  are  non-state  actors,  can  the  Appellant  access   a
             sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  state  authorities  in
             Latvia?


         (c)      If the answer to that is "No", is the harm feared  by  the
             Appellant for a Refugee Convention reason?


         (d)      If the answer to the first issue is in the negative,  does
             the Appellant have a well-founded fear of persecution from the
             police in Latvia?  In this  regard   the  conclusions  of  the
             Court of Appeal in Svazas must be taken into account.


         (e)      If the answer to the above question is "Yes", is the  fear
             of persecution by the police for a Refugee  Convention  reason
             or would there be a real risk of a breach of the provisions of
             the ECHR should this Appellant be returned to Latvia?

Assessment

20.   Turning to the  first  issue  we  find  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    identified the "racketeers" to an extent that it is possible for us  to
    conclude that there is a real risk he will be persecuted or mal-treated
    in breach of the ECHR by them on return.  Mr Mahmood agreed, when  this
    direct question was put to him by us, that this was a weakness  in  his
    client's case.

21.   In all of his evidence the Appellant has merely  stated  that  he  had
    troubles with "racketeers".  Initially it appeared they were trying  to
    extort money from him and that they beat him  up  on  other  occasions.
    However, as to who these racketeers were, their numbers, the extent  of
    their operations  in  Latvia  and  whether  they  pose  a  merely  very
    localised threat or otherwise we do not know.   At  one  point  in  his
    evidence the Appellant stated that there were four racketeers who  came
    to his home.  We have also consulted  the  relevant  objective  country
    information and there is no reference to any organised extortion gangs,
    mafia or others that would show a logical and realistic  fit  with  the
    group the Appellant states that he fears.  There is no reference in the
    section of the Latvia Bulletin 1/02 from the Home Office  on  the  Roma
    minority to them being targeted by "racketeers" or other groups.   That
    report states that there are estimated to be some 9,000 Roma in  Latvia
    and that a high proportion of them are reported to be  "unemployed  and
    living  in  conditions  of  relative  poverty".   It  states  that  the
    president of the LCNKB (Roma National Culture Society) has stated  that
    he did not think Roma were discriminated against  in  Latvia  but  were
    likely to be treated with indifference.

22.   It is of course, in every  asylum  and  human  rights  claim  for  the
    Appellant to establish his own case.  On the evidence in this  case  we
    consider the Appellant has not established that the  "racketeers"  that
    he fears can be stated to present him with a reasonable  likelihood  of
    persecution on return.  We simply have no evidence  that  supports  the
    reality of such a risk from such people.  The  best  we  have  is  that
    there were four people in the localised area he  lived  in.   Accepting
    this, we consider the risks to him must be  seen  as  remote  and  that
    while Latvia is a small country relocating elsewhere away from his home
    district where he  was  targeted  by  the  "racketeers"  is  an  option
    available to him and, based on the objective information it  would  not
    be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him  to  do  so.   The  first
    issue is therefore answered in the negative.

23.   In this situation it is now  necessary  for  us  to  consider  whether
    there is any well-founded fear of persecution by  the  police  to  this
    Appellant on return to  Latvia.   At  the  outset  we  noted  that  the
    Appellant was not targeted by the police in Latvia.  That is, they  did
    not  come  looking  for  him  to  maltreat  or  persecute   him.    The
    maltreatment occurred when he went to complain to the police about  the
    activities of the "racketeers".  We would agree with the submissions of
    Mr Deller that from the evidence the actions  of  the  police  officers
    involved were those of unauthorised drunk policemen.  There is  nothing
    in the objective evidence  to  indicate  that  there  is  sustained  or
    systemic persecution or serious maltreatment of Roma by the  police  in
    Latvia.  Indeed, the provisions of paragraph 4.17 of  the  CIPU  report
    referred to above show that police officers  who  abuse  power  can  be
    successfully prosecuted.

24.   We  are  therefore  satisfied  that  there  is  not  a  real  risk  or
    reasonable likelihood this Appellant would be persecuted or  maltreated
    in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR by  the  Latvian  police  should  he
    return to Latvia.  Again, even that very remote risk could be  lessened
    by moving to another site within Latvia away from the police station he
    reported to on the previous occasion.

25.   We find that this is a case where the Appellant has not made  out,  on
    the evidence, that he has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Refugee  Convention  reason  nor  are  there  substantial  reasons  for
    concluding that there is a real risk there would be  a  breach  of  the
    ECHR should he be returned.

26.   The appeal accordingly is dismissed.


                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
