


Appeal No. TH35562-2002
                            BT (Deportation) Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 06378


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                                       Date
                           heard:  28 January 2003
                                             Date notified:...03.02.2003....
                                  Before: -

                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MRS W JORDAN

                                                       Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                              MR BINAM TADESSE

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.The appellant, the Secretary of State, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr P V  Ievins,  dismissing
the appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
deportation order against the respondent, a national of Ethiopia, under  the
provisions of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Mr A Kaihiva  of
Counsel instructed by Sooni  Ayoola  &  Okri  Solicitors  appeared  for  the
appellant. Mr S Ouseley appeared for the respondent. To avoid confusion  the
respondent is hereafter referred to as "the claimant".

2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal.

3. The adjudicator concluded that  there  were  compassionate  circumstances
justifying him allowing the appeal. These consisted in  the  fact  that  the
claimant had come to the UK in 1993 accompanied by  a  female  relative  and
that he and his younger brother were then abandoned here. They  were  looked
after by a social services  department.  Although  he  counted  against  the
claimant that he had committed criminal offences, he found these  "were  not
as serious as some" and that these had to be  set  in  the  context  of  the
claimant being a rootless young man who had apparently  been  abandoned.  He
noted that he had no family in Ethiopia. He took into account  further  that
by virtue of being able to prove his nationality the claimant might  not  be
able to get back into Ethiopia.

4. The grounds of appeal contended that the adjudicator's  conclusions  were
perverse. He had failed to attach due weight to the fact that  the  claimant
was of an age (23) when he would be able to adapt  to  life  in  his  native
country. Given  the  factors  he  was  required  to  have  regard  to  under
paragraph 364 of HC395,  he  had  effectively  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
insufficient basis of the claimant having 9 year's residence in the  UK  and
possibly not being readmitted back to Ethiopia.

5. We consider that the grounds were correct to describe  the  adjudicator's
findings as perverse. There were perverse in two respects.

6. One was that, although correctly setting out the factors he was  required
to consider when conducting the  balancing  act  under  paragraph  364,  the
adjudicator plainly then forgot how many of these  he  had  counted  against
the claimant.

7. Before looking at what the adjudicator did, we need to set out  the  text
of paragraph 364 of HC395. This  states:

      "In considering whether deportation is the right course on the merits,
      the  public  interest  will  be  balanced  against  any  compassionate
      circumstances of the case. While each case will be considered  in  the
      light of the particular circumstances, the aim is an exercise  of  the
      power of deportation which is  consistent  and  fair  as  between  one
      person and another, although one case will rarely  be  identical  with
      another in all material respects.


      [In the cases detailed in paragraph 363A] deportation will normally be
      the proper course where a person has failed  to  comply  with  or  has
      contravened a condition or has remained without  authority.  Before  a
      decision to deport is reached the Secretary of State  will  take  into
      account all relevant factors known to him including:


           i) age;
          ii) length of residence in the UK;
         iii) strength of connections with the UK;
          iv) personal history, including character, conduct and employment
              record;
           v) domestic circumstances;
          vi) previous criminal record and the nature  of  any  offence  of
              which the person has been convicted;
         vii) compassionate circumstances;
        viii) any representation received on the person`s behalf."

8. How then did the adjudicator apply paragraph 365 to  the  facts  in  this
case? He found the claimant had no ongoing or close  relationship  with  his
brother (his own evidence was he had not seen him for a year and a half)  or
with anyone  else.  Although  he  recognised  that  the  claimant  had  been
abandoned in 1993 and had then been brought up in care, he found  that  that
did not excuse  his  criminal  behaviour.  He  found  he  was  not  of  good
character having committed offences for robbery and  offering  to  supply  a
controlled drug. He also found his prospects if released from prison in  the
UK  (he was currently in detention again, this time  under  Immigration  Act
powers) to be poor.

9. A second respect in which  his  findings  were  perverse  was  the  undue
weight he attached to the possibility that the claimant  would  not  be  re-
admitted to Ethiopia. He was perfectly entitled to count in  favour  of  the
claimant his length of time in the  UK  (9  years),  his  background  as  an
abandoned child and as someone who was now rootless and  the  fact  that  he
had no ties in Ethiopia. But he was not entitled to take  into  account  the
fact that he might not be re-admitted there at  all   -  except  insofar  as
problems in confirming his nationality might unduly delay implementation  of
his deportation.

10. There was some dispute between the parties as to  whether  the  claimant
would  in  fact  experience  difficulties  obtaining  acceptance  from   the
Ethiopian Embassy in this country that he was a  national  entitled  to  re-
admission. However, even assuming  Mr  Kaihiva  is  right  in  saying  these
difficulties would be insuperable, the only result would then  be  that  the
claimant`s departure would not be enforced. That is because the Home  Office
policy in the case of persons refused admission  to  their  own  country  of
nationality or residence is to return them to the United  Kingdom.  In  such
circumstances their deportation is not implemented.

11. Accepting this point, Mr Kaihiva  still maintained that the  adjudicator
was entitled to take into account the fact  that  the  end-result  would  be
delay and uncertainty for the claimant.  We  accept  that,  but  we  do  not
consider this likelihood  sufficed  to  justify  allowing  this  appeal.  Of
course, if lengthy delay were encountered, resulting in the  claimant  being
left in limbo, the Secretary of State would  at  some  point  need  to  take
stock. But it would be erroneous to  assume  that  the  Secretary  of  State
would not keep matters under review, since any failure to  do  could  result
in failure to comply with the claimant`s human rights.

12.  Bearing  in  mind  the  preponderance  of  the  paragraph  364  factors
quantitatively and qualitatively counting against the claimant and the  fact
that  the  adjudicator  attached  weight  to  erroneous  speculation   about
possible  non-admission,  we  consider  he  should   have   concluded   that
deportation was the right course  on  the  merits.  Whether  the  claimant`s
offences were not as  serious  as  some,  his  record  was  one  of  serious
criminal offences and included the use of  violence.  On  the  adjudicator's
own findings, it is sufficiently clear from what he  said  at  paragraph  25
that he  believed  the  claimant  had  a  propensity  to  re-offend  and  he
described  his  prospects  upon  coming  out  of  prison  as  poor.  On  the
adjudicator's own findings, the claimant had no close ties  in  the  UK.  He
was a young man with no apparent physical or mental disabilities that  would
prevent him living a relatively normal life in his country of origin.

13. In reaching our decision we have taken  account  of  relevant  case  law
including the case of R  v  Nazari  (1980)  71  Cr  App  Rep  97  which  was
obliquely referred to by Mr Kaihiva. In respect  of  the  latter,  we  would
observe that it concerned the jurisdiction of the criminal courts to make  a
recommendation for deportation following a prison  sentence,  so  it  is  of
little  direct  relevance.  However,  insofar  as  this  decision  sets  out
guidelines for when deportation is to be considered  appropriate,  there  is
nothing said in that judgment which causes us to reconsider the approach  we
have taken in this case.

14. In reaching our  decision  we  have  also  seen  paragraph  364  of  the
Immigration Rules as requiring a purposive reading in accordance  with  s  3
of the Human Rights Act 1998. In our view under Strasbourg jurisprudence  on
Article 8, virtually identical considerations apply. Albeit having lived  in
the UK for 9 years having been abandoned when around 14,  the  claimant  has
no close personal or family ties in the UK. He has  a  history  of  criminal
and anti-social behaviour including offences of violence. He has been  found
by the adjudicator to have a propensity to re-offend. It is true  that  upon
any return to Ethiopia he would have no family ties  there,  but  he  was  a
young man with no mental or physical impairment. If admitted, he  would  not
be at risk of adverse attention from  the  Ethiopian  authorities.  In  such
circumstances we are satisfied that  the  decision  to  make  a  deportation
order against him did  not  and  would  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
interference with his right to respect for private and family life.

15. Although not asked  to  do  so,  we  have  further  considered  in  this
connection the relevance to  the  claimant`s  case  of  specific  Strasbourg
cases relating to individuals with a history of criminal  conduct  in  their
host country. In Macdonald`s Immigration  Law  and  Practice  (5th  edition,
2001) I is stated:

      "Deportation following conviction for criminal offences of  young  men
      who have lived for most of their life in Europe and have  few  if  any
      remaining ties, linguistic or social, with their country of origin has
      been held disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  [of  immigration
      control] in a number of ECtHR cases".

16. Reference is then made  to  several  Court  cases  (Beldjoudi  v  France
(1992) 14 EHRR 801, Moustaquim v Belgium (1991) 13 EHRR 802, Nasri v  France
(1995) 21 EHRR 458) and one Commission case  Lamguindaz v  UK   (1993)  EHRR
213. However, it is clear from these and similar  cases  that  in  assessing
proportionality much depends on from what age the individual  concerned  has
lived in the host country and what content there is to his essential  social
environment, his emotional and social circle and  his  family  in  the  host
country. In this case the claimant was already around 14  when  he  came  to
the  UK  and,  as  we  have  seen,  has  not   maintained   close   personal
relationships with anyone in the UK, family  or  non-family.  There  was  no
satisfactory evidence that he would not continue to  re-offend.  Thus  there
were and remain far fewer countervailing factors relating to the  claimant`s
private and family life in the UK than was so in the cases  just  cited.  In
Nasri v UK, for example, the Court had to consider the case of  a  deaf  and
dumb national of Algeria who had arrived in France when he was  14  and  who
had been convicted of gang rape. In deciding there was a breach  of  Art  8,
the Court attached particular weight to the fact that the  presence  of  his
family in France was especially important not only in terms of  providing  a
home but to prevent him lapsing into a life of crime.

17. Accordingly we  are  satisfied,  even  taking  express  account  of  the
claimant`s human rights and so giving paragraph 364 a purposive  reading  to
reflect these rights, that the decision of the Secretary of State to make  a
deportation order was a proportionate interference and that the  adjudicator
was wrong to effectively conclude otherwise.

18. Given we have concluded that the deportation of this claimant  would  be
in the public good, it is salient we add that  in  our  view  it  would  not
necessarily remain so if the Secretary of State -  assuming  no  obstruction
by the claimant - were to delay  unduly  in  implementing  his  decision  to
deport. Indeed, given that the claimant remains in detention, there is  more
reason than in most cases to expedite matters so as to minimise  the  period
during which the claimant is deprived  of  his  liberty  by  being  held  in
detention and to give him the earliest opportunity to  re-establish  himself
in Ethiopia.

19. For the above reasons, this appeal is allowed.




                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




