
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX57811-2001      |
|On 29 August 2002          |        |        HM (Mental Health)  |
|                           |        |Sierra Leone CG [2002] UKIAT|
|                           |        |04459                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|........30/09/2002..................                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mrs S M Ward                                                      |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|HAJA MANSARAY                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, who has been granted leave
      to appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator,
      Mr D A Kinloch, who dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision refusing asylum.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 29 August 2002. Mr C  Yeo  of  the
      Refugee Legal Centre appeared on behalf of the  appellant,  and  Mr  A
      Sheik of the Home Office Presenting Officer's Unit appeared on  behalf
      of the respondent.

   3. It was agreed that the Tribunal had jurisdiction  and  that  we  could
      proceed to hear the appeal. Mr Sheik reminded us that the Home  Office
      had accepted what the appellant said that she had been given leave  to
      enter on her own passport which she had subsequently given to somebody
      else. Hence the refusal under section 69(3) of the 1999 Act.  However,
      as had been pointed out by Mr Justice  Sullivan  in  ex  parte  Khaled
      Ahmed [2002] EWHC 624 (admin), at paragraph 19, given  the  underlying
      statutory purpose to ensure that persons required to leave the  United
      Kingdom were given an opportunity to appeal and were able to put their
      case before an Adjudicator, it made no practical difference whatsoever
      which subsection conferred the right of appeal since the substance  of
      the case put to the Adjudicator would be the same in all  cases,  that
      the person's removal would be contrary to the Refugee Convention.

   4. Mr Yeo agreed that there would be no problem  with  proceeding,  given
      that the appellant had had a full hearing  of  her  claim  before  the
      Adjudicator and  now  was  exercising  her  right  of  appeal  to  the
      Tribunal.

   5. Mr Yeo argued that the Adjudicator's findings at paragraph  8  of  his
      determination were clearly  wrong.  They  did  not  fit  in  with  the
      objective evidence of events in Freetown in 1999.  With regard to  the
      point at paragraph 8(v) she had left when she did as she was given the
      opportunity to do so. He  was  not  seeking  to  develop  the  Refugee
      Convention argument in this appeal but  was  essentially  focusing  on
      Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. He argued that  the  finding
      at paragraph 8(v) was not a good finding in the context of Article  3.
      Otherwise, the finding at paragraph  8(vi)  could  not  be  sustained,
      since the gradual disclosure was exactly what one would expect from  a
      genuine rape victim. There was no reason to doubt it had occurred. The
      Adjudicator rejected her  reason  for  not  stating  this  earlier  on
      account of his earlier credibility findings.

   6. As regards the Article 3 claim,  the  finding  at  paragraph  13  that
      arguably it would be degrading  to  return  the  appellant  to  Sierra
      Leone, meant that he should have allowed her appeal. The  use  of  the
      word  "arguably"  meant  that  there  was  a  reasonable   degree   of
      likelihood. He was given leave to put in two  papers  from  the  UNHCR
      concerning returns to Sierra Leone. UNHCR did not agree with the  Home
      Office that a case-by-case approach was  appropriate,  but  considered
      that returns were still not appropriate.  Mr  Yeo  accepted  that  the
      peace was holding, but argued  that  the  future  was  uncertain.  The
      appellant needed treatment but would not get it and the Adjudicator in
      recommending exceptional leave  to  remain  should  have  allowed  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.

   7. In his submissions, Mr Sheik took us to the  UNCHR  documentation  and
      argued that it did not show a real risk to the  appellant  on  return.
      She would be returned to Freetown and there were clearly police on the
      ground  and  also  there  was  the  UN  presence.  The  appellant  was
      relatively well off and from the capital and had a home to return  to.
      Caution was suggested but the UNCHR were not saying that there  was  a
      genuine risk on return. There was no  evidence  that  anti-depressants
      were not available in Freetown, nor that there was no  counselling  at
      all. The credibility findings should be upheld. The appellant had been
      able to stay in Freetown for two years, which indicated that there was
      no real risk on return.

   8.  By  way  of  reply,  Mr  Yeo  emphasised  his  view  concerning   the
      Adjudicator's findings at  paragraph  13  of  his  determination,  and
      argued that this was a finding of fact and there was  no  cross-appeal
      and therefore it bound the  Tribunal.  He  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had a family home, saying that it had been burned down,  and
      there was no evidence that she  was  quite  well  off.  She  would  be
      returning to a devastated country with little or no psychiatric  help.
      She had an appointment at the Maudsley Hospital and would be receiving
      counselling as an outpatient. The UNHCR view should be borne in mind.

   9. We reserved our determination.

  10. Given the very sensible way in which the representatives agreed before
      us that the main issue in relation to  which  leave  was  sought  fell
      away, this appeal is concerned essentially with risk on return to  the
      appellant of a breach of her Article 3 rights. It is of relevance  for
      us to consider the  Adjudicator's  credibility  findings  however,  we
      agree with much of what was said by Mr Yeo in this regard. Much of the
      appellant's  evidence  was  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence
      concerning what was happening at Freetown at the  time  when  she  was
      there and when what she alleges happened took place. We are  concerned
      by the lack of a clear finding as to whether or  not  the  Adjudicator
      accepted that she had been raped. The general tenor of paragraph 8(vi)
      of his determination is that he did not accept it, in particular where
      he stated that to his mind the fact that the claim  had  changed  over
      time suggested an exaggeration designed  to  bolster  her  claim.  His
      specific findings at paragraph 9 however, were that he did not believe
      that her house was targeted during the attack on Freetown or that  her
      father and husband were killed as she  has  claimed.  Given  that  she
      claimed that the rape took place during the attack on her  house,  and
      that her husband was killed at  that  time,  it  may  be  said  to  be
      implicit in that finding that he did  not  accept  the  claim  by  the
      appellant to  have  been  raped.  Perhaps  rather  paradoxically,  the
      Adjudicator did however apparently accept the  medical  evidence.  The
      doctor clearly believed the appellant's claim to have been  raped  and
      also that her father and her husband had been murdered. He noted  also
      her loss of chastity according to her perception of her religion,  her
      loss of chances of remarriage, her loss of  her  house  and  her  lost
      contact with her daughter as all together  making  understandable  her
      depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. The doctor  recommended
      anti-depressants and counselling, the  latter  over  a  period  of  12
      months.  In  addition  there  was  evidence  before  the   Adjudicator
      concerning the availability of mental healthcare in Freetown.  It  was
      said that the Kissy Mental Hospital in Freetown is the  only  hospital
      providing mental health care in Sierra Leone, and it  is  said  to  be
      managed by the only Sierra Leonian psychiatrist in the country. It  is
      also in the report (which is entitled War Related Sexual  Violence  in
      Sierra Leone: a report by Physicians for Human Rights) that  anecdotal
      evidence suggests that existing psychosocial services provided  almost
      exclusively by NGOs are proving to be very valuable inside  IDP  camps
      in larger towns such as Freetown and Kenema.  It  is  also  said  that
      recently the  World  Health  Organisation  has  begun  to  assist  the
      government  of  Sierra  Leone  in  coordinating  their  mental  health
      response to the crisis. The Report is dated 2002.


  11. If we accept that the Adjudicator's credibility findings were  flawed,
      and for the sake of argument we are prepared to do so, then it remains
      the case, nevertheless, that in our view the appellant has not shown a
      real risk of a breach of her human rights under Article 3 on return to
      Sierra Leone. We should say  that  we  do  not  agree  with  Mr  Yeo's
      argument that the Adjudicator made a finding of fact  in  this  regard
      having  determined  the  appeal  as  regards  the  Refugee  Convention
      question and the issue of Article 3, in so far as it was founded on  a
      risk of physical harm.  He made the point at paragraph  13  that:  "It
      seems to me that, arguably,  it  would  be  degrading  to  return  the
      appellant to Sierra Leone without knowing that she would  be  able  to
      receive some kind of help for her severe depression".  He went  on  to
      recommend the grant of one years exceptional leave to remain in  order
      for her  to  obtain  the  twelve  months  counselling  and  the  anti-
      depressants recommended by Dr Shehadeh. We do not  see  how  this  can
      properly be regarded as a finding of fact. It is in our view, no  more
      than a comment by the Adjudicator in the light of the evidence  as  he
      saw it from the doctor and on the objective  evidence  which  we  have
      described above.


  12. We also do not agree that the use of  the  word  "arguably"  indicates
      that the Adjudicator found it to have been established to  the  proper
      standard of proof in human rights cases, that the claim had been  made
      out. We bear in mind also the high threshold in Article 3 cases, as it
      has been said to be in cases such as Bensaid.

  13. We note that there is some mental healthcare in Freetown, albeit of  a
      limited amount only. There is a psychiatrist there  and  there  is  no
      indication that he or she is not able to  prescribe  anti-depressants,
      nor unable to provide counselling.  We  note  that  the  World  Health
      Organisation has begun to assist the government  of  Sierra  Leone  in
      coordinating their mental health response to the crisis. Even  if  one
      accepts the appellant's history as she claims  it  to  be,  and  as  a
      consequence of which the doctor made his recommendations,  we  do  not
      consider that the high threshold of Article 3 has been reached in this
      case. We do not consider that it would be inhuman and/or degrading  to
      return the appellant to Sierra Leone in the light of the diagnosis  of
      the doctor  and  the  recommended  treatment.  We  bear  in  mind  the
      recommendations of the UNHCR, but we agree with Mr Sheik that what  is
      being suggested is essentially a  counsel  of  prudence  and  caution,
      rather than an indication of a genuine risk on return  of  persecution
      and/or breach of Article 3.






  14. This appeal is dismissed.



                                                                   D K Allen

                                                                    Chairman
