
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX38664-2001
On  10  September  2002                                                   LS
(Internal Relocation-Sikh - Separatists) India CG [2002] UKIAT 04714



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . . .08.10.2002. . .
. . . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                Mr M L James
                                Mrs W Jordan


                               LAKWINDER SINGH

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Miss P Clough, dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 25  November  2000  to  issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr  A  Stedman  instructed  by  Messrs  Asghar  &  Co  represented  the
     Appellant. Mr C Buckley, a Home Office Presenting Officer,  represented
     the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant, who  comes  from  the  Punjab,  claims  in  his  written
     statement that for twelve years  prior  to  1999  he  was  pressurised,
     together with his parents, into providing support  for  the  proscribed
     Sikh  terrorist  group,  Babbar  Khalsa,  in   the   form   of   money,
     accommodation and assistance.  During 1999 he was arrested and detained
     twice by the police, for a few days each time, and was tortured. He was
     released on both occasions upon payment of a bribe by his  father.   He
     left India in June 1999 and arrived in the  UK  six  months  later,  in
     January 2000.  He did not know where  he  had  been  taken  during  his
     journey.

  4. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant's claim was not  credible  and
     dismissed his appeal. Leave to appeal was sought  and  granted  on  the
     basis that  it  was  arguable  the  Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility
     finding  was  in  error.  Mr  Buckley,  whilst  defending  the  adverse
     credibility finding also argued before  us  that  there  was  a  viable
     internal flight option, and it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
     Appellant to take advantage of  this  rather  than  seek  international
     protection.

  5. In assessing this appeal, the Tribunal first noted that there were  two
     obvious but uncorrected typographical errors in the  determination.  In
     paragraph 1, the Appellant's date of birth was given at 1994,  when  it
     should have been 1974. In paragraph 15, the Adjudicator stated that the
     Appellant claimed he first came into  contact  with  Babbar  Khalsa  in
     1981, when he was 13. However, the Appellant was 13 in 1987, not  1981,
     and 1987 is also twelve years before the Appellant  left  India,  which
     fits his evidence. Neither Representative offered any reason to  oppose
     the correction of these errors.

  6. In paragraph 16 of the determination, the Adjudicator gave the  reasons
     for her  adverse  credibility  finding,  which  may  be  summarised  as
     follows.
           1. It was not credible that the Appellant  and  not  his  father
              should have been held responsible by the Punjabi  police  for
              helping Babbar Khalsa.
           2. The Appellant claimed to  have  been  helping  Babbar  Khalsa
              financially and by providing food and accommodation from  the
              age of 13.  It was not credible that his  father  would  have
              allowed such behaviour by the Appellant in view of  the  then
              unrest in the Punjab. The Tribunal notes  the  evidence  also
              that the father did not support Babbar Khalsa himself.
           3. If the Punjabi police received information that the Appellant
              was helping Babbar Khalsa,  it  was  inconceivable  that  his
              father would not have been  arrested  or  questioned  by  the
              police as well.
           4. If the Appellant had been of any interest to  the  police  in
              connection with Babbar Khalsa, it was not credible  that  his
              father could  twice  have  obtained  his  release  by  paying
              bribes.
           5. The Appellant had difficulty remembering the date of his last
              arrest,  giving  alternatively  August  1999  (after  he  had
              allegedly left India) and May 1999.
           6. The Appellant's evidence regarding the completion of his  SEF
              was  that  it  was  completed  incorrectly   by   his   first
              solicitors, there were difficulties with the interpreter, and
              it was not read back to him.  However the Appellant's  second
              and present solicitors admit in the  skeleton  argument  that
              the SEF was filled him by representative of their firm.

  7. In paragraph 17 of the determination the  Adjudicator  dealt  with  the
     medical evidence. It came in the form of a very brief  letter  from  Dr
     Shaida, the Appellant's GP, which stated that the appellant  had  scars
     consistent with the assaults described.  The Adjudicator observed  that
     the doctor did not state his qualifications or expertise  in  examining
     torture victims, and she did not therefore accept his expertise in  the
     matter or accept that  his  opinion  either  proved  or  disproved  the
     provenance of the Appellant scars.

  8. As to reason 1, the Tribunal notes that according  to  the  Appellant's
     statement, whilst he was allegedly helping Babbar Khalsa, he was living
     with his father, who did not agree with Babbar Khalsa but was unable to
     refuse to help them also for fear of being killed.  The Adjudicator was
     therefore properly entitled to take the failure of the police to arrest
     his father as well into  account,  especially  as  the  claim  is  that
     accommodation, finance and food was provided for Babbar Khalsa  and  it
     is implausible that this could have been provided without the  father's
     knowledge and participation.

  9. Mr Stedman accepted that reasons 2  and  5  were  valid  and  that  the
     Adjudicator  correctly  held  them  to  go  against   the   Appellant's
     credibility.  He  argued  however  that  they  were   insufficient   in
     themselves to justify a comprehensive adverse credibility finding.  The
     Tribunal does not agree. Reason 2 is an important finding,  which  goes
     to the core of the claim. The objective material shows that up to  1997
     many  Sikh  families  were  pressurised  by  Babbar  Khalsa  and  other
     terrorist groups into providing them with  support.   The  support,  if
     any, provided by the Appellant's family was alleged to be in  the  form
     of money, accommodation and food that could only  have  come  from  the
     father and not from the Appellant himself, who was for much of the time
     very young and then just  worked  on  his  father's  farm.  It  is  not
     plausible that such  help  could  have  been  given  by  the  Appellant
     independently of his father. The Tribunal also notes, as argued  by  Mr
     Buckley, that according to the  objective  evidence  the  various  Sikh
     terrorist groups had effectively been crushed by the Indian authorities
     by 1997 and in 1997 and subsequently there were  no  reports  that  the
     terrorist groups were able to force Sikhs in the Punjab to provide them
     with assistance as claimed by the Appellant.  It is therefore  contrary
     to the objective  material  that  any  support  to  Babbar  Khalsa  was
     provided between 1997 and 1999 by the Appellant or his father, and this
     further undermines the Appellant's claim to have been arrested in 1999.
     As to reason 5, there is  a  clear  inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's
     evidence about the timing of the  arrest  that  allegedly  led  to  his
     fleeing India. It is not a minor issue. These  matters  taken  together
     with reason 1 above undermine the very core of the Appellant's claim.

 10. Mr Steadman argued that reason 3 was wrong because it was the Appellant
     was actually assisting Babbar Khalsa and not his father.  However it is
     clear from Appellant's statement, as we have described above, that  any
     support provided, even under duress, had to come  from  the  father  as
     well, and there is therefore no error in the Adjudicator's conclusion.

 11. With regard to reason 4, Mr Steadman argued that  the  Adjudicator  was
     wrong to find that the Appellant could not have been released twice  by
     bribery because corruption is commonplace in India. However, the Indian
     authorities take Babbar Khalsa very seriously indeed as  the  objective
     material shows, and the Adjudicator was entitled to take the view  that
     if the police did have any reason to suspect  the  Appellant  of  being
     involved with them, they would not have  released  him  once,  even  on
     payment of a bribe, let alone twice.

 12. As to reason 6, it may be that the Adjudicator was misled in her belief
     that the Appellant had two solicitors, though given  the  vagueness  of
     much of the evidence such a mistake would not be  surprising.   However
     it is also clear,  as  Mr  Buckley  correctly  pointed  out,  that  the
     Adjudicator was concerned not only with who filled in the SEF but  also
     the vagueness of its contents. For this  reason  she  referred  to  his
     explanation that he had  difficulties  with  the  interpreter  and  the
     document was not read back to him. However this  is  not  in  itself  a
     particularly important point,

 13. Turning to the medical evidence,  the  report  from  Dr  Shaida  merely
     stated that the Appellant has two scars which are consistent  with  the
     assaults he described.  It  does  not  say  what  else  they  could  be
     consistent with and  the  Tribunal  considers  that  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusion that it neither proved nor disproved the provenance  of  the
     scars was entirely correct.

 14. In summary, the Tribunal  considers  that  the  reasons  given  by  the
     Adjudicator for her adverse credibility finding were properly justified
     by the evidence and cumulatively fully support her conclusion  and  her
     decision to dismiss the appeal.

 15. She did not go on to consider the question of internal  flight  because
     it was not necessary in the light of  her  decision.   Internal  flight
     only arises if the Appellant has established a real risk of persecution
     in his home area, which he has not.  However the Tribunal  records  its
     acceptance of Mr Buckley's argument that even if the Appellant had  his
     claimed difficulties with the police in the Punjab and his  claim  were
     wholly credible, there would be a  viable  internal  relocation  option
     anywhere else in India outside the Punjab and  that  it  would  not  be
     unduly harsh to expect him to avail himself of this rather than to seek
     international protection.  There is a very large Sikh community in most
     cities and states of India.  There is free movement within India and no
     requirement for registration or obstacle to  employment.   The  Punjabi
     police would only pursue history sheeters and wanted criminals  outside
     their state and the Appellant is not in  either  of  these  categories.
     The only reason advanced by the Appellant for not be able  to  live  in
     another state was that he would be  killed  by  the  authorities  there
     also.  The Tribunal considers  that  there  is  no  substance  in  this
     argument and notes that the Appellant's father suggested that he  could
     live in other states.

 16. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
