
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |AA (Risk-Return-Luandan)    |
|                           |        |Angola CG 2002 UKIAT 01518  |
|On 7 March 2002            |        |HX11625-2001                |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|14/05/2002     ..........................................         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ALICE DA CONCELCAO GARRIDE TORRES AMARO                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms L Veloso, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Figueiredo & Bailey
For the respondent:          Mr C Trent, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant is a citizen of Angola who was born  on  29  December
        1971.  She claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  illegally
        on 17 August 1999 and applied  for  asylum  on  2  September  1999.
        Although  she  appears  to   have   submitted   a   self-completion
        questionnaire dated 25 April 2000, she did not subsequently  attend
        at interview as requested and the Secretary of  State  refused  her
        asylum application on 8 February 2001  without  giving  substantive
        consideration to what was claimed  in  the  questionnaire.   On  13
        February 2001 he issued notice of his decision for her  removal  to
        Angola  as  an  illegal  entrant  after  refusal  of   her   asylum
        application.  She appealed against that decision on asylum  grounds
        only.  Her  appeal  was  heard  on  9  August  2001  by  a  Special
        Adjudicator, Mr F R C Such, and at that hearing she  raised  claims
        that her removal would be in  breach  of  her  human  rights  under
        Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
        incorporated into English Law by the Human Rights  Act  1998.   For
        the reasons which he explained in his determination, promulgated on
        12 November 2001, the Adjudicator rejected her claims of  the  rape
        of her mother and sister in 1993 or that she had been accosted  and
        kidnapped at or about the same time with a view to her being raped.
         Nor did he accept her claim that the family,  who  were  otherwise
        supporters of the MPLA, were regarded as Unita  supporters  because
        of  an  uncle  who  supported  that   party.    The   Adjudicator's
        conclusions are then set  out  at  paragraphs  15  and  16  of  his
        determination as follows:

        "15.     For the reasons set out in paragraph 14 I  find  that  the
                 appellant has set up her account to obtain asylum.  She and
                 her family have lived for many  years  in  Luanda  and  the
                 appellant went to  school  and  worked  there.   I  do  not
                 believe the story of the raid on her parents house  or  the
                 story of the uncle coming over just prior to the  elections
                 in 1992.  I do not believe her account of being accosted by
                 two plain clothed men.  The appellant is now nearly 30  and
                 whether she is within the category of  suitable  people  to
                 return to Luanda is up to the Secretary  of  State.   I  am
                 satisfied that there is no real  risk  that  the  appellant
                 will be persecuted for a Convention reason  should  she  be
                 returned to Luanda.


             16. She will  be  in  no  better  position  than  the  ordinary
                 citizens living in Luanda, which is relatively peaceful  in
                 contrast to the Unita held area.  I find that there  is  no
                 real risk the  appellant  will  be  treated  in  breach  of
                 Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention on human rights.  She is
                 not wanted by the authorities so the  question  of  a  fair
                 trial does on arise.  Article 8 is of course qualified  and
                 every state is entitled to enforce an  immigration  policy.
                 The case on Article 8 is that there will be  no  protection
                 of her physical and oral integrity.  My assessment is  that
                 there is no real risk she will be targeted by MPLA or Unita
                 forces and therefore it will  not  be  disproportionate  to
                 deport the appellant."


     2. In granting leave to appeal  to  us,  the  Vice  President  of  the
        Tribunal said that the  Adjudicator  did  not  find  the  appellant
        credible and gave his reasons for that conclusion.   He  said  that
        the Tribunal would be loathed to interfere in  conclusions  reached
        after hearing oral evidence but that the appellant now referred  to
        a considerable amount of new evidence post-dating the  hearing  and
        that leave was granted solely to consider that new evidence and its
        possible impact on the position of the appellant.

     3. Before us Ms Veloso accepted that she was not  able  to  argue  the
        Adjudicator's findings of fact to be  unsustainable  and  that  the
        approach would be taken in the present appeal was to  consider  the
        appellant as a returned failed asylum seeker who was not subject to
        any past adverse interest on the part of the state or any non state
        actors.  She was to be regarded as  a  single  mother,  originating
        from Luanda, and now being threatened with removal there in company
        with her very young son.  In the course of her oral submissions  Ms
        Veloso confirmed that it was  her  case  that  any  female  Angolan
        citizen would be at serious risk of treatment contrary to her human
        rights on forced return to Angola.

     4. Although Ms Veloso sought to  maintain  that  return  would  be  in
        breach of the Refugee Convention, the only reason which she  sought
        to advance in this  respect  was  imputed  political  opinion  and,
        having regard to the factual findings of the  Adjudicator,  we  can
        see no basis on which this can be successfully argued.  She did not
        suggest that the appellant might be regarded as being a member of a
        particular social group, wisely in our view, since again we see  no
        basis on which  such  a  proposition  could  be  realistically  put
        forward on the background  evidence.   At  the  conclusion  of  her
        submissions, we indicated to the parties that we were not persuaded
        that any claim under the Refugee Convention could arise on facts.

     5. Otherwise Ms Veloso's submissions were directed to the claim  other
        that return would subject to the appellant to inhumane or degrading
        treatment contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention, or to a
        breach of her rights to physical and moral  integrity  contrary  to
        Article 8 of that Convention.

     6. She submitted that the appellant would be questioned on her  return
        to Luanda and referred us to paragraph  8.33  of  the  Home  Office
        Country Information and Policy Unit Assessment on Angola for  April
        2001 (the CIPU assessment).  This records that any Angolan deported
        from abroad would be questioned by Immigration and  police  at  the
        airport in order to establish their identity and whether they  were
        of interest to the authorities for political criminal reasons.  The
        fact of applying  for  asylum  would  not,  if  discovered,  be  of
        particular interest.  Ms Veloso conceded that there was no evidence
        of any sexual assaults at the airport.  Since this appellant is not
        of adverse interest to the authorities in Luanda but was  born  and
        brought up there until her departure fro Angola,  having  at  least
        her mother still resident in the city and  an  MPLA  supporter,  it
        does not appear to us that the identification of the  appellant  at
        the airport is reasonably likely to lead to any breach of her human
        rights.

     7. Ms Veloso next relied on the fact that there was, as she claimed, a
        prevalence of rape and sexual assault in  Angola,  particularly  on
        the part of the MPLA for the purposes  of  extracting  information.
        She referred us to paragraph 7.47  of  the  CIPU  assessment  which
        recorded allegations of rape by government forces  in  the  central
        highlands as having increased during the year 2000.  She  drew  our
        attention also to a reference in the Freedom of  the  World  Report
        for 1990-2000 which reported serious human rights  abuses  by  both
        government and rebel  security  forces  as  being  widespread,  and
        including   torture,   abduction,   rape,   sexual   slavery    and
        extrajudicial execution.  A similar general reference appeared also
        in the US State Department Report for 2000, which also regarded the
        government's human rights record as poor, although there  had  been
        improvements in a few areas.  She submitted that any woman returned
        to Angola after absence from the country was subject to  a  serious
        risk of treatment in violation of her human  rights.   She  pointed
        out further that  there  was  evidence  of  a  high  proportion  of
        internally displaced persons in urban  areas  which  the  Norwegian
        Refugee Council had estimated in its report of 25 October  2001  to
        amount to an average of 30,00 persons for each month in  2001,  the
        total number of displaced persons throughout the country being some
        3,000,000.  She placed particular reliance on the fact that at  the
        meeting of the UN Security Council on 13 February 2002  the  United
        Kingdom representative was recorded as saying that the humanitarian
        problems in Angola were one of the worst in the world and that  the
        situation required the concentrated attention of the  International
        Community and the Angolan government.  We note also  that  he  laid
        particular emphasis on the minimal concern for humanitarian  effect
        of  his  operations  which  were  shown   by   Unita,   the   rebel
        organisation.

     8. We do not doubt that general conditions in Angola are a  matter  of
        international concern and that the  government  has  a  poor  human
        rights record.  What we have to be concerned with is whether  there
        is a reasonable likelihood that if this appellant, who  comes  from
        Luanda and has family still resident there,  is  now  returned  she
        will suffer treatment which reaches the high threshold necessary to
        engage Article 3 or Article 8 of the European Convention.

     9. Ms Veloso was quite  right  and  perfectly  entitled  to  draw  our
        attention to the fact that the  Home  Office  policy  had  been  to
        suspend returns to Angola in the past.  That is not,  however,  the
        current policy which is set out in Bulletin 2 of 1999 issued by the
        Home Office  and  containing  advice  to  immigration  officers  on
        dealing with Angolan cases.   This makes it clear that the  general
        temporary suspension on removals to Angola, which had been in place
        since August 1998, had been removed with the  publication  of  that
        Bulletin.  It emphasised that there  should  be  careful  and  full
        assessment of the risk to individuals on the basis  of  the  latest
        country information and made it clear that rejected asylum  seekers
        should be removed  only  to  Luanda  and  then  only  if  they  had
        previously lived there or  had  close  contacts  there.   The  Home
        Office specifically recognised the  extent  of  problems  in  other
        parts of Angola, the dangers of potential call-up by the government
        for males between the ages of 18 and 45.  It was noted  that  UNCHR
        had expressed concern about a heightened level of  risk  for  young
        men aged between 15 and 25 at risk of forcible conscription and for
        young women living outside Luanda who were at risk of abduction  as
        sex slaves for soldiers.  It remained the position of the Secretary
        of State, however, that in the absence of circumstances giving rise
        to a well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,
        removal to Angola was now appropriate.

    10. Ms Veloso accepted that the UNCHR did not say  that  those  in  the
        situation of the appellant should not be returned  to  Luanda  once
        there had been a full consideration of the basis  of  their  asylum
        claim.

    11. Whilst we have carefully  considered  the  background  evidence  to
        which Ms Veloso referred us, and taking due  account  of  the  fact
        that the appellant is to be viewed as a mother with a  young  child
        to be cared for, we are not satisfied that looking  at  the  latest
        evidence, the conclusion of the Adjudicator was unsustainable.

    12. In reaching this conclusion, we have taken into account  the  press
        briefing on Angola by the UN Department of Public Information of 14
        February 2002 but it is clear that it  is  the  issue  of  internal
        displacement, which on the evidence particularly relates  to  those
        areas where Unita remains active, which is perceived  as  being  at
        the root of the humanitarian problems.

    13. What is recorded by the United Nations  Department  in  that  press
        briefing is, we agree, alarming.  It is said that  life  expectancy
        is 44 years, that 33% of all households live below the poverty line
        and that 30% of all children die before they reach the age 5  while
        one third of the total population is displaced.  Displacement is  a
        continuing problem for two reasons:  First  the  actions  of  Unita
        which were forcing people to move, and secondly military "cleaning"
        operations, which again made people decide to leave their places of
        origin.  The UN representative said that it  was  difficult  to  be
        specific as to who was most to blame and continued:

        "We are basically trying to deal with the consequences  of  actions
        taken by both Unita and the government and it is very difficult  to
        say how many people are on the move as  a  result  of  one  or  the
        other.  Activities by both entities resulted in  increased  numbers
        of displaced people.  The problem was widespread  and  not  limited
        only to certain provinces or areas of the country."


    14. We asked Ms Veloso what  evidence  there  was  to  show  that  this
        appellant, coming from Luanda and with family still there, would be
        exposed to the real possibility  of  such  treatment  but  she  was
        unable to assist us  beyond  a  reliance  upon  the  grave  general
        situation which, as we say, appears to be particularly  related  to
        those who are internally displaced.

    15. We note from the latest information from the United Nations  Report
        that the recent death of Jonas Savimbi, the former Unita leader, is
        seen as possibly creating new opportunities  for  making  peace  in
        Angola by international organisations generally.  Whilst we  accept
        that it  is  too  early  to  be  sure  how  matters  will  progress
        internally, there is little doubt that  the  prospects  are  better
        than they have been for  a  considerable  period  and  that  Luanda
        itself  remains  and  essentially  stable  area,  with  the   major
        difficulties recorded  as  taking  place  in  other  parts  of  the
        country.

    16. For all these reasons, we are not satisfied on the evidence  either
        before the Adjudicator or that additional evidence placed before us
        that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  appellant  will
        suffer treatment in breach of her human rights if now  returned  to
        her home city.

    17. therefore for all these reasons, it follows that  we  dismiss  this
        appeal.

    18. Nevertheless, we recognise that the appellant  is  more  vulnerable
        with a young child to care for than would be the case if  she  were
        on her own.  It is therefore our recommendation to the Secretary of
        State that any removal of the appellant and  her  child  should  be
        carried out in conjunction with the UNHCR or some other responsible
        international organisation with a presence in Luanda  who  will  be
        able to make appropriate arrangements for their  initial  reception
        and contact with the appellant's family.





                                                   J Barnes
                                                   Vice President

