
Appeal No: |hx
HX
cc
hx
hx     |65298/2000
16389/2001
12867/2001
43916/2001
49818/2001
 | |
|            |      |_S _K (Return - Ethnic     |
|            |      |Serb) Croatia CG* [2002]   |
|            |      |UKIAT                      |
|            |      |05613                      |
|            |      |STARRED                    |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:      |16 & 17 October 2002      |
|Date Determination notified:|3 December 2002     |



                                   Before:

                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                               Mrs. J. Gleeson
                               Mr. S. Batiste



|Secretary of State for the Home Department|Appellant   |
|And                                       |            |
|S & K                                     |Respondent  |

|For the Appellant:     |Mr. Sean Wilken              |
|                       |Mr. Andrew Robb              |
|For the Respondent :   |Mr. Nicholas Blake Q.C.      |
|                       |Mr. Mark Mullins             |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In S and Others (01 TH 00632) the Tribunal had, following consideration
    of 8 appeals which were heard together, produced a determination  which
    was intended to be :-

         "an authoritative decision as to what the current situation  is  to
         enable consistent results to be achieved because the  tribunal  has
         been able to consider all relevant evidence".

    That determination was dated 1 May 2001.  The  'current  situation'  in
    question was that in Croatia as it affected ethnic  Serbs  who  claimed
    that to return  them  to  Croatia  would  be  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.  The  tribunal  had
    had before it all  relevant  material  and  had  in  addition  had  the
    advantage of listening to oral evidence from two acknowledged  experts,
    Dr. Gow and Judge Karphammer.  It concluded that, despite the genuiness
    of the expressed fears and the fact that there  would  be  considerable
    hardship on return, the situation did not support the  contention  that
    there was a  real  risk  of  persecution.   Accordingly,  the  tribunal
    decided that unless  the  situation  worsened  or  there  were  special
    circumstances affecting an individual claimant, ethnic Serbs would  not
    be able to establish that they were entitled to asylum.

 2. Unfortunately, the  tribunal  had  not  specifically  referred  to  two
    reports  which  had  been  submitted  after  the  hearing  as  part  of
    submissions which the tribunal had permitted to  be  made  in  writing.
    This led to leave to  appeal  being  given  and  to  the  appeal  being
    allowed.  The Court of Appeal's decision was given on  24  April  2002.
    It discussed what it labelled to be the 'exotic' concept of  a  factual
    precedent at some length but concluded  that  in  the  context  of  the
    I.A.T.'s responsibilities it was in principle benign and practical.  In
    reality, the tribunal did not consider that it  was  breaking  any  new
    ground.  In all asylum claims it has to consider the situation  in  the
    relevant country of nationality as at the date of  the  hearing.   That
    involves an assessment of all available evidence about that  situation.
    In an adversarial process, it is inevitable  that  in  some  cases  the
    tribunal (or an adjudicator who has to deal with the appeal before  him
    in a similar way) will not have seen all relevant material and  so  may
    not  be  able  to  form  a  properly  balanced  view.   This  leads  to
    inconsistent decisions in relation to the  same  country  and  that  is
    clearly not only undesirable but in some instances  positively  unfair.
    Furthermore, it leads to unnecessary appeals and expense.
.
 3. The Court has in Paragraphs 29 to 32 of  its  judgment  explained  what
    should be the approach of the tribunal in undertaking such an  exercise
    to its determination and in particular to the giving  of  reasons.   It
    explains how the tribunal erred in that case.  We should set out  those
    paragraphs in full.

         "29. But if the conception of a factual precedent  has  utility  in
         the context of the I.A.T.'s duty,  there  must  be  safeguards.   A
         principal safeguard will lie in the application of the duty to give
         reasons with particular rigour.  We do not mean  to  say  that  the
         I.A.T. will have to deal literally with every  point  canvassed  in
         evidence   or   argument;   that   would    be    artificial    and
         disproportionate.   But  when   it   determines   to   produce   an
         authoritative ruling  upon  the  state  of  affairs  in  any  given
         territory it must in our view take special care  to  see  that  its
         decision is effectively comprehensive.  It should address  all  the
         issues in the case capable of having a real as opposed to  fanciful
         bearing on the result, and explain what it makes of the substantial
         evidence going on the result, and explain  what  it  makes  of  the
         substantial evidence going to  each  such  issue.   In  this  field
         opinion evidence will often or usually  be  very  important,  since
         assessment of the risk of persecutory treatment in the milieu of  a
         perhaps unstable political situation may be a complex and difficult
         task in which the fact-finding tribunal is  bound  to  place  heavy
         reliance on the views of experts and specialists.  We recognise  of
         course that the I.A.T. will often be faced with testimony which  is
         trivial or repetitive.  Plainly it  is  not  only  unnecessary  but
         positively undesirable that it should plough  through  material  of
         that kind on the face of its determination.

         30. It may be thought that this approach is not  far  distant  from
         the way in which the I.A.T. generally discharges its duty  to  give
         reasons, and not only in cases where  it  resolves  to  produce  an
         authoritative determination as to  the  position  in  a  particular
         country.  Indeed we do not mean to  suggest  that  in  this  latter
         class of case the I.A.T.'s  duty  is  of  an  altogether  different
         quality.  The experienced members of the I.A.T., not  least  if  we
         may say so its President and Deputy President,  will  we  are  sure
         have no difficulty in gauging the quality of the reasons  given  so
         as to ensure that these authoritative determinations will  be,  and
         will be seen to be, effectively comprehensive.

         31. In the present case  the  SR  reports  constituted  substantial
         recent opinion evidence from an important source.   While,  as  Mr.
         Blake acknowledged, they may not have uncovered  new  or  otherwise
         unknown primary facts, they presented a relative gloomy picture  on
         a series of important issues -  so-called  secret  lists,  arrests,
         detentions, prosecutions, the conduct of the police and  judiciary,
         and to some extent discrimination in  economic  treatment  and  the
         distribution  of  property  rights  -  which  is  in  our  judgment
         significantly at variance with  the  much  more  upbeat  impression
         given by the OSCE.  Having regard to all the  points  made  by  Mr.
         Wilken the difference is not perhaps as stark as  Mr.  Blake  would
         have us accept, particularly in relation to  such  matters  as  the
         numbers still facing outstanding  prosecutions.   The  SR  reports,
         however, convey the suggestion that whatever the good intentions at
         the level of the State political leadership, there remain problems,
         even  growing  problems,  at  the  local  level:  see  for  example
         paragraphs 41, 46 and 53 of the first report.  In the circumstances
         we entertain no doubt but  that,  if  the  I.A.T.'s  duty  to  give
         reasons in a determination of  this  kind  is  of  the  nature  and
         quality we have sought to describe, its failure to explain what  it
         made of the SR reports means that the duty has not been  fulfilled.
         The position is the more stark given the I.A.T.'s  own observations
         at paragraph 25 of the S determination, "[s]ince the  situation  is
         somewhat fluid and improvements are undoubtedly  occurring,  it  is
         necessary to look particularly at the most recent reports".

         32. Accordingly we allow these appeals, and remit all  these  cases
         to the I.A.T. to be re-determined. There will be  a  question  what
         form the re-determination should take.  That will be a  matter  for
         the I.A.T.    It  may  be  that  a  full  re-hearing  will  not  be
         necessary.  We have heard no  argument  as  to  the  scope  of  the
         I.A.T.' s procedural powers, and we make no ruling  or  finding  on
         the question".

 4. We confess to some concern that what is said in Paragraph 29 should  be
    used to justify reasons challenges when every piece of  evidence  which
    could bear on the result is not specifically mentioned.  Apart from the
    failure to refer to the two reports, we do not understand  the  balance
    of the determination to have been criticised.  What  we  did  then  and
    shall do in this case is to summarise the relevant material,  to  refer
    to the important reports which give the various different slants and to
    reach our conclusions.  We shall not specify each  document  which  has
    been put before us.  That we do not regard as  necessary;  the  parties
    know what we have had, have put in detailed written submissions and  in
    oral argument referred to those reports and the passages in  them  upon
    which they wish to rely and will be able to decide whether our  summary
    is a proper distillation of the various matters which have been  relied
    on.  We are sure that the court did not require  us  to  do  more  than
    that.  However, we do recognise the need for a  comprehensive  decision
    and one which shows we have had regard to all relevant evidence.

 5. We note but respectfully are unable to  accept the view of the court of
    the importance of opinion evidence.   The  tribunal  is  accustomed  to
    being served with reports of experts.  We have to say  that  many  have
    their own points of view which their  reports  seek  to  justify.   The
    whole point of the country reports is to bring  together  all  relevant
    material.  From them, the tribunal will reach its own conclusions about
    the situation in the country and then will see whether the facts  found
    in relation to the individual  before  it  establish  to  the  required
    standard a real risk of persecution or of treatment which breaches  his
    or her human rights. Further, the tribunal builds up its own  expertise
    in relation to the  limited  number  of  countries  from  which  asylum
    seekers come.  Naturally, an expert's report can assist, but we do  not
    accept that heavy reliance is or should be placed  upon  such  reports.
    All will depend on the nature of the report and the particular  expert.
    Furthermore, it is rare for such experts to be called to give  evidence
    or for their views to be tested.  We were fortunate in S  to  have  had
    called before us two experts who were truly knowledgeable and  who  had
    no particular axes to grind.  We  have  reports  from  experts  in  the
    present case which we shall of course take into  account  and  we  will
    decide what weight should be accorded to their views.

 6. We are not sure how we  would  have  approached  our  task  if  we  had
    reconsidered the cases of which S was the lead.  We had concluded  that
    there was no  real  risk  of  persecution,  but  had  not  specifically
    referred to the reports which, it was argued, might have  affected  our
    decision.  However, in Lazarevic  a  differently  constituted  tribunal
    under the  chairmanship  of  the  Deputy  President  did  consider  our
    decision and the two reports.  It decided and gave  valid  reasons  for
    its decision that the conclusion reached in S was correct.  We have  no
    reason to dissent from that decision.  Indeed, we approve  it.   It  is
    difficult to imagine that we would have reached any  other  conclusion.
    But S and the cases decided with it were all concerned only with asylum
    since the decisions appealed against were all  made  before  2  October
    2000.  Thus human rights would not be considered: see Pardeepan.   This
    meant that all the cases would in all probability  be  the  subject  of
    subsequent appeals if (as seemed likely) claims based on Article  3  or
    any other of the Articles of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
    were rejected.  Accordingly, it was  decided  that  it  would  be  more
    sensible to consider the question whether ethnic Serbs  could  properly
    be returned on both asylum and human rights grounds and so to choose  a
    number of cases in which the decisions appealed against were made after
    2 October 2000.  This we have done.  We therefore have  looked  at  the
    evidence to decide whether now there is a real  risk  of  a  breach  of
    either Convention if returns are made.  Inevitably, we  shall  rely  on
    our conclusions in S insofar as the Court of Appeal has not  criticised
    them.  But we must see whether the evidence before us shows  that  now,
    some 18 months later, there is an impediment to return.

 7. We have heard 5 cases together so that all factual situations which are
    likely to recur and to be relied on in other appeals can be considered.
     3 (including this one) are appeals by the Secretary of State  and 2 by
    the individual.  We shall for convenience refer to all  individuals  as
    claimants.   We  shall  set  out  in  this  determination  our  general
    conclusions and our analysis of the material relating to the  situation
    in Croatia and shall incorporate those in the individual determinations
    which we must make so that appeal rights  are  properly  preserved  and
    proper consideration is given to any  matter  affecting  an  individual
    claimant which may not have been dealt with in the general conclusions.

 8. We should identify those other cases and  the  representatives  in  the
    various appeals.  In this appeal as in all the Secretary of  State   is
    represented  by  Mr.  Sean  Wilken  and  Mr.  Andrew  Robb  of  counsel
    instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.  Mr. Nicholas Blake Q.C. and  Mr.
    Mark Mullins of counsel instructed by Messrs Sutovic and Hartigan  have
    represented the claimant SK.  The other appeals are as follows:-

         1.  NT  (HX/16389/2001).   This  is  an  appeal  by  the   claimant
         represented by      Mr. John Livingston of counsel instructed by  J
         Andrews, solicitor.


         2. MM(CC/12867/2001).  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.
          In it and in all the other appeals the representation is as in SK.


         3. NK (HX/43916/2001).  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
         .


         4.ZM (HX/49818/2001).  This is an appeal by the claimant.


9.   In one case only, that of  NT,  an  issue  of  credibility  might  have
   arisen.  He had stated that he had received threatening telephone  calls
   and had identified the caller as the local police commander.  He did not
   mention that until  after  his  asylum  interview  and  the  adjudicator
   rejected his explanation that he had mentioned it  but  the  interpreter
   had failed to do his job properly.  However,  the  adjudicator  accepted
   that he had received threatening calls and it was acknowledged that this
   dispute would not affect the overall claim.  Mr. Wilken did not seek  to
   rely on the possible credibility issue and he was and we are content  to
   approach all these  cases  on  the  basis  that  no  relevant  issue  of
   credibility arises.

10. We dealt with the background and the relevant history in S  and  see  no
    reason to add to the length of this determination by repeating what  we
    there said.  We also explained how  we  should  approach  our  task  of
    deciding  whether  persecution  within  the  meaning  of  the   Refugee
    Convention had been established with particular  reference  to  Horvath
    [2000] 3 W.L.R. 379. We have also considered whether  the  more  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Svazas v SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  74
    makes  any  difference.   While  the  State  does   not   approve   the
    discrimination and has taken measures to  try  to  prevent  it,  it  is
    officials at a lower level who are to an extent frustrating the State's
    intentions.  We are not here concerned  with  active  ill-treatment  by
    such as the police:  indeed, it is clear that the police  do  represent
    the ethnic mix in that there are a  number  of  Serb  officers  roughly
    corresponding to the numbers in the population of  the  relevant  area.
    In the context of a case such as this where officials are said to be at
    least in part responsible for producing the persecution or breaches  of
    human rights,  a  more  rigorous  approach  may  be  needed.   We  have
    concluded that the threshold of persecution or  of  breaches  of  human
    rights is not crossed and that in general there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection. The same matters, with one  exception,  are  relied  on  in
    these cases as were relied on in S to constitute either persecution  or
    contravention of the claimant's human rights.  They are,  putting  them
    broadly, physical  violence,  hostility  and  discrimination  based  on
    ethnicity.  Their homes in Croatia have either been destroyed or  taken
    over by Croats or any tenancy rights which they may have had have  been
    removed.  They have  lost  and  cannot  regain  employment.   There  is
    chronic unemployment and economic hardship but the  Serbs  are  at  the
    bottom of the heap.  The present regime has failed to recognise and  so
    to 'convalidate' their pension rights which should  have  continued  to
    accrue while the Serbs were in control.  While it is recognised and  to
    an extent accepted that central government is trying to uphold minority
    rights and encourage the return of ethnic Serbs who  had  fled  Croatia
    and who for good reason failed to return while the  HDZ  under  Tudjman
    was in control, it is contended that the government's instructions  are
    being frustrated  at  local  level  by  continuing  discrimination,  by
    judicial  and   bureaucratic   incompetence   and   failures   and   by
    unwillingness or inability to remedy the situation.  In  addition,  and
    this is particularly relevant in the case of MM, there is, it is  said,
    a real risk that prosecutions for alleged war crimes will be pursued on
    the basis of collective responsibility notwithstanding that individuals
    cannot themselves be proved to have done anything which could  properly
    be regarded as a war crime. The one matter not pursued is the assertion
    made in S that there would be a requirement to do military service  and
    the conditions of such service would result in persecution.

11.  Mr. Blake's submissions which were adopted by  Mr.  Livingston  can  be
    summarised as  follows.   The  claimant  fled  ethnic  cleansing,  some
    discrimination, harassment and lack of protection.  At the time Tudjman
    was in power ethnic cleansing was government policy and the steps taken
    to achieve it by forcing Serbs to leave and not to return  amounted  to
    persecution or at the least a breach of human rights.  Thus they  would
    have succeeded had their claims been considered then.  They  have  lost
    all that they had in Croatia - homes, jobs, economic  security,  social
    position - and there is, because of discrimination  and  a  failure  to
    implement the expressed intentions of the government, no real  prospect
    of improvement.  This  constitutes  degrading  treatment.   Further,  a
    sustained breach of core human rights can and does in the circumstances
    of these claims amount to  persecution.   While  it  is  accepted  that
    generally speaking if persecution is not established Article 3 would be
    unlikely to be breached, it is said that where degrading  treatment  is
    relied on it is possible that Article 3 could be  contravened  even  if
    the treatment could not be said to amount to persecution.  Nonetheless,
     it is clear that persecution and breach of Article 3 do usually  stand
    or fall together.  So much was accepted by Mr. Blake and  is  supported
    by the tribunal decision in Kacaj [2002] Imm. A. R. 213.

12.  Since  we  have  to  decide  whether  there  is  now  a  real  risk  of
    persecution, it is obvious that the more recent reports  and  forecasts
    are most relevant.  But we cannot ignore the historical background  and
    evidence as to how the situation has developed over  the  months  since
    Tudjman's death and the election of the new regime  in  early  2000  is
    clearly relevant.  We sought in S to draw a line at the  date  of  that
    determination in the spring of 2001.  We decided that  those  claimants
    had not established a real risk of persecution.  We relied particularly
    on the latest full report from the Organisation for  Security  and  Co-
    operation in Europe (OSCE) of  March  2001.   It  was  said  that  this
    painted too optimistic a picture and that was the burden of the  expert
    evidence from Dr. Gow and Judge Karphammer.  We  have  been  criticised
    for that.  Thus we find Mr. Misha Glenny in the course of an  interview
    carried out in October 2001, which was put before  us  as  an  expert's
    report, expressing his 'astonishment' that we  should  have  failed  to
    follow the views of Judge Karphammer and Dr. Gow.  We do not doubt  Mr.
    Glenny's expertise or his right to criticise us, but we  are  satisfied
    that our reasons for concluding as we did stand up and  have  not  been
    shown to be wrong by anything put before us in these cases.

13. It is said that we were wrong to express doubts about the  existence  of
    'hidden and secret lists of alleged war criminals'.  A bulky  list  has
    been produced before us downloaded from the internet.  But, as Dr.  Gow
    recognises, its provenance is unproven and there is indeed no  evidence
    that it is approved by the government or by anyone who might be able to
    institute proceedings. Dr. Gow's assertion that 'it seems reasonable to
    assume  it  may  be  authoritative'  we  cannot  accept:  he  gives  no
    satisfactory reason for that assertion.  We shall have to return to the
    war crimes question in more detail later in our  general considerations
    and more particularly in MMs case.

14. Mr. Blake persuaded the Court of Appeal in S that specific reference  to
    and consideration of two reports from the Special Rapporteur of the  UN
    Commission on Human Rights (the SR Reports)  was  needed  because  they
    might have affected our considerations.  These did on their face  paint
    a somewhat more gloomy picture than that disclosed in the OSCE  report.
    We had (and have in these cases) to form a judgment based  on  all  the
    material, both historical and recent.  We now recognise that we  should
    have referred specifically to those reports.  But the tribunal did just
    that in Lazarevic.  Since we did have those reports before us  and  our
    error lay in not referring  specifically  to  them  and  since  another
    division of the tribunal had regard to them and explained why they made
    no  difference  to  the  result,  we  see  no  reason  to  modify   our
    conclusions.  But that does not mean we automatically decide  that  the
    claims are not established unless there has been  a  worsening  of  the
    situation since the spring of  2001.   We  have  to  consider  all  the
    material  before  us  and  put  it   into   the   historical   context.
    Nonetheless, we are inevitably and in our view properly  influenced  by
    the conclusions reached in S.  We have too to bear  in  mind  that  the
    argument deployed by Mr. Blake may go beyond those put before us in S.

15  Not surprisingly, greater emphasis has been placed on the  human  rights
    claims.  While it is recognised that Article 14 is not  free  standing,
    it is submitted that discrimination may  amount  to  conduct  which  is
    intended to and does arouse in the victim a feeling of fear, anguish or
    inferiority and so humiliates and degrades him.  Thus the circumstances
    of the individual have to be  considered  and  there  is  no  universal
    standard applicable.  Support for this approach is said to be found  in
    the decision of the European Commission on Human  Rights  in  the  East
    African Asians case(1973) 3 E.H.R.R. 76.  At  Paragraphs  207  and  208
    this was said:-

         "207.  The Commission has stated ... that the  legislation  applied
         in the present cases discriminated against the  applicants  on  the
         grounds of their colour or race.  It has also confirmed  the  view,
         which it expressed at the admissibility stage, that  discrimination
         based on race could, in certain circumstances, of itself amount  to
         degrading treatment ...


         The Commission  recalls  in  this  connection  that,  as  generally
         recognised,  a   special   importance   should   be   attached   to
         discrimination based on race; that publicity to single out a  group
         of persons for different treatment on the basis of race  might,  in
         certain circumstances, constitute a  special  form  of  affront  to
         human dignity; and  that  differential  treatment  of  a  group  of
         persons on  the  basis  of  race  might  therefore  be  capable  of
         constituting degrading treatment  when  differential  treatment  on
         some other ground would raise no such question.


         208. The Commission considers that the  racial  discrimination,  to
         which  the  applicants  have  been  publicly   subjected   by   the
         application of the  ...  immigration  legislation,  constitutes  an
         interference  with  their  human  dignity  which,  in  the  special
         circumstances   described   above   [viz:   that   the   provisions
         deliberately treated Asians because of their race  less  favourably
         than whites who might have been forced to  leave  Uganda  following
         Idi Amin's actions] amounted to 'degrading treatment' in the  sense
         of Article 3 ..."


16. Mr. Wilken suggests that it is an  old  case  which  has  not  been  and
    should not be followed.  Not so, submits Mr. Blake, relying on Cyprus v
    Turkey (ECtHR: 10 May 2001).  He relies particularly on Paragraphs  304
    to 306 of the judgment.  We do not need to set them out  here;  suffice
    it to record  that  the  Court  referred  to  without  criticising  the
    Commission's observations in the East African Asians case and noted:-

         "Regardless of recent improvements in this situation, the hardships
         to which the enclaved Greek  Cypriots  were  subjected  during  the
         period under consideration still affected  their  daily  lives  and
         attained a level of severity which constituted an affront to  their
         human dignity".


   In Paragraph 307, the Court notes a UN report that the Greek Cypriots in
   question "were the object of very severe  restrictions  which  curtailed
   the exercise of basic freedoms and had  the  effect  of  ensuring  that,
   inexorably, with the passage of  time,  the  community  would  cease  to
   exist".


   It concluded (Paragraph 309):-


         "The conditions under which that population is  condemned  to  live
         are debasing and violate the very notion of respect for  the  human
         dignity of its members".


17.  We do not doubt that discrimination on the ground of race is  a  factor
    that should be taken into account  in  deciding  whether  a  breach  of
    Article 3 has been established.  It may in some circumstances  tip  the
    balance.  In Cyprus v Turkey  the  conditions  of  the  enclaved  Greek
    Cypriots was such as to breach Article  3  and  the  discrimination  on
    racial grounds was the motive.  The Court did not suggest  that  merely
    to discriminate on racial grounds would have sufficed to breach Article
    3: the effect of the discrimination and its purpose are important.   In
    both East African Asians and Cyprus v Turkey, the racial discrimination
    was government policy intended to achieve a result which was  degrading
    to the victims.  While we accept that an intention to  degrade  is  not
    necessary and treatment which in fact degrades will constitute a breach
    (see Pretty v United Kingdom at Paragraphs 52 and 53), its absence will
    be relevant in forming an overall view.  Thus  here  the  treatment  in
    issue is the removal by the United Kingdom to Croatia in  circumstances
    where it is said there is a real  risk  of  degrading  treatment.   The
    knowledge that the government opposes such discrimination and is taking
    measures to try to prevent it is clearly a most  relevant  factor.   It
    would be very different if return were in issue when the Tudjman regime
    was in power and ethnic cleansing was the policy.  We have to  consider
    whether notwithstanding the government's measures the  treatment  which
    the claimants will receive does mean there is a real  risk  that  there
    will be a breach of Article 3.  That  some  will  discriminate  despite
    government policy to the contrary is not sufficient: it must  be  shown
    that that there will be  a real risk that whatever is done  amounts  to
    degrading treatment.  Hence there are the references  in  East  African
    Asians to the particular circumstances and in Cyprus v Turkey   to  the
    actual conditions faced by the enclaved Greek Cypriots.

18. Reliance is also placed on Article 8.  The  concept  of  'private  life'
    covers both physical and  psychological  integrity  of  a  person.   In
    Pretty the Court states that the 'notion of personal  autonomy  is,  an
    important principle underlying the interpretation of  [the  Convention]
    guarantees'.  Restrictions which adversely  affect  the  quality  of  a
    person's life can produce a breach of Article 8.

19. Before going further,  we  should  deal  with  a  problem  which  arises
    because of the provisions of s.77 (3) and (4) of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  These read:-

         "(3) In considering -


            (a) any ground mentioned in s.69, or


         (b) any question relating to the appellants' rights under Article 3
         of the Human Rights Convention


         the appellate authority may take into account any evidence which it
         considers to be relevant to the appeal  (including  evidence  about
         matters arising after the  date  on  which  the  decision  appealed
         against was taken).


         (4)  In considering any other ground, the appellate  authority  may
         take into account only evidence -


          (a) which was available to the Secretary  of  State   at       the
         time when the decision appealed against was taken; or


         (b) which relates to relevant facts at that date".


    Those provisions may seem to require that a different approach is taken
    to Article 3 from the  other  Articles.   This  could  lead  to  absurd
    results.  It may be, to give perhaps a somewhat extreme  example,  that
    the appellate authority is persuaded that at the time of the  Secretary
    of State's decision there would have been a breach of Article 3.   This
    would mean almost inevitably that there was then a breach of Article 8.
     At the date of the hearing there had  been  a  fundamental  change  of
    circumstances in the country of nationality and so there was no  breach
    of Article 3 or  of  Article  8.   Would  the  appellate  authority  be
    excluded from considering the change of circumstances and thus have  to
    find a breach of Article 8?  The absurdity is obvious, and it can  work
    in the opposite direction.  We have had put before  us  a  decision  of
    Ouseley J R(Nyakonya) v I.A.T. [2002]EWHC 1437 (QB) in which he gave  a
    very wide interpretation of  'evidence'  within  s.77(4)(b).   This  is
    helpful, but still may necessitate in an individual case an examination
    which may be difficult and involve an element of  logic  chopping.   It
    also does not easily deal with cases where it is said that family  life
    has been established in the United Kingdom (perhaps because  of  delays
    following the decision under appeal) and so Article 8 would be breached
    by a return.




  20. We do not think such refinements are needed.  It is the  intention  of
    the 1999 Act reflected in ss. 74 to 77 under  the  heading  "'One-stop'
    procedure" that all issues relevant to return ought to be dealt with at
    one hearing.  It is accepted that the safety of return must  be  judged
    at the time  of  the  hearing.   That  is  obviously  sensible  because
    otherwise there would be likely to be a flood of fresh claims based  on
    alleged changes of  circumstances  since  the  original  decision.   It
    reflects, in the asylum context, the decision of the Court of Appeal in
     Ravichandran [1996] Imm A.R. 97 and gives it statutory  approval.   It
    was said in Ravichandran that the appellate authority was an  extension
    of the decision-making process.  With that observation we must  quarrel
    since it may seem to suggest that the appellate authority is somehow to
    be regarded as being part of the administrative process.   It  is  not.
    It is an independent body hearing an  appeal  against  a  decision  but
    bound to test that decision against facts found by it at  the  date  of
    the hearing.  Unless withdrawn, the decision  under  appeal  is  to  be
    regarded as being maintained at the date of the hearing.

21. Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 requires the appellate  authority
    as a public authority  (see  s.6(3)(a))  to  act  in  a  way  which  is
    compatible with a convention right.  This obligation does not apply  if
    "as the result of one or more provisions of  primary  legislation,  the
    authority could not have acted differently" (s.6(2)(a)).  Section 3  of
    the 1998 Act requires us to read and give effect to legislation so  far
    as possible in a way which is compatible with  the  Convention  rights.
    To make a determination which upholds a decision to return in breach of
    human rights could, subject  to  the  impact  of  primary  legislation,
    breach section 6.  It  is  important   to  note  the  language  of  and
    relationship between s.77(3) and (4).   In  s.77(3)  a  distinction  is
    drawn between a 'ground mentioned in s.69' and a question  relating  to
    rights under Article 3.  S.77(4) refers to consideration of 'any  other
    ground'  not  to  consideration  of  other   questions   arising.   The
    differences in wording must be taken to have been deliberate.   We  are
    well aware that the Home Office view was (and  the  argument  has  been
    raised by Mr. Wilken in his skeleton but not developed because  of  our
    decision in Kacaj) that only Article 3 could be relied  on  in  removal
    cases.  It is therefore not  surprising  that  Parliament  should  have
    wanted  to  leave  the  matter  open,  particularly  in  the  light  of
    indications in Soering v United Kingdom (1989)  11  E.H.R.R.  439  that
    Article 6 certainly might be relied on in such  cases.   Parliament  no
    doubt recognised the absurdities and contradictions of  its  'one-stop'
    policy which would arise otherwise and it is incidentally to  be  noted
    that the matter is put beyond doubt in the 2002 Act which has just been
    passed.


22. In our judgment s.77(4) does not in  appeals  concerned  with  potential
    removals from the United Kingdom prevent consideration of any  question
    relating to an appellant's rights under any Article of the Human Rights
    Convention as at the date of hearing.  Such a question is not a  ground
    within the meaning of s.77(4).  The explicit reference to Article 3  in
    s.77(3)(b) is explained by the concern to put beyond doubt the need  to
    consider Article 3 breaches as at the date of hearing.  Since Chahal  v
    United Kingdom (1996) 23 E.H.R.R. 415 had made it clear that the United
    Kingdom was bound to do just that it is not surprising that  Parliament
    should have decided to legislate in such a way  as  meant  no  argument
    could be raised about it.  This means that when human rights issues are
    raised no distinction is drawn between Article 3 and any other  Article
    and so the appellate authority can comply with s.6 of the 1998 Act  and
    effect is given to the 'one-stop' principle.

23.  Mr. Blake has argued that both in relation to Article 3 and  Article  8
    the  individual's  circumstances  must  be  considered.   Thus,  it  is
    submitted, those who had houses  and  jobs  and  will  be  returned  to
    neither will suffer more severely and so their quality of life will  be
    affected  to  a  greater  degree.   We  accept  that  an   individual's
    circumstances can be relevant.  Thus, for example,  a  person  who  has
    learning  difficulties  or  some   physical   disability   may   suffer
    disproportionately because of his or her condition.  Nonetheless, there
    must be a threshold which  is  of  general  application.   Croatia  has
    suffered the ravages of a fierce and bitter civil war.  Thus  the  mere
    fact that there will be return to hardship resulting from  that  cannot
    produce a breach of human rights.  The general situation must be  taken
    into account, as must what is generally  accepted  in  the  society  in
    question.  Otherwise, the wealthy could claim merely because  they  had
    lost more.  But obviously if on return particular people are far  worse
    off and so are disproportionately affected by the general  difficulties
    because of discrimination, they may be able to establish a breach.  But
    this will not be because they had a reasonable standard and  return  to
    poverty and hardship.  It will be because they  are  unable  to  escape
    from such poverty and alleviate such hardship because  of  the  way  in
    which they are treated.

24.  We must now turn to the factual situation and consider whether, in  the
    light of the approach we have set out, there is in general a real  risk
    that ethnic Serbs such as these claimants will  suffer  persecution  or
    breaches of their human rights.  Before doing so,  we  should  identify
    the material before us.  The parties were aware that these  cases  were
    intended by the tribunal to establish the general position  as  at  the
    date of hearing and so to enable (subject to  any  special  factors  in
    individual cases or to a deterioration or improvement of the  situation
    in Croatia depending on the  tribunal's  conclusion)  adjudicators  and
    subsequent tribunals to reach consistent  decisions.   Thus  they  have
    between them endeavoured to and, so far as we are aware,  succeeded  in
    putting before us all relevant material.  In addition  to  the  various
    reports from the Home Office, UNHCR, OSCE, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty,
    the U.S. State Department, the European Commission against  Racism  and
    Intolerance (ECRI), various reports from NGOs  both  international  and
    local and from the Commission of the  European  Communities,  a  report
    from Donald Anderson MP to  Alice  Mahon  MP  and  a  report  from  the
    department for International Development (DFID), we have statements (or
    in the case of Mr. Glenny, the record of an  interview  and  a  further
    statement) of three experts, that is to say Dr.  Milivojevic,  Dr.  Gow
    and Mr. Glenny.  The DFID report is expressly  stated  to  reflect  the
    views of  the  consultant,  not  DFID.   These  are  largely  those  of
    Professor Pajic.  We have also seen a number of  press  and  television
    news reports and interviews and correspondence with  and  from  various
    individuals, such as  the  outgoing  leader  of  the  OSCE  (Ambassador
    Poncet) and his successor (Ambassador Semneby).  We did  not  hear  any
    evidence from the experts and so their reports were not tested.  We did
    not consider that that exercise was necessary since the material before
    us enabled us to form a judgment and to reach our  conclusions  without
    extending the process.  The views of the experts were of  course  taken
    into account and we have  weighed  them  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence.  We note the concerns of the Secretary of  State   that  they
    are appearing to some extent to enter  the  arena  by  criticising  our
    previous conclusions in S and so acting more as advocates than experts.
     As we have already said, we accept that they are entitled to criticise
    if their views remain that we were wrong and we  do  not  reject  their
    opinions on that account.  But theirs is but part of the  large  volume
    of evidence before us and, although helpful  and  to  be  accorded  due
    respect, it cannot be determinative.

25.  Mr. Blake was constrained to leave the hearing during the afternoon  of
    the second day.  We agreed that he  should  be  entitled  to  submit  a
    written reply  since  it  was  agreed  between  the  parties  that  the
    claimants should open the appeals rather than the Secretary of State  .
    But we bear in mind that three of the appeals were by the Secretary  of
    State  and that we had to be flexible in dealing with rights  of  reply
    and to try to ensure that neither side was disadvantaged.   So  it  was
    envisaged that the Secretary of  State   might  reply  to  Mr.  Blake's
    written submissions to deal in particular with any new matters  raised.
    Messrs Sutovic and Hartigan have complained at what was in fact put  in
    by Mr. Wilken  and submitted that it goes beyond a legitimate  response
    to the claimants' 'reply' and so should be ignored.  This  is  disputed
    by the Secretary of State.  We of course  accept  that  there  must  be
    finality and we note that the Secretary of State  through the  Treasury
    Solicitor has asked us to ignore the submissions rather than enter into
    disputes about finality.  We have read them.  We are bound to say  that
    we do not think they add anything of significance  to  the  submissions
    made by Mr. Wilken orally and in writing  before  us.   Certainly  they
    raise nothing which has not been dealt with by Mr. Blake or  any  other
    counsel.  We are content in the circumstances to act on  the  arguments
    made before us at the hearing and Mr. Blake's reply.   There  was  some
    additional material, namely a translation of the application  of  Mirko
    Gravec to the ECtHR  (the  referral  was  in  the  papers  before  us),
    production of proper copies of photographs of the state of  the  houses
    of some of SK's family in the village in which he used to have  a  home
    and a transcript of Scott Baker, J's judgment in R(Ahmadi) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department CO/3894/2002 of 11 September 2002.  In
    that case, at Paragraph 38 Scott Baker, J said:-

         "What the case [Bensaid] does  establish  ...  is  that  Article  8
         includes  protection  of  the  right  to  identity   and   personal
         development, which includes the development of  relationships  with
         other human beings and the outside world".


    Ahmadi concerned the return to Germany  of  an  Afghan  family  and  in
    particular the lawfulness of the  certification  by  the  Secretary  of
    State  that their claim under  the  Human  Rights  Act  was  manifestly
    unfounded.  Scott Baker, J quashed the decision partly because  of  the
    evidence of the wife's mental condition and the anticipated  effect  on
    it of removal to Germany for their asylum and human rights claims to be
    considered here.  It does not add anything to the  authorities to which
    we have already referred.  We entirely accept that the conditions to be
    faced on return can engage Article 8.  The point in Ahmadi was that the
    situation was not as the Secretary of State  had asserted it to be, but
    was far less satisfactory and so could impact adversely on the family's
    and in particular the wife's mental health and well being.


26.  Following  those  digressions,  we  turn  to  our  assessment  of   the
    situation.  The claimants recognise that unfair war crimes  trials  are
    of less significance in these cases (with the exception of MM) and that
    there is no sufficient evidence to suggest that in general there  is  a
    real risk that returning Serbs will  face  unfair  war  crimes  trials.
    There must be some special factor to  bring  that  concern  into  play.
    Similarly, as we have already noted, military service and any  problems
    said to stem from it are not  live issues.  Those concessions mean that
    we need not go into those issues in depth, although we  shall  have  to
    deal with war crime trials in the context of MM's case.  The  essential
    complaints common to all are :-

         1. Discriminatory loss of homes and livelihood.


         2. Discriminatory denial of social and economic rights in the areas
         to which return is envisaged.  No special efforts are being made to
         redress the wrongs suffered and the help return to society.


         3. Discriminatory denial of judicial assistance in reclaiming homes
         occupied by Croats.


         4. Loss of stability and security because  of  the  prospect  of  a
         marginalised and ostracise existence in largely ethnically cleansed
         country.  Only a small fraction  of  Serbs  who  used  to  live  in
         Croatia now remain and  the  majority  are  the  elderly  who  have
         returned to die in their homeland.


27. There  is  a  history  of  ethnic  tensions  in  what  is  now  Croatia.
    Following the first multi-party elections in Croatia, the HDZ under the
    leadership of Tudjman came to power in 1990.  This was followed in 1991
    by a declaration of independence  which  triggered  war.   Tudjman  was
    fiercely nationalistic, but  initially  his  attempt  to  establish  an
    independent Croatia was unsuccessful and, following fighting, the  part
    of Croatia in which Serbs were in the majority was declared to  be  the
    Republic of Serbian  Krajina  (RSK).   In  1995,  the  Croatian  forces
    captured what were then  UN protected areas (i.e. the bulk of the  RSK)
    and expelled in all some 212,000 Serbs.   In  1998,  some  50,000  more
    Serbs fled when eastern Slavonia (the only part of the RSK  left  under
    UN control) was to be handed over to Croatia.  The Tudjman  regime  was
    maintaining a policy of ethnic cleansing and removal of  Serbs.   There
    was great bitterness because of atrocities which had been committed  by
    both sides, but it was only the Serbs  who  were  to  be  targeted  and
    punished on the basis of collective responsibility.  Positive  barriers
    were erected to prevent  Serbs from  returning  to  their  homes,  from
    obtaining employment and from being able to reintegrate  into  society.
    Furthermore, acts and threats of violence to Serbs were commonplace and
    were not dealt with by the authorities, particularly when they emanated
    from war veterans who were  known  as  'homeland  defenders'  who  were
    regarded as 'untouchable'.

28. The Tudjman  policies  had  led  to  a  regime  of  political  and  more
    significantly financial ostracism.  Croatia needed support  to  rebuild
    its economy and this was not forthcoming so long as its  discriminatory
    policies remained in being.  It wished to join  the  EU.   In  December
    1999 Tudjman died.  In February 2000 Mesic was elected President for  3
    years and in Parliamentary elections the HDZ was soundly defeated.   It
    is accepted that the new government has made real efforts  to  overcome
    the legacy of hatred and that positive steps have  been  taken  in  the
    form of legislation and other actions to try to remove the obstacles to
    return and the discrimination against ethnic minorities such as  Serbs.
    However, there are concerns that too little is being done and that  the
    good intentions of central government are being frustrated by the local
    officials who are supposed to implement the policies and by  delays  in
    the political process coupled with incompetence of or unwillingness  to
    apply the laws in favour of Serbs by the judiciary.  Thus we  find  the
    January Human Rights Watch report stating:-

         "President  Stipe  Mesic's  government  often  failed  to  confront
         entrenched   ethnic   Croat   nationalists   obstructing    reform,
         particularly on issues of impunity  for  war-time  abuses  and  the
         return of Serb refugees".



    And later in the same report, it is said:-



         "Obstacles to the return  of  Croatian  Serb  refugees  remained  a
         significant human rights concern.  Although  by  August  2001  over
         100,000 Croatian Serbs  had  returned  according  to  the  UN  High
         Commission  for  Refugees,  most  were   elderly.    According   to
         international organisations, significant numbers of these  refugees
         may have again departed for FRY or Bosnia-Herzegovina after only  a
         short stay in Croatia.


         Human rights violations contributed to the reluctance  of  refugees
         to return and to their renewed flight.  While  violent  attacks  on
         Croatian Serbs continued to decrease in frequency, isolated serious
         incidents  contributed  to  apprehension  about  return.   Croatian
         authorities frequently condemned ethnically motivated  attacks  and
         opened investigations, but arrests or judicial proceedings did  not
         always follow".


    So far as the last sentence is concerned, it  is  always  dangerous  to
    read too much into particular  incidents  since  arrests  and  judicial
    proceedings require evidence and the absence of arrests  may  not  mean
    that  the  investigations  were  not  carried  out  properly.   Amnesty
    International in its report of September 2002 noted:-


         "Croatia continued to suffer the  legacy  of  the  1991-1995  armed
         conflict, particularly impunity for war crimes and other violations
         of human rights.  Significant progress  was  made  in  co-operation
         with ICTFY.  The domestic criminal system improved  its  record  in
         investigating and prosecuting war crimes committed by  both  Croats
         and Croatian Serbs, although not  all  proceedings  were  conducted
         thoroughly and impartially.  Return of the country's  pre-war  Serb
         population continued  to  be  marred  by  discriminatory  laws  and
         political obstruction.  Allegations that law enforcement  officials
         ill-treated  detainees   were   not   investigated   promptly   and
         thoroughly".


29.  In September 2002, Ambassador Semneby made a presentation on behalf  of
    OSCE.  In it, he noted the deficiencies that existed in the  protection
    available for returning Serbs.  He said:-

         "It appears that the majority of the Croatian Serb refugees in  FRY
         wish to remain there for various reasons including difficulties  to
         repossess  private  property,  to  receive  adequate   remedy   for
         terminated occupancy rights and  to  validate  documents  regarding
         pension rights.  Still, most surveys indicate  that  about  30%  of
         Croatian Serb refugees in FRY wish  to  return  or  would  consider
         returning if conditions for their return were more favourable".


    After setting out the need to ensure  that  the  necessary  action  was
    taken to improve the situation, he noted:-


         "Croatia's ambitious objective to become part of the  Euro-Atlantic
         community, which has been acknowledged through the signing of an EU
         Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) in October  2001  and
         the announcement of a Membership Action Plan (MAP) with NATO in May
         2002 has underlined  the  necessity  to  urgently  address  several
         problems within the Missions mandate.


         As a consequence, the quality of the Government's dialogue with the
         Mission and its  international  partners  has  improved  in  recent
         months, but there is still a  need  to  involve  the  international
         community earlier in the decision-making process in order to ensure
         the  quality of legislation and other decisions.  The Mission is an
         important instrument to help  Croatia  in  dealing  with  the  many
         challenges it faces".


30. In September 2002 Donald Anderson MP,  visiting  as  a  NATO  delegate,
    noted that doubts still remained about the  sustainability  of  returns
    because in many war affected areas hard line nationalists continued  to
    run local government and would frustrate any return policy.  Even where
    local government was  favourable,  the  necessary  infra-structure  was
    lacking and particular difficulties were  created  by  the  failure  to
    enable Serbs to repossess their properties.  In November 2001 the UNHCR
    was concerned at the lack of homes, the absence of proper repossession,
    the deprivation of tenancy rights and economic restraints  on  returns.
    Nevertheless, returns are being encouraged by UNHCR and a letter of  17
    May 2002,  while  recognising  the  existing  difficulties,  notes  the
    Government's  action  in   taking   positive   steps   to   assist   in
    reconstruction of damaged homes and its plans to render  assistance  to
    those whose tenancy rights have been determined.  This is criticised as
    jam tomorrow, but does show that genuine efforts are being made, albeit
    they may not yet have borne much fruit.

31. In May 2002 OSCE issued its status  report.   It  noted  that  property
    repossession remained at the core of the return  process.  In  December
    2001 the government had presented  an  Action  Plan  to  return  19,000
    properties by the end of 2002: some 10,557 had by  May  been  returned.
    But the Plan does not  cover  all  properties  affected  and  there  is
    opposition preventing further extensions of the Plan.  Loss of  tenancy
    rights is not covered, but there are some encouraging signs.   Thus  it
    is noted (p.16 of the Report):-

         "In December 2001, after consultations with representatives of  the
         international community, the Government stated that a proposal  for
         a comprehensive solution to this issue would be prepared, but  such
         a proposal has  not  yet  materialised.  ....  Public  comments  by
         President Mesic in February 2002, acknowledging that  circumstances
         during the conflict provided reasonable grounds for Serbs to depart
         in fear for their physical safety, suggest  that  the  climate  for
         addressing this issue is improving".


    And in relation to reconstruction, it  noted  that  in  late  2001  the
    Government, supported by UNHCR, 'for  the  first  time  encouraged  and
    promoted the conditions for filing reconstruction applications to  Serb
    refugees in the place of asylum".


32. Reliance has been placed on interviews with Ambassador  Poncet  in  July
    and December 2001 which are said to confirm that  the  OSCE  report  of
    March 2001 was too optimistic.  He was asked:-

       "Although no particular progress has been  achieved  in  the  ...  of
       repossession of property, it seems that ... has  to  admit  that  the
       political climate has  significantly  changed,  after  all.   Do  you
       agree?


       He replied:-


       "Yes, I agree, the tension has  considerably  decreased,  and  it  is
       easier to establish dialogue, even with the people from  HDZ.   There
       is less nationalism and more realism.  Politically, the situation  is
       gradually changing and people are more focussed on the  future,  than
       on the past".


    In December, he said 'truly commendable progress has been made  in  the
    last year and a half' in relation to co-oporation with  OSCE.   But  he
    was saddened by the failure to  pass  a  new  law  on  the  Rights  and
    protection of Minorities and to enforce judgments properly.  But he was
    encouraged by public discussions on occupancy rights.


33.  We have, we hope, cited enough to identify the  real  difficulties  and
    discrimination that undoubtedly face Serbs if returned.  The government
    has the right intentions but is still being frustrated at lower levels.
     However, the government is undoubtedly taking  steps  to  improve  the
    situation and in June 2002 the UNHCR/Stability Pact for South  Croatian
    Europe under  the  heading  'Return  Programme  of  the  Government  of
    Croatia' states:-

         "UNHCR continues to support directly the return  Programme  of  the
         Government of Croatia, accepting and assisting with the  processing
         of return applications.  The total number of  applications  to  the
         Office for Displaced Persons and Refugees (ODPR) procedure from the
         start of the Return Programme  in  June  1998  until  mid-May  2002
         stands at 6,908 while 3,921 persons have returned thus far.   Those
         numbers do not include returns occurring spontaneously  outside  of
         the  Return Procedures.  Currently, there are 1,173 cases where the
         procedure has not been completed or is pending  clearance,  and  of
         these 451 cases have been deferred for lack of records ..."


    While these numbers are small in the context of the total of Serbs  who
    fled, it is clear that the UNHCR  is  still  encouraging  return.   And
    later in the same report it notes that the government  of  Croatia  has
    'agreed to accept all persons who sign a waiver that they  will  accept
    collective accommodation if their housing is not habitable or if  there
    is no host who will accept them.   In  particular,  the  Government  of
    Croatia indicated that it would prioritise Croatian Serbs being evicted
    from  B.H.   (Bosnia-Herzegovina)   for   return   and   provision   of
    accommodation'.  It is further noted that the  Croatian Government  had
    'undertaken to assist returnees in their reintegration by  providing  a
    basic assistance depending on monthly income  for  a  six-month  period
    following confirmed returnee status, although in practice,  a  lack  of
    funds has caused delays. The assistance includes cash  grants,  medical
    coverage and other legal and social benefits'.  It  may  be  said  with
    some force that the situation on the  ground  is  not  so  satisfactory
    since there are bureaucratic delays and obstructions because  of  local
    officials' reluctance to follow the Government's  lead.   We  recognise
    that, but remain of the view that, whatever the  pressures  on  it  and
    notwithstanding its obvious concern to cease to have to be concerned to
    assist those who would otherwise  be  refugees,  the  UNHCR  would  not
    encourage return if persuaded that there would be persecution  contrary
    to the Refugee Convention or, indeed, treatment contrary to  Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.


34. We are well aware that there are concerns that the numbers of  returnees
    have been exaggerated and that  many  who  returned  have  left  again.
    Equally, those who have remained  are  said  in  the  main  to  be  the
    elderly.  We note, too, that the percentage  of  ethnic  Serbs  in  the
    population has reduced from about 12% to  nearer 4%.  This  means  that
    they now represent no threat to the majority but an increase in numbers
    may be regarded  differently.  We note that the figures show  that  the
    majority apparently are unwilling to return, preferring  to  remain  in
    FRY or elsewhere and seeing their future there.   The  numbers  in  the
    United Kingdom likely to be affected by  our  decision  are  relatively
    small.  We recognise that those who are prejudiced against fellow human
    beings on grounds of race or ethnicity may be stirred to react if  they
    fear that an increase in the numbers will threaten them.  We have to an
    extent seen this phenomenon in the United Kingdom where an increase  in
    immigrants can lead to support for nationalist  policies  and  even  to
    violence.   Even  where   the   government   pursues   vigorous   anti-
    discrimination policies and the forces of law and order are prepared to
    provide protection, it is not possible to guarantee that there will  be
    no discriminatory acts or even violence.  But that does not  mean  that
    there is a real risk of a breach of Convention obligations.   It  is  a
    question of judgment and we have regard to  the  high  threshold  which
    must be applied as the ECtHR has recognised in Bensaid v United Kingdom
     (2001) 33 E.H.R.R. 208 and to the 'rigorous scrutiny' needed where the
    ill-treatment will be  contrary to government policy and from non-state
    actors.  It is we think worth citing Paragraph 40 where the court said:-



         "The Court accepts  the  seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
         condition.  Having regard however to  the  high  threshold  set  by
         Article 3, particularly where the case does not concern the  direct
         responsibility of the Contracting State for the infliction of harm,
         the Court does not find that there is a sufficiently real risk that
         the applicant's removal in these circumstances would be contrary to
         the standards of Article 3.  It does not disclose  the  exceptional
         circumstances of the D case [D v United Kingdom  (1997) 24 E.H.R.R.
         423] where the applicant was in the  final  stages  of  a  terminal
         illness, AIDS, and had  no  prospect  of  medical  care  or  family
         support on expulsion to St. Kitts".


35. Considerable reliance has been placed on the DFID draft report based  on
    visits to Croatia in the summer of 2001.  It notes that the police  are
    being reformed and  the penal system appears satisfactory but that:-


         "there are considerable problems on the provision of and access  to
         justice especially for the minorities ... and in  relation  to  the
         return of refugees".


    Discriminatory practices in relation to housing and war crimes are said
    to have put returning Serbs at risk and to  raise  the  possibility  of
    future inter-ethnic conflict 'and to create the most significant  major
    barrier to regional stability and the successful integration of Croatia
    into Western structures'.  It is  said  that  Croatia  has  'the  worst
    record on integration of refugees and displaced persons.   There  is  a
    clear ethnic bias against non-Croats'.  There follows reference to  the
    problems faced by Serbs to which we have already referred  and  to  the
    failure by the Office  of  Displaced  Persons  (ODPR)  set  up  by  the
    Government  of  Croatia  to  act  in  an  even-handed  manner  and  its
    persistence  in  discriminating  against  non-Croats.   All   this   we
    recognise, but it is now somewhat out  of  date.   The  government  has
    clearly recognised the importance for Croatia of economic ties with the
    EU.  There has been greater co-operation  with  ICTY  and  the  concern
    about that which was expected by some to result  in  the  fall  of  the
    present government in July 2002 have not provoked that result.  We find
    in the OSCE fortnightly report  of  25  September  to  8  October  2002
    reference to President Mesic's testimony at the Milosevic trial. Croats
    have been handed over to face trial on charges of crimes against  Serbs
    and the weekly report, having noted the considerable  public  interests
    in the President's testimony which was carried live and watched  by  as
    much as 40% of the population according to one opinion poll, concluded:-




         "More than half of the viewers believe the  President's  appearance
         before  the  ICTY  would  improve  the  international  standing  of
         Croatia, arguing that it showed that Croatia believes in  the  rule
         of law and takes its international commitments seriously".


    The OSCE background report of 10  October  2002,  while  recording  the
    support for the decision to challenge the  indictment  against  General
    Bobetko, notes that the most recent polls indicate a  shift  of  public
    opinion  back  to  a  support  for  co-operation  and  compliance  with
    Croatia's  international  commitments.  The   opposition   to   General
    Bobetko's surrender to ICTY is based to a greater extent on his age (he
    is now 83) and cannot in our view  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of
    failure to co-operate generally  with  ICTY.   It  further  notes  that
    public acknowledgements in the media by Croatian  officials  that  both
    sides committed war crimes have notably become more common.   All  this
    gives some encouragement since it shows that there  is  recognition  of
    the importance to Croatia of integration into Western Europe  and  this
    is more likely to result in greater acceptance of the need to show that
    discrimination is being tackled.


36.  Local elections were held in May 2001.  The HDZ  gained  one  third  of
    the local regional assembly and  council  seats  contested  nationally.
    This is said to show a  resurgence  of  support  for  ultra-nationalist
    policies including discrimination against  Serbs.   Thus  we  find  Dr.
    Milivojevic saying:-

         "As things stand now ... the high hopes of radical political change
         and a possible  rejection  of  the  HDZ  years  engendered  by  the
         election of a new government at the beginning of 2000 may prove  to
         have been little more than illusions about the supposed seizure  of
         the HDZ and all that it represents".


    In his report of August 2002, he says that  the  'powerful  and  quasi-
    criminal wing' of the HDZ led by Ivic Pesalic has not been fully curbed
    by the new leader.  But there has been a significant change  and  there
    are signs that the HDZ, although no doubt still nationalist  and  right
    wing, is not run by those  espousing  the  extremist  policies  of  the
    Tudjman era.  The majority of Croatians will not want to return to  the
    isolation and economic damage  resulting  from  it  which  the  Tudjman
    policies produced  and  which  similar  policies  would  be  likely  to
    produce.   In  addition,  in  some  areas  the  HDZ  has  entered  into
    arrangements with other parties,  including  the  SDS  (the  government
    party),  to  share  power.   While  the  dangers  of  a  resurgence  of
    nationalism are apparent - the history of this part  of  Europe  cannot
    instil confidence that in the future there will be no regression  -  we
    do not regard the increased support for the HDZ as it now is  with  the
    same pessimism as is displayed by Dr. Milivojevic.


37.  The government  of  prime  minister  Racan  has  survived  despite  the
    expectations that  it  would  not.   Dr.  Gow  refers  to  major  anti-
    government demonstrations in 2001.  He concludes thus:-

         "Regarding the status and conditions of ethnic  Serbs  in  Croatia,
         generally since the election in February 2000 of  a  new  President
         with a new approach, Mr. Stipe  Mesic,  there  has  been  a  marked
         change of emphasis in Croatia at the government  level  in  Zagreb.
         However, it clearly remains the case that  despite  the  top  level
         change, the position for ethnic Serbs in certain regions especially
         individuals who have served in the OS RSK, or  similar,  cannot  be
         guaranteed to be beneficial and free from acts that could be deemed
         persecution.   It  is  equally  apparent  that  despite  the   best
         intentions of President  Mesic  and  of  the  government  of  Prime
         Minister Ivica Racan, at the  national  level,  the  power  of  the
         nationalist HDZ remains entrenched in many areas and,  indeed,  was
         reinforced and enhanced by results in the May 2001 local elections,
         where the HDZ made gains.  This may confirm the impression that  in
         relevant areas, the situation  has  deteriorated  at  a  time  when
         generally there has been improvement in Croatia".


    These views are entitled to be accorded considerable respect, but  they
    seem to us to be over pessimistic and to ignore the signs to  which  we
    have referred which point in a more optimistic direction.  Contrary  to
    the views of at least one tribunal, we  do  not  regard  the  increased
    support for the HDZ in May 2001 (which incidentally,  still represented
    a fall in support as against the Tudjman years ) as showing a worsening
    of the situation since S was decided.


38. War crimes prosecutions we  can  deal  with  relatively  briefly  having
    regard to the concession that unless there is a  particular  reason  to
    believe an individual will be prosecuted or (as in the case of MM)  has
    been prosecuted, they cannot be relied on as a barrier to  return.   We
    should say that we are satisfied that the concession was rightly  made.
    It is, of course, proper that war  criminals  should  be  punished  for
    having committed crimes and there can be no doubt that both  Serbs  and
    Croats have been guilty of such crimes.  But such prosecutions must  be
    based on proper evidence and proof of individual  responsibility.   The
    OSCE and the UNHCR closely monitor prosecutions and, in particular,  if
    a returnee is arrested, the UNHCR will  'very  closely  and  thoroughly
    monitor the situation'.  It notes that' we found the trials  have  been
    very fair and correct in their procedure'.  The numbers do not  suggest
    there are widespread prosecutions let alone an  implementation  of  the
    lists to which we have been referred.  There has been an  amnesty,  but
    that amnesty has not wiped out  the  conviction  and  so  there  remain
    barriers to individual's employment prospects unless the conviction  is
    expunged.  In November 2001, we find OSCE noting:-

         "a positive trend in  ...  decisions  by   County  Prosecutors  and
         judges to reject war crimes and genocide charges against groups  of
         Serbs due to the lack of any evidence of individual crimes".


39. Despite this, there remain some problems where trials in  absentia  have
    been held.  MM is an example, he  having  been  sentenced  to  4  years
    imprisonment on the  basis  of  charges  which  on  their  face  cannot
    properly be said to amount to conduct which can reasonably be  regarded
    as constituting a war crime.  He manned a barricade  and  was,  it  was
    said, offensive and threatening in  a  racist  manner  to  Croats.   An
    accelerated  procedure  has  been  put  into   effect   to   ensure   a
    reconsideration and if necessary a  re-trial  of  anyone  convicted  in
    absentia.  But there may be a remand in custody of usually no more than
    one or two months while the matter is reconsidered.   If  it  is  clear
    that the case is too weak  to  be  able  to  succeed,  release  may  be
    effected after a couple of days.  Whatever may seem to be the  strength
    of the case from the information produced to us, we find it  impossible
    to say that there would be persecution or a breach of human  rights  if
    the question  whether  there  should  be  a  re-trial  is  investigated
    properly even if there may be a  relatively  short  remand  in  custody
    while that is being done.

40.  As will no doubt be apparent, we are satisfied that there has  been  no
    worsening of the situation since we decided S and   in  any  event  the
    material before us does not persuade us on the  low  standard  required
    that there is a real risk that in general Serbs if returned to  Croatia
    will suffer persecution or a breach of  any  Article  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  We recognise that  the  situation  is  far
    from pleasant and the deprivation and misery that will be faced.   That
    stems from the war and the destruction  caused  by  it.   But  that  by
    itself cannot mean that surrogate protection is needed  or  that  there
    will be a breach of human rights.  We regard the  steps  taken  by  the
    Croatian government, despite the difficulties at local  level  and  the
    obstacles that still undoubtedly exist, as sufficient  to  provide  the
    necessary protection.  It follows that we accept the  submissions  made
    by Mr. Wilken, set out in detail in  his  skeleton  argument  and  more
    particularly in Annex 2 to it.  Even  though  there  is  discrimination
    coupled with the difficulties particularly of housing,  employment  and
    convalidation to which we have referred,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    threshold of Article 3, in particular of degrading treatment,  has  not
    been crossed.  Equally,  although  we  recognise  that  the  Article  8
    threshold is lower, we are not persuaded that it has been crossed.  But
    even if it has, we are satisfied that removal is justified by a  proper
    control of immigration.

41.  We must finally consider the circumstances of  the  claim  by  SK.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on a flight from  Hungary  with  a  valid
    Croatian passport on 27 November 1997 and was given leave to enter as a
    visitor for 6 months.  On 22 January 1998 he claimed  asylum,  but  was
    not interviewed until 16 October 2000.  On 24 November, his  claim  was
    rejected and removal directions were made.  His appeal was heard by  an
    adjudicator on 1 May 2001.  The adjudicator allowed his appeal  on  the
    basis that he had a well-founded fear of persecution and faced  a  real
    risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The Secretary of State  was given leave to appeal on the
    ground that the adjudicator had not been able to consider S and, if  he
    had, should have reached a different conclusion.

42. The claimant was born in Knin and lived there until August  1995.   Kuin
    was in the RSK.  He was doing his military service in the OS  RSK  when
    Operation Storm occurred and he then fled to Bosnia.  He then  went  to
    Serbia and came from there to the United Kingdom because, he  said,  he
    feared that the Serb authorities would try  to  mobilise  him  for  the
    impending war in Kosovo.  He had obtained Croatian  documentation  when
    the region of Eastern Slovenia was Serb controlled under UN protection.
     The Secretary of State  in refusing his claim did not consider whether
    he could have remained in safety in Serbia but rejected it on the basis
    that he would not by then suffer persecution or a breach of  his  human
    rights if he returned to Croatia.

43.  SK's family had a house near Vrtika, a small  town  near  Knin,  and  a
    flat in Knin.  The house in Vrtika was burnt down and the flat in  Knin
    was taken over by Croats.  The family owned  arable  land  at  Podosje,
    which is near Vrtika.  All houses have, as the photographs  show,  been
    destroyed and the village "turned into a rubbish dump".  Although  some
    family are now living there, he would have  nowhere  to  live  and  any
    scheme for living with sympathetic families would founder for such lack
    of resources.  His father has applied for repossession of the Knin flat
    but so far no steps have been taken by the Croat  authorities  in  that
    direction.

44.  SK is now in full-time employment as a security officer.  He is  living
    with a British citizen and she is  expecting  their  baby  in  February
    2003.  He has thus established a family life in this country and return
    to Croatia would, unless his partner went with him, interfere with that
    family life.  So far as we are aware, that  aspect  has  not  yet  been
    considered by the Secretary of State.  He could  if  returned  seek  an
    entry clearance on the basis of that relationship.  There is  no  doubt
    that he would if returned suffer hardship and  the  situation  for  the
    partner, who would be uprooted from a reasonable standard of living  in
    the United Kingdom to  what  can  only  be  described  as  a  miserable
    existence, would be harsh  in  the  extreme.   If  satisfied  that  the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting, the Secretary of State  will no
    doubt bear all this in mind in deciding whether to return the claimant.
     We have to apply the approach of the Court of  Appeal  in  Mahmoud  in
    deciding whether return would breach Article 8.  The establishment of a
    family life when a person's immigration position is precarious will not
    usually justify a finding that Article 8 is breached since  application
    can be made from abroad and it is  wrong to jump the  queue.   Thus  we
    are  not prepared to make the primary decision;  that must be  done  by
    the Secretary of State .  Nor do we think that it is appropriate for us
    to make a specific recommendation in the absence of  any  consideration
    of the full circumstances, which we cannot do since we  only  have  his
    word at the  moment  and  the  Secretary  of  State   has  not  had  an
    opportunity of investigating the position.

45.  Despite  the  hardship  that  the  claimant  will  undoubtedly   suffer
    resulting from the fighting in  his  country,  he  does  not  show  any
    special circumstances which mean that he can establish that  he  should
    be given the benefit of either Convention.  For the  reasons  which  we
    have  given,  therefore,  we  take  the  view  that  the  adjudicator's
    conclusion was wrong and this appeal must be allowed.

46. This case has  been  starred  but  the  starring  only  relates  to  the
    consideration of s.77(4).  Although  it  is  intended  to  provide  the
    answer to claims by ethnic Serbs who seek to prevent  their  return  to
    Croatia, it is a decision based on  fact  and  so  cannot  be  starred.
    However, unless the situation deteriorates to a significant  extent  or
    special circumstances can be shown in an  individual  case,  no  ethnic
    Serb should be able to establish a claim under either Convention.










Sir Andrew Collins
President
