
ar                                                            Appeal    No.
HX12237-2002
                                  NB (Mixed Ethnicity-  Ethiopian-Eritrean)
                            Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 06526


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing : 27 September 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 14/02/2003.

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                             Mrs S I Hewitt, JP




                                NAJAT  BASHIR


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Ms A. Oliso of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the respondent :  Miss J. Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who appeals  by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  T.J.  Cary,
      dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to
      grant her asylum and to give directions for removal to Ethiopia.

   2. The appellant arrived in this country in July last  year  and  shortly
      after arrival claimed asylum.

   3. The basis of her claim  is  that  she  is  the  daughter  of  a  mixed
      marriage, her mother being Ethiopian and  her  father  Eritrean.   The
      family lived in Ethiopia and  she  has  an  Ethiopian  passport.   The
      appellant left Ethiopia for Saudi Arabia in May 1999 to work  in  that
      country as a domestic servant. After her departure her father received
      a letter from the government requiring the family to  leave  Ethiopia.
      She has never suffered any persecution in Ethiopia and it would appear
      that her parents have left the country,  though  where  they  are  she
      knows not.  She has a half sister in this country  with  whom  she  is
      currently  living.   Her  father  had   two   wives   and   kept   two
      establishments in Ethiopia, her sister in this country is the child of
      the second wife. She claims that she could not be returned to Ethiopia
      because she would not be allowed  to  enter  the  country  as  she  is
      Eritrean and her life would be at risk in Ethiopia.

4.    The Adjudicator has found that the appellant would  be  recognised  as
      an Ethiopian were she to return to that country. She was born in Addis
      Ababa of an Ethiopia mother and an Eritrean. She  had  never  been  to
      Eritrea. She speaks Amharic and held an Ethiopian  passport  when  she
      left the country in May 1999. She regards herself as Ethiopian.    For
      reasons which are set out in some  detail  in  the  determination  the
      Adjudicator finds that there was no risk that she would be  persecuted
      were she to  return  to  Ethiopia.   These  reasons  are  set  out  in
      paragraphs 49 to 53 of the determination.  The  Adjudicator  has  also
      rejected claims made under Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Act.

5.    Miss Oliso submitted that because the appellant is of mixed  ethnicity
      she would be deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea and  her  rights  under
      Articles 3 and 8 would be infringed. She has a  half  sister  in  this
      country who is recognised as a refugee and with whom she has developed
      a family life since her arrival. There is no family life  in  Ethiopia
      as her family has dispersed.  In considering the Article 8  claim  the
      Adjudicator had attached too  much importance to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant and her half sister did not have a family life  together  in
      Ethiopia. Miss Oliso accepted that the half sisters had  led  separate
      lives in Ethiopia but points out that they are blood relations and the
      appellant herself would have no family life in Ethiopia.

6.    Miss Sigley in  her  submissions  maintained  that  the  Adjudicator's
      findings are perfectly sound. There were certain discrepancies in  the
      appellant's evidence, in particular in relation to whether or not  the
      appellant was or was not in Ethiopia at the time the  family  received
      the expulsion letter. The appellant had no problems in Ethiopia and in
      Miss Sigley's submission the Adjudicator has fully considered all  the
      objective evidence.  Miss Oliso in her submissions had referred us  to
      a letter (no. 19 in her bundle) which is from a Miss Susan Rogers  who
      is the Country Officer for Angola, Ethiopia and Eritrea, addressed  to
      Mr Stuart Ousley, Home Office  Presenting  Officer  Unit  in  Feltham.
      This letter is dated 2 August 2001 and states:

              'In reply to your fax dated 12 July 2001 I regret to say that
             the information I  have  received  this  week  indicates  that
             deportation of Eritreans from Ethiopia are continuing as UNHCR
             has suggested  in  their  letter  that  despite  the  previous
             information which was that they had ceased.


             The current information I have is  marked  'Restricted'  so  I
             cannot provide it for use at the hearing, however it seems  to
             me that in view of this it would not be proper to maintain our
             previous position.  In this type of case it  would  seem  that
             removal to Eritrea may  however  be  appropriate  and  I  have
             attached a disclosable letter from  FCO  on  the  question  of
             Eritrean nationality which may be of assistance.'

7.    As Miss Sigley points out there is no indication as to what case  this
      letter refers (it certainly does not refer to the instant appeal)  nor
      do we know the circumstances relative to the case to which it  refers.
      Miss Sigley told us that she had no knowledge  of  the  background  to
      that letter. She referred us  to  the  CIPU  Report  relating  to  the
      expulsion by Ethiopia and Eritrea of citizens of either  country  from
      their respective countries.  She also referred us to 5.66 to  5.69  of
      the same report indicating that the  government  of  Ethiopia  stopped
      deporting Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean  origin  after  signing
      the Cessation  of  Hostilities  Agreement  in  June  2000.   Voluntary
      repatriations to Ethiopia have taken place. The other paragraphs refer
      to UNHCR concern with regard to the treatment of Eritreans in Ethiopia
      and the expulsion by Ethiopia of 772 people identified as Eritreans.

8.    Turning to the human rights claim,  Miss  Sigley  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator's findings with regard to Article 8 are  perfectly  sound.
      The appellant and her half-sister  are  now  adults,  if  there  is  a
      private life in this country it would  nevertheless  be  proportionate
      for the Secretary of State to deport the appellant.   The  Adjudicator
      has taken these matters fully into consideration.

9.    Miss Oliso in a final submission points out that  the  appellant  does
      not currently have an Ethiopian passport and referred us to  the  CIPU
      Report emphasising the deportation of Eritreans from Ethiopia.

10.   The basis of the appellant's claim is  quite  simply  that  she  fears
      that if she were to be returned to Ethiopia she would be deported back
      to Eritrea as she is a person of mixed ethnicity. The Adjudicator  has
      dealt with this perfectly adequately in paragraphs 47  to  52  of  the
      determination.  The Adjudicator finds that  the  appellant  has  never
      been persecuted in the  past and that  she  would  be  entitled  to  a
      Ethiopian passport under Article 6 of the Ethiopian Constitution.  She
      rightly points out that the appellant held an  Ethiopian  passport  as
      recently as three years ago.  There  is  no  evidence  objectively  to
      indicate that she would not be entitled to a fresh Ethiopian  passport
      were she to apply for one.  The  Adjudicator  rightly  points  out  in
      paragraph 48 that the appellant's claim is based solely on  her  mixed
      parentage but  on  her  own  admission  she  had  never  suffered  any
      harassment during her time in Ethiopia and had never been arrested  or
      detained,  nor had any attempt been made to deport her.  She seems  to
      have been of no interest to the authorities prior to her departure for
      Saudi Arabia.  The Adjudicator has  fully  considered  the  background
      material in paragraph 49 which includes much of the material  that  is
      before us and  the UNHCR letter of 20 February this year, and  as  she
      rightly points out in paragraph 50 'There is nothing in the letter  to
      suggest that every Ethiopian national of mixed parentage is at risk of
      deportation or even harassment.'
11.   The relevant passage in the UNHCR letter reads:

             'There are also reports that  some  Eritreans  and  Ethiopians
             with Eritrean links were not called to renew their  Dine  Year
             Residents Permits which expired in April/May  2001.   However,
             it seems that in Addis Ababa the Immigration  and  Nationality
             Department is  in  the  process  of  renewing  such  residence
             permits or at least some of them.   Information  available  in
             June/July indicated that  radio  announcements  were  made  in
             Harar and Diredowa requesting Eritreans  and  Ethiopians  with
             Eritreans links to renew their residence  permits.   But  some
             individuals in this category may not have been able to  afford
             the  residence  permit  renewal  fees  because  of   loss   of
             employment, thus becoming potentially at risk of deportation.'

12.   We do not think that this in fact refers to the circumstances of  this
      particular appellant. We bear  in  mind  that  she  has  never  had  a
      residence permit because she has never needed one as she  already  had
      an Ethiopian passport on which she travelled to Saudi  Arabia  in  May
      1999. Clearly her family were regarded as Ethiopian citizens  at  that
      time.  Assuming the question of a residence  permit  even  arises,  it
      would appear that the Immigration & Nationality  Department  is  quite
      prepared to grant such residence permits, publicly proclaiming this on
      the radio, in particular in relation to  Addis  Ababa  and  we  remind
      ourselves that the appellant comes from that city.

13.   In reviewing the determination and all the  objective  evidence  which
      was before the Adjudicator and which is before us, we  entirely  agree
      with the Adjudicator's findings  at  paragraphs  52  that  'I  do  not
      consider it is reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  of  any
      interest to the authorities were she to return  to  Ethiopia   now  in
      view of the cessation of hostilities in Eritrea and Ethiopia.' In  the
      following paragraph she states:  'I  do  not  consider  it  reasonably
      likely either  that  the  appellant  will  be  denied  readmission  to
      Ethiopia or that her rights once there will be infringed sufficient to
      engage either the United Nations Convention or the ECHR.'  We entirely
      concur with those conclusions of the Adjudicator.

14.   Turning now the question of the  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  the
      Article 8 appeal, as the Adjudicator rightly points out, the appellant
      has only been living with her half-sister for just  over  a  year  and
      that there was no family life between the two half sisters in Ethiopia
      because the father maintained two separate marital establishments  and
      the appellant belonged to one family the half sister to another.  They
      met at school and they occasionally met socially,  but  clearly  there
      were two separate establishments and the appellant's family  life  was
      with her parents and whatever other siblings she may have had by  that
      marriage. Both the appellant and  her  half  sister  are  adults  (the
      appellant is twenty-four this year but we do not know the age  of  her
      sister).   Even if the two half-sisters have established a family life
      between themselves in this country, the nature of that family life and
      the circumstances of this appellant are such that in our view it would
      not be disproportionate for the  Secretary  of  State  to  deport  the
      appellant and we entirely concur with the  Adjudicator's  findings  in
      relation thereto.

15.   The Article 3 claims have not been pressed by Miss Oliso  and  rightly
      so. There is no evidence that the appellant would suffer any breach of
      Article 3 rights were she to return to Ethiopia, for the same  reasons
      as relate to her appeal against deportation.

16.   The appeal is accordingly dismissed.



                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


