
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX61897-2000      |
|On 20 August 2002          |        |MA (Risk-Jaaji              |
|                           |        |Clan-Benadiri) Somalia CG   |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 04084          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|30TH AUGUST 2002                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mr R Baines, JP                                                   |
|Mr D R Bremmer                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MOHAMUD OSMAN AMIN                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by
                       Wilson & Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, is a citizen of Somalia, born on 5 January 1969.  He
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 November 1994 and  applied  for
        asylum.  His asylum application was refused for the reasons set out
        in a letter dated 6 April 1995, but he was at the same  time  given
        12 months  exceptional  leave  to  remain  which  was  subsequently
        extended until 5 May  2001.   On  3  August  1995  he  applied  for
        variation of the first grant of leave on the  basis  of  a  renewed
        asylum application and this was refused by letter dated  25  August
        2000.  He appealed against that refusal under Section 14(1) of  the
        Immigration Act 1971 and Section 8(2) of the Asylum and Immigration
        Appeals Act 1993.

     2. On 13 December 2000 his appeal was  heard  by  Mr  M  P  Keane,  an
        Adjudicator, who dismissed his appeal.   The  Adjudicator  accepted
        the appellant is a credible witness in his claims but,  found  that
        his claim did not engage the Refugee Convention since, applying the
        principles in the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Adan
        [1998] Imm AR 338, on  the  basis  that  treatment  feared  by  the
        appellant was no  more  than  that  arising  out  of  the  ordinary
        incidences of the civil war in Somalia and that the  appellant  was
        not subject to the necessary  deferential  impact  which  would  be
        necessary for the Convention to be engaged.

     3. The appellant then sought leave to appeal to the Tribunal which was
        granted on 31 January 2001 limited to the appeal under Section 8(2)
        of the 1993 Act and the claim that the Adjudicator had erred in law
        in his application of the principle in Adan.

     4. The appellant came from Mogadishu in the Benadir region and  was  a
        member of the Jaaji clan.

     5. The Adjudicator made the following findings of fact at paragraph 23
        of the determination:

        "The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He  is  a  member  of  the
        minority Jaaji clan.  He was captured and detained in 1991  in  the
        mistaken belief that he was a  member  of  the  Hawiye  clan.   His
        release was secured by his employers.  On returning to his home  in
        Mogadishu two harrowing events  took  place.   First,  two  of  his
        brothers were murdered in front of him by  armed  gunmen.   Second,
        his wife and two sisters were raped while lay  unconscious  on  the
        floor.  Their attackers were also armed gunmen.  The appellant  was
        captured and detained in September 1992.  After 1 month he was able
        to escape and resolved upon flight.  He left Somalia for Ethiopia."


     6. There are certain additional details from the  determination  which
        we should record.  It was the appellant's claim that the Jaaji clan
        were an outcaste minority clan outside the  noble  clan  structure,
        and that they had a very low  status.   They  had  a  tradition  of
        endeavouring to conceal  their  clan  identity  and  attempting  to
        integrate themselves into other clan structures.  They did not have
        an armed militia and were not protected by a  warring  clan.   They
        had not participated in the civil war  which  had  taken  place  in
        Somalia from 1991  onwards.   The  appellant  had  originally  been
        captured and detained by the Darode militia on 15 January 1991 when
        he was working away from his home area.  At that time he  had  been
        mistaken for a member of the Hawiye clan and  was  ill-treated  for
        that reason until his employers were able to  secure  his  release.
        He was captured and detained for the second time  on  25  September
        1992 in his home area because he was from the minority Jaaji  clan,
        and he was detained in the Habar Gadir military camp until  he  was
        able to escape about a month later.  It was between these two areas
        of capture and detention, after he had returned to Mogadishu,  that
        his brothers were shot in front of him and, subsequently, that  his
        wife and two sisters were raped by Abgal gunmen after he  had  been
        knocked unconscious.

     7. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr  Toal  referred  us  to  the
        Adjudicator's record of proceedings because there were passages  in
        the evidence which had not  been  included  in  the  determination.
        These passages were the appellant's explanations in  oral  evidence
        as to why he and his fellow clan members were treated in the way he
        had described.  He had said that the  two  incidents  in  Mogadishu
        where his relations were attacked had been carried  out  by  gunmen
        from the Abgal tribe and that he and his family had  been  targeted
        because it was their practice  to  find  out  the  tribal  or  clan
        origins of those in the area whom they intended to attack  and  his
        neighbours were all aware that he and his family were of the  Jaaji
        clan.  Their attackers would know that they could act against  them
        with impunity and without any fear of reprisal  because  there  was
        nobody to protect him and his clan members.

     8. At the time of the hearing before the Adjudicator  the  appellant's
        exceptional leave to remain expired on 5 May 2001,  a  little  less
        than 6 months ahead.  The Adjudicator was satisfied that there  was
        no likelihood of any material change in the  situation  in  Somalia
        and that he could properly consider whether removal at  that  stage
        would be in breach of the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
        Refugee Convention.  He said at paragraph 28 of his determination:

        "I find that the appellant does not have  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution for the Convention reason of race if he was removed  to
        Somalia on or after 5 May 2001.  Earlier in  this  determination  I
        made findings of  fact.   The  appellant's  account  of  event  was
        credible and truthful.  Nevertheless, the important issue  in  this
        appeal concerns the motives of those who  persecute  the  appellant
        and indeed his brothers, wife  and  sisters.   Depending  on  their
        motives for the attacks and actions in question, the  appellant  is
        either a victim of the incidents of civil war  or  a  member  of  a
        group which is the victim of  persecution.   If  the  appellant  is
        merely a victim of the incidents of civil war he is not  a  refugee
        within the Convention..."


     9. The Adjudicator then referred to the judgments in Adan, setting out
        extracts  from  the  judgment  of  Lord  Lloyd  and  continued   at
        paragraphs 32-34 of the determination as follows:

        " I find that the appellant is just such a person.  He is a  member
        of a minority clan which has decided that because it  is  powerless
        to defend itself it should not try to  defend  itself.   The  Jaaji
        clan and its members are victims of civil war.  Mr Toal  sought  to
        distinguish Adan (page 15 of the record of proceedings) by  stating
        that the appellant and his father had  not  been  involved  in  the
        fighting and indeed the Jaaji clan also had not  been  involved  in
        the fighting.  This submission was reinforced by  paragraph  13  of
        his written submissions which  made  the  same  point.   I  do  not
        consider that Mr Toal's submission is well-founded.  Indeed I  rely
        on the passage of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  in  Adan  quoted
        with approval by Lord Lloyd at  page  349  of  his  judgment.   The
        appellant is just one of many victims of civil war in Somalia.  The
        fact that he has not participated in the war and the fact that  his
        clan, the Jaaji clan, have not participated in the  war,  does  not
        provide for him a differential impact at the time envisaged by Lord
        Lloyd.  At 33 I note in passing that Professor James C Hathaway  in
        "The Law of Refugee Status" stated that:


        "...The Convention today remains firmly anchored in the  notion  of
        elevating only a sub-set of  those  at  risk  of  war  and  violent
        conflict to the status of refugee."


         34. Professor Hathaway admitted of  two  important  exceptions.   I
             consider one only.  The exception comprised those  persons  who
             may be differentially at risk where the civil war  or  violence
             is  directed  at  a  particular  social  sub-group.   Professor
             Hathaway mentioned a Canadian Immigration Appeal Board decision
             of Tekeste  Kifletsion  [1980]  which  concerned  a  civil  war
             against a minority race inside a country verging  on  genocide.
             The claimed refugee status in those  circumstances  did  arise.
             However, that is not the position here.  The appellant is not a
             member of the clan which other clans which to exterminate.   He
             is a victim of civil war.  A highly unpleasant adjunct to civil
             war is that individuals, often armed and  extremely  dangerous,
             seek to exploit matters for their own benefit.   The  appellant
             and his family tragically been victims of their activities.   I
             find that the appellant is a victim of  civil  war  and  not  a
             victim of persecution."

    10.  Mr  Toal  for  the  appellant  has  made  long  and  comprehensive
        submissions, both written and  oral  before  us.   We  hope  we  do
        justice to those submissions in saying that the essence of them was
        that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in  law  in   restricting   his
        consideration to one only  of  the  two  exceptions  identified  by
        Professor Hathaway to the general rule  that  victims  of  war  and
        conflict are not refugees unless they are subject  to  differential
        victimisation based on civil or political status.  He expresses his
        views as to the second exceptional at  page  188  of  "The  Law  of
        Refugee Status" in the following terms:

        "Second, even within the context of generalised  violence  or  war,
        there may exist a risk of serious harm specific to persons  defined
        by a particular form of civil or  political  status.   While  early
        Canadian decisions prefer simply to adopt an absolutely  dismissive
        view of claims derived from situation of conflict, the decision  of
        the Federal Court of Appeal in Zahirdeen  Rajudeen  v  Minister  of
        Employment and Immigration marked a watershed in  the  approach  to
        this issue.  This case involved a Sri Lankan Tamil whose  need  for
        protection  from  Sinhalese  thugs  had   been   ignored   by   the
        authorities.  The Immigration Appeal Board dismissed the  claim  as
        nothing more than a reflection of the generalised violence  in  Sri
        Lanka.  The Federal Court, however, found that the  harm  faced  by
        the claimant was in fact due to the unwillingness of authorities to
        protect him because of his race and religion:


        "The applicant was not mistreated because of civil  unrest  in  Sri
        Lanka but because he was a Tamil and Muslim."


        This decision underscores the particular  importance  of  enquiring
        into all of the circumstances of a claimant  coming  from  an  area
        which suffers from generalised violence in order to discern whether
        or not the risk faced by a particular individual  or  group  is  in
        fact rooted in civil or political status,  in  which  case  refugee
        status may follow.


        Thus, while the general proposition is that the victims of war  and
        violence are not by virtue of that fact allowing  refugees,  it  is
        nonetheless possible for persons coming from a strike-torn state to
        establish a claim to refugee status.  This is so where the violence
        is not simply generalised, but is rather directed  toward  a  group
        defined by civil war  or  political  status;  or,  if  the  war  or
        conflict is non-specific in impact, where the claimant's  fear  can
        be traced to specific forms of disfranchisement within the  society
        of origin."


    11. Again, we hope we fairly  reflect  Mr  Saunder's  able  submissions
        before us that the Adjudicator  was  right  in  his  approach;  the
        appellant and his immediate family had simply been the  victims  of
        random criminal violence which formed part of generalised  violence
        within a civil war situation in which  they  were  attacked  simply
        because they were more vulnerable than other groups.   He  and  his
        family were not attacked because of their political or civil status
        but, simply for reasons of vulnerability and an inability to defend
        themselves.

    12. The Somali clan culture is, of course, highly complex  and,  as  Mr
        Saunders fairly commented, one of the difficulties in this case  is
        the lack of knowledge of the situation of the Jaaji clan.  They are
        not as are, for example, the Bajuni clan mainly concentrated in one
        geographic area but, rather spread more diffusely  through  Somalia
        with particular concentrations in specific parts  of  the  country,
        including Mogadishu where the appellant comes from.  The  Secretary
        of State is prepared to recognise that membership of certain of the
        minority  clans  in  Somalia  is  reasonably  likely  to  lead   to
        persecution by reason  of  their  racial  or  ethnic  origin.   The
        Secretary of State generally accepts, for example, that members  of
        the Benadiri and the Bajuni minority groups are vulnerable and says
        in terms at paragraph 5.46 of the current CIPU assessment that "the
        future of the Bajuni in Somalia is uncertain".

    13. Similar information in relation to what  are  referred  to  in  the
        assessment as minority groups appears at paragraphs 4.17 and  5.44;
        in the former there is the only reference which we  can  detect  to
        the Jaaji clan by name.  It is appropriate to quote  the  whole  of
        paragraph 4.17 dealing with the situation in Mogadishu:

        "As before the civil war, Mogadishu, as the  capital  city,  has  a
        population containing people from virtually all  clans  and  ethnic
        groups in Somalia, although  the  majority  is  Hawiye  clan-family
        members.   After  Barre's  overthrow,  reprisals  were  exacted  on
        members of his Marehan clan, with many leaving the city,  but  some
        of Marehan have returned and generally  do  not  face  persecution.
        Members of the minority population, such as  the  Reer  Hamar,  the
        original Benadiri population  of  Mogadishu  (known  in  Somali  as
        Hamar) living in the Hamar Weyne and Shingani districts, and Bantu,
        found themselves particularly exposed at times of  heavy  fighting.
        As with Somalia as a whole, an individual in Mogadishu will be most
        secure in an area in which his or her clan is able to  afford  them
        protection.  Members  of  small  clans  and  minority  groups  are,
        inevitably, at more risk, although some minority  groups,  such  as
        the low caste Midgan, Tomal, Yubir, Ayle, Jaaji and Yhar,  who  may
        risk harassment by Somali clans in rural areas, do not  necessarily
        find themselves facing particular human rights or security problems
        in Mogadishu."


    14. Mr Toal referred us particularly to the report Dr  Virginia  Luling
        on caste groups in Somalia in or about 1996 and the report  by  Lee
        Cassanelli of  May  1995  on  "victims  and  vulnerable  groups  in
        Somalia".  Dr Luling says that little is known of the situation  of
        the "caste groups" or "Bondsmen" who are a small minority among the
        Somali who traditionally lived among the past nomadic clans but  in
        recent decades had in many cases gone to live in cities.  They  are
        collectively known as Sab.  The Jaaji tribe are one  of  the  names
        met in this connection and were originally fishers.  They all  have
        in common that they are of low status and separate from the general
        Somali clan system.  Previously they would attach themselves  to  a
        patron clan for whom they would  perform  services  in  return  for
        protection but the many members of this collective group  who  have
        moved to the towns have become free of their  dependence  on  their
        former  patrons  and  are  now  without  protection.   Their   only
        participation in the clan system was through the clan  group  which
        was there patron and they could not own land  or  major  livestock,
        they are stigmatised because they would eat  parts  of  the  animal
        "free" Somalis will not eat; marriage between  a  Sab  and  a  free
        Somali person is  traditionally  forbidden;  but  are  not  usually
        differentiated by appearance from the free Somalis.  Dr Luling says
        that before the civil war and the separation and stigmatisation  of
        the caste group was beginning to break down and that  the  move  to
        the  towns  with  people  setting  up  independently  in   business
        contributed to this although a deep prejudice survived.  During the
        Barre government people from caste groups were often  favoured  and
        might reach high positions but, those who did so  under  the  Barre
        regime were sure to be doubly resented and open  to  revenge.   She
        says that in the post 1991 violence members of the caste groups are
        especially vulnerable and, because of their traditional low status,
        are liable to be considered legitimate  victims  (like  the  Bantu)
        with no powerful clans to protect them.

    15. Professor Cassanelli's research paper was prepared for the Research
        Directorate of the Canadian Refugee Board in May 1995.  He lists as
        factors making minorities  as  a  whole  especially  vulnerable  to
        militia violence both during the early stages of  war  and  the  UN
        intervention,  as  military  weakness,  vulnerable  assets,  social
        isolation, political ****** and  limited  support  networks  beyond
        their home communities.  He states that the minorities were not  as
        a rule singled out as military targets by the post Barre  militias,
        but that they were victimised repeatedly by  armed  gunmen  of  all
        persuasion with their home subject to searches and  looting,  women
        being raped and elders intimidated.  In dealing  the  caste  groups
        whom he also refers  to  being  known  collectively  as  "Sab"  and
        treated as outcasts because traditionally  they  could  only  marry
        among themselves and other Somali clans  considered  them  ritually
        polluted, but makes it clear it is difficult  to  generalise  about
        the fortunes of such caste groups in the civil war.  He  says  that
        they did not pose a significant threat to any other  Somali  group,
        although particular individuals and families who visibly  supported
        the old regime were vulnerable to  retaliation.   Although  he  had
        been unable to find evidence save in one case involving  the  Abgal
        clansmen and the Yibir caste group, he had not  found  evidence  of
        other  cases  of  systematic  retaliation  against  these  minority
        groups.  Although they could be attacked with impunity as they  had
        no natural clan allies in the  widest  society  and  no  collective
        voice in political circles.

    16. The joint British, Danish and Dutch fact finding mission to Nairobi
        of September 2000 says very much the same about the plight  of  the
        caste groups.  That report refers to the "Jaaji as  being  included
        in the term Midghan as collective  term  covering  all  these  sub-
        groups and again emphasises the fact that they  are  scattered  all
        over Somalia with little  specific  information  available  on  the
        human rights and security situations.  Again, it is said there  are
        no indications that the security of Midghan, Tumal and Yibir is  at
        risk for targeted actions by other clans but there are  indications
        that their relationships with  the  major  Somali  clans  have  not
        improved much from  traditional  times  and  that  they  are  still
        discriminated against in social and  economic  spheres.   There  is
        also a reference to the Sab castee groups has having  no  right  to
        the payment of compensation for murder from the noble Somali  clans
        - the payment of what is traditionally called "Diya".   It  was  Mr
        Toal's submissions to us that this demonstrated  very  clearly  the
        degree to which they  are  isolated  from  the  traditional  social
        infrastructure which provided some stability for  the  majority  of
        Somali clansman.

    17. What seems to emerge clearly to us from this background evidence is
        that it is extremely difficult to identify the situation  of  those
        who  form  part  of  these  scattered  castee  groups   but   that,
        nevertheless, they do comprise defined and recognised sub-groups in
        Somali society who cannot in general terms place any reliance  upon
        the traditional infrastructure of clan support.  Because  of  their
        scattered nature it seems to us that there vulnerability has almost
        been approached on a case by case basis depending upon the specific
        facts  which  have  been  found  as  relating  to  the   individual
        appellant, but nevertheless bearing in mind that the  vulnerability
        or otherwise of specific individual from one of these castee groups
        stems from the vulnerability of members of such castee groups.   It
        does, therefore, seem to us relevant that in the present  case  the
        appellant  links  the  vulnerability  of  him  and  his  family  in
        Mogadishu to the fact that it was the lack of structured protection
        within Somali society which led to them being vulnerable  and  that
        their vulnerability would be revealed  by  enquiries  made  in  the
        districts in which people who could be attacked with impunity would
        be sought out.  This seems to  us  to  be  more  than  more  random
        violence but rather a violence from whichever force happened to  be
        dominant to be given at a time directed specifically against  those
        who because of their position in society could not seek traditional
        sources of protection.

    18. In this connection, what is said at  paragraph  4.17  of  the  CIPU
        assessment is significant.  Members of the Jaaji group among others
        are referred to as  "not  necessarily"  finding  themselves  facing
        particular human rights or security problems  in  Mogadishu.   That
        does not suggest that such problems may not exist  for  members  of
        such a  sub-group  but  that  the  individuals  circumstances  will
        require to be carefully analysed  to  see  whether  the  particular
        applicant is at risk.

    19. Applying this approach, and taking into account the fact  that  the
        appellant has been found wholly  credible  in  the  claims  of  the
        appalling treatment meted out to him and his family in Mogadishu in
        1991 and 1992, we find that  the  appellant  and  his  family  were
        targeted by reason of their castee group and that the  mistreatment
        did not arise simply because of the civil  unrest  in  Somalia  but
        because  they  were  of  that  sub-group  and  could  therefore  be
        mistreated with impunity.  We are satisfied,  therefore,  that  the
        treatment suffered was not simply ordinary incidence of  civil  war
        to which the population at large was subject, but was inflicted  on
        a genuinely differential  basis  against  this  appellant  and  his
        family.  The treatment received at the time  he  fled  the  country
        would, therefore, in our view  engage  a  Convention  as  being  by
        reason of his racial or ethnic origin.

    20. It was Mr Toal's submission to us that on the  background  evidence
        extensively placed before us, the situation had not improved in the
        intervening years and that Mogadishu still remain an  exceptionally
        dangerous city.  Mr Saunders did not seek to challenge that general
        assertion.   The  fact  of  past  persecution  is,  of  course,  an
        important consideration in deciding whether there is  a  reasonable
        likelihood that it  will  be  repeated  if  the  appellant  is  now
        returned or, indeed, had he been returned at the expiration of  his
        exceptional leave to remain in  May  2001.   We  do  not  consider,
        having regard  to  the  current  country  situation  and  the  past
        persecution of this appellant, that it can  be  said  there  is  no
        current real possibility that he would  be  further  persecuted  by
        reason of his ethnic origin in Somalia.  We are satisfied therefore
        that he is entitled to succeed in his claim that he has  a  current
        well-founded fear of persecution in Mogadishu,  his  home  area  to
        which any return would as we understand it currently be effected.

    21. It was not seriously suggested to us that  the  return  to  another
        part of Somalia, given the general problems of  instability  within
        that country and the fact that the appellant would  be  effectively
        be a displaced person elsewhere than in  Mogadishu,  would  not  be
        unduly harsh.

    22.  For  the  above  reasons,  and  on  the  specific  facts  of  this
        appellant's claims, this appeal is allowed.




                                                   J Barnes
                                                   Vice President










