

                                                     Appeal No. HX14126-2002
                                                                 AS (Article
                                 3- Kenyan Asian) Kenya CG [2002] UKIAT05943


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date heard: 21 November  2002
                                               Date notified:.8 January 2003


                                   Before

                            DR H H STOREY (CHAIR)
                               MR P ROGERS JP
                                 MR A SMITH



                                                               Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                          MR ANJAM SAEED SOMRA (+3)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr I J French, allowing  on
human rights grounds the appeal of the  respondent,  who  claimed  to  be  a
former national of Kenya who was now stateless, against the decision  giving
directions for removal  following  refusal  to  grant  asylum.  Mr  J  Jones
appeared for the appellant. Mr I Ali, assistant solicitor of  Harbans  Singh
& Co (Soho Road)  appeared  for  the  respondent.  To  avoid  confusion  the
respondent is hereafter referred to as the "claimant".


2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal.

3. We should clarify at the outset that we see no basis  in  this  case  for
interfering with the adjudicator's  principal  findings  of  fact.  He  gave
clear reasons based squarely on the evidence for those  findings  and  there
has been no challenge raised to them in the grounds or in any  cross-appeal.
The only question in this  case  is  whether  those  findings  entitled  the
adjudicator to allow the appeal under Article 3.

4. Among the reasons the  adjudicator  gave  for  rejecting  the  claimant's
asylum claim was that he did not accept that attacks carried out on him  and
his family were  aimed  specifically  at  his  family  or  were  politically
motivated. However, when it came to assessing the claimant's  Art  3  claim,
the adjudicator gave as one of his principal reasons  "the  risk  of  attack
or robbery without assistance from the police". In our view the  adjudicator
forgot here that the test under Art 3, as under the Refugee Convention,  was
one of real risk, not mere risk. On the evidence as found by him  he  should
have concluded that, as there was  no  real  risk  of  the  claimant  having
become the target for attacks and robberies, this was  not  a  valid  reason
for allowing the appeal under Art 3.

5. What other reasons were mentioned by the ajdudicator in  support  of  his
conclusion that Art 3 was breached? He  mentioned  only  three  others.  One
concerned the fact that the claimant lacked Kenyan citizenship and so  would
arrive as a stateless person. Another was that he had  only  one  member  of
his family remaining in Kenya, a brother who was said to be  in  hiding  and
no longer working. The third reason was the  likelihood  that  the  claimant
would not be able to work, as he had no appropriate documentation.

 6. Even accepting each of these as relevant factors,  we  do  not  consider
that they were individually or cumulatively sufficient  to  cross  the  high
threshold of serious harm under Art 3. As regards  the  inability  to  work,
there was evidence  that  the  Kenyan  authorities  in  September  1990  had
informed the claimant that he was not a citizen of Kenya. But there  was  no
satisfactory evidence that in the period  up  until  he  left  his  lack  of
citizenship prevented him from working. Nor was his claim that he  would  in
practice be prevented  from  working  supported  by  any  objective  country
materials. From the CIPU Country Assessment of April 2002, paragraph 5.  30,
it would appear that the Asian community in Kenya, whilst it faces a  number
of  discriminations,  is  relatively  affluent.  Mention  is  made  of   its
reluctance of its reluctance to employ blacks, but not of any reluctance  to
employ fellow-Asians.  In the light of such evidence, it was not  reasonably
likely that such a community would not assist a fellow-Asian  in  trying  to
set up his own business or to find employment. There was  no  evidence  that
Asians in Kenya faced a significant problem of unemployment.

7. As regards the claimant's lack of family in Kenya,  even  accepting  that
all but one of his family have now left and even accepting that his  brother
is in hiding, the claimant was an adult in good health and would be able  to
return to live among fellow-Asians. This lack of family  certainly  did  not
demonstrate that return would expose him to serious harm. (Nor,  given  that
he was now separated from his wife, can we see  there  would  be  any  valid
basis for saying that his right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life
would be disproportionately interfered with as a result of the  decision  to
remove him.)

8. That leaves the issue of the claimant's alleged statelessness. Since  the
appeal in this case is against removal  directions  to  Kenya,  the  country
from which he travelled to the United Kingdom there is no issue here of  any
invalidity of the  removal  directions.  Nor  is  there  any  issue  of  the
claimant not being able  to  return  to  Kenya.  He  has  not  produced  any
evidence to show the Kenyan authorities would refuse to admit him.  However,
even if let us suppose the Kenyan authorities refused to  admit  him,  there
would still be no breach of Art 3, since  it  is  Home  Office  policy  that
where a person cannot be returned because a  country  to  which  removal  is
sought will not accept him, he is then returned to the United Kingdom.  Such
a result does not infringe Art 3: see Pavlov [2002] UKIAT 02544.

9. In any event, we do not consider that the claimant is stateless.   Whilst
we are satisfied that the claimant is not (and  has  never  in  law  been  a
citizen of Kenya), it would appear  he  has  a  presumptive  entitlement  to
Pakistan citizenship. The claimant has confirmed that he  was  told  by  the
Kenyan authorities in 1990 to apply for Pakistan  authorities  and  we  have
been shown evidence that he did in  fact  apply.  Despite  that  application
being lodged in 1998, the claimant has not produced  any  evidence  to  show
either that he pursued this application in the intervening 4 years or  that,
if he did pursue it, it was refused. In our view  it  is  reasonably  likely
that the Pakistan authorities would accept (if they had not in fact  already
done so) that he is a citizen of Pakistan by paternal descent. The  claimant
has failed to demonstrate that there have been or would be  any  significant
obstacles to him obtaining Pakistan  citizenship.  Applying  the  principles
set out by the Court of Appeal in the case of Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR 359  we
consider it reasonably likely that he is a citizen of Pakistan.

10. For  the  above  reasons  this  appeal  is  allowed.  The  adjudicator's
principal findings did not  justify  his  conclusion  that  return  of  this
claimant to Kenya would expose him to a real risk of treatment  contrary  to
his human rights.



                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




