
ar             DS (Persecution- Risk-Return) China CG [2002] UKIAT 02340

                                                   HX43480-2001



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date of Hearing: 3 May 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 ................4 July 2002

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                              Mrs M E McGregor







                               DICKEY  SHERPA

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellants    : Mr M. Braid, counsel,  instructed  by  Gillman-Smith
Lee
For the respondent  : Mr M. Davidson, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of China from Tibet who  appeals  by  leave
      of the Tribunal against the decision  of  a  special  adjudicator  (Mr
      N.J. Bennett)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
      Secretary of State to grant asylum and for her removal as  an  illegal
      entrant to China or, to be exact, Tibet.

2.    The only issue for the Tribunal to decide, and which forms  the  basis
      of the grounds of appeal, is the question of the safety of  return  of
      the appellant now.

   3. In paragraph 30 of the determination the adjudicator points  out  that
      no submissions were made that failed asylum seekers cannot be returned
      to Tibet, but he does go on to consider the report of TCHRDT to  which
      reference is made in the grounds of appeal.  He  refers  to  the  fact
      that detainees undergo harrowing interrogation sessions concerning the
      motivation for their visit and their future objectives. Life in  Tibet
      becomes  one  of  captivity,  without  actual  imprisonment;    random
      surveillance and regular enquiry become a part of  everyday  life  for
      these returnees. A further area of discrimination  awaiting  returning
      exiles is in the sphere of job opportunities because they are rendered
      officially unemployable.


4.    In paragraph 31 the adjudicator goes on to say:





             'Quite how the respondent intends to return the  appellant  to
             Tibet is not clear, but none of the foregoing  indicates  that
             the appellant will be persecuted or subjected  to  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment on her  return  to  Tibet.   Although  the
             interrogations may be harrowing, there is nothing  to  suggest
             that she would be tortured  or  physically  or  mentally  ill-
             treated whilst being detained or whilst being interrogated.'


5.    Mr Braid put before us a very helpful skeleton argument  in  which  he
      refers extensively to the objective evidence to support his contention
      that there was a reasonable likelihood that  the  appellant  would  be
      subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment or tortured upon  return.
      He refers in particular to the US State Department Report, to  Amnesty
      International Reports and to a TCHRDT report, and  in  his  submission
      these reports indicate  overwhelmingly  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that the appellant would be detained  and  maltreated  upon
      return.

6.    Mr Davidson, in his submissions, urged us to accept that it cannot  be
      argued that  every  returnee  would  be  subjected  to  the  treatment
      referred to by Mr Braid in  his  skeleton  argument.  He  referred  in
      particular to the reports  which  indicate  that  there  is  a  strong
      discrimination against those who are  returning  from  India  or  from
      Nepal.  He submitted that there was nothing  in  any  of  the  reports
      before us to indicate that those returning from the west,  and  Europe
      in  particular,  with  proper  documentation  would  be  subjected  to
      detention and possible torture.

7.     We  find  ourselves  in  considerable  sympathy   with   Mr   Braid's
      submissions as expressed in his skeleton argument. In considering  the
      objective evidence we apply the test of a reasonable likelihood as set
      out in Sivakumaran and more recently in Karanakaran.

8.    Unfortunately, neither Mr Braid nor Mr Davidson were  able  to  assist
      us as to whether or not it  is  illegal  for  Tibetans  to  leave  the
      country without the permission of the Chinese authorities, and nothing
      in the objective evidence before us indicates that this might  be  the
      position.  What is clear from the US State Department Report  for  the
      year 2000, however is that those fleeing the country are subjected  to
      arrest and detention and that this is 'a common feature of  repression
      of Tibet today'.  The paragraph to which we refer on  page  5  states:
      'Whilst it is impossible to accurately monitor the number of prisoners
      detained on the border whilst trying to exit or  re-enter  Tibet,  the
      fact that these detainees go through interrogation, beatings and other
      forms of punishment is certain'.  We note in particular the  reference
      to re-entering Tibet.

9.    The report of the  Tibetan  Centre  for  Human  Rights  and  Democracy
states:

             'Increased restrictions were imposed during  2000  on  Tibetan
             returnees from exile  leading  to  the  alleged  detention  of
             approximately fifty students and the expulsion of  twenty-nine
             Tibetan tour guides.  The movement of  exiled  returnees,  who
             are viewed with suspicion while being  involved  in  political
             disturbances, are monitored closely through China's  pervasive
             espionage network and interrogation procedure. The possibility
             of securing any government related jobs  is  non-existent  for
             Tibetans returning to  their  home  lives  from  a  period  in
             exile.'

10.   The preceding paragraph of the same  report  which  refers  to  prison
      malpractice in the form of torture would appear to  be  well  recorded
      and documented.

11.   We accept that there is particular emphasis in these reports of  those
      Tibetans returning from India or Nepal and we accept that  it  is  not
      being alleged by the appellant that she would be returning from either
      of those countries, though quite  which  route  the  respondent  would
      chose for her is far from clear.  Further, the general  tenor  of  the
      objective evidence, would  appear  to  refer  to  returnees  from  any
      country, but with particular emphasis on India and Nepal.

12.   The grounds of appeal and the submissions made  by  Mr  Braid  do  not
      question the adjudicator's finding that the appellant's claim to  have
      been a participant in a demonstration in 1999,  or  that  her  parents
      disappeared immediately  following  that  demonstration,  and  that  a
      friend of  hers was arrested by the authorities, is  not  sustainable,
      for the reasons which he has set out.  However,  in  paragraph  19  he
      states:

              'Against that background I am prepared to accept that if  the
             appellant  were  to  be  arrested  for  participating   in   a
             demonstration held in March 1999, demanding  independence  for
             Tibet  and  commemorating  the  fortieth  anniversary  of  the
             unsuccessful Tibetan uprising against the Chinese in 1959, she
             would have a well-founded fear of persecution because  of  her
             political opinions and that there would be a real risk of  her
             rights under Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention would be
             infringed thereafter, even though she is not a nun.'

13.   The backboard information referred to an  analysis  contained  in  the
      preceding paragraph.

14.   Whilst we would normally  agree  with  the  adjudicator  that  if  the
      appellant has acted or been involved as she claimed, then there  is  a
      real risk of persecution and a risk of a breach of her  human  rights,
      we do not, in this particular case, however, agree with his view  that
      a finding to the contrary means that there is no risk to the appellant
      upon return.  The overwhelming tenor of the objective  evidence,  from
      which we have quoted some small extracts, leads us to the view that as
      a person who has gone into self-imposed exile, whatever her activities
      may or many not have been before she left Tibet, there is nevertheless
      a reasonable likelihood that she would be questioned and detained upon
      return.  This questioning and detention would  not  necessarily  arise
      out of her possible activities prior to departure but arise out of the
      fact that she is returning from the west.   The  evidence  would  also
      indicate to us that such questioning and detention  could  lead  to  a
      reasonable likelihood of punishment, torture and inhuman and degrading
      treatment.

15.   We make this finding in the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case
      because the adjudicator has rejected  the  basis  of  the  claim  very
      largely upon the fact  that  there  is  no  record  in  the  objective
      material before him  of  the  particular  demonstration  having  taken
      place.  He may or may not be right in that conclusion, but  what  does
      concern us is that the objective evidence relating to the  suppression
      of information, in particular anything indicative  of  action  against
      the Chinese government, might have led  to  the  possibility  that  no
      record of this demonstration was allowed to reach the  outside  world.
      The objective evidence indicates a very substantial suppression by the
      Chinese authorities of all personal freedom and in particular  freedom
      of  information  and  press  freedom.  Therefore,  we  are   left   in
      considerable doubt  as  to  whether  or  not  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood  that  the  demonstration  did  take  place  but  that  its
      existence was never disclosed to the outside world.   Because  of  our
      doubts, we are left with  the  feeling  that  there  is  more  than  a
      reasonable likelihood that this appellant would face the exigencies to
      which we have referred above were she to return.  It is also clear  to
      us that there is more than a reasonable likelihood that she  would  be
      discriminated against in relation to employment, even is she were able
      to enter the country without risk to her person.

16.   For these reasons, therefore we allow this appeal.







                                M W  RAPINET

                               VICE  PRESIDENT




-----------------------
      1


