
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX49602-2001
On 22 May 2002               SQ (Delay  -  Minor)  Kosovo  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
02448


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             9 July 2002

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                Mr M L James



                                 SOKOL QATA


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia
     (Kosovo),  appeals,  with  leave,  against  the  determination  of   an
     Adjudicator, Mr WL Grant, dismissing his appeal against the decision of
     the Respondent on 21  August  2001  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum.  The
     Appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain  in  accordance  with
     standard practice, as he was an unaccompanied minor, and his  right  of
     appeal against the decision was under section 69(3) of the  Immigration
     and Asylum Act 1999.

  2. Mr B Halligan, instructed  by  Messrs  Gadwah  &  Co,  represented  the
     Appellant. Mr J Morris, a Home Office Presenting  Officer,  represented
     the Respondent.

  3. Mr Halligan said that the Appellant will be 18 on 29th  June  2002  and
     his exceptional leave to remain will  then  expire.  He  would  not  be
     arguing that the Appellant is traumatised by his experiences in Kosovo,
     as had been previously suggested.  The main issue in dispute is whether
     the decision reached by the Respondent was in accordance with the  law,
     due to the delay in reaching the decision. The  Appellant  entered  the
     United Kingdom on 13 August 1998 and claimed asylum the next  day.   He
     made a trip to France in 1999 because he heard that  his  father  might
     have been there.  He went to look for him and was away for  two  weeks.
     The Adjudicator  found  that  the  Appellant  had  by  leaving  the  UK
     abandoned his first claim for asylum and then made a  new  one  on  his
     return.  That finding is not challenged, but it  is  argued  that  even
     from March 1999, when he returned, the delay  in  making  the  decision
     until August 2001 was too long, in the context of  paragraphs  350  and
     351 of HC 395 (the Immigration Rules), and paragraph 28  of  the  UNHCR
     Handbook.  The delay was also in breach  of  section  6  of  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998, which made it unlawful for a public authority  to  act
     in a way, which is incompatible with a Convention right. The Respondent
     did not accord with his own rules and in accordance with  paragraph  21
     of Schedule 4 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  Act,  the  appeal
     must therefore be allowed.

   4. He argued further that  if  the  Respondent  had  acted  in  a  timely
      fashion, in accordance with the Rules,  entitlement  to  asylum  would
      have been decided on  the  facts  as  they  were  in  1998,  when  the
      Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom or 1999, when he returned from
      France.  The Respondent should not be allowed, as a consequence of his
      delay, to have the benefit of  assessing  the  claim  in  the  changed
      circumstances at the present time.  The  appeal  both  in  respect  of
      asylum and Article 3 should be determined on the basis of the facts as
      they  were  when  the  application  was  made.   Thus  the  grant   of
      exceptional leave to remain in 2001, being based on the  facts  as  at
      that time, was not in accordance with the law as it should  have  been
      based on the facts as at 1998.

  5. Mr Halligan also sought  leave  to  argue  that  paragraph  23  of  the
     determination dealing with the Article 8 claim was in error in that the
     Adjudicator did not deal with the question of proportionality.  However
     this matter had not been raised  in  the  leave  application,  was  not
     covered by the grant of leave. Leave had not been sought prior  to  the
     hearing, nor had the Respondent  been  notified  that  leave  would  be
     sought, so that a considered  response  could  be  prepared.  In  these
     circumstances leave was refused. In any event  the  Tribunal  indicated
     that in its view the finding by the Adjudicator was that the  Appellant
     had not established evidence that he had private or family life in  the
     UK which would be interfered with by removal. Therefore the question of
     proportionality did not arise.

  6. Mr Morris argued that the delay in dealing with the  Appellant's  claim
     was due to the well-publicised problems in  the  Home  Office  at  that
     time.  The Appellant did  receive  immediately  from  arrival  all  the
     welfare arrangements that were required. His case did  receive  in  all
     material respects the priority required under the Rules.   This  appeal
     is about returnability now. There was no dispute that  in  the  current
     circumstances  he  could  now  be  returned  to  Kosovo  safely.    The
     Respondent had met his obligations by looking after  the  Appellant  to
     the age of 18.  He can now safely be returned. Paragraph 350  does  not
     impose any time limits on the decision-making process itself.

  7. The Tribunal reserved its decision.

  8. The starting point in assessing whether  the  Respondent  has  been  in
     breach of the Rules is to decide what the  Rules  actually  require  of
     him. Paragraphs 350 and 351 of HC395, upon which  Mr  Halligan  relies,
     state as follows.
           "350.  Unaccompanied children may also apply for asylum and,  in
           view of their potential vulnerability, particular  priority  and
           care is to be given to the handling of their cases.
           351.   A person of any age may qualify for refugee status  under
           the Convention and the criteria in paragraph 334  apply  to  all
           cases.  However, account should  be  taken  of  the  Applicant's
           maturity and in assessing the  claim  of  a  child  more  weight
           should be given to objective indications of  risk  than  to  the
           child's state of mind and understanding of  his  situation.   An
           asylum application made on behalf  of  a  child  should  not  be
           refused solely because the child is too young to understand  his
           situation or to have formed a well founded fear of  persecution.
           Close attention should be given to the welfare of the  child  at
           all times. "

  9. Paragraph 350 sets out no specific timetable or time  limits.  It  does
     not refer to the timing of decisions specifically. It requires that the
     handling  of  the  cases  of  unaccompanied  minors  should  be   given
     particular priority and care because of their potential  vulnerability.
     This reference to vulnerability is the context in which  the  paragraph
     (and the Respondent's obligations under it) has to be interpreted,  and
     the key to that  interpretation.  In  reality  it  does  no  more  than
     restate, in this specialist field, the general  principle  in  our  law
     that the interests of children have to be given priority. The prime and
     most urgent need of  an  unaccompanied  minor,  coming  to  the  United
     Kingdom to seek international protection, is to  receive  proper  care.
     There is no dispute that the  Respondent  has  provided  such  care  in
     proper response to his obligations. The next need is to ensure that  an
     unaccompanied minor is not returned to his home country, whilst he is a
     minor,  without  ensuring  that  adequate  reception   facilities   are
     available. Again the  Respondent  has  not  acted  in  breach  of  this
     obligation. No removal directions were set, or yet have been,  and  the
     Appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain here until  his  18th
     birthday in accordance with published policy. His case  and  his  needs
     have been given priority and care. It is  unfortunate  that  the  well-
     publicised problems at the Home Office resulted in considerable  delays
     in the asylum decision making process in many thousands of  cases.  But
     that delay was not caused by any desire to  manipulate  the  result  of
     asylum appeals and has not caused any failure in the provision  of  the
     care required by the Appellant as  a  vulnerable  unaccompanied  minor,
     pending the making of the decision.

 10. Paragraph 351 then sets out how  the  assessment  of  an  unaccompanied
     minor's asylum claim should be assessed and the specific protection and
     allowances needed in that process. Again  there  is  no  timetable.  It
     restates that close attention should be given to  the  welfare  of  the
     child at all times. There is no suggestion that the Respondent has  not
     acted properly in accordance with these specific requirements also.

 11. In summary,  we  cannot  see  anything  specific  in  either  of  these
     paragraphs which sets a timetable for completing  the  decision  making
     process on the claim itself or even deals with this  issue,  though  it
     does go into detail about how other aspects of the  process  should  be
     conducted, when it is under way. Nor do we agree with Mr Halligan  that
     a timetable of any kind is implicit in any of the wording of these  two
     paragraphs, sufficient to impose a legal obligation on the  Respondent.



 12. Of course when the claim does come to be assessed,  consideration  must
     be in accordance with the law. The UNHCR Handbook is not however a part
     of the law of the United Kingdom. In any event paragraph 28 states
           "A person is a refugee within the meaning of the 1951 Convention
           as soon as he fulfils the criteria contained in the  definition.
           This would necessarily occur prior to the time at which  refugee
           status is  formally  determined.   Recognition  of  his  refugee
           status does not therefore make him a refugee but declares him to
           be one.  He does not become a refugee  because  of  recognition,
           but is recognised because he is a refugee."

 13. That is a statement of the obvious. Even if paragraph 28 were a part of
     our law, it does not require that, at the time  recognition  and  hence
     status is being considered, it should be done other than on  the  basis
     of the facts prevailing at the time of assessment.

 14. The issue of timing was however addressed by the  Court  of  Appeal  of
     Appeal in Saad, Diriye and Osorio C-2000-3650. Whilst this was  decided
     under the old law, prior to the 1999 Act, the comments of Lord Phillips
     MR as to timing are still of assistance. He held
           "What emerges from our analysis  is  that  where  an  appeal  is
           brought under section 8(1) the appeal tribunal will  necessarily
           have to determine the refugee status  as  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing..... The same is true of an  appeal  under  sub-sections
           8(3) and 8(4). In each case the decision facing the Tribunal  is
           the hypothetical one of whether removal would be contrary to the
           Convention at the time of the hearing - ie on the basis  of  the
           refugee  status  of  the  Appellant  at  that   time......   The
           particular  position  under  section  8(2)   is   perhaps   more
           complex.... In our judgement it is implicit in the  test  to  be
           applied under Rule  334  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should
           proceed on the assumption that the state of  affairs  prevailing
           at the time that he makes his decision will persist at the  time
           that any limited leave to remain that has been granted expires."

 15. This extract shows that in all types  of  asylum  appeal  the  relevant
     facts have to be ascertained as at the time the  decision  is  made  or
     when it is later reviewed in the appeal process. There is no  authority
     for the proposition that in an assessment of an asylum appeal,  whether
     of an unaccompanied minor or anyone else, the Respondent  is  under  an
     obligation to assess the facts at the time of the  application,  rather
     than the time of the decision. Such a proposition would fly in the face
     of fairness and commonsense.

 16. In this appeal the Respondent made a proper assessment at the  time  of
     the decision and this has been reviewed further at  the  time  of  both
     appeals in the light of the facts then pertaining. The  Respondent  has
     not acted other than in accordance with the law and the relevant Rules.

 17. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
