
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO  HX26601-2002     |
|On 18 December 2002        |        |AA (Children - Eritrean)    |
|                           |        |Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |06533                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....14.02.2003...                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mrs E Morton                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ARSEMA ABREHA                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, who was born in Ethiopia, appeals the  determination
        of an Adjudicator (Mr M Weisman,  OBE)  who  dismissed  her  appeal
        against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her
        application for  asylum.    He  also  dismissed  the  human  rights
        appeal.

     2. The appellant was  represented  before  us  by  Mr  M  Chatwin,  of
        Counsel, instructed by S Osman, Solicitors.   Mr D Ekagha  appeared
        for the Secretary of State.

     3. The appellant, although born in Ethiopia, is Eritrean  through  her
        father.   Her mother is Ethiopian.  She was born on 3 June 1987 and
        is still only 15.  She had problems following the border dispute in
        1998 between Eritrea and Ethiopia.   On 24 November 2000 her father
        was captured by Ethiopian security forces  in  Addis  Ababa.    The
        security forces came to the appellant's house, hit the appellant on
        the back, throwing her out of her home, and  proceeded  to  ransack
        the house.  Her mother was hit in  the  struggle  and  taken  away.
        The appellant went to stay with  a  friend.    The  appellant  then
        learnt that her mother had been beaten  up  very  severely  by  the
        police and died of her injuries on 10 January 2001.   The  security
        forces had raided the house because the  father  was  suspected  of
        being involved with the EPLF Eritrean  Government  -  he  had  been
        suspected simply because he  was  an  Eritrean.    The  appellant's
        mother, who had been released from her period in detention prior to
        her death, told the appellant  that  she  had  only  been  released
        because she herself was Ethiopian.

     4. The appellant suffered these events when  she  was  only  13.   She
        arrived in this country  and  applied  for  asylum  in  July  2001.
        Although the Secretary of State refused the application, he granted
        her leave to remain until 2 June  2005  the  day  before  her  18th
        birthday.

     5. The Adjudicator was prepared to give the appellant the  benefit  of
        the doubt that her parents had suffered as described but he was not
        prepared to accept that the  appellant  was  at  the  time  of  the
        hearing of any particular interest to  the  authorities.    If  the
        incident took place, it was not carried out with the connivance  or
        support of the government.   It  may  have  been  irresponsible  or
        undisciplined.

     6. The Adjudicator also took into account the fact that she  had  been
        looked after by a friend  and  had  gone  to  Kenya  prior  to  her
        departure for the United Kingdom.  She had the opportunity to apply
        for asylum in Kenya and he concluded that her reasons for coming to
        the United Kingdom were economic.

     7. Among the points taken in the grounds of appeal was that  it  would
        be odd for a 13 year  old  to  be  considered  to  be  an  economic
        refugee.   A complaint was also made about the suggestion that  the
        state might not be responsible and accountable for  the  deaths  of
        the appellant's parents.   There was no ground of appeal  on  human
        rights grounds and the Chairman did not give leave  in  respect  of
        any human rights points.   The  Chairman  was  concerned,  however,
        that attention was not focused  on  Eritrea,  the  country  of  the
        appellant's nationality.

     8. Counsel submitted that the Secretary of State and  the  Adjudicator
        had dealt with the question of citizenship properly and had  viewed
        the case against the situation in Ethiopia, where the appellant had
        been born and  bred.   It  was  appropriate  to  consider  Ethiopia
        bearing in mind paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
        1971.   There was no evidence for example, that the  appellant  was
        not Ethiopian as well as Eritrean.   Ethiopia was also a country to
        which there was reason to  believe  that  the  appellant  would  be
        admitted.   No point was taken on this  aspect.    There  might  be
        difficulties about  the  appellant  getting  to  Eritrea  as  three
        witnesses were required to establish Eritrean nationality.

     9. Although the appellant had exceptional leave to  remain,  this  was
        not a period of 4 years exceptional leave to remain.   It lapsed on
        her 18th birthday.   She was a child with nowhere to go  to.    She
        had suffered persecution at a tender age and had been  orphaned  by
        the actions of the state.  It was  Counsel's  submission  that  the
        persecution she suffered continued.   She would be returned  as  an
        orphan and suffer the continuing consequences of what had  happened
        to her as a 13 year old.

    10. It was suggested to Counsel that the state had not been  interested
        in the appellant - she had been injured in the course of an attempt
        to get at her parents.  Counsel accepted  that  she  had  not  been
        singled out by the authorities.

    11. Mr Ekagha submitted that the appellant would not be of interest  on
        return and would not suffer persecution.   There  was  no  evidence
        that the Ethiopians would return her to Eritrea.    In  any  event,
        the objective evidence showed that deportees were  catered  for  in
        Eritrea.    In  paragraph  6.106  of  the  October   2002   Country
        Assessment most of the deportees had apparently  been  accepted  in
        Eritrea as citizens.   The deportees had integrated  into  society:
        see paragraph 6.111.   The situation was not as gloomy as painted.

    12. The Secretary of  State  never  deported  children  without  making
        arrangements for their reception with the UN or  other  appropriate
        agency.    Children  would  not  be   returned   without   suitable
        arrangements having been made for their reception.

    13. Mr Chatwin submitted that the Tribunal should focus on the position
        today.  Anything could happen in 2005.   The Country Assessment was
        not of assistance as that dealt with the position of those forcibly
        expelled.  The Eritrean authorities require  documentation  as  was
        made plain in paragraph 5.6 of the  assessment  -  three  witnesses
        were required.

    14. The persecution suffered by the appellant was a continuing state of
        affairs and although the effects might reduce with the  passage  of
        time it would be persecutory to return the  appellant  at  present.
        Counsel acknowledged there was no medical evidence before us as  to
        the appellant's current state of health.

    15. We reserved out determination.   Counsel makes it plain that he was
        not relying on the fact that the appellant  might  herself  be  the
        target  of  persecutory  intentions  by   the   authorities.    His
        submission was based on the fact that the  appellant  had  suffered
        harm in the past and that the effects of the harm suffered were  so
        grave that it would carry forward and it would  be  persecutory  to
        return her in present circumstances.

    16. The Tribunal has listened carefully to the arguments  put  forward.
        Undoubtedly the appellant  suffered  gravely  and  was  effectively
        orphaned by the actions of the state.   But it is our understanding
        of the evidence that the appellant was merely brushed aside by  the
        security forces in their efforts to get at her parents.    She  was
        not and is not the object of interest, as the Adjudicator found.

    17. There may be circumstances in which  past  experiences  would  have
        such a grave present impact upon an individual that it would  be  a
        breach of his human rights to return him.   In the ordinary  course
        of events, one would expect strong  medical  evidence  to  buttress
        such a submission.   Human rights arguments were not put before  us
        and in any event the Chairman had not granted leave to  pursue  any
        human rights arguments.  Perhaps that is  unsurprising,  since  the
        appellant has leave to remain until 2005.    Counsel's  submissions
        were, however, focused on the question whether the appellant  would
        suffer persecution for a Convention reason if returned today.

    18. We reject his submission that the persecution  continues.    It  is
        necessary in cases under the 1951 Convention to consider whether an
        individual's fear of suffering persecution is  well-founded  as  at
        the date of hearing.  Although we would not support every  word  of
        the Adjudicator's determination,  we  are  in  agreement  that  the
        Adjudicator was correct in stating that the appellant  was  not  of
        interest for a Convention relevant reason.   We  do  not  think  it
        appropriate in the circumstances of this  appeal  to  consider  the
        appellant to be an economic migrant.  She was, as  the  grounds  of
        appeal make clear, a very  young  person  when  she  came  to  this
        country.

    19. We are to look at the situation as to  what  would  happen  if  the
        appellant  were  to  be  returned  now.   In   those   hypothetical
        circumstances, we are satisfied that the  appellant  would  not  be
        returned  without  suitable  arrangements  being   made   for   her
        reception.   Mr Ekagha submits, and we accept, that that  would  be
        the position.   Of course she is not to be  returned  as  a  child.
        She will not be returned, if at all, before her 18th birthday.   At
        that time she can be advised appropriately  about  her  status  and
        whether to apply for an extension of  her  leave  to  remain.   Any
        application will be considered against the prevailing circumstances
        at that time.  What we must do is  to  consider  the  circumstances
        pertaining today.

    20. If the appellant were removed, there would be appropriate reception
        conditions and on the basis of the material before us  we  are  not
        satisfied that the appellant would be  persecuted  because  of  her
        ethnicity or suffer potential persecutory  conduct  as  a  deportee
        from Ethiopia to Eritrea.  Steps have been taken to facilitate  the
        integration of deportees into society and documentation is provided
        by the government valid for a period of time.   If during that time
        deportees were able to find the required witnesses  they  would  be
        issued with appropriate documentation confirming their nationality.
         For those who could not demonstrate Eritrean ties, the  government
        would grant  them  identity  documents  that  specified  they  were
        Ethiopian but permitted them  to  stay  in  the  country.    It  is
        reported that at times deportees were subjected to  harassment  and
        detention by military authorities checking for deserters and  draft
        dodgers.

    21. We are of course concerned with purely hypothetical  circumstances.
         About 75,000 persons have been deported to Eritrea  from  Ethiopia
        and  although   there   was   initial   uncertainty   about   their
        nationalities most have apparently  been  accepted  in  Eritrea  as
        citizens (see paragraph 6.106 of the Country Assessment).

    22. Counsel did not direct to our attention  to  any  material  in  the
        bundles  that  have  been  lodged.   Both  parties  confined  their
        attention to the country assessment.   It was Counsel's  submission
        that the appellant's return would expose her to persecution because
        of the past events which would have a  continuing  impact  on  her.
        We reject that submission.   It is not established to the  required
        standard  that  the  appellant  would  suffer  persecution  for   a
        Convention reason if returned to Ethiopia.    Human  rights  issues
        are not before us today.   The appellant need not be troubled about
        her immigration status in the United Kingdom until she is  18  when
        we are confident that any application she makes for leave to remain
        will be sympathetically  considered.    However,  on  the  material
        before us, we must dismiss this appeal.

    23. Appeal dismissed.




                                                G  Warr
                                                Vice President

















