
JH
|Heard at Field House with  |        |APPEAL NO HX43346-2001      |
|video link to Manchester   |        |                            |
|On 26 November 2002        |        |AA (Persecution-            |
|                           |        |"Causing"-Public            |
|                           |        |Affection-Religion-Unmarried|
|                           |        |) Iraq CG [2002] UKIAT 07246|
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17.03.2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)                                          |
|Ms S S Ramsumair, JP                                              |
|Mr D M Froome                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ahmed Rasul Ameen                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr M Schwenk of Counsel
                       Representing Clifford, Johnston & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iraq, an ethnic Kurd from the  City
      of Suleymania in the Kurdish Autonomous Area (KAA).  This  Area  being
      recognised as controlled by the PUK.  The appellant appeals with leave
      against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,   Mr   G   Campbell,
      promulgated 20 May 2002 wherein he dismissed  an  appeal  against  the
      decision of the respondent who had refused leave  to  enter  following
      refusal of asylum and human rights claims.

   2. The Adjudicator noted that the basis of the appellant's claim was that
      he had formed a relationship with a young woman called Amil  in  April
      1999 when she was 21 and he was  24.   When  the  relationship  became
      known to the brothers the appellant's problems began.

   3. Amil came from a village situated outside the city of  Suleymania  and
      she was a student at an Institute of Health.  She came  from  a  large
      sub-tribe (Swara) which is evidently part of a larger Jafs tribe which
      comprises 10-15% of the total population of the KAA.

   4. In September 1999 the appellant and Amil were in a park in  Suleymania
      where  they  were  sitting  talking  and  holding  hands.   This   act
      unfortunately was seen by some relatives of Amil.  After that  two  of
      Amil's  brothers  X  and  O  who  it  was  claimed   were   uneducated
      Fundamentalist Islamic supporters came to  the  appellant's  shop  and
      threatened to kill him.  In so doing  they  attempted  to  kidnap  the
      appellant.  Fortunately through the intervention of a  number  of  the
      appellant's friends in the area and a larger crowd who  gathered,  the
      two brothers were unable  to  abduct  the  appellant.   Following  the
      incident the appellant fled from  his  shop  and  went  to  stay  with
      relatives considering he could not return to his home.   He  explained
      that the relationship with  Amil  was  an  unauthorised  one  and  was
      contrary to Islamic law  and  was  condemned  and  could  draw  severe
      penalties.  The brothers considered the appellant had disgraced  their
      sister.  The Adjudicator stated that they were coming to seek  revenge
      on him and wanted to kill him for the wrong they believed he had  done
      to the family.  The appellant's  father  tried  to  intercede  in  the
      matter but no compromise could be  achieved  with  Amil's  family  who
      continued with their insistence that they would  kill  the  appellant.
      Beyond this Amil's tribe and family refused to curtail of X and O  and
      this led to the appellant fleeing the KAA for fear of  his  life.   He
      considered he could not move to another part of the KAA, such as  that
      controlled by the KDP, as the Swara tribe had close contacts with that
      area and the KDP.  The appellant  understood  that  the  brothers  had
      taken Amil from the college and she had also fled the KAA to Iran.  To
      the best of his knowledge she remains in exile there.

   5. The claim put forward to the Adjudicator was that the appellant was  a
      refugee based on his imputed political views or, in  the  alternative,
      was a member of a particular social group, namely  "persons  who  have
      transgressed the law of Islam".  The appellant also claimed  that  the
      details of his relationship and his transgression had been transferred
      on to the Islamic Party (IM) and its agenda in the PUK.

   6. The Adjudicator considered background material including reports  from
      Dr Maria O'Shea and Sheri Laser on which he attached "great reliance".



   7. At paragraph 16 of the determination the Adjudicator set out  findings
      that the appellant was generally credible and his evidence fitted well
      with the background material.  The Adjudicator stated:
           "I have no reason to disbelieve what he has told me and I accept
           what the appellant has said in his witness statements and in the
           oral evidence before me.  It is clear  that  the  appellant  was
           playing with fire when he chose to embark on a relationship with
           Amil in the  circumstances  that  he  found  himself  in  within
           Kurdish society."

   8. He then went on to find that the KAA could not provide  a  sufficiency
      of protection to the appellant and that the risk from the two brothers
      was a real one.  Next he found that it was  clear  that  at  different
      times people have freedom  of  movement  within  the  KAA  "mainly  to
      perform trades".   However  removal  from  one  area  to  another,  he
      considered,  was  a  different  matter  with  different  dialects  and
      different customs, and if  the  appellant  moved  from  Suleymania  to
      Erbril he would be seen as  an  outsider  and  possibly  a  spy.   The
      Adjudicator did not believe relocation within the  KAA  was  a  viable
      option in this case.

   9. He then addressed, what he stated were "questions of law", and applied
      them to the facts he had found.

  10. The Adjudicator concluded that fears held by the appellant were not of
      the "State" but rather of individuals within it.  He did  not  however
      go on to reach conclusions  on  whether  the  appellant  would  suffer
      serious harm on return to  his  home  district  from  those  non-state
      actors, although having decided at paragraph 16 that he fully accepted
      the appellant's credibility it would appear he also accepts that there
      is a real risk the appellant would suffer serious harm on his  return.
      As stated above he also considered  the  appellant  could  not  access
      sufficiency of protection on return.  (Effectively therefore he  found
      that the appellant would be persecuted if  he  returned  to  his  home
      district as both limbs of the persecution test  for  non-state  actors
      had been met, i.e. serious harm and lack of state protection.)

  11. He then went on  however to conclude that the appellant's case did not
      fall within one of the five reasons set out in the Refugee Convention.
       In his opinion the case  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  appellant's
      political opinions but everything to do with revenge of family honour.
       "This case starts and remains a case of  two  ill  educated  brothers
      seeking  a  misplaced  revenge  against  the  appellant  for  apparent
      infringement of family honour."   He found that  the  submission  that
      the persecution that the appellant would suffer by reason of political
      opinions  was  "misplaced  and  wrong".    Finally   the   Adjudicator
      considered the issue of whether  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  a
      particular social group, that is "persons who have transgressed the  m
      orals, mores, and social value of Islamic society". He stated  in  his
      opinion that this was not a social group.

           "Such  individuals  may  very  well  draw  upon  themselves  the
           condemnation and wrath of other members  of  society  within  an
           Islamic society, but that does not in my judgment classify  them
           as a social group within the definition of the 1951  Convention.
           It is the attention that such individuals suffer that identifies
           them rather than their activities themselves.  In other words  a
           group cannot claim protection merely by virtue of the fact  that
           persecution is the only identifying factor."

  12. He then dismissed the refugee claim.

  13. The consideration given to the human rights claim is very  short.   He
      simply states that he had examined the arguments put forward and found
      no substance in them and,  that  in  the  light  of  his  conclusions,
      presumably relating to the refugee claim, that there would  not  be  a
      breach of the obligations of the United Kingdom under  the  ECHR.   He
      dismissed the appeal made under Articles 2, 3, 5, 8,  and  10  of  the
      ECHR.

      The Human Rights Appeal
  14. Because  of  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  thee  Adjudicator  and
      concession made by Mr Blundell that he was  in  some  difficulties  in
      arguing that Article 3 of the ECHR was not  applicable  we  reach  our
      conclusions on the human rights issue  firstly  before  moving  on  to
      consider the more vexed question of whether the appellant is a refugee
      which requires close consideration of the nexus issue.

  15.  Mr Schwenk rightly submitted  to  us  that  the  Adjudicator,  having
      reached positive credibility findings to the effect that the appellant
      would be persecuted on  return  to  his  home  district  and  that  no
      relocation or internal protection was available  within  the  KAA  for
      this appellant then, following the conclusions  of  this  Tribunal  in
      Kacaj (01/TH/00634)*  that  there  must  be  substantial  reasons  for
      concluding that there is a real risk that this appellant would  suffer
      maltreatment in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

      Decision on Human Rights Issue
  16. It is abundantly clear in this case that the appeal on  human  rights,
      particularly Article 3, must succeed. The Adjudicator simply  did  not
      give consideration to the human rights issues or  follow  the  leading
      decision of this Tribunal in Kacaj.  There is no requirement  for  the
      torture, inhuman or degrading treatment that the appellant is at  risk
      of receiving on return to the KAA to be  for  a  specified  reason  or
      reasons as is the situation with the Refugee Convention.   The  appeal
      therefore succeeds on human rights grounds.




      The Refugee Convention
  17. Both parties agreed that the only matter at issue in this  regard  was
      whether, given that  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  of  positive
      credibility and the lack of an internal flight alternative in the KAA,
      the persecution  feared by this appellant would be for one or more  of
      the five Refugee Convention grounds.

  18. Mr Schwenk submitted  to  us  that  the  Adjudicator  had  incorrectly
      concluded that there  was  not  an  imputed  political  opinion  or  a
      particular social group nexus in this case.  When  we  asked  him  for
      comments on the possibility of there being a  religious  nexus,  given
      the several statements in  the  determination  that  referred  to  the
      appellant having breached Islamic mores of Fundamentalist beliefs,  he
      also submitted that direct or imputed religious beliefs should be seen
      as one of the reasons for the risk of persecution to this appellant on
      return.


      The Respondent's Submissions on the Nexus Issue
  19. Mr Blundell submitted to us that there was not a nexus  in  this  case
      for either an imputed political opinion or a particular social  group.
      However the religious issue was a more mixed one.  He agreed It was  a
      more vexed issue.  He submitted that such a nexus  did  not  exist  in
      this case and it was appropriate to follow decisions such as Gomez and
      Omoruyi [2001] Imm AR 175. He contended we should follow the Court  of
      Appeal in Omoruyi and conclude that the risk to this appellant was not
      because of his religious beliefs but because the two  brothers  wished
      to seek revenge on him for  his  attentions  to  their  sister.   This
      situation was  therefore  very  similar,  in  his  submission  to  the
      findings in Omoruyi where the nexus for  the  persecution  feared  was
      found to be the refusal by the appellant to give up his father's  body
      to the Ogboni rather than his Christian beliefs.

  20. In final reply Mr Schwenk submitted that a religious  nexus  could  be
      established and the appellant had established this where he stated  in
      his uncontested evidence that his SEF (page 47 of the bundle) that:

           "My  girlfriend  Amil  has  two   brothers   who   are   Islamic
           Fundamentalists.  They disapprove of my  relationship  with  her
           and believe I have brought shame on them and their family.  They
           now want to kill me  and  I  cannot  seek  protection  from  any
           authority against this desire. ... I regard myself  as  educated
           and free-minded.  I have been brought up in the Muslim faith but
           Amil's brothers think that my beliefs contradict  with  some  of
           the aspects of Islam and that I have broken the rules of conduct
           and as such that I should be punished.  I approach religion in a
           much different way to them.  They are very  strict  Muslims  and
           members of the Islamic Party."

  21. He submitted therefore that the brothers wished  to  carry  out  their
      death threats against this appellant for reasons  of  their  religious
      beliefs and his conduct with  their  sister  was  a  breach  of  their
      standing (ie.fundamentalist) of correct behaviour in Islamic  society.
      He further submitted that the  appellant's  conduct  of  showing  open
      affection to Amil indicated, to the brothers that he  was  opposed  to
      some basic Fundamentalist  tenets  of  Islam.They  thus  discriminated
      against the appellant for his religious beliefs (or non-beliefs)  they
      perceived him to hold.

  22. Finally he  submitted  that  in  the  Fundamentalist  Islamic  society
      pursued by the Islamic Party (IM) that political and religious beliefs
      cannot be separated and are fundamentally entwined.


      The Issue
  23. As stated we found  the  only  issue  before  us  to  be  whether  the
      persecution feared by this appellant, which has been accepted as  well
      founded by the Adjudicator,is for reasons of one of the  five  Refugee
      Convention grounds.   In  particular,  consideration  is  required  of
      religious, political opinion and particular social group issues.


      Assessment
  24. We are satisfied that the particular social group  argument  does  not
      have merit.  We find that the appellant does not have any inherent  or
      inalienable characteristics.

  25. Turning to consideration of the possible religious nexus.  While there
      is some weight in Mr Schwenk's  submissions  that  the  fundamentalist
      Islamic culture  of  the  Islamic  Party  in  the  KAA  religious  and
      political views may be  indistinguishable,  because  of  our  findings
      reached on the religious  nexus,  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  be
      conclusive on whether one or both grounds is also present.

  26. The decision in Omoruyi is a starting point.  This is  a  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal given by Simon Brown  LJ  in  October  2000.   The
      appellant was a citizen of Nigeria who had claimed asylum on the basis
      that he had incurred hostility from a  Nigerian  secret  society,  the
      Ogboni.  When his father died, because of his  won  Christian  beliefs
      the appellant refused to release his father's body for  ritual  burial
      by the Ogboni.  As a result of this he was threatened with  death  and
      claimed that his brother had been brutally murdered by the Ogboni,  in
      mistake for himself and that his brother's body  had  been  mutilated.
      He also claimed that his 3-year old son had been killed since he  left
      Nigeria and his body had also been  mutilated.   Both  these  acts  he
      claimed were in revenge although the Ogboni got the wrong target  with
      his brother.

  27. While there were some problems in credibility acknowleged Simon  Brown
      LJ go on to consider the crucial nexus issue states at paragraph 8:

           "I come now to the  critical  question  for  decision  which  is
           whether on the basis of the  assumed  facts  the  appellant  can
           properly be said to be a refugee as defined by Article 1(A2)  of
           the Convention:
           "For the purposes of the present Convention,  the  term  refugee
           shall apply to any persons who ... owing to a well-founded  fear
           of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,  nationality,
           membership of a particular social group or political opinion, he
           is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or owing
           to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of
           that country ... The appellant's case is that  he  has  a  well-
           founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of  religion.   His
           fear of serious, indeed fatal harm at the hands of  the  Ogboni.
           ... it is clear too that on the assumed facts he cannot look for
           protection of the  authorities  in  Nigeria:   they  are  either
           unable or, more probably, unwilling to protect  him.   The  real
           question is whether such harm as may be  befall  him  on  return
           home  should  be  properly  characterised  as  "persecution  for
           reasons of religion".

  28. Lord Justice Simon Brown then went on to consider what  was  meant  by
      "religion" and found authority in Professor Hathaway's book  "The  Law
      of Refugee  Status"  (Butterworths  1991)  at  paragraph  5.3.   After
      quoting from that paragraph Simon Brown LJ states:

           "It is, therefore, plain (and hardly surprising)  that,  whether
           the harm is perpetuated by the religious on the non-religious or
           vice versa (or indeed by one religious  body  against  another),
           and whether because of adherence (or refusal  to  adhere)  to  a
           belief or because of behaviour, there will  be  persecution  for
           reasons of religion provided always that the  other  ingredients
           of the definition are satisfied."

  29. We consider this last finding to be highly significant in  this  case.
      It is  not  argued  that  Islamic  beliefs,  including  fundamentalist
      Islamic beliefs, are not religious beliefs in this case.  It would  be
      ridiculous to suggest otherwise.   However  in  Omoruyi  determination
      Simon Brown LJ firmly rejected adherence to the Ogboni cult as being a
      religious belief.  He states at paragraph 12:

           "This argument I would utterly reject.  The notion of  a  "devil
           cult" practising pagan rituals of the sort here described is  in
           any  sense  a  religion  I  find  deeply   offensive.    Assumed
           opposition to any practises on the part of a secular  state;  is
           that to be regarded as a religious difference?  I  hardly  think
           so.  It seems to me rather that these rights and rituals of  the
           Ogboni  are  merely  the  trappings  of   what   can   only   be
           realistically   recognised   as   an   intrinsically    criminal
           organisation - akin perhaps to the voodoo element of the Ton-Ton
           Macoute in Papa Doc Duvalier's Haiti."

  30. To this extent therefore Mr Ameen's case  differs  substantially  from
      that of Omoruyi.

  31. Simon Brown LJ also goes on to  give  consideration  to  the  view  of
      whether discriminatory behaviour is required to establish a Convention
      ground.  He traverses the arguments on this  issue  in  the  House  of
      Lords' decision in Shah [1999] 2AC629.  He concludes at paragraph 21:

           "If, as I believe, these are correct  statements  of  Convention
           law (that is statements from Shah and from the  Australian  High
           Court decision in Chen Shi Hai [2000] HCA19 it  plainly  follows
           that discrimination, at least in the sense that the  substantive
           law or its enforcement in practise  is  unequally  on  different
           people or different groups, i.e. essential  to  the  concept  of
           persecution under the Convention.  Only those  who  for  one  or
           another Convention reason are singled out, whether  malevolently
           or not, can qualify for asylum."

  32. The decision in Omoruyi goes on to conclude that  the  Nigerian  State
      authorities were not unable or  unwilling  to  protect  the  appellant
      because of his being a Christian but rather because  he  was  at  risk
      having crossed this particular cult and he was not being discriminated
      against by the Ogboni because of  his  Christian  beliefs  but  rather
      because he had dared to defy them:  "the cult would have  been  wholly
      indifferent to his underlying reasoning or beliefs".

  33. Simon Brown LJ then states at paragraph 26:

           "This case fails not for want of enmity or malignity on the part
           of the Ogboni (these feelings, we must assume, were  present  in
           abundance), rather because that motivation (that  hostility  and
           intent to harm) was in no realistic sense discriminatory against
           the appellant on account of his Christianity but rather  stemmed
           from his refusal to comply with their demands."

  34. Turning now to the predicament of this  appellant,  we  find  a  quite
      different situation to that in  Omoruyi.   It  is  accepted  that  the
      brothers X and O were Islamic fundamentalists  and  followers  of  the
      Islamic Party, those are their religious beliefs. In  those  religious
      beliefs is the conviction that Muslims should not  indulge  in  public
      displays of affection. The evidence would not appear to indicate  that
      fundamentalists would wish to kill or punish every  Muslim  that  they
      perceived was breaching this banned behaviour.  However, it  is  quite
      clear, that where it is a sister of such fundamentalists  who  engages
      in such practices with another Muslim that there is a real  risk  that
      they will carry out their death threats, as  is  the  situation  here.
      The issue is therefore whether the enmity or malignity that  X  and  O
      wish to visit upon the appellant is merely because he was engaged in a
      public display of affection with their sister and thereby crossed  the
      two brothers or because of the fundamentalist Islamic beliefs  of  the
      two brothers such behaviour had to be punished.  It is our  view  that
      there is clearly an  element  of  both  in  the  motivation  of  these
      brothers.  If they were not fundamentalist Islamic believers there  is
      not a real risk that they would pursue the appellant in this  fashion.



  35. At this point we return to the findings of Simon Brown  LJ  after  his
      consideration of the  meaning  of  "religion"  as  cast  in  Professor
      Hathaway's book.  He states whether the harm  is  perpetuated  by  the
      religious upon the non-religious or vice versa and whether because  of
      adherence (or refusal to adhere) to a belief or because  of  behaviour
      that there will be persecution for reasons of religion. In Mr  Ameen's
      case therefore it is  not  so  much  the  religious  beliefs  of  this
      appellant (or lack of beliefs) that is part of the causation but  very
      much the religious beliefs of the two  brothers  and  their  attitudes
      towards the appellant's behaviour that brings about  their  desire  to
      kill him.

  36. We are satisfied therefore on the facts as found and accepted by  this
      Adjudicator and on the basis of the above analysis  that  there  is  a
      well-founded fear of this appellant being persecuted  for  reasons  of
      religion.This conclusion is reached very much on  the  facts  of  this
      case and does not imply that in every case where there  is  a  mix  of
      personal revenge and religious beliefs that the religious element will
      be sufficiently significant to reach the conclusion we  have.  We  now
      turn to address this issue.

  37. In the assessment of causation we consider it relevant  to  take  into
      account whether it is necessary for the religious element  within  the
      causation to be found central or predominant to the cause of the risk,
      to be a contributing factor to the  risk  ,or  merely  a  marginal  or
      insignificant element to the risk faced  by  the  appellant.   At  the
      outset we are satisfied that the  religious  element  is  at  least  a
      contributing cause and  not  a  marginal  or  virtually  insignificant
      element within the risk.  In this regard our  conclusions  would  fall
      within paragraph 13 of the recently published "Michigan Guidelines  on
      Nexus to  a  Convention  Ground"  [2002]  23(2)  Michigan  Journal  of
      International Law 207-221 which states:

           "In view of the unique objects and purposes  of  refugee  status
           determination, and taking into account the practical  challenges
           of refugee status determination, the Convention ground need  not
           be shown to be the sole, or even the dominant cause of the  risk
           of being persecuted.  It need only be a contributing  factor  to
           the risk of  being  persecuted.   If,  however,  the  Convention
           ground is remote to the point  of  irrelevance,  refugee  status
           need not be recognised."

  38. "The Michigan Guidelines on Nexus"  are  of  course  not  part  of  UK
      refugee law. They are however well informed  and  researched  academic
      commentary.We  must  now  look  at  the  UK  position  and  then   the
      international jurisprudence to see  if  throw  light  on  the  current
      "positions "on causation or nexus.
      The position of causation in UK law  where  there  is  more  than  one
      reason for an Applicant's well-founded fear of being persecuted


  39. It is well accepted that the Refugee Convention does not require  that
      one or more of the five grounds is the only reason for an  applicant's
      well-founded fear of being persecuted.  For example, Lord  Hoffman  in
      Shah & Islam [1999] ImmAR 283 recognises this where he states that:


           "I turn, therefore, to the question of causation.  What  is  the
           reason for the persecution which the appellants fear?   Here  it
           is important to notice that it  is  made  up  of  two  elements.
           First, there is the threat of  violence  to  Mrs  Islam  by  her
           husband and his  political  friends  and  to  Mrs  Shah  by  her
           husband.  This is a personal affair, directed  against  them  as
           individuals. Secondly there is the inability or unwillingness of
           the State to do anything to  protect  them.   There  is  nothing
           personal about this.  The evidence was that the State would  not
           assist them because they were women."

  40. In this case, as stated, the reasons for the persecution feared by  Mr
      Ameen is made  up  of  two  elements.   The  personal  threat  to  the
      appellant by the two brothers because of  his  conduct  towards  their
      sister and secondly the threats  to  him  by  the  same  brothers  for
      reasons of their Fundamentalist Islamic beliefs which they  considered
      the appellant had transgressed by his public display of  affection  to
      their sister.  The first of  these  reasons  is  apparently  a  purely
      personal one directed towards the appellant as an individual and  does
      not, to us, to have an  apparent  linkage  to  any  one  of  the  five
      Convention reasons.  The second however clearly involves a  religious,
      and possibly to a small extent, political element.

  41. This leads us to the next issue of whether the Convention  ground,  in
      this case religion, must be  the  essential,  central  or  predominant
      cause of the applicant being persecuted or simply is it a contributing
      cause.   The  international  jurisprudence  on  which  is   the   most
      appropriate test to apply is probably best described  as  being  in  a
      developing state.

  42. The UK position, at this time, appears to encompass the  possibilities
      of two tests at this time with the preference being to leave the issue
      to a "common sense,case by case"approach.  The two tests are; the "but
      for" test which  is  taken  across  from  the  law  of  tort  and  the
      "effective cause" which appears to mean that an essential, central  or
      predominant cause must be found.

  43. In Shah & Islam both Lord Steyn and Lord Hoffman both declined to make
      a choice between these tests and do  not  appear  to  have  come  down
      firmly in favour of one or the other.  The development therefore of  a
      "contributory cause" jurisprudence in this country along the lines set
      out in the Michigan Guidelines on Nexus,  may  still  be  open.We  see
      considerable logic and practical assistance in  these  Guidelines  for
      those   involved   in   refugee   status    determination    at    all
      levels,particularly when confronted, as often happens,by more than one
      or mixed reasons for the persecution.We recognise that those who would
      wish to  adhere  to  the  "effective  cause"  test  may  consider  the
      "contributory cause" test to be possibly a more liberal  approach  but
      after considering the UK  jurisprudence,  particularly  the  Court  of
      Appeal  decision  in  Montoya  [2002]  INLR  399,  discussed  below,we
      consider the "contributory cause' approach is a more helpful  one  for
      refugee decision makers , particularly noting the seriousness  of  the
      issues before them and need  to  reach   clear  decisions  often  very
      promptly.It also can  not  be  confused  in  a  way  we  consider  the
      "effective  cause"  test  can  be  with  an   erroreous   predominancy
      principle.

  44. Lord Steyn in Shah & Islam when the "but for"  and  "effective  cause"
      were argued by the parties before the House of Lords decided that,  in
      that case, it made no difference which test was applied and stated "in
      these circumstances the legal issue regarding the test  of  causation,
      which did not loom large in this appeal, need not be decided".

  45. Also in Shah & Islam Lord Hoffman is critical of the "but  for"  test.
      He stated:

           "Once one has established  the  context  in  which  a  cause  or
           question is being asked, the answer involves an  application  of
           commonsense notions rather than mechanical rules.  I  can  think
           of cases in which a  "but  for"  test  would  be  satisfied  but
           commonsense would reject the conclusion whilst for  the  reasons
           of sex."  [He then goes on to  set  out  an  example  which  was
           particularly applicable to the gender persecution issues in  the
           Shah & Islam case].

  46. The Court of Appeal have also rejected  the  "but  for"  test  in  the
      decision in Velasco  [2000  Lexis,  EINdatabase  SLJ-1999,  7981-C]  a
      decision of April 2000 and also  considered  the  causation  issue  in
      Montoya, a decision that upheld a determination of  the  Tribunal.  At
      Paragraph 28 of Montoya  Schiemann LJ states:
           "We are thus brought  to  the  potentially  difficult  issue  of
           causation. Lords Steyn,Hope of Craighead and Hutton  in  Shahana
           Islam v SSHD:IAT-ex parte Syeda Shah [1999] 2 A C  629  did  not
           find it necessary to add to  the  vast  amount  of  doctrine  on
           causation.  Lord Hoffman, at 653G and 164C respectively,  points
           out that answers to questions about causation will often  differ
           according to the context in which they are asked.  At  654H-655A
           and 165D-F respectively he indicates that in the present context
           such cases have to be considered by the factfinders on a case-by-
           case basis as they arise.  We agree."

  47. The commonsense or case-by-case approach is  thus  concurred  with  in
      Montoya,  although  not  actually  applied  as,  like  in  Omoruyi,  a
      Convention reason is not found, on the facts.

      International jurisprudence
48.   A US Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit decision in  Gafoor  v  INS,
      [2000] 231F3d645 (3 November 2000) sets out  the  range  of  competing
      approaches.  This was a case where the applicant  was  an  Indo-Fijian
      police officer who had witnessed a rape of a 13-year old  girl  by  an
      ethnic Fijian army officer.  He arrested the officer but  however  the
      officer's superior, also an ethnic Fijian informed the applicant  that
      the officer must  be  released.   Following  this  the  applicant  was
      assaulted by the army officer and his colleagues and then detained  in
      an army camp where he endured beatings and warnings not  to  publicise
      the arrest.  He was again attacked on release by  other  soldiers  and
      threatened with death and told to "go back to India".   He  then  fled
      the country to the United States.  The Board  of  Immigration  Appeals
      confirmed a  decision  that  the  attacks  were  motivated  solely  by
      revenge.  The arrest of the army officer and that there was  no  nexus
      between the incidents and a Convention ground.  The  majority  of  the
      9th Circuit Court of  Appeal  overturned  the  decision  applying  the
      principal that the applicant need only establish that  the  harm  "was
      motivated" at least in part, by an actual or implied protected ground.
       The Court did not  attempt  to  weigh  up  the  significance  of  the
      protected ground to the well-founded fear of being persecuted,  rather
      it concluded that once the applicant had established that race  played
      a part in the fear of being persecuted the nexus had been established.
       Arguments relating to the applicant being required to establish  that
      the protected grounds must stand alone or that the  persecution  would
      not have occurred in the absence of a protected ground were  rejected.
      They went on to refer to anti-discrimination legislation in the United
      States and considered  it  was  equally  appropriate  in  the  refugee
      context.  The dissenting Judge appears to have effectively  applied  a
      "but for" test.

49.   The Australian Federal Court, in the  decision  in  Rajaratnam  v  IMA
      [2000]  FCA  1111  (10  August  2000)  in  a  decision  prior  to  the
      legislative amendment (Migration Legislation Amended Act (No. 6) 2001)
      which legislates that the definition is  not  satisfied  "unless  that
      reason  is  the  essential  and  significant  reason   (s)   for   the
      persecution"  set  out  that  decision-makers   should   undertake   a
      sophisticated  evaluation  allowing  "for  the  possibility  that  the
      extortive activity has [a] dual  character."   The  Federal  Court  of
      Canada in Zhu (DC.NO.A-1017-91) also made the  relevant  comment  that
      "people frequently act out of mixed motives, and it is enough for  the
      existence  of  political  motivation  that  one  of  the  motives  was
      political".

50.   However as the dissenting judge in Gafoor appears to  indicate  simply
      asking whether  a  Convention  ground  was  at  least  one  factor  in
      producing the risk of being  persecuted  may  trivialise  the  refugee
      enquiry that a role of  that  factor  was,  at  best,  extraordinarily
      minor.  A similar approach is taken in Velasco regarding the "but for"
      test in that it "opens up the possibility of an infinity of causes".We
      firmly agree with these comments.

51.   The New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority (NZRSAA) decision  in
      Refugee Appeal No 72635/01 (6 September 2001), at  paragraphs  167  to
      179,  sets  out  a  very  detailed  and  informative   commentary   on
      causation/nexus issues both in New Zealand and  international  refugee
      law, including a full statement of the "Michigan Guidelines on Nexus".
       After that review, at paragraphs 177, it states:
           "... on the decisive question of the standard of  causation,  we
           accept that as a matter of principle the only proper  conclusion
           to be drawn from the language, object and purpose of the Refugee
           Convention is that the Convention ground need not be shown to be
           the sole, or even the dominant,  cause  of  the  risk  of  being
           persecuted.  It need only be a contributing factor to  the  risk
           of being persecuted."

      The decision goes on to note that if the Convention ground is  remote,
      to the point of irrelevance, refugee status should not be recognised.


      Application to the appellant's case
52.   In the facts as found in this determination however we  are  satisfied
      that  regardless  of  whether  a   "but   for",   "effective   cause",
      "commonsense", or "contributory cause"  approach  is  taken  the  same
      result follows.  Indeed if we adopted a distillation of that approach,
      which was succinctly and pragmatically suggested by Professor Hathaway
      at  the  recent  "Advanced   Refugee   Law   Seminar"   (International
      Association of Refugee Law Judges Conference - Auckland,  New  Zealand
      -October 2002), of "How did the applicant get himself in the  mess  he
      is  in?"  clearly  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  brothers  are   a
      significant part of that "mess".

  53. Applying a "but for" test, if the brothers X and O  were  not  Islamic
      fundamentalists but merely wishing to stop the  appellant  having  any
      form of relationship with their sister, we do not consider there would
      be a reasonable likelihood they would wish to persecute or kill him in
      the manner threatened and accepted here.  Similar logic  applies  with
      the "effective cause" test.  We consider that the real  risk  to  this
      appellant arises through the transgression of  fundamentalist  Islamic
      mores rather than mere association with the sister of the two possible
      persecutors.  A commonsense approach also adopts a  similar  logic  in
      that it is reasonably likely that the tenets of fundamentalist Islamic
      beliefs held by the two brothers in this case are  the  driving  force
      behind their wish to kill  or  persecute  the  appellant  rather  than
      merely just the appellant's  behaviour  and  the  family  association.
      Finally, as set out above,  we  consider  it  clearly  a  contributory
      factor.


      Decision
54.   The appeal is allowed both on refugee and human  rights  grounds.   We
      consider that there is a reasonable likelihood of this appellant being
      persecuted for reasons of religion (and other factors which may not be
      protected by the Refugee Convention) on return to the KAA. As noted at
      Paragraph 16 the Human rights appeal under  Article  3  ECHR  is  also
      allowed.



                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President


