
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX17991-2002      |
|On 24 October 2002         |        |SA (Persecution-Eyle-Weak)  |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |06665                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....20.02.2003.....                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J R  A Fox (Chairman)                                          |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mrs E Morton                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Suleykha Abdi Ali                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia, has been  given  leave  to  appeal
     against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr A J E  Eames)  allowing
     her human rights appeal against the respondent's decision of 2 November
     2001 to give directions for removal from the United Kingdom and  refuse
     asylum and dismissing her refugee Convention appeal.

  2. At the hearing the appellant was represented by Miss Wolfe  of  Counsel
     and the respondent by Mr Jones of the Home Office.

  3. The issue before the Tribunal is the asylum appeal.  The appellant does
     not wish to appeal against the human rights decision.  The appellant is
     a citizen of Somalia who claims to have been born 17  June  1984.   She
     arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 September 2001 and  claimed  asylum
     at the Asylum Support Unit on 24 September 2001.

  4. She completed an SEF form and was  interviewed  and  made  a  statement
     which was recorded.  The respondent  then  heard  her  application  and
     refused the same and the reasons for refusal are set out  in  a  letter
     dated 27 October 2001.

  5. The appellant appealed.  Her appeal was heard by an Adjudicator who  in
     a determination promulgated on 10 July 2002 dismissed her asylum appeal
     and allowed her appeal on human rights grounds.

  6. The appellant has appealed in relation  to  the  asylum  decision.  The
     grounds of appeal are as follows:

           "1. The appellant does not seek to appeal against  the  decision
           of the Adjudicator allowing her Human Rights Appeal.  Her appeal
           is only against the decision of the  Adjudicator to  reject  her
           asylum appeal.
           2.  The  Adjudicator  concluded   at   paragraph   35   of   his
           determination  that  the  appellant  failed  to  show  that  her
           persecution and that of her family was for a  Convention  reason
           over and above the ordinary risks of clan warfare.  In so  doing
           the Adjudicator failed properly to consider the evidence.
           3. The Adjudicator at paragraph 32 accepted that the appellant's
           evidence was "generally credible".  At paragraph 34 he  accepted
           objective evidence that  the  Eyle  Clan  was  a  minority  clan
           without  protection  from  the  main  Somali  clans   and   that
           relationship with clans in the home areas of the  Eyle  was  not
           good.
           4. In reaching the  conclusion  which  he  did  the  Adjudicator
           failed properly  to  assess  the  appellant's  position  in  the
           context of the civil war in Somalia.  The harm suffered  by  the
           appellant and her family  was  not  an  instant  of  civil  war,
           ordinary or otherwise because:
                 a) The appellant was not a member of a warring clan;
                 b) She was not targeted in the course of or as a  means  to
                    prosecute the civil war;
                 c) The harm suffered by the appellant and  her  family  was
                    not inflicted during the course of  or  as  a  means  to
                    prosecute fighting between "warring clans";
                 d) She had not been "caught up in the fighting";
                 e) Nor was the appellant merely "caught in the cross fire".
           5. The appellant and her family were  deliberately  targeted  by
           armed gunmen.  Albeit that this occurred against the backdrop of
           civil war and state collapse, it amounted to persecution and not
           an incident of the civil war.  In  the  absence  of  significant
           change of circumstances three is a real risk that the  appellant
           will suffer similar persecution in the future.
           6.If Adan requires that an asylum seeker establish that s/he  is
           more at risk than the population in general  in  order  to  show
           well founded fear of  persecution,  it  is  submitted  that  the
           following factors establish such a risk:
                 a) The appellant  is  a  young  woman  and  therefore  more
                    vulnerable to abuse by militia men and bandits than  men
                    are;
                 b) She is a member of a clan that does not have  a  militia
                    to protect its members;
                 c) Her clan does not have control  over  any  territory  in
                    which its members are safe from the  militias  of  other
                    clans.
           7.Further it is submitted that if what  the  appellant  and  her
           family suffered are found to be "incidents of civil  war",  they
           are  no  "ordinary  incidents  of  civil  war".   The  treatment
           inflicted on them, whilst they were taking  no  active  part  in
           hostilities, amounted to "serious violations" of Common Articles
           C and A3 of the  1949  Geneva  Conventions  including  "(a)  the
           killing of the appellant's father and  subsequent  step  father;
           (b) the rape of the  appellant  and  of  her  sisters;  (c)  the
           repeated looting of the appellant's family home.
           8.The  above  amounted  to  persecution  rather  than  "ordinary
           incidents"  of   civil  war.    The   flagrant   disregard   for
           international humanitarian law by all of the militias in Somalia
           is  such  that  manifestly  the  appellant  does  not  have  the
           protection of the 1949  Geneva  Conventions  so  as  to  obviate
           protection by the Refugee Convention.
           9.For  the  above  reasons  the  appellant  submits   that   the
           Adjudicator erred."

  7. At the  hearing  the  Tribunal  was  advised  that  the  appellant  had
     exceptional leave to remain until 2006 and then it would be open to her
     to apply for indefinite leave to remain.

  8. Miss Wolfe submitted the appellant was a member of  the  Eyle  clan  in
     Somalia and that she was a young and vulnerable woman and a member of a
     minority clan.

  9. The Adjudicator had made findings of fact which  showed  that  she  was
     credible and that she had suffered ill treatment including being  raped
     and her father being killed.

 10. In her submission the Adjudicator had applied the test wrongly  as  set
     out in Adan.  It was capable of showing a differential impact.

 11. The Eyle clan was regarded as a religious outcast clan  which  numbered
     some 200 to 300 members.  She referred us to Dr Luling's  report  which
     described the clan as being one of the most vulnerable.

 12. In her submission, as a woman in Somalia she was even more  vulnerable.
     She refers to the passages in the US State Department  in  relation  to
     women in Somalia.

 13. The Home Office report indicated the Eyle clan  was  one  of  the  most
     vulnerable.  She had been targeted as a member of a minority  clan  and
     as a female.

 14. In her submission the manner in which the Adjudicator  had  interpreted
     the test meant that no Somali clan could seek international protection.

 15. The harm that she had suffered was not evidence of a civil war. She was
     not a member of a warring clan.  Ill treatment is not part of  a  civil
     war.

 16. She drew our attention to the Tribunal decision in Ndilingham.

 17. Mr Jones submitted that the Adjudicator had found at paragraph 35  that
     he did not accept that the persecution the appellant had  received  was
     above a clan war.  She had been born into a clan without influence  and
     protection.

 18. He accepted that the authority was Adan  and  the  consideration  would
     have to be given is to the motives of those who  persecuted  her.   She
     was a victim of the civil war, she was not a refugee.  The  Adjudicator
     had been entitled to make those findings.

 19. The objective evidence showed  that  the  Eyle  clan  were  treated  as
     slaves.  It showed that they had no protection.  They were  in  a  weak
     position because they did not bear arms.  There was  no  evidence  they
     were involved in the civil war because they had been  attacked  because
     they were weak.  There were no indications that this appellant had been
     targeted.  He referred us to her witness statement  and  again  pointed
     out that she came from an unprotected clan.  They were in  a  weak  and
     vulnerable position.

 20. In his submission the Adjudicator had quite correctly  found  that  she
     was not entitled to refugee status.

 21. Miss Wolfe made further submissions by way of reply.

 22. In this appeal the relevant  rule  is  paragraph  336  of  HC395.   The
     appellant has to demonstrate a reasonable likelihood that she  will  be
     persecuted for a Convention reason on return to Somalia.

 23. The Tribunal has regard to the guidance given in  Sivakumaran  and  the
     majority decision in Kacaj and it has also  referred  to  the  guidance
     given in Adan.

 24. In Adan it indicates that killing and torture incidental to a clan  and
     sub-clan based civil war did not give rise to a well  founded  fear  of
     being persecuted within the meaning of Article 1A(2) where  the  asylum
     seeker was at no greater risk of such ill treatment by  reason  of  his
     clan or sub-clan membership than others at risk in the war.  Lord Lloyd
     in Adan stated:

           "I conclude from these authorities and from my understanding  of
           what the framers of the Convention had  in  mind  that  where  a
           state of civil war exists it is not enough for an asylum  seeker
           to show that he would be at risk if  he  were  returned  to  his
           country.  He must be able  to  show  what  Mr  Pannett  calls  a
           differential impact.  In other words he must  be  able  to  show
           fear of  persecution  for  Convention  reasons  over  and  above
           ordinary risks of clan warfare."

 25. The basis of the appellant's claim is that she believes  that  she  was
     born in the Hamerweyn district of Mogadishu in  June  1984  and  was  a
     member of the Eyle clan.  The Eyle are a minor clan  and  do  not  bear
     arms.  The family lived on land owned by the major Hawiye clan for whom
     her father worked.  In 1991 when she was  aged  7  inter-clan  fighting
     broke out and Hawiye militia looted the family home,  beat  her  father
     and shot dead her maternal great uncle.  The family immediately located
     to Burhakaba near Biadoa where her parents had been born.  The area was
     controlled by the Rahanwe clan.  In 1993 the Hawiye militia invaded the
     lands of the Rahanwe and her father was  shot  dead  when  he  resisted
     their efforts to steal his working tools.  A few days later the militia
     returned, looted  the  house  and  raped  the  appellant's  two  oldest
     sisters.  The family remained  in  the  area.   Her  mother  married  a
     relative supported by the family by working as a butcher (a traditional
     trade of the Eyle).

 26. In 2000 inter-clan violence again erupted.  The  Hawiye  militia  again
     raped her two eldest sisters and a week later they returned  and  raped
     the appellant (then aged 16) and her mother.  The family were unable to
     move  anywhere  more  safe  so  they  remained  in  the  Biadoa   area.
     Eventually a relative living in an Arab country provided money for  the
     appellant to leave Somalia.  She travelled  to  Addis  Ababa  and  from
     there was assisted by an agent to travel to the UK.

 27. The objective evidence reveals that the Eyle  were  hunters  and  agro-
     partialists.  They believed themselves to be  of  Falasha  (or  Jewish)
     origin before they were Islamised.   They  were  treated  by  the  main
     Somali clans as religious outcasts.

 28. Before the wars there was some 1,000  Eyle  families  living  scattered
     throughout southern Somalia up to and including the  Hiran  region  but
     the majority lived in two districts, Buloburte in the Hiran region  and
     Burhakaba in the Biadoa regions.  These remain today the two  principal
     areas  where  the  Eyle  live  in   Somalia.    Presently   there   are
     approximately 200 to 300  Eyle families in Somalia.  They are  despised
     by the Hawiye and the Digir.

 29. Their numbers have been constantly in decline since the  1960s  due  to
     assimilation with the Rahaweyn and the Bantu  agricultural  communities
     or through migration to large towns such as Mogadishu where they  found
     employment as butchers.

 30. In 1992 in Mogadishu the eight minority groups combined  to  create  an
     NGO in order to appeal for help to the  international  community.   The
     NGO implemented a number of projects but in 1998  the  members  of  the
     executive committee founded by Aideed'USC  after  which  they  fled  to
     Kenya.

 31. The CIPU refers to the fact that they were treated  as  slaves  by  the
     main Somali clans.  They had no protection  from  any  clan  and  their
     relationships with the clans in their home areas, the Rahaweyn and  the
     Hawadle were not good.  For religious  reasons  they  were  treated  as
     outcasts.  There are not physical differences between the Eyle and  the
     surrounding Somali clans.  There was no inter-marriage between the Eyle
     and the major Somali clans.   There  are  no  Eyle  in  the  government
     institutions and there are no Eyle involved in the Arta  peace  process
     at the present time.  They could inter-marry  with  some  Benadiri  and
     with the Tumaal but not with the Ebur.

 32. During the civil war many Eyle fled Somali for Kenya, Ethiopia and  the
     Yemen.  No Eyle have fled to the northern part of Somalia.

 33. At the present time  there  are  some  to  200  to  300  Eyle  families
     remaining in Somalia mainly in the districts of Buloberti in the  Hiran
     region and Burhakaba in the Bay region.   They  are  still  in  a  weak
     position as they do not bear arms.  They cultivate and suffer from  the
     drought that reigns in southern Somalia.

 34. There are no indications from  other  sources  that  the  Eyle  are  at
     present targeted by the main Somali clans.  So  far  as  they  live  in
     unstable areas they could become victims of armed conflicts.

 35. As Mr Jones put it, the Eyle were attacked because  they  were  a  weak
     tribe which did not  bear  arms.   Sadly  they  are  victims  of  armed
     conflicts in the clan warfare.  They are an unprotected clan who are in
     a weak and vulnerable position.

 36. There is no evidence before the Tribunal to show that the appellant was
     targeted.  She was a member of that clan at  no  greater  risk  of  ill
     treatment than others at risk in the civil war.

 37. There is no error of law in the finding on the part of the  Adjudicator
     that she does not have a well founded fear of persecution  if  returned
     to Somalia for a Convention reason.






 38. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed.



                                                                   J R A Fox
                                                              Vice President








