
KH

|Heard at: Field House      |        |APPEAL NO  HX42447-2001     |
|on 10 June 2002            |        |GG (Return - Eritrean)      |
|                           |        |Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |05996                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|10 January 2003                                                   |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Professor  D  B  Casson (Chairman)                                |
|Mrs M Roe                                                         |
|Between                                                           |
|Gebre-Yohannis Goitom                                             |
|aka Gabre Yohannis Goytom                                         |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by an ethnic Eritrean against the  determination  of
      an Adjudicator (Dr R Keki?) dismissing his appeal on asylum and  human
      rights grounds against the decision by the respondent on 22 April 2001
      to refuse to grant leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  give
      directions for removal to  Ethiopia.   Before  us  the  appellant  was
      represented by Mr R Solomon instructed by Spence & Horne,  solicitors.
      The respondent was represented by Mr A Mole,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer.

2.    The appellant claimed to have been born in Asmara and  to  have  moved
      to Addis Ababa in 1975, where he lived until July 1998, when  he  left
      the country.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 August  1998  and
      claimed asylum on arrival.  He had travelled via  Italy  on  a  Somali
      passport which he had tried to destroy.  He  was  accompanied  by  his
      wife and son, who are his dependants for the purposes of the appeal; a
      daughter was born in the United Kingdom on 27 October 2000.

3.    The asylum appeal was refused for reasons  given  in  a  letter  dated
      5 December 2001, which superseded a letter dated 2 April 2001.

4.     The  appellant  gave  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator,  who   also
      considered background documentation including  a  report  by  Dr Pool
      dated 13 March 2002.  It was common ground that the appellant  was  of
      Eritrean origin.  The Adjudicator restricted her findings on the basis
      of  removal  to  Ethiopia,  in  accordance   with   the   respondent's
      intentions.  The Adjudicator noted  that  the  appellant's  claim  was
      based solely on the question of  his  ethnicity  "and  whether  as  an
      Eritrean he would be forcibly deported from Ethiopia or ill-treated in
      some other way."   Having  considered  the  evidence,  and  Dr  Pool's
      report, which questioned whether the appellant would be accepted  back
      to  Ethiopia  at  all,  the  Adjudicator  expressed  her  findings  at
      paragraph 53 of her determination as follows:

           "I find nothing in the report which persuades me, to  the  lower
           standard, that the  appellant  would  face  a  current  risk  of
           persecution in Ethiopia.  Most of the report deals with the past
           deportations  and  refers  to  material  pre-dating  the   peace
           agreement and I therefore find that  it  does  not  advance  the
           appellant's claim."


5.    At paragraph 57, the Adjudicator noted that the evidence submitted  by
      both sides showed a cessation of forced removals and  some  continuing
      repatriation with consent.  More than 200,000  Eritreans  remained  in
      Ethiopia and there was no reason why the appellant  could  not  safely
      return there.  The evidence did not indicate a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that he would be subjected to persecution or  any  breaches
      of his human rights were he to return to Ethiopia.

6.    The grounds of appeal are wide ranging, but Mr Solomon,  who  had  not
      represented the appellant before the Adjudicator, made it  clear  that
      he was limiting his submissions to the  question  of  the  appellant's
      ethnicity.  Mr Solomon put before us a  letter  from  UNHCR  dated  12
      April 2002 and a further report by Dr Pool dated March 2002,  both  of
      which post-dated the Adjudicator's decision.  In  his  submissions  Mr
      Solomon accepted that there had been improvements  in  the  situation,
      but he  reminded  us  that  the  Adjudicator  had  accepted  that  the
      appellant was Eritrean; that he had been detained  for  one  month  in
      1998 and that there had been a risk of repatriation which  had  ceased
      since December 2000.  Mr Solomon submitted that there continued to  be
      a risk of repatriation and ill-treatment which, although at a  reduced
      scale, continued.  Mr Solomon submitted  that  if  the  appellant  was
      allowed entry (which he denied) he would be persecuted and ill-treated
      simply because of his ethnicity.  It was Dr  Pool's  opinion  that  he
      would be denied entry and that Eritreans had been turned back. In  his
      submissions Mr Mole said that the  Adjudicator's  conclusion,  on  the
      basis of the evidence before her, was correct, and that there  was  no
      evidence that the appellant would be at risk on  return  to  Ethiopia.
      Mr Mole submitted that the new evidence indicated an  improvement  in
      the situation with a virtual cessation of  large  scale  deportations,
      although there might be  deportations  on  an  individual  basis.   He
      submitted that there was no evidence to show a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that this appellant would be deported.   In  his  response,
      Mr Solomon pointed to the UNHCR view in June 2001 that the return  of
      failed asylum seekers of mixed Ethiopian/Eritrean origin  to  Ethiopia
      should generally be ruled out. Mr Solomon accepted that the  appellant
      was not of mixed descent but was a full Eritrean which, he  submitted,
      made the risk greater.  Mr  Solomon  further  submitted  that  if  the
      appellant were sent to Ethiopia he would be considered stateless,  but
      he acknowledged that that was not a matter which was our concern.

7.    There is little dispute as to the relevant facts in this  appeal.   It
      is common ground that the appellant is Eritrean, born in  Asmara,  and
      that he lived in Addis  Ababa  from  1975  until  July  1998.   It  is
      intended to return him to Ethiopia.  The Adjudicator  decided  on  the
      evidence available to her in February 2002 that his return  would  not
      expose him to a real risk of persecution or breach of protected  human
      rights.  It is also common ground  that  the  situation  has  improved
      since then.  We have the benefit of reports which were  not  available
      to the Adjudicator. In particular, the UNHCR  letter  dated  12  April
      2002 reports that:

           "The large scale  deportation  of  Eritreans  or  Ethiopians  of
           Eritrean origin, which took place in 1998/9,  virtually  stopped
           in 2000.  However, according to the International  Committee  of
           the Red Cross (ICRC), deportation  continued  on  an  individual
           basis.  Since then, the ICRC has monitored the  repatriation  of
           Eritrean civilians and/or prisoners  of  war  from  Ethiopia  to
           Eritrea.  Notwithstanding this, a group  of  702  Eritreans  and
           Ethiopians with Eritrean links were deported from Tigray by  the
           Ministry of Security in June 2001 without the  participation  of
           the ICRC."


8,    The report notes that the UNHCR office in  Addis  Ababa  is  aware  of
      instances where Eritreans and Ethiopian nationals with Eritrean  links
      have faced serious risks from the Ethiopian authorities.  Examples  of
      such  risks  include  arbitrary   deprivation   of   their   Ethiopian
      nationality, summary expulsion to Eritrea, and  internment  as  "enemy
      nationals".   UNHCR's  general  understanding  is  that  although  the
      situation has improved somewhat, the  threat  of  deportation  remains
      despite the signing by both states of  the  cessation  of  hostilities
      agreement of 18 June 2000 and the comprehensive  peace  agreement  of
      12 December 2000.  On the question of lawful status in  Eritrea,  the
      report states:

           "The Eritrean Government has advised UNHCR that  expellees  from
           Ethiopia  are  not  automatically  considered  to  be   Eritrean
           nationals,  simply  by  virtue   of   Eritrean   origin   and/or
           participation in the 1992 referendum.  Recent reports,  however,
           indicate that expellees from Ethiopia are not turned away by the
           Eritrean authorities with a majority of them being  granted  the
           "blue card" which is akin to a national identity card with  many
           of  the  inherent  rights  and  obligations   that   come   with
           nationality... the displacement of expellees, even those holding
           the "blue card" is a common feature in Eritrea."


9.    Dr Pool's report dated 13 March 2002 states:

           "The presence of the United Nations force at the moment  appears
           to have halted the physical deportation  of  Eritreans  but  the
           popularity of the measure within Ethiopia remains,  particularly
           with regard to those  Eritreans  owning  both  small  and  large
           portions of property and capital.  The same social, economic and
           political pressures  behind  the  original  deportation  process
           remain."


      Dr Pool  refers  to  the  report  that  200,000  Eritreans  remain  in
      Ethiopia, but says he has become increasingly sceptical  of  both  the
      criteria  used  for  defining  "Eritreans"  remaining   in   Ethiopia,
      Ethiopians "of Eritrean origin" and the  concept  of  "resident".   He
      says that the Ethiopian Government's categorisation of  Ethiopians  of
      Eritrean origin is highly  political  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
      statistic is  of  questionable  proof  of  the  numbers  of  Eritreans
      remaining in Ethiopia.


10.    Dr  Pool's  caution  is  perhaps  understandable  but  he   expressly
      acknowledges that the presence of the United Nations force appears  to
      have halted the physical deportation of Eritreans.  The  situation  is
      not static.  It cannot be said that there is no risk that  on  removal
      to Eritrea, the appellant would face deportation.   The  question,  is
      whether  there  can  be  said  to  be  a  real  risk  of  deportation,
      persecution or breach of human rights.  Having considered  the  matter
      with care, we take the view that the  Adjudicator  was  right  in  the
      decision based upon the evidence before her.  We are  clear  that  the
      situation  has  improved  since  the   date   of   the   Adjudicator's
      determination, as attested  by  the  up-to-date  evidence  before  us.
      Despite Mr Solomon's able submissions, we are not persuaded that  this
      appellant's removal to Ethiopia would expose him to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or breach of protected human rights by way of  deportation
      or otherwise.

11.   The appeal is dismissed.



                                                                D  B  Casson
                                                       Acting Vice President
