
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC/77847/1997     |
|On 23 August 2002          |        |HS (Return - Failed Asylum  |
|                           |        |Seeker) India CG [2002]     |
|                           |        |UKIAT 04912                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|........21/10/2002..................                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MISS K ESHUN (Chairman)                                           |
|MRS E MORTON                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Harwinder Singh                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:


For the appellant:           Mr A Burrett, Counsel

                       Instructed by Chhokar & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appeals with leave of the  Tribunal
      against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mrs  P  A  Simmons)
      promulgated on 3 September 1998  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      decision of the respondent made on 20  February  1997  to  direct  his
      removal  as  an  illegal  entrant  following  refusal  of  his  asylum
      application.

   2. There is a history to this appeal.  The Tribunal  on  1  October  1998
      refused  the  appellant  leave  to   appeal   against   Mrs   Simmons'
      determination, but that refusal was quashed by the order of  the  High
      Court in September 1999.   It  would  appear  that  the  Adjudicator's
      refusal to adjourn the appeal further, taken in  the  context  of  the
      fact that the application had previously been adjourned  so  that  the
      Secretary of State could authenticate a number of documents upon which
      the appellant sought to rely, was considered a  procedural  unfairness
      on the appellant.

   3. The appeal subsequently came before the Tribunal on  23  August  2002.
      At the hearing Counsel had not  been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination by his instructing solicitors, nor did  he
      have translations of the documents upon which it  had  been  said  the
      appellant wished to rely on and upon which judicial  review  had  been
      sought and  granted.   Counsel  informed  the  Tribunal  that  he  was
      instructed by his solicitors, Chhokar & Co seven days ago and that  he
      had been in touch with the solicitors prior to the  hearing  but  they
      claimed  that  they  did  not  have  a  copy  of   the   Adjudicator's
      determination.  This was surprising given that they must have had  the
      determination when they applied to  the  High  Court  for  a  judicial
      review of the Adjudicator's determination.   The  Tribunal  were  also
      informed by  Counsel that Chhokar & Co  were  of  the  view  that  the
      appeal would be remitted by the Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  It  was
      not clear to us how the solicitors could have formed such a view. This
      would   perhaps  explains  their  unprofessional  behaviour   in   not
      supplying Counsel with all the documentation that he needed  in  order
      to properly conduct the hearing before us.  In the circumstances,  due
      to lack of proper instructions, it was not surprising that Counsel was
      unable to assist in this case.

   4. On behalf of the respondent Mr Walker submitted that  the  Adjudicator
      did not find the appellant credible.  In fact she did not believe  any
      of the appellant's story.  Nevertheless the events go back almost  ten
      years.  It is therefore not credible that the appellant would have any
      problems if he returned to India today.

   5. Mr Walker further submitted that the appellant left India on  his  own
      genuinely  issued  passport  without  any  difficulty.   According  to
      paragraph 5.243 of the April 2002 CIPU report, the UNHCR have observed
      that returnees did not have  problems  if  they  returned  with  valid
      travel documents and if their departure had  taken  place  with  valid
      travel documents.  In the circumstances the appellant's appeal  cannot
      succeed.

   6. We now look at the appellant's claim to asylum.   He  is  married  and
      his wife and son remain in India.  He had obtained an Indian  passport
      10 days before he left India.  He had  had  no  problems  getting  the
      passport and no difficulty leaving India with it.  He left India alone
      and flew to Italy where the agent's contact had met him.  He stayed in
      Italy for about five  days  before  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom
      concealed in the back of a lorry on 28 October 1995.

   7. The appellant said that his life was in  danger  in  India  because  a
      terrorist called Bahgga was near his home and the police harassed  him
      because they thought he was involved with Bahgga.  They  would  arrest
      and beat him and his father had to pay money to get him released.  Due
      to this his brother was killed.  He did not know if it was the  police
      or the terrorists that killed his brother, but it had been five  years
      previously.  He did not remember the date  of  his  brother's  murder,
      except to say that it happened before he, the  appellant,  married  in
      1991.

   8. He had been arrested six or seven times.  The first had been in  1992,
      about June and the last was in May 1995.   He  had  been  arrested  on
      these occasions because they thought that he was  providing  food  and
      shelter to  terrorists.   He  was  released  without  charge  on  each
      occasion because his father paid a bribe.  The appellant  agreed  that
      the police had a legitimate reason to arrest him if he had a terrorist
      living nearby but said that they had no right to beat him.  He did not
      leave India sooner because he thought things would get  better.   Even
      though his brother had been murdered five years previously, because he
      had got married, he thought he would be left alone after that,  as  he
      had settled down.  He put up with the harassment for three  years  and
      had not moved to another part of India because the police had  put  up
      photos and posters everywhere so there was  nowhere  for  him  to  go.
      Despite this he was able to leave India on his own passport because he
      did not tell the police that he was leaving.

   9. He did not belong to any party or organisation.  He did not  know  the
      name of the terrorist organisation Bahgga belonged to, nor did he know
      what activities Bahgga got involved  with.   He  just  knew  that  the
      police had been looking for him for a long time.  The  appellant  said
      that  he  had  been  arrested  two  years  previously  for  causing  a
      disturbance in Simbli and was taken to court and cleared.   Before  he
      left India his cousin had been engaged in a dispute over land  with  a
      neighbour and  because  the  cousin  lived  with  the  appellant,  the
      appellant himself became involved in the  case.  The  case  was  still
      outstanding when he left India.

  10. With a letter dated 3 September 1997 the  appellant's  representatives
      submitted what was alleged to be an  order  of  the  Additional  Chief
      Magistrate of Hoshiarpur and a statement of Gurdev Singh Lambardar and
      Malkiat Singh Sarpanch.  These were  the  documents  that  formed  the
      subject matter of the judicial review  application.   At  the  hearing
      before the Adjudicator the appellant's  representative  said  that  he
      needed an adjournment to have the documents assessed by an  expert  he
      knew, to establish their authenticity.  When the  Adjudicator  pointed
      out to him that he had had since September 1997 to  do  this  and  the
      burden  of  proof  lay  clearly  on  the  appellant,  the  appellant's
      representative said that the investigation had been left to  the  Home
      Office because there was a very good investigation unit at the British
      High Commission in Delhi.  The Adjudicator was not prepared to adjourn
      the case yet again for the  appellant's  representative  to  begin  to
      undertake investigations he had had  at  least  10  or  11  months  to
      pursue.

  11. As already  noted  by  the  Tribunal,  to  date  there  have  been  no
      translation of these documents.

  12. In dismissing the appeal the Adjudicator found  herself  in  agreement
      with the Secretary of  State  and  did  not  believe  the  appellant's
      claims.    She  found  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  Bahgga  to  be
      extremely poor.  The claims about his own persecution were  too  vague
      to be believed.  The Adjudicator found it hard  to  believe  that  the
      appellant would not know, somewhat more precisely than he appeared  to
      at his interview, when his brother was killed.  He was vague about the
      number of times he claims to have  been  arrested  and  did  not  give
      precise dates for these.  His responses to the query as to why he  had
      delayed so long before leaving India, if his brother had  been  killed
      before his own marriage in 1991 and his own arrests had begun in 1992,
      simply made her doubt the whole claim to have been  arrested  at  all.
      The appellant said he had delayed because he thought things would  get
      better because he had married and  settled  down,  but  then  said  he
      married in 1991 and that his first arrest was in June 1992.

  13. The Adjudicator did not also believe that the appellant was in trouble
      with the police and that they had put up posters and  photos  of  him.
      He would not have been issued with a passport ten days before he  left
      and he would not have been able to leave India using his own  passport
      if the police were looking for him everywhere so there was nowhere  in
      India he could go.

  14. The Adjudicator did not accept that the  two  documents  submitted  in
      September  1997  in  any  way  corroborated  the  appellant's  claims.
      Furthermore she had heard no evidence on these documents at all.   She
      did not know how and when they were obtained by the appellant.  The so-
      called  order  of  the  Additional  Chief  Magistrate  was   virtually
      illegible.  It appeared to be dated 20 September 1997 and  to  declare
      that the appellant was an offender.  The  statement  of  Gurdev  Singh
      Lambardar and Malkiat Singh Sarpanch was undated.  The  two  gentlemen
      certified that the appellant had been falsely implicated by the Punjab
      police in a case and had been proclaimed an offender.   The  appellant
      may be falsely implicated in more cases and therefore his  life  would
      be in danger in India.  However the Adjudicator heard no  evidence  as
      to why the appellant should have been falsely implicated in  any  case
      nearly two years after he left India, whereas he claimed he was  never
      charged while in India.

  15.  The  Adjudicator  concluded  by  saying  that  she  accepted  on  the
      background documentary evidence that there were  problems  and  abuses
      perpetrated by the Indian authorities in the Punjab and that  all  may
      not be totally well even now, but as she could not believe the  claims
      being made by the appellant,  she  was  totally  unsatisfied  that  he
      feared persecution for any reason in India now or that he  left  India
      in fear of  persecution for any reason.

  16. As Counsel was unable to assist us in this appeal, we were  left  with
      the additional grounds of appeal submitted on behalf of the  appellant
      by Chhokar & Co on 11 September 1998.  We have already dealt with  the
      issue of the documents which have not  been  translated  to  date  and
      therefore have not  been  authenticated.   However,  in  view  of  the
      Adjudicator's comments about the illegible copy of the  order  of  the
      Additional Chief Magistrate, the undated statement  of   Gurdev  Singh
      Lambardar and Malkiat Singh Sarpanch, and her finding that there is no
      evidence as to why the appellant should have been  falsely  implicated
      in any case nearly two years after he left India, when he  claimed  he
      was never charged while in India, we come to the conclusion that these
      documents are not genuine and therefore the Tribunal cannot place  any
      reliance on them.

  17.  According  to  the  appellant's  additional  grounds  of  appeal  the
      Adjudicator placed too much emphasis on credibility and the  appellant
      should have been given the benefit of the doubt.  To that we say  that
      on the evidence before the Adjudicator, she could not have come to any
      other conclusion other than the finding the appellant's  evidence  was
      totally lacking in credibility.

  18. The objective evidence referred to in the additional grounds of appeal
      date back to June 1997.  That is the  Ottawa  Report.   Although  that
      report is five years out of date, it would appear that as far back  as
      June 1997, the situation in the Punjab had improved despite some human
      rights concerns.  Given the total lack of credibility of his claim, we
      find, even on that evidence that the appellant does not have  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution in India today for a Convention Reason.

  19. The appellant left India  about  1995  on  his  own  genuinely  issued
      passport without any difficulty. This evidence, coupled with the total
      lack of credibility of his claim, indicates that the appellant did not
      have a well-founded fear of persecution when he left India.

  20. On the issue of any likelihood of risk of persecution  on  return,  we
      take account of the observation by the UNHCR in paragraph 5.243 of the
      April 2002 CIPU report, that nationals who returned after having their
      asylum applications abroad rejected, did not  have  problems  if  they
      returned with valid travel documents and if their departure had  taken
      place with valid travel documents.  Refused Indian asylum seekers  who
      returned to India with temporary travel documents could enter  without
      any problems as such, but if they arrived  after  their  passport  had
      expired then they would be questioned  about  the  reasons  for  this.
      These arrivals were  questioned  briefly  and  could  then  leave  the
      airport.  It was part of the appellant's evidence that the agent  kept
      his passport.  However, in the light of the objective evidence  before
      us, we find that there is no  reasonable  likelihood  whatsoever  that
      this appellant, on his return  to  India,  will  suffer  any  risk  of
      persecution, least of all for a Convention reason.

  21. His appeal is therefore dismissed.


                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
