
Appeal No:CC-16979-2001
        RD (Sufficiency of Protection-IFA-Roma) Poland CG [2002] UKIAT 00983

Immigration Appeal Tribunal

                                                       Date heard: 18/1/2002
                                                     Date notified: 4/4/2002
                                   Before:
                            Mr A R Mackey (Chair)
                                Mr N Kumar JP
                               Mr R Baines JP
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant
                            ROBERT DAWGIERT (+3)
                                 Respondent

Determination and Reasons

Representation:
For the appellant:Ms C Cooper, Home Presenting Officer
For the claimant:Mr M O'Donnell of Counsel representing Herwald Seddon
Solicitors
1. The Secretary of State appeals, with leave, against a decision of an
Adjudicator (Mrs D Taylor). In that determination the Adjudicator allowed
an appeal by the claimants against the decision of the Secretary of State
who had refused leave to enter, asylum and rights under the European
Convention on Human Rights 1950 (ECHR).
The Adjudicator's decision:
2. The determination, which was promulgated 8 October 2001, accepted that
the claimants, Polish Roma from the town Kielce, did have a well founded
fear of persecution on returning to Poland for reasons of their ethnicity.
The Adjudicator also found that the claimants had suffered significant
trauma and that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.
3. The claimants' credibility was accepted. The Adjudicator found that the
claimants had reported attacks on themselves and their property to the
local police on approximately 20 occasions but there had been no progress.
She stated:
"The police, unable or unwilling mattered little to Mr Dawgiert, did not
offer him protection. It is clear that there is in Poland a system in place
but it was not operated by the police in Kielce."
4. She then went on to consider whether, as she puts it, the claimants
should have moved to another area of Poland "before seeking surrogate
protection of the international community". In this regard her findings
were that the Roma in Poland were a small community and reside in
restricted areas and it would be difficult to blend in coming from outside
and the community. Also they faced disproportionately high unemployment and
had been hit hard by economic changes and restructuring more than ethnic
Poles. She referred to a Tribunal decision in Franczak (00TH/02394) where
the Tribunal had before it a report from a Professor "Bacton" who believed
that internal flight would be difficult because those who flee to another
area in Poland would be seen as troublemakers. She noted a comment from the
Tribunal in that decision which stated:
"In this case we take into account the severity of the ill treatments
suffered by the respondents, the country information, in particular that
the Polish government have not been able to control or prevent violence
against Roma in some areas, and find that the authorities had been and are
still likely to be unwilling to afford protection to these respondents."
5. (Franczak was also an appeal by the Secretary of State against the
decision of the Adjudicator. The Tribunal dismissed that appeal on 24
October 2000.)
6. The Adjudicator had also taken into account the House of Lords' decision
in Horvath [2000] 3A11 ER 577 and relevant comments made by this Tribunal
in Kacaj and Harakel.
The appellant's submissions:
7. In the grounds of appeal submitted by the Secretary of State four items
are concentrated on. These are;
a. Failure of the Adjudicator to address properly the reason for refusal of
the claimants' case by the Secretary, as outlined in the refusal letter on
7 February 2001, where it was stated;
"In order to bring yourself within the scope of the United Nations
Convention, you have to show that these incidents were not simply random
actions of individuals but were a sustained pattern or campaign of
persecution directed against you which was knowingly tolerated by the
authorities, or that the authorities were unable, or unwilling, to offer
you effective protection."
It was submitted that the Adjudicator appeared to rely on the contents of a
local newspaper, that had been produced which had reached the conclusion
that a system, in place to protect the Roma community, "is not operated by
the police in Kielce". The objectivity and methodology employed in the
research in this article was submitted as an unknown quantity and thus too
much reliance had been placed on it by the Adjudicator. This submission is
expanded to the claim that no police force can provide total protection and
there was no substance in claims that the police were just going through
the motions or that it would have been reasonable, "to expect some progress
had been made." Ms Cooper submitted that the Adjudicator had been persuaded
by these claims but had failed to give explanations why she concluded the
police did not offer effective protection.
b. The Adjudicator had failed to provide adequate reasons why she found it
unduly harsh for the claimant and his family to relocate within Poland.
Beyond this, it is submitted that there has been an apparent failure by the
claimant to approach national authorities when not satisfied at the local
level.
c. The Adjudicator had relied on the Tribunal decision in Franczak whereas
the Secretary would rely on the more recent Polish Roma case of Andrasz
(01/TH/02224).
d. It would have been desirable for the Adjudicator to have provided more
detailed reasons for allowing the appeal under Article 3 rather than simply
stating that it followed from the appeal being allowed on asylum grounds.
8. In addition to the latest CIPU report on Poland Miss Cooper placed
before us a copy of a decision of the Court of Appeal in Wierzbicki [2001]
EWCA Civ 830 and the decision of the Tribunal in Andrasz (01TH/02224). She
submitted that the Wierzbicki decision was of general application and
specifically referred us paragraph 22 of the Tribunal decision in Andrasz.
9. Andrasz is a decision where, after considering a failure of police
action in Poland in respect of various incidents that happened to Mr
Andrasz, (also a Polish Roma), it states:
"22. There was a limit to how far the best police forces can pursue
offenders who can not be identified; this is precisely why protection for
ordinary people must depend on the general effectiveness of the criminal
justice system. In this case, there is nothing to suggest that gypsies in
Poland face nearly the same level of public prejudice as in the Czech
Republic. So far as they do have problems, there is no reliable material
before us to show that the criminal justice system generally (as distinct
from police in particular localities, referred to at paragraph 6.59 of the
Home Office Country Assessment, above) is either unwilling or unable to
address them effectively. In our view the evidence before us does not show
there would be any real risk of breach of human rights if this family were
returned to Poland, and this appeal too must be allowed."[We note this
appeal by the Secretary of State was only on ECHR grounds which had been
allowed by the Adjudicator.]
10. Miss Cooper submitted that these conclusions in Andrasz were directly
relevant to the case before us. As with Mr Andrasz, in the current case,
the claimants had reported various attacks on them and their property to
the police and the police were investigating. Beyond this she submitted
that each claim needed to be fact dependent and with the failure of the
police in Kielce to provide results on their complaints it was reasonable
to expect that the claimants to have complained to higher authorities,
beyond merely the local police.
11. She submitted, relying on the CIPU report 6.65 to 6.68, that the
problems for Roma in Poland were taken seriously by the police and
government authorities and that there was a "sufficiency of protection"
available in Poland to these claimants. The Secretary of State did not
agree that this claimant had a well founded fear of persecution in his home
district and that the sufficiency of protection extended to that area as
well as the rest of Poland. Therefore the decision of the Adjudicator was
an unreasonable one and unsustainable one. She stressed that it was her
submission that because there was sufficiency of protection across the
whole of Poland the issue of internal flight or internal protection
alternatives did not need to be specifically covered because of the general
sufficiency of protection offered by the state in Poland.
12. In relation to Franczak she submitted that we should not place too much
reliance on this decision as the report of Professor "Bacton" was actually
not before the Adjudicator in this claimant's case.
The respondents' submissions:
13. Mr O'Donnell submitted that we needed to be convinced that the
Adjudicator's findings were unsustainable and constituted an error of law.
He conceded that there was not an adequate coverage of the country
information in the decision as might be desired, but that it was
sufficient. There was a clear finding that these claimants would suffer
persecution on return to their home area in Poland. He submitted the claim
by the Secretary of State that the claimants could have gone to a higher
authorities in Poland beyond the local police was unreasonable. Given there
had been a lack of action by the local police, he submitted it was logical
that this would undermine the faith of the claimant in reporting any
matters to the authorities.
14. It was submitted that the Adjudicator had gone into the appropriate
legal leading decisions that needed to be considered at paragraphs 17 and
18 of the determination. Whilst the investigation into those cases could
have been better done, it did not, in his submission, amount to an error of
law that made the decision unsustainable.
15. In relation to the internal flight / internal protection alternative
(IFA/IPA) he submitted that the conclusions of the Adjudicator were not in
error and that the unduly harsh test derived from the leading decision in
Robinson [1998] Imm AR 568, had clearly been applied and that it was also
appropriate for the Adjudicator to follow the decision in Franczak and
Professor's Bacton's comments. He stressed, in particular, the trauma that
would be suffered by the dependent children if they had to return and that
we should note the medical report in that regard that had been before the
Adjudicator. The consideration of the children he submitted showed that it
would be unduly harsh in this instance to expect the claimant and his
family to relocate elsewhere in Poland.
16. He concluded therefore that the appeal should be dismissed as the
Adjudicator's decision fell well short of being unsustainable.
17. The issues
We found the issues before us to be:
"A. Was the conclusion of the Adjudicator that the claimants had a well
founded fear of persecution for a convention reason in their home district
sustainable on an analysis of the relevant law and country information that
was before the Adjudicator?
B. If the answer to issue one is "no" is there sufficient evidence
available before this Tribunal to reach conclusions on the issue of a
prospective fear of persecution on return to the claimants' home district?
C. If there is a well founded fear of persecution locally by the claimants
is the Adjudicator correct in her conclusion that an internal flight
alternative (IFA/IPA) is not available to these claimants because it would
be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate to other parts
of Poland?
D. If the claimants are not found to have a well founded fear of
persecution in their home district or there is an IFA available are there
still any remaining obligations on the United Kingdom under the ECHR to
which these claimants are entitled?
18. Assessment
Turning to issue one. The Adjudicator accepted the credibility of the
claimants and the respondent did not make any specific attack on their
truthfulness. From this, after taking into account the decisions in
Franczak and noting the comments in the leading decisions of Horvath and
Kacaj the Adjudicator went on to find that the claimants had been subjected
to sustained attacks on them personally and to their property, by skinheads
in their home district and that despite reporting these to the police they
had been unable, or unwilling, to be offered effective protection against
the skinhead attacks. While reaching this conclusion, the Adjudicator
however did state that it was clear a "system" of protection is available
in Poland. She did not define what that "system" is but stated that it did
not operate for these claimants in Kielce.
19. The Secretary of State submits that this finding is in error as
although the claimants may have a subjective fear of persecution from
skinheads (non state actors) on return to their home district this is not
persecution within the meaning of the Refugee Convention. This is because
there has not been a failure of state protection by the authorities in
Poland as there is a police and criminal justice system available to
provide protection to a level that can be reasonably expected to overcome
the real risks of harm to these claimants from non state actors.
20. This generalised submission by the Secretary of State appears to be
that if there is "sufficiency of protection" available in a country such as
Poland then, logically followed through, there is no place for
consideration of an IFA. We consider that this submission must be rejected.

21. Unfortunately the leading decisions in Shah and Islam and later in
Horvath (and quite recently a High Court decision (Administrative Court) in
Hari Dhima v Immigration Appeal Tribunal (CO/2392/2001), delivered 5
February 2002 by Lord Justice Auld and Mr Justice Ouseley), which have all
developed and considered the issue of a "sufficiency of protection", by non
state actor cases, have not gone on to consider the implications of this
legal reasoning in relation to the well settled jurisprudence in relation
to the IFA/IPA which is set out in the leading decisions of Robinson [1997
Imm AR 568] and Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271.
22. Because of the findings we reach as to the flaws in this Adjudicator's
determination, and our own conclusions based on the objective country
information, it has not been necessary for us to go on and determine
whether the concepts of "sufficiency of protection" or "systems of
protection" involve conclusions which must be reached only on a national
basis (thus making the IFA/IPA question irrelevant) or whether they permit
of localised failures in protection and consideration of the IFA/IPA.
23. Our own prima facie view is that if the formula adopted by Lord Hoffman
in Shah and Islam which states that Persecution = Serious harm + Failure of
state protection (for non state actor claims) is accepted as a starting
point, there are serious potential IFA/IPA application problems if a
failure of state protection is only assessed on a national or state wide
basis and does not allow of localised failures in state protection. If it
is only a national test, as appears , if by implication, to be indicated by
several of their Lordships in Horvath, then IFA/IPA consideration becomes
irrelevant once a national sufficiency of protection is established. If the
Lord Hoffman formula is adopted, it would appear, there is thus no
"persecution" at the local level as there is no failure of state
protection. We do not consider that this was an intended result. However it
would appear important for the future that a starred decision, or higher
court, should at some stage in the near future address the issue of IFA/IPA
and how the Robinson and Karanakaran tests should be applied in relation to
findings of "sufficiency of protection" where there appear to be localised
failures, and potential "protection" is available by internal relocation.
24. Returning to the terms of this Adjudicator's determination we find that
the conclusions reached at paragraphs 22 and 23 are in error. The
Adjudicator concluded that the claimants " have been subjected to sustained
attack in their home area" however the Adjudicator immediately moved on to
the issue of the IFA without consideration of whether these claimants faced
a reasonable likelihood of serious harm on return to their home district,
regardless of whether there was a system of protection available to them or
otherwise. Simply stated the prospective fear on return has been
overlooked. While the finding of past serious harm is highly relevant it is
only an indicative factor and not conclusive of a future real risk.
25. On the basis of the somewhat limited country information before us we
do however consider we are able to reach a sustainable conclusion on the
well-foundedness of the fear of serious harm to this family on return to
their home district and we return to this later in the decision.
26. We also find that the conclusions of the Adjudicator were unsustainable
in relation to the treatment of the IFA/IPA. Having found that there was a
"system" of effective protection in place in Poland, "that was not operated
by the police in Kielce" the Adjudicator did not carry out an analysis or
balancing of that protection and its impact on these claimants. She merely
proceeded to conclude that it would be unduly harsh for them to relocate to
another part of Poland based on statements relating to the Roma community
facing disproportionately high unemployment and that in moving to another
part of Poland they would be seen as "troublemakers". We consider that
these findings internally inconsistent. Having found that there is
"effective protection" in other parts of Poland, and indeed similar
findings were reached in both Franczak and Andrasz, then it is prima facie
inconsistent to conclude that it would be "unduly harsh" to expect the
claimants to relocate to other parts of Poland. As is spelt out clearly in
the leading decisions of Horvath, and Shah and Islam, the central concept
of the Refugee Convention is that of "surrogate protection". Thus where
there is "effective protection" available concluded on objective evidence,
it is extremely difficult to see how it can then be argued, that
applicants, such as these claimants, are placed in an unreasonable or
unduly harsh position by expecting them to relocate. The subjective
elements, clearly involved in tests "unreasonableness" or it being "unduly
harsh", would, in our view, need to be very strong and persuasive before
the objective assessment of "effective protection" should be overridden. An
overemphasis on the subjective analysis in IFA/IPA situations is not, in
our view, consistent with the fundamental objectives of the Refugee
Convention, which seek to provide protection from "well founded fear" not
subjective fear.
27. While we agree that this may appear to be a gloss on the test of Linden
JA in Thirunavukkarasu [1993] 109 DLR (4th) 682, as adopted by Brooke LJ in
Robinson at 578, we consider that tying the IFA/IPA assessment back to the
underlying concept of protection and an objective human rights based
assessment of persecution, is clearly consistent with the later decisions
of House of Lords in Horvath and Shah and Islam. This does not mean that
unreasonableness or unduly harsh situations should not be considered but
that these should be carried out against the backdrop of findings in
relation to sufficiency or meaningful protection. We also note that such an
approach is, on the face of it, more consistent with the recent academic
considerations of Professor Hathaway and others in the so called "Michigan
guidelines" (Michigan Journal of International Law. Vol 21:131) and the
growing use of the term "internal protection alternative" rather than the
older terms of "internal flight alternative" or "relocation". Consideration
of the subjective and objective elements involved in IPA/IFA is also made
in the New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority decisions Refugee
Appeal 71427/1999 (16 August 2000) and Refugee Appeal 71684/99 (29 October
1999).
28. We have adopted the approach of considering the IFA/IPA against the
backdrop of findings on sufficiency of protection in Poland as well as the
accepted Robinson test, later in this decision.
29. Do the claimants have a well founded fear of persecution in their home
district?
As stated the country of origin information in relation to Poland
discriminatory treatment of the Roma community in Poland is prevalent and
official assistance is not as fulsome as might be desired. The same issue
was faced by this Tribunal in both Franczak and Andrasz. The latest reports
appear to be: those by Mark Braham in March 1993 to the UNHCR, a Helsinki
Human Rights Foundation report in 1997, CIPU paragraphs 6.64 ? 66 and the
United States State Department reports of February 2000 and 2001. These
commentaries all indicate that while there are reports of discrimination
and abuse, particularly by skinheads against the Roma population, the
Polish government does have in place a criminal justice system to deal with
such abuses and the national government does not discriminate against Roma
overtly. The country information also recognises that some local officials
are known to discriminate against Roma and that the judiciary often lacks
resources. The report of Professor Bacton, or "Acton" as referred to in
Franczak, must be set against this objective country information. On the
totality of the evidence presented to the Adjudicator, where credibility of
the claimants was accepted, we must agree that there have been several
instances of discrimination by skinheads against these claimants in their
home district. Whether these have reached the level of being persecutorial,
as sustained or systemic attacks on core human rights, we have doubts. In
this case, it is not necessary for us to be determinative as we consider
that even if these claimants may be able to establish, to a reasonable
degree of likelihood, that they would suffer serious harm on return to
their home district the failure of state protection, essential
additionally, in non-state actor claims, has not been established even
locally. The evidence before the Adjudicator shows that the claimants made
several complaints to the police. However it does not indicate that the
police were unwilling to assist them, nor that they would be "unwilling" in
the future. The fact that the culprits may never have been caught does not
indicate the police were unwilling to protect the claimants. It equally
could indicate insufficiency of identification or lack of resources to
carry out prosecutions. We consider therefore that the conclusion of the
Adjudicator that the police did not offer the claimants effective
protection in their home district was a highly dubious one on the evidence
before her.
30. Indeed, as noted the claimants did not take the matter to higher
authorities as would have appeared logical when there was little result
locally. Again it is unnecessary for us to reach firm conclusions on this
point as we consider, based on the totality of the country information,
that these claimants can move to another part of Poland where they can
access meaningful protection. The country information indicates that there
is a criminal justice system in place and whilst the Romany community,
which numbers about 40,000, faces disproportionately high unemployment to
that of ethnic Poles, the national government does not overtly discriminate
against Roma. We agree with the conclusions, set out at paragraph 22 by Mr
Freeman in Andrasz set out above. We also concur with and follow the
conclusion on sufficiency of protection for Polish Roma in Wierzbicki.
31. We have also gone on to consider, set against the objective findings in
relation to sufficiency of protection in Poland, the application of the
more subjective tests set out in Robinson and Karanakaran that is whether
it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect these claimants to
relocate to another part of Poland. In this regard we have considered the
evidence relating to these claimants found by the Adjudicator and set out
in their initial application. It is clear that the family have suffered
discrimination and some trauma from the specific attacks made on them by
skinheads, but looking to the future, as we must, because of the
sufficiency of protection available in other parts of Poland we consider
that even if it were accepted they have a well founded fear of persecution
on return to their home district, which we do not, there are clearly other
sites within Poland where they could relocate and access meaningful state
protection. Beyond this we find no evidence of conditions in other parts of
Poland that they would suffer serious harms or conditions that would force
them back to the site of possible persecution in Kielce. While their
economic prospects may not be as good as they would be remaining in this
country or as many other Poles, there is nothing in the country information
that indicates they could not access the same level of welfare, health and
education as other Poles. As stated the national government does not
discriminate overtly against Roma. For these reasons we do not consider
that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect these claimants to
locate to another site of protection within Poland, away from Kielce.
33. For the above reasons the claimants are not refugees within the meaning
of Article 1 A (2) of the Refugee Convention 1951. As with the conclusions
in Andrasz, we do not consider for these claimants there would be a real
risk of a breach of human rights if they were returned to Poland.
33. Decision:
The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
A R Mackey
� Crown Copyright

