
CH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX/45738-2001     |
|On 2 July 2002             |        |AM (Bajuni-Somali           |
|                           |        |Speaker-Kibajuni Speaker)   |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |03169                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                    |Date Determination notified:|
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |26 July 2002                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MR D K ALLEN (CHAIRMAN)                                           |
|MR A G JEEVANJEE                                                  |
|MRS J HARRIS                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ADAM MUSSA MOBARAK                                                |
|                                                                  |
|APPELLANT                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|RESPONDENT                                                        |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, who claims to be a citizen of Somalia, has been granted
      leave to appeal to  the  Tribunal  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Dr M S W Hoyle, who determined  on  a  preliminary  issue
      that he was not a citizen of Somalia  and  accordingly  dismissed  his
      appeal against the Respondent's decision to give  directions  for  his
      removal from the United Kingdom, subsequent to refusal  of  his  claim
      for asylum.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 2 July 2002.  Mr D O'Callaghan for
      Selva & Co. appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Mr M Blundell  of
      the Home Office Presenting Officer's Unit appeared on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent.

   3. Mr O'Callaghan stated that much in the grounds  was  relevant  to  the
      problems he had been confronted with at the appeal in the light of the
      failure by the Respondent to comply with directions, but  it  was  now
      the case that the issues had refined themselves  quite  significantly.
      The Adjudicator had agreed  that  the  lower  standard  of  proof  was
      appropriate to the nationality issue, since it went to  the  heart  of
      the asylum claim.  The Appellant asserted that  he  was  Bajuni.   His
      answers to questions in interview were not challenged and they  seemed
      to be correct.  At paragraph 62 of his determination, the  Adjudicator
      had said that he would have given the Appellant  the  benefit  of  the
      doubt on those answers alone.  Much emphasis had been  placed  on  the
      report headed "Minority Groups in Somalia",  being  the  report  of  a
      joint British, Danish  and  Dutch  fact  finding  mission  to  Nairobi
      between 17  and  24  September  2000.   The  proper  approach  to  the
      assessment  of  evidence  as  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Karanakaran [2000] INLR122 was at the forefront.  There was concern as
      to whether it was appropriate to attach such  weight  to  this  report
      when other matters favoured the Appellant.   The  point  was  made  at
      paragraph 5.2 at page 20 of  the  minority  groups  report  that  most
      Bajuni speak some Somali.  The Appellant's evidence was  that  he  did
      speak some Somali.  He said that  the  main  language  spoken  by  the
      Bajuni was Kibajuni.  At the hearing, he had said he  spoke  Kibajuni.
      He did not therefore fall outside this paragraph of  the  report.   He
      speaks  Kibajuni  and  also  some  Somali.   However,  Mr  O'Callaghan
      accepted that he could not answer paragraph 2 of paragraph 5.2  as  he
      was not a linguist.  It was the  case  that  the  Appellant  had  been
      interviewed in  Swahili  and  also  a  Swahili  interpreter  had  been
      provided at the hearing, and that was at the Appellant's request,  and
      no particular dialect had been requested.


   4. As regards the determination of the Tribunal in Suleiman [2002]  UKIAT
      00416, there  were  problems  with  credibility  in  that  case.   The
      Appellant there spoke no Somali at all and said she spoke no  Kibajuni
      at all.  In Karanakaran terms, you could say that she did not  satisfy
      the lower standard of proof.

   5. It was also submitted that there was an error by  the  Adjudicator  in
      paragraph  62  of  the  determination  concerning  a   lack   of   any
      justification or explanation for the Appellant's explanation as to his
      lack of Somali.  This was  to  be  found  from  paragraph  16  of  the
      determination, where the Appellant said that he  lived  in  a  Swahili
      speaking village and needed to speak Swahili and Arabic in  his  area.
      The next village was Arab speaking.  An explanation had therefore been
      given.  The community stayed within itself, and there was very  little
      contact beyond the village other than the local Arab village.  It  was
      necessary to go further to find Swahili speakers.  If it was all taken
      into account and bearing in mind how close this  village  was  to  the
      border, then to the lower standard he had shown he  was  Bajuni.   The
      only adverse issue being paragraph 2 of paragraph 5.2 of the  minority
      report, and in Karanakaran terms that could not be allowed to outweigh
      everything else.

   6. In his submissions, Mr Blundell accepted  the  points  of  distinction
      between this case and Suleiman.   The  answers  given  concerning  his
      nationality at interview appeared to be correct.  However, Mr Blundell
      relied on Suleiman as it addressed the language point and this  was  a
      central issue.  He took us to  paragraph  12  of  that  determination,
      where the point was made that someone who  spoke  Kibajuni  could  not
      possibly describe their language as Swahili.  At paragraph 14 the test
      was stated.  It was said by  the  Tribunal  that  Adjudicators  should
      approach any case  involving  someone  who  claimed  to  be  a  Bajuni
      resident of Somalia but  who  could  not  speak  Kibajuni  (let  alone
      Somali) with great caution.  The Appellant had spoken some Somali, but
      it was only his evidence that he could speak Kibajuni.  There  was  no
      reliable evidence therefore that he could speak Kibajuni and hence the
      paragraph 14 point was relevant.  The fact that  he  could  not  speak
      Kibajuni was  a  strong  indication  that  he  was  not  Bajuni.   The
      Adjudicator was therefore correct in his conclusions.

   7. By way of reply, Mr O'Callaghan suggested that the appeal had narrowed
      itself down to two issues, the question of whether the Appellant spoke
      Kibajuni and the application of Karanakaran.  It did not seem that his
      claim that he spoke Kibajuni was challenged, but at the  time  of  the
      hearing, no one had the minority report before them.  If he was  found
      to be truthful and correct on a number of issues concerning Somalia or
      his own area, then he should be given the benefit of the doubt that he
      spoke Kibajuni.  Paragraph 5.3.2 of the minority report indicated that
      fishermen spent a lot of time on the islands and it was plausible that
      he would have had  limited  contact  with  Somali  speakers.   Fishing
      carried on.  Only certain fishermen, not including the Appellant,  had
      been unable to assume their former occupations as fishermen.

   8. We reserved our determination.

   9. The minority report was not before the Adjudicator, but, since he  was
      clearly  troubled  and  understandably  so  by  a  lack  of   evidence
      concerning the language issue in this case, he adjourned the appeal to
      enable  the  document  to  be  provided  and  submissions  made.    Mr
      O'Callaghan very properly did not pursue a number of  the  matters  in
      the grounds of appeal since it is now the case, albeit  very  late  in
      the day, that he has been provided with a copy of the minority  report
      and has had an opportunity  to  read  it  and  consider  it.   We  are
      grateful to both him and to Mr Blundell for the helpful  and  sensible
      way in which the appeal was conducted before us.

  10. The Appellant claimed to be from Somalia.  He claimed to be a  Bajuni.
      He was interviewed in Swahili.  His evidence at the hearing before the
      Adjudicator was given with the benefit of a Swahili  interpreter,  and
      no particular dialect was requested.  At interview,  he  was  able  to
      answer a number of questions accurately, such  as  the  names  of  the
      principal towns in Somalia, the principal rivers, the capital and  the
      largest city south of Mogadishu and the President from 1969  to  1999.
      He said that he belonged to  the  Bajuni  clan  and  his  clan's  main
      language was Swahili.  He said that his clan also  spoke  Arabic.   He
      said that he did not speak Somali.  He said that he spoke  Swahili  at
      home.  He was a fisherman.

  11. In his witness statement, the Appellant said that he  left  school  at
      fifteen and worked as a fisherman.  Three hundred people lived in  his
      village and the next village consisted of  Arabs  and  was  an  Arabic
      speaking village.  He said that he  spoke  Swahili  which  was  called
      Bajuni Swahili.  He said he needed to speak Swahili and Arabic in  his
      area.  He said that he knew a few Somali words.  He said that  Bajunis
      only spoke Swahili where he was.   Two  thirds  of  his  village  were
      Bajuni.  He said he did not speak Somali himself because  his  parents
      spoke Swahili and Arabic.  He said it was Bajuni Swahili.  Bajuni  was
      a clan.  Kibajuni was the language.  It was like Swahili.

  12. The Adjudicator attached weight in determining the appeal to paragraph
      5.2 of the "Minority Groups in Somalia" report.  This was  information
      provided to the delegation by Bajuni elders.

  13. According to the elders, most Bajuni speak some Somali,  although  the
      main language spoken by the Bajuni is Kibajuni, a dialect  related  to
      Swahili.  The  Bajuni  elders  advised  the  delegation  that  younger
      Bajuni, who have lived mainly  in  exile,  alienated  from  mainstream
      Somali society, may have only very limited  knowledge  of  Somali  but
      they stress that they should know at least some key words in Somali as
      their family elders would have taught them.  Bernard  Harborne,  Chief
      of the UN Coordination Unit for Somalia, with whom the delegation met,
      also stated that most Bajuni are able to speak some Somali in addition
      to Kibajuni.

  14. The  Bajuni  elders  informed  the  delegation  that,  although  their
      language, Kibajuni, is related to  Swahili,  their  language  is  very
      different to  the  Swahili  dialect  spoken  in  the  areas  of  Kenya
      immediately below the Kenya-Somalia border, including the islands that
      continue from the Somali border down along the coast towards  Mombasa,
      although there are some common words.

  15. The Adjudicator concluded, at paragraph 62 of his determination,  that
      whereas the Appellant showed some knowledge of Somalia  at  interview,
      the answers generally were  inconclusive.   He  would,  however,  have
      given him the benefit  of  the  doubt  on  those  answers  alone.   He
      concluded, however,  that  the  report  showed  that  the  Appellant's
      explanation as to his lack of Somali language needed  a  justification
      or explanation which had not been provided and that this  was  adverse
      to him such that the Adjudicator did not believe his story.

  16. Mr O'Callaghan argued that an explanation was  provided  in  that  the
      Appellant lived in a village which was Swahili speaking and he  needed
      to speak Swahili and Arabic in his area, Arabic being the language  of
      the next village.  He said that he knew a few Somali words.   We  note
      in passing that this goes in contrast to what  he  said  at  interview
      that he did not speak Somali.  In any event, we note that the  comment
      of the Bajuni elders was that the younger Bajuni  might  have  only  a
      very limited knowledge of Somali but this was premised on the basis of
      applying to those who had lived  mainly  in  exile.   The  Appellant's
      story is, however, that he lived in Somalia until 2000.  We note  also
      that he said he went to school until the age of fifteen.

  17. Mr O'Callaghan, however, very fairly accepted that he could not answer
      paragraph 2 of  paragraph  5.2  reproduced  at  paragraph  14  of  our
      determination.  There, as can be  seen  from  the  above  Kibajuni  is
      described as being related to Swahili and Kibajuni is said to  be  the
      main language spoken by the Bajuni and to  be  a  dialect  related  to
      Swahili.  We remind ourselves that the Appellant was  interviewed  and
      gave evidence in Swahili and at no stage appears to have asked  for  a
      Kibajuni interpreter to be provided.  We also bear in mind  the  point
      from paragraph  14  of  the  tightly  reasoned  determination  of  the
      Tribunal in Suleiman that,  following  a  careful  assessment  of  the
      evidence  concerning  a  claim  raising  some  similar   issues,   the
      Tribunal's conclusion that Adjudicators (and by inference the Tribunal
      also) should approach any case involving someone who claims  to  be  a
      Bajuni resident of Somalia but who cannot speak  Kibajuni  (let  alone
      Somali) with great caution.

  18. We do not consider that we can  accept  the  bare  contention  by  the
      Appellant that he speaks Kibajuni as being sufficient to show  to  the
      lower standard of proof that he does.  It has to be seen in the  light
      of the way in which he gave his evidence, at no stage having sought  a
      Kibajuni interpreter.  As part of the balancing exercise, we must bear
      in mind that at best he speaks a few words of Somali, and  the  Bajuni
      elders said  that  younger  Bajuni  who  had  lived  mainly  in  exile
      alienated from mainstream Somali society should know at least some key
      words in Somali, and we bear the very limited knowledge of Somali that
      the Appellant has in mind in this regard, albeit as a  lesser  factor.
      We must, of  course,  place  into  the  balance  also  the  apparently
      accurate answers the Appellant gave about Somalia at interview.  In so
      doing, we bear in mind the principles in Karanakaran,  which  required
      the reaching of a well rounded decision  as  to  whether  in  all  the
      circumstances there is a serious  possibility  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason, not excluding the possibility that relevant matters
      did not happen unless we have no real doubt  that  they  did  in  fact
      happen and not excluding any matters from consideration and  assessing
      the future unless they can be safely discarded on account of a lack of
      any  real  doubt  that  they  did  not  in  fact  occur  or  were  not
      concurrently occurring.  Believing that  something  probably  did  not
      occur does not justify excluding a matter totally from  consideration.
      In assessing the evidence in the round in this  way  as  we  must,  we
      consider that the Adjudicator came to the  right  conclusion  in  this
      case.  Answering the two questions or issues posed by  Mr  O'Callaghan
      in his closing submissions, we consider it has not been  shown  to  be
      the case on the lower standard of  proof  that  the  Appellant  speaks
      Kibajuni, and we consider that that taken with the other evidence  and
      looked at as a whole leads us to the conclusion that he has  not  made
      out his claim to the lower standard  of  proof  to  be  a  Bajuni  and
      therefore we do not accept that  he  is  a  citizen  of  Somalia.   We
      reiterate, therefore, our agreement with the  conclusions  reached  by
      the Adjudicator.


  19. This appeal is dismissed.




                                                                Mr D K Allen
                                                                    Chairman
