
H-MOH-V2
                                                Appeal Number : HX56242-2001
                                                      DG (Due Process-KAA)
                         Iraq CG [2002] UKIAT 06874
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  21 November 2002                        |                             |
|Dictated : 3 December 2002                    |.....27.02.20003.............|
|                                              |..................           |


                                   Before:


                           Miss K Eshun - Chairman
                        Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes
                              Mrs M Padfield JP


between
                              Dana Aziz Ghader
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Mohammad of Musa A Patel & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer.


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals with leave of  the  Tribunal
      against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  J  P  N  Hallam)
      dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent  made  on
      17 March 2001 to refuse him leave to enter and asylum.

2.          The appellant's claim to asylum is  that  his  father  had  been
      involved with  the  PUK  in  the  1980s.   In  April  1988  the  Iraqi
      authorities arrested the appellant, his mother,  two  brothers  and  a
      sister.  The appellant at that stage was 12 and he was  detained  from
      April 1988 until August 1988 when he was released as a  result  of  an
      Amnesty being declared.  He  was  ill-treated  during  his  detention.
      After their release from detention,  the  family  moved  to  Iran  and
      stayed  there  until  9  December  1999  at  which  time  the  Iranian
      government put pressure on the appellant and his family to  return  to
      Northern Iraq.

3.    The appellant began  to  trade  between  Northern  Iraq  and  Iran  in
      Medicine, Tea and Soap and he continued this until November 2000.  His
      trading involved him travelling to Iran three or four times  a  month.
      He had to bribe  the  customs  in  both  Iran  and  Iraq  and  he  was
      apparently warned many times not to  travel  to  Iran  and  back  from
      Kurdistan.  Notwithstanding these warnings,  the  appellant  continued
      with his trading until November 2000 when  he  returned  to  Kurdistan
      with his trading partner and he found the local  police  had  come  to
      arrest him in Kurdistan because they had been  tipped  off  about  his
      return.  He managed to escape by the back door  but  his  partner  was
      arrested and his brother was shot at and wounded.  The  appellant  was
      shot at but still managed to escape.  He went to his uncle's house and
      on 20 December he left Iraq  with  the  assistance  of  an  agent  and
      arrived in the United Kingdom via France on 22 January 2001 where upon
      he claimed asylum.

4.    The appellant indicated that he was trading illegally but that he  was
      suspected by the PUK of spying on behalf of the  Iranian  Intelligence
      and there was also an accusation that he was involved  with  the  PKK.
      He was warned by the PUK on a number of occasions but he ignored these
      warnings and continued with his trading because he knew  that  he  was
      not involved  in  assisting  the  Iranian  Intelligence  and  was  not
      involved either with the PKK.  He claimed that there was a warrant for
      his arrest and he was fearful of returning to the  Kurdish  Autonomous
      Area because he feared persecution by the PUK.

5.     So  far  as  the  appellant's  illegal  trading  was  concerned,  the
      Adjudicator found that the appellant was fearful of prosecution rather
      than persecution.  The  appellant  had  indicated  that  he  had  paid
      customs on both sides of the border in order that he was not  arrested
      for his illegal trading conduct which  was  in  contravention  of  the
      Customs Act.

6.    The Adjudicator found also that  there  was  no  indication  that  the
      appellant had been involved with either the  Iranian  Intelligence  or
      the PKK and there was no evidence to show that the PUK had any grounds
      for fearing that he was involved with either organisation.

7.    In view of the fact that the appellant did not give any indication  as
      to the reason for the warrant for his arrest being issued, it was  not
      clear to the Adjudicator that the  appellant  can  indicate  that  the
      arrest was issued for any other reason other than his illegal trading.
       In the light of the evidence before him the  Adjudicator  found  that
      the appellant could not establish that he has a well-founded  fear  of
      persecution for a Convention ground and that the appellant's fear  was
      of prosecution for his illegal trading.

8.    Leave to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on the basis  that  it  is
      arguable that the Adjudicator failed to give sufficient  consideration
      to the Article 3 claim and in particular, whether as a result  of  the
      prosecution which the Adjudicator found the appellant faced, his human
      rights would be infringed.

9.    We agreed with Mr Mohammed that the Adjudicator did not  consider  the
      appellant's human rights claim in depth.

10.   Counsel submitted that if the Adjudicator says that the appellant  may
      be prosecuted for his illegal activities, then the  Adjudicator  ought
      to have gone on to consider any risk the appellant may face  following
      prosecution.  He said  that  prosecution  would  involve  the  arrest,
      detention and trial of the appellant.  Although there is no  objective
      evidence as to the likely punishment for illegal trading between  Iran
      and Iraq, he would safely submit that the appellant  would  receive  a
      custodial sentence.  Had the Adjudicator  referred  to  the  objective
      evidence before him, he would have found that following his arrest and
      detention, the appellant would face the risk of human  rights  abuses.
      Mr Mohammed referred us to paragraph  4.52  of  the  April  2002  CIPU
      Report on Iraq in support of his argument that human rights violations
      occur during detention in Iraqi  prisons.   He  also  referred  us  to
      paragraph 4.39 which states that prison conditions are extremely  poor
      and life threatening.  Therefore upon conviction for illegal  trading,
      the appellant's life would be at  risk  as  a  result  of  the  prison
      conditions and probable mistreatment during any term of imprisonment.

11.   In reply Mr Sheikh pointed out that paragraph 4.39 of the CIPU  report
      relates to the Iraqi State and not to the Kurdish Autonomous  Area  of
      Northern Iraq.

12.   Mr Sheikh submitted that we  still  had  no  evidence  of  the  arrest
      warrant the appellant claims had been issued against him, if indeed it
      had been handed to his mother before he came to the United Kingdom.

13.   Referring to paragraphs 4.18 and 4.19 of the CIPU  report,  Mr  Sheikh
      submitted that there is a functioning  judicial  system  operating  in
      Northern Iraq.  The principle of separation of power  is  applied  and
      the judiciary is considered to be independent.  In both  the  PUK  and
      KDP areas, judges are appointed by the Government and the  Parliament.
      The  PUK  have  recently  established  their  own  Supreme  Court   in
      Sulaymaniyah.  Everyone in Northern Iraq is entitled to the assistance
      of legal Counsel, which is customary in legal proceedings.  If a party
      cannot afford legal Counsel, a lawyer is assigned by the  authorities.
      There are currently many legal practitioners  in  Northern  Iraq  with
      little or no work.  It is thus not difficult at the moment in Northern
      Iraq to find a lawyer for a reasonable fee.   In  the  light  of  this
      evidence Mr Sheikh submitted that the appellant will be subject  to  a
      proper  legal  process.   Although  Mr  Mohammed  said   that   prison
      conditions are poor, according to paragraph 4.52 of  the  CIPU  report
      there has been some improvement in prison conditions over recent years
      owing to the intervention of the ICRC.  At the beginning of  2002  the
      ICRC visited 500 prisons regularly and as a  result  of  these  visits
      workshops have been set up by the  ICRC  to  improve  the  qualify  of
      prison life, the Northern  Iraqi  authorities  are  co-operating  with
      them.   Nevertheless,  Mr  Sheikh  submitted  that  it   is   complete
      speculation that the appellant would be  found  guilty.   We  have  no
      evidence that he would not be granted bail while awaiting  trial.   We
      have no evidence that he  would  be  given  a  custodial  sentence  as
      opposed to a fine.  In the light of the objective  evidence  he  would
      submit that the Adjudicator was right to find that the appellant would
      not be at risk on return either under the 1950 Convention or the  1951
      Convention.

14.    In  reply  Mr  Mohammed  submitted  that   because   there   are   no
      international flights from Northern Iraq, there is no  postal  service
      and that is why it has not been possible for the appellant to obtain a
      copy of the arrest warrant.  As Mr Mohammed had no objective  evidence
      to support his submission, we could accept his argument.

15.   We note that the Adjudicator's finding  that  the  appellant  will  be
      subjected to prosecution for illegally trading between Iran  and  Iraq
      was accepted by both parties.   In  the  light  of  this  finding  the
      Adjudicator should have gone onto consider the likely  punishment  the
      appellant might receive if convicted and any risks he may  face  as  a
      result thereof.

16.   The objective evidence presented to us indicates  that  the  appellant
      is likely to receive legal assistance, either through his own  efforts
      or through the authorities.  We also find that he will be  subject  to
      what we consider to be a fair legal  process.   We  have  no  evidence
      before us to suggest that the  appellant  would  receive  a  custodial
      sentence as opposed to a fine.  If he  were  to  receive  a  custodial
      sentence, although we accept that  prison  conditions  are  poor,  the
      objective evidence also suggests that prison conditions have  improved
      over recent years owing to the intervention of the ICRC.

17.   Therefore, on the totality of the evidence,  we  find  that  were  the
      appellant to be returned to Iraq, there are no reasonable grounds  for
      believing that he would suffer  ill-treatment in breach of  Article  3
      of the ECHR.  Accordingly his appeal is dismissed.





                                                              Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
