

                                                    Appeal No. CC/34439/2001
                        MS (DUP-Activities Abroad)  Sudan  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
02385

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                     Date heard: 31 May 2002
                                                    Date notified 05/07/2002

                                  Before: -

                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                               MR F T JAMIESON




                                                       Between

                       MR MOHAMED AL-IMAM FAISAL SALIH


                                              Appellant



                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of  Sudan,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr D J Boyd QC,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State giving  directions
for removal from the United Kingdom, having refused asylum.  Mr  J  Trussler
of Counsel instructed  by  Malik  &  Michael  Solicitors  appeared  for  the
appellant. Mr J P Jones appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The adjudicator had accepted  as  credible  the  appellant's  account  of
being a Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) low level  supporter  who  had  been
arrested, detained and ill-treated on two occasions the first in  1995,  the
second in March 2001.He also accepted that the appellant had been active  in
DUP activities in the UK albeit on a modest scale.

4. However the adjudicator did not accept  that  these  two  experiences  of
detention demonstrated the authorities had  continued  to  have  an  adverse
interest in the appellant. With regard to his UK  activities,  he  concluded
they would have come to the notice of the Sudanese authorities.  Essentially
he  considered  that  the  Sudanese  authorities,  whilst  they  might  well
question him on return, would only be interested  him  as  someone  who  had
evaded  conscription.  He  also  found  that  the  decision  to  remove  the
appellant had not interfered disproportionately with his  right  to  respect
for private and family life, despite the fact that he had a mother,  brother
and two sisters in the UK. In this regard he  noted  the  appellant  was  no
longer a minor and in any event had been happy for them to leave for the  UK
without him when he was a student.
.
5. The grounds of  appeal  contended  that  the  adjudicator  had  erred  in
concluding that a man who had been  politically  active,  albeit  at  a  low
level, with a history of previous detentions and ill treatment and  who  had
left  illegally  would  not  be  of  interest   to   the   authorities.   In
amplification of those grounds Mr  Trussler  pointed  out  that  the  latest
objective country materials showed that  the  human  rights  record  of  the
government in Sudan remained extremely poor. The current  regime  restricted
political freedom and political opponents were subject to  arbitrary  arrest
and detention without trial.   The  CIPU  2002  report  mentioned  the  risk
facing those who had been involved in political  activities.  The  US  State
Department Report documented harassment of political opponents, as  did  the
Human Rights Watch report. There was  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
political activities in the UK being known to the authorities in  the  Sudan
other than the photographs. It was reasonable to infer from the  appellant's
own evidence that participation in a demonstration so close to the  Sudanese
Embassy would have been  noticed  Mr  Trussler  did  not  dispute  that  the
appellant had no objection to  performing  military  service  as  such;  his
complaint was that in the process of punishing him he would be  ill-treated.


6. Mr  Jones  for  the  respondent  countered  that  the  CIPU  2002  report
mentioned the regime permitting political parties such  as  the  DUP  to  be
officially recognised. There was no evidence DUP was not  now  a  registered
political party. Whilst there was evidence of  persecution  of  leading  DUP
members, this was lacking in respect of  low-level  members.  The  same  was
true of members of other opposition parties such as the SPLN and SPLA. As  a
draft evader he faced a punishment of up to 3 years, plus  a  fine.  In  any
event the appellant had not refused to  perform  military  service,  so  the
penalty might possibly be simply be that he had to serve it.

7. The grounds do not mount  any  substantial  challenge  the  adjudicator's
principal findings of fact. Nor do we see any basis on  which  to  interfere
with those findings.

8.  The  grounds  submit,  however,   that   the   adjudicator's   findings,
particularly when read in the light  of  the  objective  country  materials,
should have led him to conclude the appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution.

9. We find ourselves unable to agree with this submission.

10.  As  regards  the  appellant's  past  experiences  in  the  Sudan,   the
adjudicator noted that on the occasion of  his  first  arrest  he  had  been
released with no more than an a requirement that he sign an undertaking  not
to take part in anti-government activities and with no more than  a  warning
that he should watch it. On the appellant's  own  account  he  was  able  to
continue with his DUP activities thereafter without the  authorities  taking
any interest in him. He had been able to conduct a normal  life,  graduating
from university in 1999 and working as a sales  manager  in  a  construction
company. We consider this assessment was soundly reasoned.

11.  We  also  consider  sound   the   adjudicator's   assessment   of   the
circumstances surrounding the appellant's second detention  in  March  2001.
Whilst when detained then for attending an anti-government  meeting  he  had
been ill treated, all that was subsequently required  of  him  was  that  he
perform his military service. The adjudicator  found  that  the  authorities
had found nothing to support their suspicions and so the appellant  was  "on
this occasion also, of little or no interest". He further found that  whilst
the appellant had escaped, that made him  no  more  or  less  than  a  draft
evader. Mr Trussler has not substantially challenged that further finding.

12. As regards  the  appellant's  activities  in  the  UK,  the  adjudicator
accepted the appellant`s  account  of  having  participated  in  one  public
demonstration and also in several meetings and seminars.  He  also  accepted
he  had  helped  in  education  programmes  and  also  with   research   and
translating. In relation to the demonstration, the adjudicator  pointed  out
that on the basis of the photographic evidence,  all  he  could  accept  was
that it took place outside a UK government building. There was  no  evidence
that the demonstration ventured near the Sudanese Embassy or was noticed  by
any Embassy personnel. He concluded:

      "These events, as Mr Turner submitted, may  well  have  been  intended
      merely to provide an opportunity for  photographs  for  use  in  these
      proceedings. My  assessment  is  that  none  of  the  appellant's  DUP
      activities in the UK are likely to have come  to  the  notice  of  the
      Sudanese authorities or to put him at any risk were he to return."

13. In the course of attacking this assessment Mr Trussler argued  that  the
adjudicator was wrong to confine himself to the  photographic  evidence.  We
think there is  some  force  in  that  argument.   As  regards  whether  the
appellant's DUP activities would be known to the Sudanese  authorities,  the
adjudicator had other items of evidence. Amongst these were the  appellant's
own evidence, a letter from the Sudan Human Rights Organisation  urging  all
Sudanese to take part in a demonstration outside Chatham House in  St  James
Square and a witness statement signed on 5 November  2001  from  Rtd.  Major
General  Mohammed  Osman  Merghani  which  stated,  inter  alia,  that   the
appellant "attended demonstrations in front of the Sudanese Embassy  and  10
Downing St". The author of  this  letter  also  mentioned  his  belief  that
agents  of  the  Sudanese  service  in   London   attended   some   of   his
organisations`s  political  activities  and  so   would   know   about   the
appellant's activities. In addition  he  believed  some  of  the  DUP`s  own
members in the UK had passed on information about DUP UK activities  to  the
regime back in Sudan.

14. Had the adjudicator given fuller consideration to these other  items  of
evidence we think he would have concluded the appellant`s DUP activities  in
the UK would be known to the Sudanese authorities.

15. However, we do not think that the adjudicator's  failure  to  appreciate
this fact was fatal to his decision to dismiss the appeal.

16. We find that when the appellant was returned to the Sudan (1)  he  would
come to the attention of the Sudanese authorities;  (2)  it  was  reasonably
likely they would know or learn of his activities in the  UK  on  behalf  of
the DUP; but (3) they would nevertheless not  consider  him  to  be  someone
they should target for persecution or ill-treatment.

17. As regards finding (1), the adjudicator, quite correctly  in  our  view,
noted the possible effect on the appellant of the border  directive  by  the
Sudanese authorities requiring those who return to Sudan  after  a  year  or
more abroad to be transferred to the security headquarters  for  questioning
(this directive is set out in Drrias  [1997]  Imm  AR  346).  Even  if  that
directive were not applicable for some reason, it was reasonably likely  the
authorities would keep a record of the appellant's previous  detentions  and
his background as a DUP member. His evasion of  military  service  was  also
likely to mean he would be interrogated. We also think it reasonably  likely
for reasons already given (and this leads us on to finding (2))  that  their
record would include details of his UK activities.

18. We base finding (3) on the fact that, despite the  appellant  coming  to
the attention of the authorities in  the  Sudan  on  account  of  his  anti-
government and DUP activities before he left, they had not regarded  him  as
a significant threat or as someone they needed to harass. Given  his  escape
just before departure, they would only be  interested  in  ensuring  he  was
punished for evading military service. We further base this finding  on  the
fact that they would know from their agents in London that  the  appellant's
activities on behalf of the DUP in the  UK  were  essentially  of  the  same
order as  those  he  had  undertaken  in  the  Sudan,  that  is,  activities
undertaken by someone who was no more than a  low-level  supporter  for  the
DUP. In the light of his Sudanese and UK activities they would  continue  to
view him as not being a significant enough figure as  a  political  opponent
to merit targeting for persecution.

19. In reaching this conclusion we have taken full account of  the  evidence
presented in support of the appellant including that of Rtrd  Major  General
Mohammed Osman Merghani who had written in one of his two letters  that  due
to  his  political  activities  the  appellant  was  subject  to  harassment
resulting in his suffering by the  NIF  security  forces  and  he  had  been
advised by the Party to leave the country. We have also had  regard  to  the
letter of May 2001 from the Secretary-General  of  the  Sudan  Human  Rights
Organisation which spoke of the appellant`s two detentions and  maltreatment
and exposure to close surveillance and harassment.

20. Insofar as these sources comment on the appellant`s previous  activities
we do not find them sufficiently objective. On the appellant's  own  account
they were composed after he had discussed his  asylum  claim  with  them  in
detail. They are clearly either friends or colleagues of the appellant.   We
prefer the evidence indicated in the more objective sources such as  the  US
State Department report and the  CIPU  2002  report.  Whilst  these  sources
confirm that political opponents  are  targeted,  the  cases  they  document
largely  concern  members  of  opposition  political  parties  with  a  high
profile. We accept that these  same  reports  refer  to  widespread  use  of
torture and arbitrary arrests and detentions without  trial,  in  particular
against political  opponents  Significantly.  However,  none  of  the  major
reports on the Sudan states that persons are at  real  risk  of  persecution
simply on account of being DUP members. Since, therefore,  it  would  appear
that the authorities consider returnees on an individual basis, we think  it
reasonably likely, for the reason already given, that  they  would  conclude
in the case of this appellant that, despite his DUP  involvement,  he  posed
and would go on posing) no significant threat to them.

21.The appeal is dismissed.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




