
Heard at FIELD HOUSE
On 10th July 2002

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination  notified

                                                          2ND SEPTEMBER 2002

                                   Before:
                         Mr. D. J. Parkes (Chairman)
                             Mrs. E. Hurst J.P.
                                Mr. A. Smith

      BETWEEN:

                              MRS. LINA ROSTAS

                                                                   Appellant

                                   - and -

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen  of  Romania.    She  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr. C. J. Deavin, promulgated on  7th
      February 2002 dismissing her appeal  against  the  removal  directions
      issued by the Secretary of State on the 3rd January 2001.

2.    Mr.  R.  Ghaffar  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Messrs.  Shahid  Rahman
      appeared for the Appellant.   The Secretary of State  was  represented
      by Senior Presenting Officer Ms. A. Green.

3.    The Appellant is a Romanian Gypsy who lived among the gyspy  community
      in Huedin in Romania until 1998.    On 20th August 1998 together  with
      her husband and two children she fled Romania and came to  the  United
      Kingdom where her husband applied for asylum.    His  application  was
      refused in  February  1999  and  a  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed
      whereupon the Appellant claimed asylum  with  her  husband  and  their
      children as dependents.

4.    The appeal was originally certified and the  Adjudicator  agreed  with
      the certificate but upon Judicial Review it was by  agreement  quashed
      and the determination repromulgated thus enabling this appeal  to  the
      Tribunal.

5.    It is apparent from the report of the Country Information  and  Policy
      Unit of the Home Office that in Romania as in  many  Eastern  European
      countries there is discrimination  against  Roma  by  members  of  the
      population generally and often by those in official  office.     There
      is a strong population of Roma in Romania.    The most recent  census,
      in 1992, put the number of 409,000 but community associations estimate
      the true figure to be more than 2 million possibly 2.5  million,  more
      than 10% of the total population.

6.    In October 2000  the  U.N.H.C.R.  stated  that  whilst  it  is  beyond
      dispute that Roma  in  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  are
      frequent victims of discrimination and on occasion victims of violence
      conditions do not warrant the recognition of such asylum claims  on  a
      prima facie basis.    At paragraph 5.91 of the  most  recent  C.I.P.U.
      report there is reference to the United Nations  Economic  and  Social
      Council in February 2000 report on racial  discrimination  in  Romania
      which acknowledged that some  forms  of  racial  discrimination  still
      existed.     It  pointed  out,  nevertheless,  that  this  should  not
      detract from the numerous measures the government has already taken to
      deal with the problem  of  discrimination  against  the  Roma  at  its
      source, in other words, their socio-economic  marginalization.     The
      European Commission in its annual report on progress towards accession
      of November 2001 concluded that the government has taken several major
      initiatives to address the problems faced by the Roma minority.

7.    The Appellant claims that she and her husband  were  harassed  by  the
      police in Romania and that each of them have been ill-treated.     She
      claims that to have been due to their activities  in  a  Romany  party
      called the Ace of Clubs.   It was the Respondent's  contention  before
      the Adjudicator that the troubles experienced  by  the  Appellant  had
      nothing to do with any such political activity.    At  interview  that
      had not even been mentioned.    The problem, suggested the Respondent,
      was really about the  Appellant's  husband  selling  goods  without  a
      licence as a result of which a warrant had been issued for his  arrest
      and this had led to problems with the police.     It is right  to  say
      that the Appellant in her written statement says that her husband  was
      harassed by the police and his building materials were taken away from
      him and he was arrested and beaten  up.

8.    In her statement the Appellant claims of two  incidents  which  it  is
      said amounted to persecution.     The first was on 7th March 1997 when
      she says that the police came to her home and detained her and she was
      beaten on her back and her shoulders and her head and was kept at  the
      police station for three  days.      Upon  release  she  went  to  the
      hospital in Huedin, she says, where she was kept in for two  days  and
      treated and given  medicaments  for  her  injuries.     Following  her
      return home she was frequently visited by the police who were  looking
      for her husband.

9.    The second incident was some 15 months later on  the  18th  June  1998
      when the police again came to the home  looking  for  the  Appellant's
      husband and when she was unable to tell them where he  was  they  beat
      her up, she says, in front of the children and when that did not cause
      her to give the information which they thought that she had they  took
      her to the police station and detained her for a further  seven  days.
       She had been beaten up whilst in detention she says and when released
      on 25th June 1998 she went to hospital where she  remained  for  seven
      days to be treated for her injuries.

10.   It was following that release  from  hospital  that  the  couple  sold
      their house in August 1998, she contacted her husband who had been  in
      hiding and they arranged to leave the country.

11.   There  was  documentary  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      Appellant was treated in hospital at Huedin from 25th June 1998 to 2nd
      July of that year for cranial polytraumatism and thoracic  traumatism.
         She was discharged as improved.     The injuries had  been  caused,
      says the hospital report by repeated blows with a hard object.

12.   There is also evidence of a summons dated  24th  June  1998  requiring
      the Appellant to attend the Prosecutors Office in Huedin concerning  a
      case of State Order disturbance and violence against the police.

13.   The Adjudicator considered the  totality  of  the  evidence  including
      what the Appellant claimed orally before him and what she had said  at
      interview and he came to a view upon the facts of  the  1998  incident
      that the police had come to  the  Appellant's  home  looking  for  her
      husband but that there was some sort of fracas  which  resulted  in  a
      truncheon being used upon her and in her being reported for an assault
      on the police.     He did not accept that she had  been  arrested  and
      detained for seven days but he accepted the medical evidence as to the
      injuries which she had suffered.

14.   It is not submitted to us that the Adjudicator  was  not  entitled  to
      come to the conclusion which he did about what had  happened  in  June
      1998.    First it is said, and correctly so, that there  has  been  no
      consideration by the Adjudicator as to whether the incident  of  March
      1997 happened.    Secondly it is said, and regardless of the  incident
      in 1997, what happened in 1998 as found by the Adjudicator amounted to
      a serious assault by the police who  were  not  non-State  agents  and
      which therefore  should  be  regarded,  when  considering  whether  in
      Romania there is a sufficiency of protection, quite  differently  from
      the general principle set out in the case of Horvath.

15.   Thinking no doubt of the summons, and what might  be  the  outcome  of
      any proceedings,  Mr.  Ghaffar,  referred  us  to  paragraph  4.66  of
      C.I.P.U. to the effect that overall prison conditions in  Romania  are
      often extremely poor and  prisons  remained  severely  overcrowded  in
      2001.     The report goes on, however, to refer to a law of  May  1999
      providing for alternative  sentences  for  minor  offences  comprising
      community service instead of detention which has helped to reduce  the
      number of people detained.

16.   Ms. Green referred us to those paragraphs of C.I.P.U. relating to  the
      process  of  the  Courts.      Although  the  Judiciary  suffers  from
      systemic corruption defendants are presumed innocent.     There  is  a
      guaranteed right to a defence attorney.   There is a right of  appeal.
         Confessions extracted as  a  result  of  police  brutality  may  be
      withdrawn by  the  accused  when  brought  before  the  Court.     The
      practice of  extracting  confessions  through  beating  occurred  only
      occasionally in 2001.     Detention of persons undergoing  prosecution
      must not be the general  rule,  but  only  a  measure  justifiable  in
      exceptional circumstances.    There is a right  to  compensation  from
      the  State  for  the  harm  suffered  if  criminal   proceedings   are
      subsequently dropped or the accused is acquitted.

17.   We are not persuaded that the determination of the Adjudicator can  be
      realistically attacked on the basis of the warrant either upon  asylum
      or human rights grounds.

18.   We turn  now  to  the  question  of  police  brutality.    It  is  not
      sufficient for it to be shown that there is a general  system  of  law
      and order which might be  regarded  as  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      against the  behaviour  of  non-State  agents.     The  Appellant  was
      injured by the police upon the finding of the Adjudicator  in 1998 and
      we will for the purpose of this appeal take it that she  was  attacked
      as she claims in 1997.      The Adjudicator referred to the likelihood
      of  fracas  arising  as  a  result  of  the  police  endeavouring   to
      investigate or intervene in relation to the unlawful activities of the
      Appellant's husband.   Be that as it  may  if  the  actions  of  State
      agents amount to violence sufficient  to  be  persecution  it  is  the
      responsibility of the State to  show  that  it  is  able  to  exercise
      control over those agents such as to provide  for  the  citizens  that
      measure of protection from such activities as is to be expected  in  a
      civilized and democratic country.

19.   We are mindful of the fact that what has  happened  in  the  past  may
      well be important evidence as to what  is  likely  to  happen  in  the
      future.     It is not, however, inevitably the  case  and  it  is  the
      future which has to be considered.   The most recent incident is now 4
      years ago.     Whereas it might take a long time for the attitudes  of
      members of the population to be changed or educated and to  develop  a
      sufficiency of control that may not necessarily be the case in  regard
      to those coming directly under the control of the State  such  as  the
      police.

20.   Ms. Green argues that the most  recent  information  reveals  that  in
      Romania, a country anxious to become part of the  European  Union,  it
      can be shown that the government no longer tolerate bad  behaviour  by
      agents of the State.    Information from the  Innovation  and  Refugee
      Board of Ottawa, Canada reveals that on 5th March  2001  the  Interior
      Ministry of Romania  ordered  an  investigation  into  allegations  of
      corruption published on an Internet site against several high  ranking
      police officers.     12 Officers including 6 Colonels and a  Constanta
      Police Chief who was reportedly accused of covering  up  a  number  of
      incidents  in  exchange  for  money  were  concerned.      Since   the
      appointment of the new Left Wing Government in November  2000  several
      regional  police  chiefs  have  reportedly  been  dismissed  following
      allegations of  corruption.     Amnesty  International  reported  that
      between January and June 2001 they received numerous reports of police
      ill-treatment.   However following concern  expressed  by  Amnesty  in
      2000 about the alleged ill-treatment by Officers of the  Buzau  County
      Police Inspectorate Emergency Intervention sub-unit the County  Police
      had repremanded and transferred to  another  unit  the  chief  of  the
      police unit concerned and several other officers  in  the  squad  were
      demoted and an additional officer was transferred to another unit.

21.   We have considered those findings of the Adjudicator  which  upon  the
      totality of the evidence he was entitled to make, we have  taken  into
      account the incident in 1997 and thus made good the deficiency in  his
      determination.    We have considered the grounds of appeal and all the
      submissions made to us including  the  references  to  the  background
      country information and we consider that the Adjudicator was  entitled
      to find upon the totality of the evidence that  applying  the  removal
      directions which are the subject of the appeal  would  not  cause  any
      breach on the part of the United Kingdom  of  either  the  Refugee  or
      Human Rights Convention.

22.   In those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.




























                                                                D. J. Parkes
                                                       Acting Vice-President

























