

                    El-Ali (Palestinians: Article 1D) Lebanon * [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       00159


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                           Date of Hearing:  25 October 2001
                                     Date Determination notified: 29/01/2002



                                   Before


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr J Barnes

                                  Between:


                            AMER MOHAMMED EL-ALI



                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  RESPONDENT





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


                                      I


   1. This starred determination includes the Tribunal's  judgement  on  the
      meaning and interpretation of Article 1D of the Convention relating to
      the Status of Refugees.

   2. The Appellant appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr
      K  Kimnell,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
      Respondent on 9 July 2000 refusing  him  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom having refused him asylum.  Before us he was represented by Mr
      A Salfiti  of  Salfiti  &  Co,  Solicitors,  and  the  Respondent  was
      represented by Mr T Eicke, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.
   3. The Appellant was born in Kuwait, but had lived nearly all his life in
      Lebanon.    He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1998.   He  was
      travelling on a  Jordanian  passport,  which  is  said  to  have  been
      obtained fraudulently.  He destroyed  it  during  the  course  of  the
      journey and so it has not been possible to evaluate that claim.  He is
      described  as  Palestinian  and  says  that  he  is  stateless.    The
      Respondent, however, asserts that he may be entitled  to  Lebanese  or
      Jordanian  nationality.   The   Appellant   has   produced   documents
      apparently showing that he  is  registered  with  the  United  Nations
      Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) in the  Lebanon
      field.  For some reason he was not  registered  until  December  1996,
      over two years after the other  members  of  his  family:  and  it  is
      surprising  that  the  UNRWA  certificate  includes  the   misspelling
      'Palastine'.  The documentation has not, however,  been  doubted.   It
      indicates that the Appellant was registered as a  'Palestine  Refugee'
      and that his residential centre was Ein El Hilweh Camp I.

   4. Before the Adjudicator the Appellant  claimed  to  have  left  Lebanon
      because he had suffered difficulties with the Lebanese authorities  in
      the previous two years.  He claimed that if returned he was at risk of
      similar treatment which, he argued, would amount to persecution for  a
      Convention reason.  He raised two further arguments.  One was that the
      Lebanese government systematically discriminates against  Palestinians
      to such a level as amounts to persecution.  The  other  was  that  the
      Respondent erred in law in failing to follow,  and  to  apply  to  the
      Appellant, his policy relating to mandate refugees.

   5. The Adjudicator rejected all the Appellant's claims.  He accepted that
      the Appellant had been  detained  and  investigated  by  the  Lebanese
      authorities, but  not  that  this  treatment  was  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason or that (if repeated) it  would  be.   He  found  no
      evidence  to  substantiate  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he   risked
      discrimination amounting to persecution.  He found that the  Appellant
      had failed to establish a breach of any applicable policy.

   6. The last two matters are raised again in the grounds of appeal to  the
      Tribunal.  We  can  deal  with  them  briefly.   So  far  as  concerns
      discrimination the position is, as  the  Adjudicator  said,  that  the
      evidence does not establish that the Lebanese authorities discriminate
      unlawfully against Palestinians in such a manner or to such an  extent
      that returning a Palestinian to Lebanon would, for that reason,  be  a
      breach of the Refugee Convention.  Nothing in the materials put before
      us by Mr Salfiti gives any  proper  basis  for  interfering  with  the
      Adjudicator's conclusion on this point.

   7. The argument  related  to  mandate  refugees  is  more  complex.   The
      Adjudicator frankly indicated that he did not  find  the  Respondent's
      submission on the issue easy  to  follow.   The  reason  is  that  the
      situation of mandate refugees, and the Respondent's treatment of them,
      has little in  common  with  the  situation  of  the  Appellant.   The
      published guidelines on mandate  refugees  specifically  relate  to  a
      particular situation not  covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules.   They
      envisage the possibility of  a  person  who  has  already  established
      refugee status, and is already under the protection of  UNHCR,  making
      an application, from abroad, to be admitted to the United Kingdom as a
      refugee.  The guidelines  show  how  such  an  application  is  to  be
      treated.  They specify that, in particular, an officer  must  evaluate
      the applicant's circumstances in the present country  of  refuge,  and
      assess whether the United Kingdom is the most appropriate country  for
      the applicant's  resettlement.   Another  broader  statement  of  Home
      Office policy indicates that a person  who  receives  protection  from
      UNRWA should be considered  in  accordance  with  the  instruction  on
      mandate refugees.

   8. The Appellant did not make an application from abroad or from  another
      country of  refuge.   He  did  not  make  it  as  a  person  receiving
      protection from UNRWA - indeed, as will be seen, his case  as  it  has
      been put to us is that he has ceased to receive such protection.   His
      is not a situation that is not covered by the Immigration  Rules.   He
      claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on arrival here.  His claim  fell
      to be considered under the applicable  Immigration  Rules  (paragraphs
      330-336 of  the  HC395).   The  policy  on  mandate  refugees  has  no
      relevance to him.


                                     II


   9. The Appellant does not challenge the Adjudicator's  findings  relating
      to his history, or his conclusion that if the  authorities'  treatment
      of him were repeated, that would  not  amount  to  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.  Instead, he bases his claim to asylum  largely  on
      Article ID of the Refugee Convention.  That Article reads as follows:

         'This Convention shall not apply to  persons  who  are  at  present
         receiving from organisations or  agencies  of  the  United  Nations
         other than  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
         protection or assistance.


         When such protection  or  assistance  has  ceased  for  any  reason
         without the position of such persons being  definitely  settled  in
         accordance with the relevant resolutions  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations, these persons shall ipso  facto  be
         entitled to the benefits of this Convention.'

  10. The Appellant submits that Article 1D is to be given its full  literal
      meaning and that, as a result, he is entitled to enter and  remain  in
      the United Kingdom as a refugee.  While he was in Lebanon he was  able
      to claim protection or assistance  from  UNRWA,  and  so  the  Refugee
      Convention did not apply to him.  Now that he has left  Lebanon,  that
      protection or assistance has  ceased,  and  so  'ipso  facto'  he  has
      become, he says, entitled to the benefits of the Refugee Convention.

  11. That claim is based on four assumptions.  The first is that Article 1D
      is to be read literally.  The second is that  UNRWA  is  an  organ  or
      agency of the United Nations within the meaning of Article 1D.   There
      is no difficulty about that: everybody agrees that it is and,  indeed,
      as we  shall  show,  Article  1D  was  drafted  with  the  Palestinian
      situation, and UNRWA in particular, specifically in mind.  But, if the
      Article is to be read literally, it is  difficult  to  see  why  (say)
      UNICEF does not also fall  within  the  description.   It  would  seem
      impossible that any child who received assistance from UNICEF is to be
      excluded from the Refugee Convention.

  12. The third assumption is that 'at present' means 'at any relevant time'
      - that is to say, the present time whenever the Article  falls  to  be
      applied.  This is not a fanciful assumption,  although  we  shall  say
      more on this issue below.

  13. The fourth assumption is that this reading of Article 1D would benefit
      the Appellant.  We have to say - although this was  not  fully  argued
      before us - that we have considerable doubts whether  it  would.   The
      Appellant is not lawfully here:  after leaving  Lebanon  he  travelled
      unlawfully to Syria and Jordan before (he says) coming to  the  United
      Kingdom on a false passport.  He cannot claim the benefit  of  Article
      32 to resist expulsion.  Article 33 would prohibit his  refoulment  to
      any country or territory where he is at  risk  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.    But the Respondent proposes  to  remove  him  to
      Lebanon and, on the Adjudicator's findings, that is not a place  where
      the Appellant is at risk of persecution for a Convention  reason.   As
      it appears to us, therefore, if the Appellant's reading of Article  1D
      were to be accepted, it would not avail him in this appeal against the
      refusal of leave to enter and the consequent removal directions.   His
      appeal would therefore fall to be dismissed in any event.


                                     III


  14. In case we are wrong about that, however, and because the matter is of
      general interest and has been fully argued before  us,  we  go  on  to
      consider the meaning of Article 1D.

  15. Mr Eicke submitted that the  literal  interpretation  proposed  by  Mr
      Salfiti should not  be  accepted.   Instead,  he  suggested  that  the
      intention was that UNRWA was to be treated  as  a  complement  to  the
      protection offered by the Refugee  Convention.   If  UNRWA  ceased  to
      provide effective protection, the  individuals  concerned  (no  longer
      excluded by Article 1D) would be  entitled  to  make  their  case  for
      protection as refugees under the Convention.  They would, however, not
      be entitled to status as refugees unless they showed  that  they  came
      within the definition of Article 1A.

  16. Mr Eicke suggested that such  an  interpretation  of  Article  1D  was
      closer to the intentions of the High  Contracting  Parties  than  that
      proposed by Mr Salfiti.  He offered a number of processes by which, in
      his submission we could adopt this  narrower  reading  of  Article  1D
      without doing undue violence to its language.  He suggested that  "the
      protection or assistance has ceased for any reason" is not an  obvious
      form of words to use of a situation where a person has chosen to leave
      protection which (for all one knows) might have been available to  him
      if he remained.  The words might possibly be  appropriate  in  a  case
      where a  claimant  shows  that  sufficient  protection  is  no  longer
      available to him, so that  he  needs  to  leave;  but  in  Mr  Eicke's
      submission the sense intended was that the first sentence  of  Article
      1D should cease to exclude Palestinians  if  UNRWA  itself  ceased  to
      exist.   He  supported  his  argument  by  reference  to  the  travaux
      pr�paratoires, usefully  summarised  by  J.C.  Hathaway,  The  Law  of
      Refugee Status pp 205-208.

  17. The history of the Article is of some interest in this context.  On 29
      November 1947 the United Nations General Assembly voted in  favour  of
      partitioning Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state.  The two
      communities started hostile actions almost immediately.   The  British
      mandate in Palestine ceased on 14 May 1948.   On  15  May  the  Jewish
      community in Palestine  proclaimed  the  territory  as  the  State  of
      Israel.  In the war that followed, many Arab  Palestinians  fled  into
      neighbouring  countries.   Following  numerous  debates,  the   United
      Nations established UNRWA in December 1949.  Its task was  to  provide
      assistance to any person

         "whose normal residence was Palestine for a minimum  of  two  years
         immediately preceding the outbreak of conflict in 1948 and who,  as
         a result of that conflict, lost both ...  home  and  ...  means  of
         livelihood, and who is in need."

      It is right to say that UNRWA's mandate has subsequently been enlarged
      to include the children of such  persons,  and  others  in  the  area,
      particularly those displaced by the war of 1967.

  18. At the time of the negotiations leading to the Refugee Convention,  it
      was thought necessary to prevent overlapping between  protection  that
      was being provided by UNRWA and protection that would be  provided  by
      UNHCR.  Further, the Arab  nations  took  the  view  that  the  United
      Nations should  bear  particular  responsibility  for  the  plight  of
      Palestinian refugees.  They argued that the need for such persons  was
      repatriation and that they should not  be  submerged  in  the  general
      class of refugees defined by Article 1A of the Convention.  There  was
      a further issue.  If the Palestinians were given refugee status  under
      the  Convention  they  would  in  principle   have   mobility.    This
      possibility  was,  it  appears,  unattractive  both  to  Arab  nations
      (because they sought repatriation) and other nations (because they did
      not  see  the  displaced  Palestinians  as  entitled   to   the   same
      considerations as those fleeing from persecution  in  Europe).   As  a
      result, the first  sentence  of  Article  1D  was  drafted,  excluding
      (permanently) from  the  Refugee  Convention  all  those  "at  present
      receiving  from  other  organs  or  agencies  of  the  United  Nations
      protection or assistance."

  19. It was then decided that this formulation might leave the Palestinians
      without any protection at all if UNRWA were to cease  operating.   The
      Arab states argued, strongly and persuasively, that a  further  clause
      should be added, giving the Palestinians deferred inclusion.    As the
      Egyptian delegate, proposing the amendment, said,

         "It was only right and proper that,  as  soon  as  the  Palestinian
         problem had been settled and the refugees no longer enjoyed  United
         Nations assistance and protection, they should be entitled  to  the
         benefits of the Convention."






      Referring to the amendment at a later date, he said


         "The object ... was to  make  sure  that  the  Arab  refugees  from
         Palestine who were still refugees when the organs  or  agencies  of
         the United Nations at present providing  them  with  protection  or
         assistance ceased to function would automatically come  within  the
         scope of the Convention." (Hathaway, op. cit,  p  208,  notes  113-
         114).


      Thus Article 1D in its present form was agreed.

  20. That process, argued Mr Eicke, showed  that  the  second  sentence  of
      Article 1D was not intended to take effect on an individual basis  but
      only on the cessation of  UNRWA  operations.   Until  then,  a  person
      entitled to receive 'protection or assistance' from  UNRWA  could  not
      qualify as a refugee under the Convention.

  21. Further or alternatively, he argued that the word "shall ipso facto be
      entitled to  the  benefits  of  this  Convention"  were,  despite  the
      wording, apt not simply to give all the benefits of the Convention  to
      the persons affected, but simply to bring them within the scope of the
      Convention.  That was the word used  by  the  Egyptian  delegate  (see
      above).  The 'benefits' of the Convention were confined to  protection
      if one was at risk of persecution (as defined).  There was  no  reason
      for the Refugee Convention to give any benefit to a person  who  could
      not establish that he was at such risk.


                                     IV


  22. The Convention is a treaty and is to be interpreted in accordance with
      the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of  Treaties.   The  process  is
      that set out in Articles 31 and 32 of that Convention.

         Article 31: General rule of interpretation.


         1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in  accordance  with
            the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the  treaty  in
            their context and in the light of its object and purpose.


        2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation  of  a  treaty
           shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its  preamble
           and annexes:
               a) any agreement relating  to  the  treaty  which  was  made
                  between all the parties in connection with the conclusion
                  of the treaty;
               b) any instrument which was made by one or more  parties  in
                  connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted
                  by the other parties as  an  instrument  related  to  the
                  treaty.


        3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
               a) any subsequent agreement between  the  parties  regarding
                  the interpretation of the treaty or  the  application  of
                  its provision;
               b) Any subsequent practice in the application of the  treaty
                  which establishes the agreement of the parties  regarding
                  its interpretation;

      There is no need to set out the remainder of that article.


        Article 32: Supplementary means of interpretation.


        Recourse may be  had  to  supplementary  means  of  interpretation,
        including the preparatory work of the treaty and the  circumstances
        of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning  resulting  from
        the application of Article 31, or to determine the meaning when the
        interpretation according to Article 31:
               a)  leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
               b)  leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
                   unreasonable."

  23. But, as Lord Lloyd of Berwick pointed out in Adan v SSHD [1999]  1  AC
      293, 305, 'the starting point must be the language itself'.

  24.  Applying those principles, we find ourselves  unable  to  accept  the
      construction of Article 1D offered by either party.  Mr Eicke's second
      argument - that "shall ipso facto be entitled to the benefits of  this
      Convention" should be read as if the words were "shall then be persons
      to whom this Convention applies" - we regard as impossible    in  view
      of the  language  actually  chosen  -  after  debate  -  by  the  High
      Contracting Parties.  If they had meant to say simply that  the  first
      sentence of Article 1D would cease to apply, they  would  surely  have
      said so.  The phrase "the benefits of this  Convention"  has  a  clear
      meaning which is obviously different from any phase imparting all  the
      terms of the Convention as a whole.

  25. Mr Eicke's first argument - that the second  sentence  of  Article  1D
      comes into  play  only  if  and  when  UNRWA  ceases  operation  -  is
      superficially more attractive in view of the  travaux   pr�paratoires.
      Closer analysis shows, however, that  it  lacks  coherence.  If  UNRWA
      ceased operations, the individuals formerly receiving assistance  from
      UNRWA would be left in the countries  in  which  UNRWA  had  operated.
      Some would have or would be entitled to the nationality of the country
      in which they had been residing.  Others would be stateless but  would
      have been habitually resident in that  country.   How  could  they  be
      "entitled to the benefits of the Convention" while remaining  in  that
      country?  The benefits of the Refugee Convention are entirely  phrased
      in terms of the obligation of nations to aliens of a specific sort.

  26. Further, why should such persons  be  'ipso  facto'  entitled  to  the
      benefits of the Convention?  Those benefits are  intended  to  protect
      persons who are at risk of  persecution.   If  UNRWA  ever  did  cease
      operation, the reason for the cessation might be  that,  in  some  new
      world  order,  Palestinians  no  longer  needed  any  "protection   or
      assistance".  And "any reason"  is  sufficient  to  bring  the  second
      sentence of Article 1D into play.   The  benefits  of  the  Convention
      cannot have been intended to be conferred on a whole class of  persons
      who (in these circumstances) would have no need of them.

  27. The interpretation offered by Mr Eicke is complicated further  by  the
      events which happened.  UNRWA  operates  in  countries  that  are  not
      signatories of the Convention.  If UNRWA ceased to operate, how  could
      the Palestinians be 'ipso facto'  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the
      Convention?  There would be no national authority which, as a party to
      the Convention, owed them those benefits.  They could only conceivably
      become 'entitled' to the benefits if UNRWA ceased  operation  and  the
      persons in question moved  to  a  country  that  is  a  party  of  the
      Convention.   'Ipso facto' cannot mean that.

  28. We find similarly unattractive the argument that 'has ceased  for  any
      reason' means 'has effectively ceased, so  causing  an  individual  to
      flee to another country'.  (This was  also  suggested  by  Mr  Eicke).
      Again, the problem is  with  the  words  'ipso  facto':  even  if  the
      cessation is interpreted in a sense implying necessity,  the  benefits
      could only apply following cessation and movement.  We incline to  the
      view that there is a further difficulty in  that  Article  1D  is  not
      obviously phrased in such a way as to allow  an  individual  to  claim
      that protection has  ceased.   Unlike  the  rest  of  the  Convention,
      Article 1D refers throughout, to 'persons' in the plural.  We  mention
      this point again below.

  29. Mr Salfiti's argument, on the other hand, carries the implication that
      any Palestinian who has at any time received UNRWA assistance and  has
      then, by his own voluntary act, ceased to receive that assistance,  is
      entitled to the benefits of the  Refugee  Convention.   That  argument
      does have the merit of adhering closely to the wording of the Article.
       Its effect, however, renders it unacceptable.

  30. The purpose of the Refugee Convention was and is to provide assistance
      to those in need of it.  At the time the Convention was drafted, there
      was little doubt about who  those  persons  were:  the  Convention  is
      therefore largely concerned with the obligation of states to  refugees
      within  their  territories.   Because  the  Convention  does   provide
      benefits to refugees, however, it runs the  risk  of  being  used,  by
      persons who have no real need of protection, merely  as  a  device  to
      obtain those benefits.  Thus it has happened that, all over the world,
      litigation on the Refugee Convention is almost  entirely  confined  to
      Article 1, the definition section.  Individuals who are able to travel
      to a country in which they wish to stay agrue that (for one reason  or
      another) they fall within the definition of 'refugee'  and  that  they
      are therefore entitled to remain  in  that  country  and  receive  the
      benefits provided to refuges.  This is not to say  that  nobody  needs
      the protection of the Refugee Convention.  If anything,  the  need  is
      greater that it was in 1951.   Further,  modern  transport  facilities
      make it easier for those who are genuinely in need  of  protection  to
      reach a place  of  safety.   But  the  Refugee  Convention  was  never
      intended to offer any benefits at all to those who are not in need  of
      protection.  It is not to be used as a device to  secure  immigration.
      The Convention's function of protection cannot but be harmed if it  is
      seen, or used, in any other way.

  31. Thus the interpretation of the Convention, in the light of Article  31
      of the Vienna Convention, which we have set out above, must always  be
      such that the primary question is whether an  individual  is,  in  his
      present circumstances,  one  who  is  in  need  of  protection.   This
      principle has been clearly emphasised in decisions  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal and the House of Lords, notably Adan v SSHD [1999]  1  AC  293,
      Horvath v SSHD [2001] 1 AC 489 and Revenko v SSHD [2000] Imm  AR  610.
      In each of those cases the individual claimed that a  literal  reading
      of  Article  1A(2)  entitled  him  to  the  benefits  of  the  Refugee
      Convention.   In  each  case  it  was  decided  that  the   principal,
      underlying question was whether the individual had,  at  the  time  of
      status determination, any need of protection under the Convention.  In
      each case the Convention was authoritatively interpreted in such a way
      as to give benefits to persons who were in need of protection, but not
      to those who  were  not  able  to  demonstrate  any  present  need  of
      protection.

  32. For these reasons, relating both to the purpose of the Convention  and
      its current interpretation and application,  we  reject  Mr  Salfiti's
      argument.


                                      V


  33. As we said at the hearing, we consider that the key to the problem  is
      the interpretation of the words 'at present' in the first sentence  of
      Article 1D.  In the submissions made to us it was assumed, as we  have
      said above, that 'at present' has a continuative meaning: that  is  it
      to say, that the first sentence of Article 1D excludes anybody who, at
      the  time  of  status  determination,  is  receiving   protection   or
      assistance from UNRWA.

  34. The meaning of 'at present' was the subject of argument in Dyli v SSHD
      [2000] Imm AR 652.  The Tribunal did not need  to  reach  a  concluded
      view, but said this:

      "43.  Most authorities appear to consider that "at present" in article
           1D means at the time the Convention  entered  into  force";  see
           Grahl-Madsen, The status of refugees in international law (1966)
           p 264, pointing out that when the Convention means another  date
           it says so specifically; Hathaway, The  law  of  refugee  status
           (1991) p 208, referring  to  the  view  of  the  United  Kingdom
           representative at the drafting of  the  Convention;  Takkenberg,
           The status of Palestinian refugees in international law (1998) p
           96.  Professor Greenwood QC takes the same view, noting  however
           that there is a respectable  contrary  argument,  based  on  the
           terms and status of the 1967 Protocol,  which  entirely  changed
           the temporal effect of article 1A of the Convention.  The  UNHCR
           Handbook indeed, at paragraphs  142-3,  sets  out  a  view  that
           clearly implies that "at present" means "at the time  of  status
           determination".  We have not been able to reach a conclusion  on
           this point.  On the one hand, the use of the words "at  present"
           does suggest that there is intended to be  a  meaning  different
           from that imported by  the  simple  use  of  the  present  tense
           elsewhere in article 1.  On the other hand, everybody  seems  to
           agree that article 1D does, and was always intended to, apply to
           the work of the United  Nations  Relief  and  Works  Agency  for
           Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA): but everybody  also
           seems to agree that article 1D applies not only  to  Palestinian
           refugees  who  were  actually  receiving  assistance  when   the
           Convention came into effect, but  also  includes,  for  example,
           Palestinians born since that date (Grahl-Madson, op cit 1 p 265,
           Hathaway, loc cit; Takkenberg, op cit p 99:  this interpretation
           was adopted by the German  Federal  Administrative  Court  in  a
           decision of 4 June 1991 (Bverwg 1 C 42.88) and is  described  as
           suggested by common sense in Professor Greenwood's opinion).  As
           a result, "at present" has to be interpreted so as to include an
           element of futurity; and the construction of the  exact  meaning
           of the words "at present" then becomes  so  complicated  that  a
           simple interpretation in line with that in  the  UNHCR  Handbook
           may well be preferable."

  35. It is only with the greatest circumspection that we should differ from
      the   majority   of   expert   opinion,   the    UNHCR,     and    the
      Bundesverwaltungsgericht.  It does appear,  however,  that  there  are
      very substantial difficulties in adopting a continuative  meaning  for
      the phrase in question.

  36. First, there is the matter to which Professor Greenwood made reference
      in his opinion in Dyli.  As originally executed, Article 1A(2)  -  the
      principal definition of 'refugee' for the purposes of the Convention -
      was limited in time.  Those who feared  persecution  as  a  result  of
      events before 1951 could claim protection under it.  The  only  others
      protected by the Convention were those  who  had  been  recognised  as
      refugees under  earlier  international  Conventions  (Article  1A(1)).
      Under the 1967 Protocol, the references to time in Article 1A(2)  were
      removed.   Thus  the  Convention  became  an  instrument  capable   of
      recognising the needs  of,  and  protecting,  victims  of  persecution
      whatever the date of the events giving rise to  risk  of  persecution.
      That is what is meant by the  statement  in  Dyli  that  the  Protocol
      'entirely  changed  the  temporal  effect  of  Article   1A   of   the
      Convention'.

  37. What the Protocol did not do, however,  was  amend  Article  1D.   One
      reason - perhaps the most likely  reason  -  for  that  was  that  the
      meaning of Article 1D was  to  remain  unchanged.   But  before  1967,
      Article 1D could refer only to those persons who had a fear  based  on
      events before 1951.  If the meaning of Article 1D is  unchanged,  then
      its  first  sentence  continues  to  exclude   only   those   persons.
      Palestinians whose fear is based on subsequent  events  would  not  be
      excluded by Article 1D and would need to establish their  claim  under
      the amended Article 1A(2).

  38. Secondly, there is the difficulty in saying exactly what 'at  present'
      does mean, if it does not mean 'at the time of the signature  of  this
      Convention', i.e. 28 July 1951.  Some of the problems were referred to
      in Dyli, but there  are  others.   Some  authorities,  in  particular,
      Takkenberg (op.cit. 96-101) argue that the words 'at present'  confine
      the ambit of Article 1D to organs or agencies of the United Nations in
      operation on that date (or their successors), but do not  confine  its
      ambits to individuals receiving protection or assistance on that date.
       These arguments are unpersuasive.

  39. In Dyli the second sentence of Article 1D was  not  in  issue.   Here,
      however, it is: and the claim that that sentence gives  the  Appellant
      rights as a refugee raises a further difficulty  about  'at  present'.
      His claim is that he has ceased to have the assistance of UNRWA.  What
      is the basis of his claim to be covered by Article 1D  at  all?   That
      Article  only  applies  to  those  who  are  'at  present'   receiving
      assistance.  The suggestion in the UNHCR Handbook  that  'at  present'
      be interpreted as 'at the time of status determination' works for  the
      first sentence of Article 1D but can only work  if  that  sentence  is
      taken in isolation.  It renders the second sentence  entirely  without
      meaning or effect.  At any particular time a person cannot be both 'at
      present' receiving assistance and yet able to say that the  assistance
      has ceased.  A person who is (at the  time  of  status  determination)
      receiving assistance from UNRWA is excluded  by  the  first  sentence.
      But a person who has been receiving such  assistance  would  never  be
      able to claim under the second sentence because, at the time of status
      determination, he would not be a person to  whom  the  first  sentence
      applied and so would not be one of 'these persons'  who  received  the
      benefit of the second sentence.

  40. Thirdly - and to our minds very persuasive - is the  drafting  history
      to which we have referred.  Those who debated and agreed  the  wording
      of Article 1D could  not  have  intended  'at  present'  to  bear  any
      continuative meaning.  It will be remembered that the second  sentence
      was proposed, and agreed, because it was seen that the first sentence,
      essentially  excluding  Palestinians   from   protection   under   the
      Convention, would gravely prejudice them if UNRWA ceased  to  operate.
      That is why the second sentence was  added.   But  that  reasoning  is
      inconsistent with a view that 'at present' in the first  sentence  has
      any  meaning  related  to  the  date  of  the  claim  or   of   status
      determination.  If  it  did,  the  problem  addressed  by  the  second
      sentence would not arise.  If UNRWA ceased to operate, no  Palestinian
      could possibly  (at  that  future  time)  be  'at  present'  receiving
      assistance from UNRWA: so the cessation of  UNRWA  would  not  exclude
      Palestinians from benefits, but would simply mean that  there  was  no
      longer anybody excluded by Article 1D.

  41. It follows clearly, in our view, that the words  'at  present'  cannot
      have been intended to  carry  any  continuative  meaning.   The  first
      sentence of Article 1D refers to the circumstances which were  present
      at the time of the signing of the  Convention.   The  second  sentence
      makes provision for the uncertain  future.   (There  is  scope  for  a
      little argument about what date is meant, but  we  note,  with  Grahl-
      Madsen, op. cit p 264, that when a date other than the date of signing
      of the Convention is intended, it is specified).  We therefore  decide
      that 'at present' in Article 1D is a reference to 28 July 1951.   Only
      persons  receiving  on  that  date  protection  or   assistance   from
      organisations or agencies of the United Nations (other than UNHCR) are
      excluded from the Convention by the first sentence of Article 1D,  and
      only those persons are entitled to the benefit of the second sentence.


                                     VI


  42. So far from producing a bizarre result, as has sometimes been  argued,
      this interpretation would appear to operate  fairly  and  efficiently.
      The crucial consideration  is  that  those  who  were  within  UNRWA's
      mandate on 28 July 1951 were actually  displaced  persons.   They  had
      been compelled to leave their homes - or to remain away from them - by
      the Israel-Arab war of 1948-9.   To that extent it was right to  treat
      them as a group, with a common, shared experience.  Hence  the  plural
      'persons' is used in Article 1D, in contrast to Article 1A, C,  E  and
      F, each of which regulates the circumstance of an  individual  person.
      The closest parallel to the Palestinians is perhaps the  situation  of
      the 'statutory refugees' that is, those already recognised as refugees
      under earlier Conventions.  They are included  as  'refugees'  by  the
      wording of Article 1A(1):  they too are treated as  a  group,  not  as
      individuals; and they do not have to establish their  claim  according
      to the criteria of Article 1A(2).  Palestinians who, on 28 July  1951,
      were receiving protection or assistance from UNRWA, were excluded from
      the Convention for that reason: but, if UNRWA ceased to  operate,  the
      understanding was that  they  should  received  the  benefits  of  the
      Convention without further enquiry.  They have the potential, in other
      words, to become a sort of deferred statutory refugee.

  43. In our view it makes perfectly good sense to restrict  this  treatment
      to those who were already, in 1951, in  the  circumstances  described.
      They were those  who  had  been  the  subject  of  mass  displacement,
      essentially for a Convention reason, at a time before the  signing  of
      the Convention.   There  was  an  issue  relating  to  United  Nations
      responsibility for the events of 1948-9, and an issue relating to  the
      proper treatment of those who had been prevented from living in  their
      homes.  It was right, in  1951,  to  recognise  the  claims  of  those
      persons as a whole.  But the principle of the 1951 Convention  is  one
      of individual status  determination.   There  is  no  reason  why  the
      situation of those actually displaced before 1951 should  be  extended
      to a person  who is displaced after  1951,  simply  because  he  is  a
      Palestinian or because of the  operations  of  UNRWA.   A  Palestinian
      leaving  his  home  after  1951  should  be  subject   to   the   same
      considerations under the Convention as any other asylum seeker.

  44. There is  even  less  reason  why  the  situation  of  those  actually
      displaced should be extended  to  Palestinians  who  have  never  been
      displaced at all.  No doubt on 28 July 1951 there were babies who  had
      been born since their parents' flight, but they would fall  as  minors
      to be considered as members of their parents' families in  any  event.
      An adult who has never lived in the area he regards as  his  ancestral
      homeland cannot claim to be regarded  with  the  same  sympathy  as  a
      person who has had to leave his home and take  refuge  elsewhere.   He
      may be a refugee: but, if so, he should  establish  his  claim  as  an
      individual in need of protection.

  45. It may be said that UNRWA has not confined its attention to those  who
      had been displaced by 28 July 1951.  It  has,  particularly  following
      United Nations Resolutions 2252 and 2341, in 1967, provided assistance
      for all those displaced as a result of conflicts in  its  geographical
      areas of operation.  Within families, it does not distinguish  between
      those born before and those born after 1951, and  so  far  as  we  are
      aware, it does not distinguish  between  families  that  left  Israeli
      territories before or after 1951.  Neither these  considerations,  nor
      the fact that UNRWA calls those registered with it 'refugees',  affect
      the proper interpretation of the Refugee Convention.   The  assistance
      and protection provided by UNRWA is quite different from the  benefits
      of the Refugee Convention and we would not be inclined to accept  that
      UNRWA can, by extending its mandate or enlarging  its  activities  for
      humanitarian reasons, exclude individuals from  the  benefits  of  the
      Refugee Convention.  That would be the effect of taking the  ambit  of
      UNRWA's present work into account in interpreting Article 1D.

  46. If 'at present' refers, as we decide, to 28 July 1951, it follows that
      no organ or agency of the United Nations  beginning  operations  after
      that date can be the subject of Article  1D.   In  fact,  as  we  have
      indicated, some authorities have taken that view in any event.  Others
      have simply thought that there had not in fact been  any  body,  other
      than UNRWA, that was capable of coming  within  the  definition.   The
      travaux clearly indicate that, despite its general wording, Article 1D
      was drafted and agreed with Palestinians only in  mind.   We  consider
      that it is right that new or future organs or agencies of  the  United
      Nations  should  not  be  seen  as  excluding  individuals  from   the
      possibility of seeking  protection  as  refugees.   The  international
      obligation to refugees  is  now  well  established  and  there  is  no
      argument of principle capable of showing that a person should not have
      the benefits of refugee status, simply because he could have  obtained
      other benefits or protection in a country of  refuge  near  his  home.
      The solution adopted for  the  Palestinians  in  1951  should  not  be
      allowed to blight other claimants.  (Where an organ or agency  of  the
      United Nations offers assistance to persons within  their  country  of
      nationality, Article 1D is not engaged:  see Dyli, paragraph 45.)

  47. It is a consequence of our interpretation  of  Article  1D  that  many
      persons at present receiving protection or assistance from  UNRWA  are
      not (because they were not receiving it on 28 July 1951) excluded from
      the protection of the Refugee Convention.  We repeat that that  is  as
      it ought to be.  We emphasise that we do not see this consideration as
      likely to lead to an increase in claims to refugee status.

  48. A claimant needs, in essence, to show that he has a well-founded  fear
      of being persecuted in  his  country  of  nationality  or  (if  he  is
      stateless) in his  country  of  former  habitual  residence.   Without
      deciding  the  issue,  we  note  that  a  person  described  only   as
      'Palestinian' is likely  to  be  regarded  for  the  purposes  of  the
      Convention as stateless. He will therefore be assessed by reference to
      the Arab country in which he has been living.  (In this context it may
      be worth recording that UNRWA assists only those  who  are  registered
      and actually residing in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, the  Gaza  Strip  and
      Egypt.)  If the claimant is not only 'Palestinian', he may have, or be
      entitled to, nationality of the country where he  has  been  resident.
      In order to establish his claim he will need to show a  real  risk  of
      persecution for a Convention reason, in the Arab country in  question.
      The position is slightly more complex in the case of persons from  the
      Gaza Strip and  some  other  disputed  territories,  for  a  stateless
      Palestinian might establish that Israel  was  his  country  of  former
      habitual residence.  He would nevertheless need to show a well-founded
      fear of persecution for a Convention reason (not merely  war)  in  his
      home area - that is, in the Palestinian  community  in  which  he  was
      living.

  49. For these reasons it does not appear to us that the interpretation  of
      Article 1D that we have adopted  will  have  any  untoward  effect  on
      claims to asylum by Palestinians.  The situation for Palestinians,  as
      for everybody else, is that only a person who is able to show that  he
      comes within the definition in Article 1A(2) is  entitled  to  refugee
      status.


                                     VII


  50. We conclude as follows:

     1. Article 1D of the Refugee Convention applies only  to  persons  who
        were receiving protection or assistance from UNRWA on 28 July 1951.


     2. The Appellant is not such a person.  Although  his  nationality  is
        not clear, he has failed to establish that he  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution in any relevant place.  He is  not  a  refugee.
        His appeal is dismissed.

  51. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                     -----------------------
      14


