


   Appeal No. HX15856-2002
FS (Camps-Vulnerable Group-Woman) Sierra Leone CG [2002] UKIAT 05588

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date heard:  17 September   2002
                                              Date notified: 3 December 2002
                                  Before: -




                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MR M L JAMES
                         RT HON THE COUNTESS OF MAR

                                                       Between

                              MS FATMATA SUMAH

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Sierra Leone, has  appealed  with  leave  of
the Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Dr R Kekic,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  set  removal
directions after refusing  asylum.  Mr  A  Deve  of  Counsel  instructed  by
Refugee Legal  Centre  (RLC)  appeared  for  the  appellant.  Mr  D  Wontumi
appeared for the respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal on Article 8 grounds only.

3. The core of the appellant`s account was that she  had  been  abducted  by
RUF rebels in January 1999 because she had supported the SLPP. She had  been
raped  by  four  of  her  abductors.  After  escaping  she  found  that  her
grandmother's house had been burnt down and that her  aunt  and  sister  had
been killed in the fire.  She  and  her  brother  and  grandmother  fled  to
Guinea. During her 2 years there a French man called Henry  lured  her  into
prostitution, when she came to the UK she managed to give  Henry  the  slip.
the appellant left for France. She feared that if returned to  Sierra  Leone
she would be treated as a second-class unclean woman

4. The adjudicator did not accept the appellant`s  account.  She  considered
that if the appellant had been raped in  the  circumstances  described,  she
would, found the adjudicator, have mentioned it to her representatives  much
earlier than she did. The same applied to her  claim  to  have  been  forced
into prostitution in Guinea. The adjudicator  also  found  inconsistent  and
implausible various aspects of the appellant`s account of her  grandmother's
house having  been  burnt  down.  In  addition  she  found  implausible  the
appellant's claim that her aunt left her behind.

5. The  adjudicator  also  attached  little  weight  to  the  report  of  Dr
Shehadeh, it being based only on the limited information the  appellant  had
given. She stated:

      " I find the report to be bland and do not consider that it takes  the
      appellant's case  further...  There  is  no  documentary  evidence  to
      support his conclusions that the  appellant  would  be  treated  as  a
      second class unclean woman if returned to Sierra Leone or  that  women
      with her background are treated as rejects in Sierra Leone society."

6. The grounds complain that  the  adjudicator  failed  to  take  sufficient
account of the difficulties associated with reporting  rape  and  failed  to
give adequate weight to the opinion of Dr Shehadeh and the country  specific
research on the situation of women who suffered rape and sexual violence  in
Sierra  Leone.  There  was  now  an  additional  letter  from  Dr   Shehadeh
clarifying his diagnostic methods. They also contended that the  adjudicator
had clearly elevated minor discrepancies  into  material  considerations  to
support her adverse credibility findings. As to the adjudicator's  treatment
of the medical report, the grounds contend that the criticism  she  made  of
the doctor`s diagnostic testing was selective.

7. We are not persuaded that the adjudicator erred in  concluding  that  the
appellant had not given a credible account. As the  adjudicator  noted,  the
appellant not only failed to mention her account of rape  at  interview  but
also made no mention of it to her representatives  when  she  completed  the
statement of additional  grounds  which  specially  asked  that  she  should
disclose any additional information not  previously  referred  to.  In  this
regard we should also mention that  we  are  perfectly  satisfied  that  the
adjudicator did assess this evidence, as she said  she  was  doing,  in  the
light of the IAA Gender Guidelines. We accept that the adjudicator  did  not
refer to other materials highlighting the  very  significant  underreporting
of rape both in Sierra Leone and indeed in certain parts of the UK.  But  we
do not think that they demonstrate that the appellant  had  genuine  reasons
for not mentioning the claimed rape earlier than she  did.  The  adjudicator
plainly considered this evidence, as she was indeed required to do,  in  the
context of the appellant's evidence as a whole.

8. Mr Deve sought to persuade us that the adjudicator was wrong to  identify
as implausible the account the appellant gave of being  separated  from  her
aunt, since in the chaos in the country at that time there would  have  been
many reasons why close relatives could  not  keep  in  touch.  However,  the
adjudicator  gave  sound  reasons  for  concluding  this   aspect   of   the
appellant`s account did not add up. The grounds  fail  to  explain  why  the
aunt would have felt unable to wait for the appellant simply for her to  put
on an old gown. We also think the adjudicator was fully justified in  noting
that the appellant had failed to give a  consistent  account  about  whether
she had informed her grandmother of her  employer's  offer  of  help  before
leaving.

9. Nor are we persuaded that the adjudicator was wrong to conclude that  she
could attach little weight to the medical report of  Dr  Shehadeh.  Mr  Deve
sought to argue that the adjudicator only  dismissed  the  medical  evidence
because she had not accepted the  appellant`s  account.  In  our  view  that
argument is ill founded. The  adjudicator  plainly  considered  the  medical
evidence as one piece of evidence that had to  be  weighed  along  with  the
rest of the evidence.  She  also  gave  valid  reasons  for  placing  little
reliance on it as evidence about the appellant`s past experiences.  Even  if
we accepted that she was unduly dismissive of his  diagnostic  methods,  she
was plainly correct to point out that the doctor's  assessment  was  heavily
dependant on what he had been told by the appellant as she was to point  out
that it was made in ignorance of the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  given
divergent accounts of her past experiences. The adjudicator was  correct  to
note that the recommendation for counselling had not been pursued  and  that
the appellant was not on the medication the doctor suggested.  We  recognise
from the additional comments made by  Dr  Shehadeh  that  he  considers  his
report was wrongly given little weight. However, in an asylum appeal  it  is
the job of an adjudicator and sometimes the Tribunal to  assess  the  proper
weight to be attached to medical evidence, taking  into  account  the  wider
body of evidence and having tested the appellant`s evidence in  the  context
of a hearing.

10. However, having concluded that the appellant failed to give  a  credible
account  it  still  remains  to  assess  whether  she  would  face   serious
difficulties upon return. We have decided we have to  consider  this  matter
for ourselves.  The  adjudicator's  assessment  of  this  issue  was  unduly
limited to what the situation of the appellant would be  as  a  returnee  to
Sierra Leone like any  other.  Furthermore,  although  she  considered  this
issue in the context of asylum and Article 3, she did not  consider  it,  as
she should have, in the context of Article 8.

11.  Although the appellant had failed to give a credible account of  having
been raped by rebels, there was sufficient evidence to  show  that  she  had
been the victim of sexual exploitation in the past, in France, even  if  not
in  Sierra  Leone  and  Guinea  also.  Although  the  adjudicator   properly
discounted the medical evidence as an  accurate  guide  to  the  appellant`s
past experiences, that evidence did establish that the  appellant  had  some
psychological difficulties. Given  that  the  appellant  had  not  undergone
counselling or kept to the proper medication it could not be said that  this
evidence  established  that  she  was  severely  traumatised.  But  it   did
sufficiently establish some  level  of  psychological  difficulties.  In  Dr
Shehadeh`s words, "She is not in a state of mind which would  allow  her  to
reconstruct a new life and new  social  network..."   Furthermore,  although
she failed to give a credible account of having become  separated  from  her
relatives, the objective country materials indicated that there  might  well
be difficulties in the appellant being able  to  re-establish  contact  with
her relatives.

12. The question thus arises, what conditions will face the  appellant  upon
return? She has failed to demonstrate that she  would  have  a  well-founded
fear of persecution or of treatment contrary to Art 3. Since  the  appellant
left Sierra Leone the country has entered a peace  process  commencing  with
the 1999 Lome Peace Agreement.  As  the  adjudicator  herself  noted,  since
November 2000 the government and the rebels  have  commenced  a  process  of
disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration.  Despite  isolated  incidents
of violence, the majority of the  rebels  have  laid  down  their  arms  and
participated in elections. There were no reports of  major  violence  during
the recent elections.

13. However, the objective country materials do indicate  that  upon  return
it is reasonably likely that she will end up in an IDP camp.

14. As regards conditions facing those in IDP camps, in a  letter  dated  20
May 2002 the UNHCR UK representative wrote that:


      "The vast majority  of  returning  refugees  are  becoming  internally
      displaced persons (IDPs) upon return, as they are unable to return  to
      their areas of origin. IDP camps  are  over-stretched,  as  are  UNHCR
      temporary settlements for returnees who are unable to return home. The
      total IDP population is estimated at over one million..."

15. In a report to the UN ECOSOC dated 11 February 2002  Special  Rapporteur
on Violence Against Women, Ms Radhika Coomaraswamy commented on her  mission
to Sierra Leone in August 2001 as  follows:  "The  Special  Rapporteur  also
highlights her concerns about the appalling  conditions  in  the  camps  for
internally displaced persons..." Her report  goes  on  to  mention  security
concerns of women and children displaced by the conflict in the  context  of
risk of rape and gender-related violence. At paragraph  70  she  notes  with
immediate reference to a camp near Freetown that:

      "Rape in the camps  is  common;  families  reportedly  settle  matters
      themselves through the payment of money. The  majority  of  the  women
      interviewed by the Special Rapporteur were female heads  of  household
      and were struggling to make living selling firewood which they collect
      in the hills behind the camp. Other said they were forced to  work  as
      prostitutes to have enough food for themselves and their  children  to
      survive."


16. Even giving full weight to  Ms  Coomaraswamy`s  assessment,  we  do  not
think these materials  establish  a  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
Article 3. That is because the evidence falls  short  of  establishing  that
the risk of being forced into prostitution is large-scale or that  there  is
a consistent pattern of gross and systematic coercion of women in IDP  camps
into prostitution. Nor do we think this evidence establishes that for  singe
women returnees who become IDPs there is in general a real risk  that  their
return to Sierra Leone would amount to a disproportionate interference  with
her right to respect for physical and moral integrity.

17. However, we are satisfied that there are specific factors in  this  case
which would make the decision to return her a disproportionate  interference
with her right to respect for private life.

18. We base our conclusion on Article 8 on three factors in particular.  The
first is that we are satisfied, despite serious deficiencies in the  account
she gave of her past experiences, that there is a reasonable likelihood  the
appellant  has  now  lost  contact  with  her   remaining   relatives,   her
grandmother and brother in particular. Thus upon return to  Freetown  it  is
reasonably likely she would not have an existing home or network  of  family
to turn to. It is reasonably likely, therefore, that she would have to  join
the ranks of persons categorised as  IDPs.  A  second  factor  is  that  the
appellant has already had exposure to working as a  prostitute.  Whilst  the
adjudicator's generally adverse finding of credibility  leaves  this  matter
somewhat unclear, we are satisfied there is sufficient  evidence  before  us
to show that through her contact with a man who helped her to  come  to  the
UK she has  worked  as  a  prostitute.  Thirdly,  albeit  falling  short  of
establishing that RUF  rebels  had  raped  her  in  the  past,  the  medical
evidence does establish that the appellant suffers from depression  and  low
self-esteem and would have significant difficulties in  readjusting  to  new
social networks. Dr Shehadeh also  considers,  with  some  justification  we
think,  that  given  her  religious  background  as  a  Muslim  woman  being
perceived  as  an  unclean  woman  would  add  to  her  sense  of   personal
alienation.

19. It seems  to  us  that  considering  these  factors  in  the  round  the
appellant`s  situation  upon  return  would  place  her  in   an   extremely
vulnerable situation in which her past experience of  prostitution  and  her
vulnerable psychological state would make  it  reasonably  likely  that  she
would once again be forced into prostitution. In the absence  of  any  clear
evidence that the appellant has  ever  freely  undertaken  prostitution,  we
consider that her resultant situation would violate her  right  to  physical
and moral integrity.

20. For the above reasons we dismiss the appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
grounds but allow it on Article 8 grounds.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




