
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX51785-2000      |
|                           |        |HX51773-2000                |
|                           |        |HX51779-2000                |
|On 29 August 2002          |        | 8 3 6(Risk - Pdpa Member)  |
|                           |        |Afghanistan cg [2002] UKIAT |
|                           |        |06506                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......13.02.2003..                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|A R Mackey (Chairman)                                             |
|HH D Holden                                                       |
|Ms S S Ramsumair JP                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Afghan Appellants 8(his 5 Dependants - his wife and four          |
|children), and 3 and 6.                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Julian Fountain; IAS Tribunal Unit, London.
For the respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants, who are all citizens of Afghanistan, appeal with leave
      against the determination of a panel of Adjudicators (His Honour Judge
      Dunn QC (Chief Adjudicator), Professor D B Casson and Miss  K  Eshun).
      In that determination, they dismissed an appeal against  the  decision
      of the respondent, who on 1 March 2000, had  refused  leave  to  enter
      after refusing a claim for refugee status in the United Kingdom.


      Introduction:
   2. As the decision of the respondent was made prior to the implementation
      of the Human Rights Act 1998 on 2 October 2000,  only  refugee  status
      issues were before us, not human rights issues.


   3. Because the situation in Afghanistan has  changed  dramatically  since
      the time of the hearing before the panel of Adjudicators in  2000,  by
      agreement between the parties, this  matter  proceeded  largely  as  a
      fresh hearing of the appeals for all three appellants.  Statements  of
      truth were presented by all three appellants, as  well  as  a  further
      statement from the wife of appellant 8. Given the  acceptance  of  the
      credibility of the appellants by the Adjudicators and notice to us  by
      Mr Blundell that he did not wish to cross-examine, we proceeded on the
      basis of accepting the statements of truth, which have  been  read  in
      full by us. The appellants, while present for the  hearing,  were  not
      called to give evidence.

   4. All the appellants are from the same nuclear family and  were  in  the
      aeroplane that was unfortunately hijacked to  the  United  Kingdom  in
      February 2000. Appellant 8 is the head of the family. He and his  wife
      are the parents of the adult applicants 3 and 6  and  also  they  have
      four other dependant children, who are included in the application  of
      appellant 8. We have continued with the  practice  of  addressing  the
      appellants  by  number,  in  an   effort   to   de-personalise   their
      applications as best as  possible.  The  de-personalisation  has  been
      somewhat limited however, through the need to set out and describe the
      somewhat unique and  notorious  events  that  this  family  have  been
      involved in.

   5. Apart from noting acceptance of credibility of the appellants  in  the
      determination of the Adjudicators, very  little  additional  reference
      has been made to that determination.

      The appellants' submissions:
   6. Mr Fountain presented to us the  statements  of  truth  by  the  three
      appellants and wife of appellant 8. He explained that appellant 8  had
      been a civil servant, employed by the Ministry of Agriculture in Kabul
      for many years. He and  his  family  were  on  the  plane,  which  was
      travelling  from  Kabul  to  Mazar-i-Sharrif,  (Mazar)   on   business
      concerning some family land in Mazar when the  aircraft  was  hijacked
      and they eventually arrived in the United  Kingdom.  Appellant  8  had
      been  a  previous  supporter  of  the  Peoples  Democratic  Party   of
      Afghanistan (PDPA). He joined that party in 1984 and remained a member
      until 1992, when it collapsed and the operations  of  government  were
      taken over by the Muhajeddin under President Rabbani. Appellant 8  was
      able to keep his employment, which he had held since  1971,  with  the
      Ministry of  Agriculture  during  the  regime  of  President  Rabbani.
      Subsequent to that, from 1996 until 2000 he continued to serve in  the
      Ministry of Agriculture while it was under the Taliban regime.


   7. The PDPA  were  a  communist  party  who  worked  in  support  of  the
      occupation by the former USSR.

   8. In his statement, appellant 8  stated  that,  under  the  Rabbani  and
      Taliban regimes, he had to hide his political  and  social  views.  He
      considered that  those  regimes  were  looking  for  evidence  of  his
      opinions and explained his experience of being under  surveillance  by
      those regimes.

   9. The family are all from the Mongul Pashtun tribe.

  10. Their  fears  on  return  at  this  time  to  Afghanistan,  (that  is;
      subsequent to the fall of the Taliban regime and the  installation  of
      the Afghan Transitional  Administration  which  is  supported  by  the
      International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)) are  set  out  in  the
      statements of the three appellants. Their fears are from a combination
      of:

        a) Past association as a member of the PDPA,
        b) Pashtun ethnicity,
        c) Notoriety as people who had been on the hijacked plane,
        d) Suspicions of them for having been in the United Kingdom and  in
           some way, demonstrated that they were different or not loyal  to
           Afghanistan, by remaining in the United Kingdom, both while  the
           Taliban remained in power and afterwards.

  11. In addition to those fears, appellants 3 and 6, as unmarried daughters
      of  appellant  8,  fear  persecution  as  young  and  unmarried  women
      returning to Afghanistan from a western country.


  12. The fear of persecution is not from the  interim  administration,  but
      from traditional enemies of the Pashtun, such as Tajiks, Uzbeckis  and
      Azaris, whose troops, as part of the "Northern  Alliance"  have  power
      and control in Kabul. In addition, they fear persecution from remnants
      of the former Taliban regime and fundamentalist  elements  who,  still
      wish to impose their version of Islam in Afghanistan.

  13. Mr Fountain submitted that the appellants fell within  a  category  of
      "at risk" people, set out in the UNHCR Report of  31  May  2002  "Real
      Time Evaluation of UNHCR's Response to the Afghan Emergency - Bulletin
      number 3", in that report it states:

           "Some groups of Afghans in Iran have particular reason to remain
           in Iran or to  delay  their  repatriation.  These  include  high
           ranking members of former communist regime, Islamis  and  Shiite
           clergymen."

  14. In this regard, he submitted that the  appellant,  as  a  former  PDPA
      member of reasonably long standing, was at risk of persecution.  While
      he had been able to hide during the regime  of  the  Taliban  and  the
      Muhajeddin, this would not be so easy for him to  do  on  his  return,
      particularly given that he was on  the  hijacked  aeroplane.  In  this
      situation, he submitted that he simply did not  have  the  ability  to
      disappear into the masses. He submitted his situation was  made  worse
      by the failure of appellant 8 to return under the special arrangements
      that were made soon after the hijacking, for this reason, he would  be
      seen as disloyal to Afghanistan and its society and attitudes.


  15. In addition, he submitted that the ISAF may have  stabilised  matters,
      to a degree in  Kabul,  particularly  when  the  British  forces  were
      administering the Peace Keeping Force, however, this may not  continue
      now that the Turkish army have taken over the role. He submitted  that
      the interim administration must been seen as very reliant on the ISAF.
      He referred us to the fact that the President Kaizai,  had  needed  to
      call in a bodyguard of United States troops, and even then,  the  Vice
      President had been assassinated.

  16. He also referred us to a considerable  amount  of  country  of  origin
      information on Afghanistan, which, he submitted,  indicated  that  the
      administration was a weak and shaky  one.  It  was  thus,  logical  to
      conclude that it would only be a matter of  time  before  the  interim
      administration unravels and a regime of "warlordism" returns. At  that
      time, there would be  the  risk  of  atrocities  against  Pashtun  and
      general lawlessness, as applies at this time in parts of the north  of
      Afghanistan. He submitted that this was more  than  just  speculation,
      but a real indication of what could happen in the future.

  17. Beyond this, he referred us to reports showing  that  guns  and  other
      weapons were available in the  markets  of  Kabul  on  an  unregulated
      basis, and that cheap weapons continued to flood into the market.  All
      this contributed to a higher risk of further problems.

  18. In addition, the Northern  Alliance  troops,  who  largely  controlled
      Kabul, were in charge of this trade in arms. Their position  had  been
      carefully protected in the Loya Jirga, such that their power base  was
      assured. He submitted that  the  Pashtuns  did  not  exercise  control
      commensurate with their majority in the population and that this could
      lead for tensions to explode  at  any  time.  The  volatility  of  the
      situation was shown currently in northern Afghanistan.

  19. He further submitted that the whole family were  at  risk  because  of
      their largely secular background.  The  activities  of  appellant  8's
      wife, in a women's group in the past, is clear evidence of this.

  20. In her regard, he submitted that she  had  an  additional  risk  which
      arose through the land dispute (in Mazar). It was submitted  that  the
      property owned by her  family  would  have  been  confiscated  by  the
      Taliban and that she believed there would now  be  occupiers  on  this
      land, who would  not  wish  to  see  her  return  to  Afghanistan  and
      repossess the land. In support of this, he  submitted  that  her  half
      brother had been taken away and beaten by the Taliban  and  that  this
      type of event could happen in the future.

  21. The risks to the two daughters, appellants 3 and 6, in addition to the
      above risks, included generalised fears  as  women  returning  from  a
      western country to Kabul. It was submitted that women in  Kabul  would
      still be required to wear burqas, and that there had not been any form
      of genuine emancipation. The work of the Loya Jirga,  had  shown  some
      improvement in the position of women, but,  given  the  background  of
      these two unmarried ladies returning from a  western  country,  having
      been on the hijacked plane,  their  risk  was  enhanced.  Appellant  3
      referred to a specific incident she had been personally involved  with
      during the Taliban regime, where she was hit four or five times with a
      whip, and threatened and told not to leave her  house.  She  feared  a
      recurrence of this type of event, particularly if she wished to  study
      or obtain employment in the future.

      The respondent's submissions:
  22. At the outset, Mr Blundell reminded us that we were not  dealing  with
      human rights issues, but consideration solely of the asylum issues. He
      referred us to a number of reports  that  had  been  produced  by  the
      appellants and the respondent's  bundle  as  well.  We  have  had  the
      opportunity of going through those bundles and considering all of  the
      information in them. We have  been  able  to  take  into  account  the
      submissions of both Mr Blundell and Mr Fountain in regard to them.


  23. Mr Blundell's submissions specifically relating to the appellants were
      then presented.

  24. He submitted that at present, there was no evidence of persecution  of
      former PDPA government officials and thus, there was no risk at all to
      such persons. Appellant 8, he noted, had been  a  civil  servant,  and
      therefore, not part of the actual PDPA  regime  and  certainly  not  a
      leading, or high ranking, official as referred to in the UNHCR  Report
      on persons at risk. Given this lack  of  profile.  He  submitted  that
      there would be no difficulty in this appellant returning to Kabul.  In
      addition to this, he  had  not  had  particular  problems  during  the
      Taliban or Muhajeddin regimes, and indeed, there had been no  evidence
      of any persecution of him during that time.

  25. In relation to the Pashtun ethnicity of all appellants, he again asked
      us to note that there was no claim by any of  the  parties,  including
      the UNHCR, that mere membership of the Pashtun tribe did give rise  to
      a reasonable likelihood of persecution. He pointed out that 15 of  the
      34 members of the current government cabinet were Pashtun,  and  thus,
      there was a significant representation in the interim  administration.
      In addition, there was  also  a  reasonable  gender  balance  in  that
      cabinet.

  26. He submitted to us that some of  the  country  of  origin  information
      indicated that women were on longer constrained in their dress. Beyond
      this, in a place such a Kabul, which is  the  capital  of  an  Islamic
      country, it should be  recognised  that  women  would  be  treated  in
      accordance with the mores and culture of that country.  This  did  not
      amount to persecution in his submission.

  27. In relation to the  issue  of  risks  for  returned  failed  ex-asylum
      seekers, he submitted that there  had  been  huge  numbers  of  former
      refugees who had returned to Afghanistan in recent months, a figure of
      approximately 2 million, having returned from Pakistan and Iran. Given
      this situation and an approximate number of 500,000 who  had  recently
      returned to Kabul, there were huge prospects for  anonymity  for  this
      family, in his submission. There was no evidence of any  targeting  of
      anyone who had returned to Kabul, having  previously  claimed  asylum,
      and therefore the issue of a  possible  "celebrity  status"  of  these
      appellants was, in his submission, irrelevant.

  28. In relation to  the  land  dispute,  he  submitted  that  this  was  a
      difficult point and probably outside the five Convention grounds,  set
      out in the Refugee Convention 1951. Beyond this, he submitted that  it
      could not be considered as an area of possibly persecutorial  risk  as
      it was a common situation with many people from  Afghanistan  who  had
      been removed or dislodged from their land by  the  Taliban.  The  fact
      that squatters were sitting on the land did not,  in  his  submission,
      amount to persecution nor was a Convention reason invoked.

  29. He urged us to look at the appeal following the Ravichandran approach,
      noting that we should look in a prospective manner  at  the  risks  to
      these appellants on return.

  30. He submitted that the interim government were  not  on  the  brink  of
      collapse, it had problems  he  conceded,  but  was  a  long  way  from
      disintegration, particularly given  the  continuing  presence  of  the
      ISAF.

  31. In reply, Mr Fountain urged that we look at the risks "in the  round",
      he submitted that the appellants were vulnerable given the totality of
      their background. In particular, the  risk  to  the  women  should  be
      considered and we should note the guidance, in this regard,  given  in
      the House of  Lords  decisions  in  Shah  and  Islam.  Although,  each
      decision must turn on its own facts, he submitted that the  regime  in
      Afghanistan was still effectively a repressive one where a woman could
      not feel free.

  32. He submitted that some of the articles produced  by  him  in  support,
      which had been challenged  by  Mr  Blundell  as  being  unbalanced  or
      bombastic,  should  still  be  viewed  as  commentary  from  respected
      newspapers (e.g. New York Times).

  33. In relation to the "celebrity status" issue, he submitted there was no
      actual evidence before us, as there had been no forced repatriation of
      failed asylum seekers to Afghanistan at this time, nor in  particular,
      people who had been on the hijacked plane. Therefore the situation was
      unknown, and, given the fragility of the interim  government  and  law
      and  order  in  Afghanistan,  the  risks  from   the   Tajiks,   rogue
      fundamentalists  and  others  to  these  appellants   were,   in   his
      submission, real not speculative.

      The issues:
  34. We found the sole issue before us to be whether, at this time, any  of
      these appellants, both subjectively and objectively assessed, do  have
      a well founded fear of persecution on return to Afghanistan from  non-
      state actors. If so, then we must turn to the further issue of whether
      that persecution is for one or more of  the  five  Refugee  Convention
      reasons.


      Assessment:
  35. Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention 1951 relevantly provides:


           "... owing to well founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons
           of race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
           social group or political opinion, is outside of the country  of
           his nationality and  is  unable  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
           unwilling to avail himself for the protection of  that  country;
           ..."


  36. At the  outset,  we  note  that  the  fear  of  persecution  by  these
      appellants is not from the state or agents of the state, but from non-
      state actors. We also note that these appellants are  from  Kabul  and
      the general undertaking given by the respondent is that they  will  be
      returned to that city. No issue of relocation or  an  internal  flight
      alternative therefore arises.


  37. The non-state actors feared by these appellants described  as  members
      of the Tajiks, Uzbeckis or Azaris, who are in Kabul  as  part  of  the
      "Northern Alliance" group who liberated the  city  from  the  Taliban,
      and/or other fundamentalists who would identify the appellants, either
      because they were from a secular background,  had  spent  considerable
      time in a western country and, in the case of the appellants 3 and  6,
      were young unmarried women.

  38. We  have  carefully  considered  the  country  of  origin  information
      submitted by  both  parties,  and  measured  it  against  all  of  the
      potential risks to these appellants from  the  non-state  actors  they
      have identified. We find from that  analysis,  that  there  is  not  a
      reasonable likelihood of persecution to any  of  these  appellants  on
      return to Kabul by any of those non-state actors. Any level of risk to
      them, is negligible or remote, and certainly  below  the  level  of  a
      reasonable likelihood or real risk.

  39. The primary area where it was submitted  that  there  was  a  risk  to
      appellant 8 and to a lesser extent, the other members of  his  family,
      was from his previous membership in the PDPA. In this regard, we again
      note the UNHCR Bulletin Number 3, which refers to "high  ranking  PDPA
      members". This appellant was a civil servant and a PDPA member.  There
      was no indication of a high profile, or that he was a  "Cadre",  or  a
      Senior  Official  within  the  PDPA.  This,  in  our   view,   clearly
      distinguishes him from the risks that may  be  associated  with  those
      former high ranking officials, ministers  or  cadre  within  the  PDPA
      regime. Our analysis on this  regard  is  confirmed  by  the  lack  of
      persecution to this appellant over the  period  of  some  eight  years
      during the regimes of the Rabbani and Taliban  administrations.  While
      it is accepted that he may have intentionally kept a low  profile,  it
      is significant that he was not targeted at all,  thus  reflecting  the
      lack of  interest  in  him.  An  analysis  of  the  current  situation
      indicates only a very remote level of risk.

  40. Any risk based on the Pashtun ethnicity of these appellants,  we  also
      do not consider rises to the level of a reasonable likelihood. We note
      the composition of the cabinet of the interim  regime  and  also  that
      there is little or no objective evidence of persecution of Pashtun  in
      Kabul at this time. We acknowledge that  there  are  risks  to  ethnic
      Pashtuns in the north of Afghanistan, but  such  a  situation  is  not
      indicated presently in Kabul.

  41. In relation  to  the  claim  that  the  "celebrity  status"  of  these
      appellants would raise their profile and hence, the risk to  them,  we
      are also of the view that it is  not  a  sustainable  submission.  The
      objective information indicates that some 500,000 people have returned
      to Kabul itself. The chances of anonymity  for  these  appellants,  we
      consider, must be very high. While there may be  some  recognition  of
      their past involvement in the hijacked aeroplane, there is however  no
      evidence that they would be targeted for that reason.

  42. The remaining issue in respect of appellants 3 and 6, and the wife  of
      appellant 8, is in relation to gender. We would agree that  there  are
      certainly some societal restrictions in  Kabul  on  women,  but  these
      "restrictions" are part of the Islamic society in  that  country,  and
      certainly do not rise to the level of being persecutorial. We  do  not
      consider that there are basic human rights infringed on a sustained or
      systemic basis against women in  Kabul  at  this  time.  No  objective
      evidence supports that. The decision in Shah and Islam  therefore,  is
      not relevant in this case. Any risks that may arise because  of  their
      gender, we consider highly remote and certainly not real risks.

  43. Additionally, we have looked at the totality  of  the  background  and
      profile of these appellants, as we were requested to  by  Mr  Fountain
      and find, that considered in the round, the combination of  risks  and
      their backgrounds do not indicate  a  reasonable  likelihood  or  well
      founded fear of persecution to these appellants on their return.

  44. As we do not consider there is a well founded fear of  persecution  on
      return to Kabul, the issue of whether there is a Convention ground  is
      not relevant.


      Decision:
  45. For the reasons set out above, the appeals are dismissed.





                                                                  A R Mackey

                                                              Vice President
