
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |SE (Objective Evidence)     |
|                           |        |Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |05176                       |
|On 10 October 2002         |        |CC 45213-2001               |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|............11/11/2002.........                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Sofiane Ettaani                                                   |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  the  determination  of  a  Special
      Adjudicator (Mr W G Beckett) who allowed the appeal of Mr S Ettaani, a
      citizen of Algeria, for convenience hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
      appellant, against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
      his application for asylum.

   2. Mr J McGirr appeared for the Secretary of State.  Miss  J  Scally,  of
      Counsel, instructed by  Thornhill  Ince,  Solicitors,  represented  Mr
      Ettaani.

   3. The appellant's family had a shop where they sold clothes in  Algiers.
      On 5 June 1999 two men claiming they were from the GIA demanded  money
      from the appellant.  They had told them that the  appellant's  brother
      owed them some money.  The appellant's brother had come to the  United
      Kingdom in 1997 and had been granted asylum status in  the  UK  on  13
      November 1998.

   4. The appellant went to the police to report the incident and the police
      told him that if he saw the persons again he should contact them.

   5. The appellant telephoned his brother in the UK who  denied  there  was
      any money owing.  On 21 July 1999  the  men  returned  to  inform  the
      appellant that they intended to collect money from  him  every  month.
      The appellant's brother advised the appellant  that  he  should  leave
      straight away.  He  had  had  similar  problems  with  the  GIA.   The
      appellant told the Adjudicator that he had never been a member of  any
      political party or held any particular  political  views  and  he  had
      never been charged or experienced any problems with the authorities or
      any other groups in Algeria prior to June 1999.

   6. The Adjudicator found the appellant to  be  a  truthful  and  credible
      witness in the main although there were certain discrepancies  in  his
      account of the visits to his shop by the GIA.  The appellant's account
      was not tested in cross-examination because there  was  no  presenting
      officer at the hearing.

   7.  The  Adjudicator  was  satisfied  that  the  background   information
      demonstrated that the GIA were an extremist Islamic group who attacked
      people who did not share their views particularly in order  to  obtain
      money from them.  The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant would be
      treated by the GIA "as a member of the  establishment,  being  a  shop
      owner in  Algeria and a person from whom they could obtain monies  for
      their own purposes".  The Adjudicator added:

           "Whilst the appellant himself was not on the evidence  a  member
           of any political party or hold any particular  political  views,
           nevertheless I accept that he was threatened on occasions by the
           GIA and I take the view that the appellant's subjective fear  to
           his life if returned  to  Algeria  is  amply  supported  by  the
           various  reports  which  have  been  placed  before  me  by  the
           representatives of the appellant."

   8. The Adjudicator noted that the appellant feared non-state  agents  and
      concluded that there was no  protection  available  to  him  from  the
      police.  The Adjudicator acknowledged that there were problems for the
      police in view of the lack of information supplied to  them  regarding
      the individuals who had come to the appellant's  shop.   Nevertheless,
      the Adjudicator concluded that police effectiveness was minimal as the
      police were involved with the GIA in certain cases  and  also  corrupt
      and unwilling to offer assistance.

   9. In paragraph 14 of the determination the Adjudicator gives his reasons
      for  concluding   that   the   appellant's   fear   is   well-founded,
      unfortunately misdirecting himself on the applicable standard of proof
      in the process:


           "On the evidence before me I take the view  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities that the visit of the GIA to the appellant's  shop
           in order to extort money  from  him  and  to  threaten  him  was
           connected with previous visit to  his  brother  Ahmed,  who  had
           later escaped to the United Kingdom and obtained asylum."

  10. In the grounds of appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the
      appellant's problems were totally localised and  the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to look at the question of internal relocation.   There  was  a
      sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant  in   Algeria.    The
      Adjudicator had failed to have regard to a  Tribunal  case  which  had
      been placed before him - Serrar (01/TH/1614).  The Tribunal had  found
      in  that  case  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection   for
      individuals against the activities of the  GIA.   The  government  had
      control of events in the towns and cities.  Security in Algiers  would
      have been adequate.  The police had indicated by  their  actions  that
      they were willing to assist the appellant.  The Adjudicator had failed
      to identify the objective evidence relied upon.  Mr  McGirr  submitted
      that the appellant was merely a victim of crime.  The Adjudicator  had
      not explained how  he  had  reached  his  conclusion.   The  objective
      material before the Tribunal supplied by the appellant was the same as
      that before the Adjudicator.

  11. Mr McGirr referred us  to  the  Home  Office  Country  Assessment  and
      submitted that there was nothing  in  the  material  supplied  by  the
      appellant, in particular the report entitled "Algeria:  A  Country  in
      Crisis" by George Joffee to support the Adjudicator's assertions about
      the conduct of the police.  The Adjudicator's observations were merely
      an unsupported series of comments.

  12. While there was no presenting officer at the hearing, the Home  Office
      had lodged among other documents the Tribunal case of Serrah.  It  was
      quite apparent there was a sufficiency of protection and  considerable
      changes in Algeria.

  13. As an alternative,  fallback  position,  Mr  McGirr  argued  that  the
      appellant would be able to relocate - an option not considered by  the
      Adjudicator.  There was minimal terrorist  activity  in  urban  areas.
      The GIA were organised in semi-autonomous units.  One cell  would  not
      be aware of the activities of another cell - even assuming  there  was
      any risk at all from the GIA given the objective material.

  14. Miss Scally relied on her skeleton argument.  She submitted  that  the
      GIA  would  indeed  regard  the  appellant  as   a   member   of   the
      establishment.  The appellant's brother had run the business from  the
      same shop and had fled from Algeria and had obtained political asylum.
       The GIA would have adopted the same approach against  the  appellant.
      Not being with them, he would be against them.  It did not follow that
      the Adjudicator had not considered the  case  of  Serrah  although  it
      might have been helpful for him to mention it.

  15. The Joffee report had been compiled in May 2000 but it was  relatively
      current and was in a sense prophetic since it was envisaged that there
      would be an upsurge in violence. The apparent calm was illusory.   The
      problem was not localised and not  under  control.   There  were  bomb
      attacks in Algiers.  The appellant was in an identical position to his
      brother and had been found to be largely credible.   The  Tribunal  in
      Serrah had not referred to the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  of  Noune
      [2001] INLR526.  Counsel accepted that the  background  in  Noune  was
      very different from the one in this case.  She acknowledged  that  the
      extracts from Professor Seddon's report reproduced in the judgment did
      not mention shopkeepers as  such  -  the  Islamist  groups  tended  to
      target, in addition to members of the  state  security  forces  "those
      identified as professionals, with a tendency to be  secular  and  non-
      cooperative with the Islamist movement".

  16. Counsel submitted that the appellant's shop was still in Algiers - the
      lease ran in families - and there were 11 members of the family living
      in the neighbourhood of the shop.  The GIA were bloodthirsty  and  the
      appellant had been reasonable to leave.  Relocation was not an  option
      and the police could not maintain law and order.

  17. Mr McGirr submitted that the Joffee report was two years  old  and  of
      limited value.  There was a disclaimer at the  start  of  it  and  the
      Tribunal had criticised the report for not being fully  sourced.   The
      Home Office Country Information report should  be  preferred.   Unrest
      was confined to the countryside.

  18. At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We are grateful to Counsel for her lucid  and  well-prepared  skeleton
      argument.  We take into account the documentation she relied  on.   We
      note that the Joffee report  was  prepared  mainly  on  the  basis  of
      publicly available information and did not purport to  be  exhaustive.
      It was written in May 2000.  It was the author's view that the current
      calm was merely a lull and the armed Islamist movements were as active
      as ever.  The security forces had not been  successful  in  containing
      them.  At page 16 of the appellant's bundle  there  is  the  following
      extract:

           "This means, inevitably, that the security forces will  have  to
           continue their operations, for the GIA  and  GSDJ  will  not  be
           eliminated from the very rugged countryside  that  they  occupy,
           nor will their support networks be removed from the towns."

  19. Counsel places reliance on the fact that the appellant may still be at
      risk from such support networks.   We  note  under  the  heading  "The
      Potential Victims" on page 15 of the  report  that  the  GIA  targeted
      security personnel, civil servants, intellectuals and foreigners.  The
      report continues:

           "Its militants and sympathisers, particularly  in  urban  areas,
           have also enforced behaviour in accordance with  Islamist  codes
           and practises so that persons engaged  in  activities,  such  as
           theatre, television or the amusement industry generally continue
           to be under threat, as do women who do not observe Islamic dress
           codes.  Only in areas where the security forces have established
           a massive presence, as,  in  central  Algiers  and  other  major
           towns, is this not the case."

  20. It is perhaps also worth referring to the following extract:

           "In addition, despite official claims  that  security  in  urban
           areas has been re-established, these are not fully supported  by
           the evidence.  Local emirs, claiming to  be  part  of  the  GIA,
           still run protection rackets in urban areas, particularly in the
           poorer Medina and new Medina areas - even in  the  Medina-Casbah
           in Algiers, which  used  to  be  a  GIA  hotbed,  calm  is  only
           maintained by a constant and heavy security force presence - the
           police  are  notoriously  corrupt,  engaged  in  smuggling   and
           extortion rackets (120 policemen are currently facing charges of
           extortion and murder);  and in  the  countryside,  as  mentioned
           above, there are still 400,000 armed militias who are controlled
           by communal authorities."

  21. At the conclusion of this section  there  is  reference  to  a  French
      Ministry report in  February  1998  which  states  that  the  Algerian
      government had failed in its duty to protect its own  citizens  -  the
      paragraph continues "the situation has not  radically  improved  since
      then except in central urban areas".

  22. Counsel submitted that the Tribunal in Serrah had not had the  benefit
      of the decision of Noune and accordingly might have unwittingly erred.
       We are not satisfied that that is so.  However, for the  purposes  of
      this appeal, we remind ourselves  of  the  opinion  of  Lord  Hope  in
      Horvath v Secretary of State [2001] 1AC489 at 500:

           "But the application  of  the  surrogacy  principle  rests  upon
           assumption that, just as the substitute cannot achieve  complete
           protection against isolated and random attacks, so also complete
           protection against such attacks is not to  be  expected  of  the
           home state.  The standard to be applied is  therefore  not  that
           which would eliminate all  risk  and  would  thus  amount  to  a
           guarantee of protection in the  home  state.   Rather  it  is  a
           practical standard, which takes proper account of the duty which
           the state owes to all its own nationals."


  23. Lord Hope observed that "certain levels  of  ill-treatment  may  still
      occur even if steps to prevent this are taken by the state to which we
      look for our protection".

  24. The Home Office Country Assessment notes at paragraph 5.A.6 that there
      had been a shift in the past few years in the pattern and intensity of
      the violence:

           "The overall security situation has  improved  as  the  security
           forces have largely brought the security situation under control
           and forced the insurgents  out  of  the  main  cities  into  the
           countryside."


  25. Paragraph 5.A.8 states that:

           "The Algerian authorities are in control of the vast majority of
           their territory.  As most people  live  in  towns,  many  having
           voluntarily relocated for personal security reasons, the present
           violence is not a major  feature  of  most  people's  day-to-day
           lives."

      Later in the bulletin, under the heading  of  "Armed  Groups",  it  is
      stated that:  "It is essentially rural terrorism that is taking  place
      except in the strongholds of the  armed  groups".   It  is  said  that
      "Armed groups also  threaten  individuals  (such  as  shopkeepers  and
      entrepreneurs) in dangerous regions".

  26. Towards the end of the appellant's bundle there are  some  news  items
      referring to attacks and explosions.  For example, on 23 April 2002  a
      bomb exploded in a pedestrian subway in the Belcourt  district.   This
      word is underlined in manuscript (presumably by the appellant) and  it
      is stated that that is the area where he resided.   It  is  said  that
      bomb attacks or guerrilla raids in Algiers and its near suburbs  began
      again last August after a period of calm that lasted almost two years.
       The press reports blamed the GIA for the attacks.  The other  reports
      speak of attacks at some remove from the capital.

  27. We emphasise that we reach our decision in the light of  the  totality
      of the material before us, not merely the passages we have highlighted
      above.  We do, however, feel that Mr McGirr is entitled to submit that
      the situation is indeed as claimed in the assessment, that  the  GIA's
      activities are in the main confined to rural areas.  Of  course  there
      have been and will continue to be outrages.  We are conscious  of  the
      fact that the authorities may put a brave face on matters and may wish
      to play down terrorist activity.  Nevertheless, we find that  the  GIA
      does not pose the threat that it may once have done in urban areas.

  28. We have to say that we are not overly impressed with the Adjudicator's
      determination.  We recognise that he did not have the assistance of  a
      Presenting  Officer.   We  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant   has
      established to the required standard that he would have been viewed or
      would be viewed as a member of the establishment.  The evidence in our
      view is simply of criminal racketeering.  We do not  accept  that  the
      people who came to the appellant to demand money  were  interested  in
      anything other than the money.  They were not  in  the  slightest  bit
      interested in the appellant's views nor did they  attribute  views  to
      him.  We note, incidentally, that according to the Joffee  report  the
      individuals may not have been from the GIA at all - merely  emissaries
      of local protection rackets. In making our findings we recognise  that
      the appellant's brother was granted refugee status but,  dealing  with
      the appellant before us, we do not believe that the  circumstances  of
      his case entitle him  to  similar  status.   We  also  note  that  the
      appellant turned to the police who did not send him away but requested
      the appellant to inform them if he saw them again.  It is not recorded
      in the determination whether he did so.

  29. On the material before us we are not satisfied that the appellant  can
      establish to the required standard that he has a well-founded fear  of
      persecution at the hands of the GIA in  Algiers,  his  home  area,  if
      returned there today.  We do not believe that there  is  a  reasonable
      degree of likelihood of support networks of the GIA having an interest
      in the appellant.  There can be no guarantee of safety but it  is  not
      established that there is a real risk.

  30. We also agree that the appellant's problems were localised in  nature.
      If we had been satisfied that the appellant had  established  that  he
      had a fear of the GIA in his home area (and we emphasise that  we  are
      not so satisfied), we would not have regarded it as  unreasonable  for
      him to relocate.  The Adjudicator did not explore this issue at all.


  31. In summary, we find that the appellant can properly be returned to his
      home area without fear of persecution in the light  of  the  objective
      material before us.  In the alternative, it would not be unduly  harsh
      for him to move elsewhere.

  32.  For  the  reasons  we  have  given,  we  reverse  the   Adjudicator's
      determination and allow the appeal of the Secretary of State.






                                                                   Mr G Warr
                                                                    Chairman







