
KH

|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO  HX26333-2002     |
|On  20 November 2002       |        |GM (risk -failed asylum     |
|                           |        |seekers) Democratic Republic|
|                           |        |of Congo CG [2002] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |06741                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21 February 2003 ..........................................       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Rt. Hon. The Countess of Mar                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|Guy  Mukendi                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances

For the appellant:     Mr R Solomon of Counsel instructed by Makanda & Co,
                 solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an  appeal  by  Guy  Mukendi,  a  citizen  of  the  Democratic
      Republic of Congo (DRC) against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mrs S Kebede) who dismissed his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision made on 27 March  2002  giving  directions  for  his  removal
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant was born on 29 November 1984  or  so  he  asserts.   The
      Secretary of State did not believe that this was the appellant's  true
      date of birth.  He treated the  appellant  as  an  adult  and  he  was
      interviewed about his claim on 21 March 2002.  The respondent did  not
      believe the account given by the appellant and for the reasons set out
      fully in the decision letter dated 27 March 2002 he refused his  claim
      on both asylum and human rights grounds.

3.    In brief outline the background  to  the  claim  is  as  follows.  The
      claimant says that he left the DRC on 25 January  2002  by  canoe  for
      Congo- Brazzaville where he  stayed  for  a  day.   He  then  flew  to
      Cameroon, staying for one night  before  his  onward  journey  to  the
      United Kingdom using a false red passport.  He says that both  he  and
      his father are Muslims.  His father was  the  leader  of  a  group  at
      Kinshasa University demanding change and democracy.   His  father  and
      others were arrested for demonstrating against the regime and  put  in
      prison.  The police came to the appellant's house after  his  father's
      arrest and assaulted the appellant and his sister.  A bribe  was  paid
      so that his  father  would  be  released  from  custody  and  he,  the
      appellant and his sister were able to leave the  DRC  together.   They
      became separated  as  his  father  and  sister  were  travelling  with
      different agents.  He would be at risk on return to the  DRC  and  the
      authorities would demand to know where his father was.

4.    When interviewed  the  appellant  confirmed  that  his  father  was  a
      student at Kinshasa  University  and  was  a  leader  of  the  Islamic
      Congolese Group which had nothing to do with politics.  He was in  the
      final year of a law course.  He had been arrested on 14 December  2001
      when taking part at a demonstration which he had helped  to  organise.
      After his father's arrest the police used to come to their house about
      twice a week and on one occasion tried  to  rape  his  sister  but  he
      managed to protect her.

5.    This account was confirmed in the  appellant's  oral  evidence  before
      the Adjudicator.  The appellant said that his birth certificate  which
      was with the respondent, was a  genuine  document.  He  was  currently
      17 years old.   He said that when he was trying to protect his sister
      from the soldiers he had been knifed and had a scar on his  left  leg.
      He had come to the United Kingdom with an agent and was not questioned
      himself at the airport.  His father's friend had given them the  money
      for the journey and then sold their house and taken  the  proceeds  of
      the sale.  If he returned to the DRC he would be questioned about  his
      father's whereabouts and would be arrested, beaten and killed.

6.    The Adjudicator did not believe the account  given  by  the  appellant
      for the reasons which she has set out in paragraphs 25  -  30  of  her
      determination.  She commented that his claim was based entirely on one
      incident, his father's involvement with the demonstration at  Kinshasa
      University and his subsequent arrest and escape.  Even if  the  events
      described did occur,  she  found  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  the
      authorities of the DRC would have had or would now have  any  interest
      in the appellant himself given that  he  had  had  no  involvement  in
      politics, was not present at the demonstration and was only 17 at  the
      time of his father's arrest.

7.    Mr Solomon in his submissions challenged  the  Adjudicator's  findings
      on credibility.  In paragraph 25 of the determination the  Adjudicator
      said that in the SEF the appellant had claimed that his father was the
      leader of a political group demanding change and democracy whereas  in
      his interview he said that he was the leader of an Islamic group which
      had nothing to do with politics.  Mr Solomon argued that there was  no
      necessary inconsistency between his accounts.  At A5 of  the  SEF  the
      appellant said that his father belonged to the Islamic religion and he
      was demanding that there must be democracy.  He said that  his  father
      was the leader of the group that was demanding change and democracy at
      Kinshasa University.  In the interview at  C4  when  asked  about  the
      Islamic group he explained that it was nothing  to  do  with  politics
      (Q7).  He had made it clear in answer to Questions 17 and 18 that  the
      demonstration at the university had nothing to  do  with  the  Islamic
      group and that his father went because he was a student.  In answer to
      Question 19, the appellant  said  that  his  father  was  amongst  the
      organisers.  This was consistent with his father  being  described  in
      the SEF as a leader of the group.

8.    In paragraph 26 the Adjudicator commented  that  in  the  SEF  and  in
      interview the appellant referred to his  father  being  arrested  with
      eight others yet when he was asked in cross-examination at the hearing
      whether or not his father was arrested with  eight  other  people  his
      response had been to ask why he said eight others and to ask  for  the
      question to be put properly.  Mr Solomon points out that in answer  to
      Question 23 of the interview the appellant had said that they did  not
      just arrest eight people but arrested a lot and amongst them were  the
      eight organisers.  This clarified what was said in the SEF at A3  that
      his father and eight others were arrested.

9.    In paragraph 27 the Adjudicator drew an  adverse  inference  from  the
      appellant's answer in cross-examination that he had been knifed by the
      soldiers when they came to arrest his father  and  he  was  trying  to
      protect his sister.  This was inconsistent with his account  that  his
      father had been arrested at the demonstration.  Mr Solomon points  out
      that in his evidence in chief the appellant had said that he had  been
      knifed when trying to  protect  his  sister  from  the  soldiers.   Mr
      Solomon asserted that during cross examination  when  asked  when  the
      knifing incident had taken place, the appellant had asserted  that  it
      occurred during that period when his father was arrested  and  he  did
      not know when.  He had not said that he was stabbed on the occasion of
      his father's arrest.

10.   The Adjudicator had commented that the appellant had made  no  mention
      of being knifed or of having a scar on his leg due to being knifed. He
      referred to Question 30 of the interview when the appellant was asked,
      "did you receive any injuries through the beatings?".  He had replied:
      "yes, they were beating us everywhere, I had injuries on  the  face  -
      that's normal.  It has gone numb."  Mr Solomon submitted that this was
      a direct answer to a question  asking  about  injuries  received  from
      beatings.

11.   In summary Mr Solomon submitted  that  these  factors  taken  together
      were  sufficient  to   undermine   the   Adjudicator's   findings   on
      credibility.  In the light of her findings as to  age,  the  appellant
      should not have been interviewed and it would be wrong to draw adverse
      inferences  from  discrepancies  without  taking  into   account   the
      appellant's age and the fact that he  had  not  been  present  at  the
      incidents involving his father.

12.   Mr Solomon went on to refer us  to  the  background  evidence  and  in
      particular to evidence at A30 and 32 of the US State Department Report
      confirming that the DRC  authorities  would  hold  family  members  of
      suspects.  This was further confirmed at A36.   At  A35  there  was  a
      reference to security agents forcing  their  way  into  private  homes
      without search or arrest warrants often beating inhabitants,  stealing
      money and goods and raping the occupants.  He  also  referred  to  the
      CIPU Report at 5.38 which again referred to a number  of  women  being
      held solely because of their relationship with their husbands who were
      implicated in the murder of the former President Kabila.

13.    So  far  as  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  was   concerned,
      Mr Solomon submitted that, given the exceptional circumstances of this
      case and in particular the appellant's age, the  fact  that  he  would
      have no one and nowhere to return to and in the light of the  critical
      humanitarian situation, it would be a breach  of  Article  3  for  the
      appellant to be returned. There was a further factor to be taken  into
      account, the risk of forceful conscription into the military  referred
      to at pages 24, 25 and 27 of the US State Department Report.

14.   Mr Ekagha submitted that the Secretary of State had been  entitled  to
      interview the appellant.  He had appeared to be over the  age  of  18.
      There is nothing to indicate that he  had  been  at  any  disadvantage
      during the interview.  The Adjudicator's conclusions as to credibility
      were properly open to her and fully justified on the  evidence.   They
      went to issues at the heart of the account.   The  appellant  had  not
      himself been  politically  active.   If  he  had  been  knifed  as  he
      asserted, there really was no reason why he would  not  have  said  so
      during the interview.

15.   The Adjudicator was satisfied that the appellant's date of birth  was,
      as he claimed, 29  November  1984.   Having  seen  the  appellant  she
      commented that she found it very difficult to assess his age  but  she
      came to the view that he could be just under or over 18 and  in  those
      circumstances quite rightly gave him the  benefit  of  the  doubt  and
      accepted that he was 17 at the date of the hearing.   This  does  mean
      that the interview record should be treated  with  considerable  care.
      When interviewed the appellant was 17.  It is provided by para 350  of
      HC 395 that in view of the potential  vulnerability  of  unaccompanied
      children, particular priority and care is to be given to the  handling
      of their cases.  In the reasons for refusal letter at paragraph 5  the
      respondent commented that he was not  prepared  to  accept  the  birth
      certificate as independent corroboration of his claim "considering the
      ease with which such documents can be obtained".  The respondent  goes
      on to comment that although the appellant claimed to be  a  minor  his
      physical appearance before the Asylum Screening Unit officer suggested
      that he was over 18.  In the absence of satisfactory evidence  to  the
      contrary the Secretary of State did not accept that he was a minor and
      was satisfied that he should be treated as an  adult.   This  approach
      does not entirely reflect the wording of para 349 of HC395 which  says
      that a child for the purposes of para 350-352 means a  person  who  is
      under 18 years of age or who in the absence of  documentary  evidence,
      appears to be under that age.  At the beginning of the  interview  the
      appellant was asked whether apart from his birth  certificate  he  had
      anything that served as proof of his date of birth.  He  replied  that
      he did not.  The interview continues: "In that case we  will  have  to
      treat you as an adult and interview you substantively."  The issue  of
      whether the birth certificate was genuine or a forgery  has  not  been
      addressed on the face of the appeal papers before the assertion in the
      reasons for refusal letter that such documents can  be  obtained  with
      ease.

16.   The Tribunal has taken into account that the interview  was  conducted
      in the presence of a representative.  The Tribunal  notes  that  there
      was a five-minute pause after Question 25.  The appellant did  say  at
      the end of the interview that he was happy with his  conduct  and  had
      understood the interpreter.  Even so the  fact  remains  that  on  the
      Adjudicator's finding this was a 17 year old being interviewed. Indeed
      many of his answers arguably reflect a degree of  brashness  and  over
      confidence but also display a  lack  of  security  and  an  immaturity
      consistent with a young man of 17.  We would be very  cautious  before
      drawing any adverse inferences from omissions or discrepancies in  the
      SEF or the interview.

17.    Insofar  as  the  Adjudicator's  comment  in  paragraph  25  of   her
      determination that there is a contradiction between whether the  group
      the appellant's father belonged to was a political group  demanding  a
      change and democracy or whether it was a  religious  group,  there  is
      some substance in Mr Solomon's submissions that the SEF and interviews
      can be read as indicating that the appellant did refer to two  groups.
      It is not clear whether the Adjudicator drew an adverse  inference  in
      paragraph 26 from the fact that the appellant  responded  in  the  way
      that he did when asked in cross-examination whether or not his  father
      was arrested with eight  other  people.   He  had  said  both  in  his
      evidence and in interview that  his  father  was  arrested  with  many
      others and there were eight organisers.  If the appellant  received  a
      knife wound in an attack it is certainly reasonable to expect  him  to
      refer to it when interviewed.  However, the Tribunal are not  so  sure
      that it is reasonable to expect him to refer to it  when  asked  about
      injuries received through beatings  at  Q.30  particularly  when  that
      question followed very shortly after the resumption of  the  interview
      following the short break when the appellant had been distressed after
      Q25 of the interview.
18.   The Adjudicator commented that she found  it  lacking  in  credibility
      that soldiers would come to the appellant's house on a  regular  basis
      to beat him  up  once  his  father  had  been  arrested  and  detained
      (paragraph 29).  The background evidence referred  to  by  Mr  Solomon
      does tend to indicate that such conduct does  occur  and  may  not  be
      uncommon.

19.   The Adjudicator drew an adverse  inference  from  the  fact  that  the
      appellant's account of the date and objectives of the demonstration at
      the university was inconsistent with the objective  evidence  in  para
      5.11 of the CIPU Report.  The validity of this  comment  depends  upon
      the extent of the appellant's own knowledge of the incidents  and  his
      comprehension of the issues involved.  Looking at the various  factors
      which have been put before us in argument, the Tribunal are left in  a
      position where we feel that there is a real doubt as  to  whether  the
      Adjudicator was right to reject the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
      account.  There are some aspects of his account which rightly  in  our
      view give cause to doubt whether his version of events is correct  but
      we are not satisfied that we could  properly  reject  his  account  of
      events as untrue and in these circumstances the doubts we have must be
      resolved in the appellant's favour.

20.   In our view in the light of the background evidence to which  we  have
      been referred there  is  at  least  a  serious  possibility  that  the
      appellant would be at risk of ill treatment  on  return  to  the  DRC.
      There is evidence that the authorities detain and ill-treat  relatives
      of those they have detained or are seeking  to  detain.   There  is  a
      specific reference at A32 to family members of other suspects being in
      detention in Makala Prison.  At page 36 there is a  reference  to  the
      government arresting dozens of relatives of  suspects  in  the  Kabila
      assassination.  It is recorded that when unable to locate  a  specific
      individual, the authorities often arrest or beat  the  closest  family
      member.  The DRC authorities behave in a ruthless  way  against  their
      actual and perceived opponents. There is a consensus in the background
      evidence that the  security  forces  commit  with  impunity  extensive
      abuses including disappearances, torture, beatings and rape.

21.   There is a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  if  the  appellant's
      father was involved as an organiser of a student demonstration that he
      would be of adverse interest to the authorities.  It  follows  in  the
      light of the background evidence that there would be  a  risk  to  the
      appellant, which in our view can properly be  categorised  as  a  real
      risk.  In these circumstances the  Tribunal  are  satisfied  that  the
      appellant does qualify for asylum.  The risk arises from  his  imputed
      political opinion.  Even if it did not arise for a  Convention  reason
      the Tribunal are satisfied that there would be  a  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3.

      22.   For these reasons, this appeal is allowed  on  both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.





                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
