
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |XH (Illegal                 |
|                           |        |Departure-Risk-Return) China|
|                           |        |CG [2002] UKIAT 01478       |
|On 12 March 2002           |        |                            |
|                           |        |HX27516-2001                |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10.05.2002                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Rt Hon The Countess of Mar                                        |
|Mr M G Taylor CBE                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|XU FONG HU                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of China who  has  been  granted  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
      T Thorne, who dismissed his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
      refusing to grant him asylum.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 12 March 2002. Mr  L  Jackson  for
      Nadine Wong & Co. appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr A Sheikh
      of the Home Office Presenting Officer's Unit appeared on behalf of the
      respondent.

   3. Mr Jackson reminded  us  that  the  Adjudicator  had  found  that  the
      appellant exited China illegally. He confirmed  that  the  appellant's
      family was reasonably well off and would be able to pay any fine  that
      he was required to pay  on  return.  It  seems  that  the  appellant's
      statement of 23 August 2001 was the first  reference  to  his  parents
      raising money via a loan. The Tribunal was referred to paragraph 5  of
      the grounds concerning the way in which the  financing  of  trips  was
      normally secured. It  had  not  been  put  to  the  appellant  in  the
      alternative as a question regarding the funding.

   4. As regards the question of penalties on return, Mr Jackson took us  to
      the objective evidence on this,  which  the  Adjudicator  had  rightly
      found to be somewhat confused. He argued that  the  program  analyst's
      evidence was of the greatest weight since it had been obtained from  a
      specific source whereas other evidence had been obtained on a visit or
      did not describe the sources. The appellant  as  an  illegal  emigrant
      would at least be liable to three months detention. On  this  evidence
      the question of ability to pay the fine was irrelevant to  whether  or
      not he would be imprisoned. Mr Jackson could think of no reason  other
      than the fact that they were legal emigrants with valid passports  and
      the necessary exit permission who had  overstayed  to  explain  why  a
      number of the category of people were sentenced  to  fifteen  days  or
      less in detention.

   5. He also took to us to the news articles at C1 to C2 which indicated  a
      crackdown and an  intensifying  of  the  campaign  concerning  illegal
      emigration. He also referred us to the report of Dr Burton referred to
      at paragraph 6.145 of the CIPU Report. He noted that at A5 paragraph 3
      of the US State Department Report 2001  delegations  were  to  "model"
      prisons. In  summary  it  was  argued  that  the  evidence  concerning
      punishment for illegal emigrants  was  contradictory,  but  there  was
      enough to put the appellant at risk. He should be given the benefit of
      the doubt.

   6. The objective evidence concerning the conditions  in  prisons  and  in
      redirection through labour camps in China was that the  treatment  the
      appellant would face would be at least degrading and would probably be
      inhuman. There were problems with medical care  as  well  as  inherent
      problems in the ways in which prisoners were treated. There  was  also
      evidence concerning forced labour at A5 paragraph 2. The reference  to
      repatriation was in essence a reference to repatriation  within  China
      and not people who had  been  abroad,  but  they  were  administrative
      detention centres. In the circumstances even  three  months  detention
      would be a breach of Article 3 and of Article 8. The evidence from the
      program analyst was of particular weight as it  came  from  a  Chinese
      source and they generally denied that human rights abuses occurred and
      were unlikely to exaggerate what would happen to returnees.

   7.  In  his  submissions  Mr  Sheikh  argued  that  on  the  balance  the
      Adjudicator was correct. The  Canadian  evidence  suggested  that  the
      majority of people faced a relatively short time in detention  and  in
      relatively good conditions. The evidence of Dr Chin differed, in  that
      he said that they were taken into custody to find out  how  they  were
      smuggled out so he must be  referring  to  illegal  leavers  who  were
      mainly fined. The greater likelihood was that it would be a fine only.
      It was necessary to consider how seriously this  offence  was  treated
      and if generally by way of a fine it was not likely to be regarded  as
      a serious criminal offence, and this was relevant to the  duration  of
      the sentence.

   8. The references to C1 and C2 concentrated on the  particularly  adverse
      treatment of the smugglers and gang leaders who had been  targeted  as
      opposed to the people who were being smuggled.

   9. As regards the appellant's ability to pay the  fine,  the  Adjudicator
      had rejected his credibility  concerning  the  main  issues.  But  the
      Adjudicator had accepted his evidence that his passport was  paid  for
      by his parents and it was his evidence taken with the fact that he had
      managed to get to the United Kingdom, which must have been  paid  for,
      made it more than reasonably likely that he would be  able  to  afford
      the relatively modest fine required on return to China.

  10. By way of reply, Mr Jackson argued that the  evidence  showed  a  very
      significant disparity between the  amount  paid,  as  referred  to  at
      paragraph 6.103 of the CIPU Report, to get  people  out  of  China  in
      contrast to the average national income.  No  specific  challenge  had
      been made to the appellant's account of how he funded  his  exit  from
      China so that it should be found that he  would  not  have  the  funds
      available to pay a fine. In any event  the  evidence  showed  that  he
      would not be fined but would be imprisoned.

  11. We stated that we would reserve our determination.

  12. The Adjudicator disbelieved much of the appellant's evidence.  He  did
      not accept that when he left China he was a genuine  follower  of  the
      Falun Gong movement nor  that  he  was  arrested  by  the  authorities
      because of supposed support for Falun Gong. He  did  not  believe  his
      claim to fear snakeheads  on  return.  He  did  not  mention  this  in
      interview and the Adjudicator did not accept his explanation  that  he
      did not think it relevant. At interview he said that his parents  paid
      for his release from prison. He also  said  that  they  paid  for  his
      passport. He did not claim that the payment for those  matters  was  a
      consequence of loans from snakeheads. The first reference to  that  is
      to be found in his statement on 23 August 2001 where he said that  his
      fleeing from China was arranged by his parents through  an  agent  who
      was harassing and threatening them and that his parents still owed the
      agent money. The relevance of this issue is  in  connection  with  the
      question of whether if the appellant was fined on return as an illegal
      emigrant, it would be possible for him to  pay  that  fine.  We  shall
      return to this issue shortly. In the view  of  the  Tribunal,  on  the
      basis of the evidence he gave at  interview,  which  was  not  changed
      until shortly before the hearing and at the hearing,  the  Adjudicator
      was entitled to conclude that the appellant's family  were  reasonably
      well off and would be able to pay  a  fine.  He  did  not  accept  the
      claimed risk from snakeheads, and it is not an unreasonable  inference
      to draw from that that the Adjudicator must therefore  have  concluded
      that the appellant's trip to the United Kingdom had been  financed  by
      other means. In particular in this regard we note from paragraph 6.103
      of the CIPU Report that the basic  financing  of  customers  trips  is
      usually secured through their family networks rather than through loan
      sharks, and Dr Chin, an expert,  has  said  that  family  arrangements
      account for up to 90%  of  cases.  We  bear  in  mind  also  that  the
      Adjudicator did not reject the appellant's evidence that  his  parents
      paid for his passport. In the light of  these  findings,  we  consider
      that the Adjudicator was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
      family would be able to pay any fine to which he was subjected. It may
      be that their ability to pay that fine would be as  a  consequence  of
      payment raised  by  a  family  network  rather  than  by  the  parents
      themselves, but we do not consider it  an  unreasonable  inference  to
      draw that the fact that the appellant was in the  United  Kingdom  and
      that he obtained a passport and that the Adjudicator found that he did
      not have a risk from snakeheads means that there is an ability in  his
      family either on their own  or  through  a  family  network  to  raise
      significant amounts of money should they be required.


  13. We pass on to the question of what the appellant would face on return,
      which, as Mr Jackson rightly pointed out, is a confused  picture.  The
      Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had left China  illegally.  He
      noted that opinions  are  divided  as  to  whether  a  person  in  the
      appellant's position would be punished at all.

  14. We have considered the objective evidence on this.  Mr  Jackson  urges
      that we pay particular attention to the report of  a  program  analyst
      with Citizenship and Immigration Canada who provided some  information
      regarding the repatriation  of  90  Chinese  illegal  immigrants  from
      Canada to Fuzhou in May 2000.  Two CIC  officials,  two  Canada  based
      senior officials and a locally engaged interpreter from  the  Canadian
      embassy visited the number two detention centre of public security  of
      Fuzhou in Mawei. The program analyst cited a senior  Chinese  official
      in providing the information that he did. We pass over the information
      concerning persons who  leave  China  legally  with  a  valid  Chinese
      passport since the appellant did not leave legally. The only relevance
      of this is it is said that persons who  leave  legally  with  a  valid
      Chinese passport would be punished with administrative fines of up  to
      the equivalent of $1,000 Canadian  and  would  receive  administrative
      jail terms of up to a maximum of fifteen days if  unable  to  pay  the
      fine. On the face of it, it is entirely unclear why a person who  left
      China legally with a valid Chinese passport would be punished  with  a
      fine at all, and we can only agree with Mr Jackson's surmise that this
      must be a  reference  to  persons  who  have  though  otherwise  acted
      lawfully have nevertheless overstayed their permission to  be  outside
      China, and  hence  the  need  in  the  view  of  the  authorities  for
      punishment. It is said that leaving China without exit permission or a
      passport is a criminal offence punishable up to one  year  in  prison.
      First  time  offenders  get  a  short  sentence   depending   on   the
      circumstances of their case, but  probably  with  sentences  of  three
      months.


  15. At the entrance to the detention facility which the Canadian Officials
      saw, there was a huge sign stating that in 1999 47 groups of deportees
      went through that facility for a total  of  4,698  persons,  and  that
      3,174 were sentenced to 15 days or less of detention. It is said  that
      the remaining 1,524 persons were referred to the judicial system where
      their cases were reviewed and the maximum sentence of one  year  meted
      out. It is far from clear how that can be said to be explained in  the
      light of the earlier statement that most first  time  offenders  would
      receive probably sentences of three months. Mr Jackson argued that  we
      should accept that the people who were sentenced to 15  days  or  less
      were legal emigrants. We take it that this is on the basis that  their
      sentences were said to be 15 days or less and that was a  figure  said
      to be the maximum for people who left China legally with valid Chinese
      passports. We do not consider that that is a necessary  inference.  It
      probably does not have to be necessary however, and it is perhaps more
      appropriately assessed on the basis whether or not  there  is  a  real
      likelihood that that is the case. Even on this basis,  in  absence  of
      any indication otherwise of the numbers of persons  who  are  punished
      for having left China legally with a valid Chinese passport, we do not
      find ourselves in a position to agree with Mr Jackson on  this  point.
      Particularly in the light of the clear disparity between the claim  on
      the one hand that first time offenders would probably get three months
      and the fact that all the people other then the fifteen days  or  less
      got the maximum sentence of one year,  we  find  the  evidence  to  be
      sufficiently unclear that we consider that  it  is  reasonably  likely
      that at least some of those  people  who  obtained  15  days  or  less
      sentence were people who were illegal as opposed to legal emigrants.


  16. In any event it has to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  objective
      evidence as a whole. A telephone interview with Dr Ko-Lin Chin, who is
      an Associate Professor at the School of Criminal  Justice  at  Rutgers
      University Newark, said that migrants who return to China are normally
      taken to the border patrol education camp  in  Fujian  province  where
      they are interrogated by Chinese authorities to find out how they were
      smuggled out of  the  country  and  then  given  a  fine  between  the
      equivalent of $1,800 to $3,600 Canadian. Those who pay  the  fine  are
      released immediately and  those  who  cannot  pay  are  sent  to  "re-
      education through labour" custody for up to a year.

  17. In collaboration with the Canadian embassy in  Beijing,  the  research
      directorate composed  a  series  of  questions  on  the  treatment  of
      returnees to Beijing based diplomatic officials from  four  countries,
      Canada, Australia, Japan and the United States.  These  four  official
      were asked the following question: "What are the normal  penalties  in
      practise for returnees (fines- amount, detention - length)?

  18. The first official, Dr Charles Burton, a political councillor  of  the
      Canadian Embassy, said that fines are rarely imposed in  practice  and
      would only be imposed if foreign  attention  is  raised.  The  Chinese
      Central Authorities will put pressure on  local  authorities  to  levy
      fines or  force  imprisonment  in  those  two  circumstances,  if  the
      individual has hurt the "national pride" or if  there  is  willingness
      from Beijing to implement the law on exit administration.

  19.  Dr  Grahame  Nieman,  First  Secretary,  Immigration  -   Compliance,
      Australian Embassy, said that the standard fine is the  equivalent  of
      $900 Canadian. He said that local  authorities  are  usually  soft  on
      fines unless there is strong pressure coming either  from  Beijing  or
      other foreign governments. He referred to recidivists from Nanning who
      were initially sentenced under various pressures to a three year  term
      and an eight year term but whose convictions were later suspended.

  20. Mr Morio Matsumoto, Councillor and Director of the  Consulate  Affairs
      Office of the Japanese Embassy said that the standard  fines  are  the
      equivalent of $900 Canadian and returnees are normally detained for  4
      or 5 days.

  21.  Mr  Thomas  J  Smiley,  Country  Immigration  Assistant  Attach�   US
      Immigration of Naturalisation  Service,  US  Embassy,  said  that  the
      normal penalty for a first offence is two days  of  detention  and  no
      fine and for a second offence a fine of $200 - $500  Yuan  (equivalent
      of $36 - $90 Canadian).

  22. Mr Jackson also referred us to the translation of  two  articles  from
      the Fuzhou Ribao of 28 September 1999  referring  to  a  crackdown  on
      illegal immigration activities including the following  measures  that
      all organisers and transporters will be liable to criminal charges and
      all illegal emigrants will be liable to the charge of illegal crossing
      of borders. It  is  said  that  under  this  new  judgement  criteria,
      suspects caught in illegal emigration  activities  will  not  only  be
      subject to police detention and fine but liable  to  criminal  charges
      that could result in a set term imprisonment. There is also  reference
      at C2 to a crack down on organised  emigration  crimes  and  targeting
      gang leaders and indicating that hard smugglers and serious  offenders
      and criminals who have caused injuries or loss of life and  those  who
      have  used  violence  to   resist   coastguards   will   be   punished
      relentlessly. Repeated illegal emigrants and  those  who  collectively
      put out to sea  to  emigrate  illegally  abroad  and  are  caught  and
      repatriated will be charged for  illegally  crossing  borders  and  on
      those who defy the campaign by  committing  those  crimes  during  the
      crackdown period,  the  court  will  impose  the  heaviest  punishment
      allowed by the applicable laws.


  23. It is right to point out as Mr Jackson does that it is only the report
      of  the  program  analyst  which  is  sourced  directly  from  Chinese
      authority. However that is to our mind no more than a minor factor  in
      assessing its weight in relation to the other information provided  by
      Dr Chin and by the four diplomatic officials. We take  all  this  into
      account together with the newspaper reports  to  which  we  have  just
      referred. We find it significant that the essential tenor of the views
      of the four diplomatic officials is that imprisonment is rare  and  if
      it happens it is for a very short period and that the  normal  penalty
      is more likely to be a fine. There is no evidence that  the  appellant
      is a recidivist. In our view, considering the objective evidence as  a
      whole, we consider that the greatest  likelihood  that  the  appellant
      would face on return is that he would be at risk of being fined. As we
      have found above, we consider that his family would be in the position
      to enable payment of a fine at the sort of levels that are  spoken  of
      in the objective evidence to be paid. Accordingly we consider that  he
      does not face a real risk of imprisonment  for  more  than  perhaps  a
      short period of two to five days, and, although the objective evidence
      indicates harsh prison conditions in China, we do  not  consider  that
      detention for such a short  period  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
      treatment amounting to breach of his Article 3 or Article 8 rights.


  24. As a consequence we dismiss this appeal.





                                                                   D K Allen

                                                                    Chairman
