
H-MN-V2
                                                Appeal Number :HX/53562/2001
                                                                AT (Medical
               Facilities - PTSD) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT 03520
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  24th June 2002                          |                             |
|                                              |6TH  AUGUST 2002             |


                                   Before:


                       Professor D B Casson - Chairman
                              Mrs M Padfield JP


between
                             Mrs Aferdita THAQI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    This is an appeal by an ethnic Albanian citizen  of  Federal  Republic
    of Yugoslavia from Kosovo against the determination of  an  Adjudicator
    (Mrs I A M Murray) dismissing her appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds against the decision of the Respondent on 22nd January 2001  to
    refuse to grant leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom.   Before  us  the
    Appellant was represented by Ms R Dajani instructed by H S Kang  &  Co.
    The Respondent was represented by Mr M Pichamuthu.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom at Waterloo  International
    Rail Terminal on 15th March 1999.  She said she did not know  in  which
    country she had boarded the train.  She applied for asylum  on  arrival
    but said she was without a passport or travel documents  of  any  kind.
    She said she had travelled from Montenegro to France by lorry and  that
    she had never been issued with a passport.  She was accompanied by  her
    son aged 7 years.

3.    The Appellant told the  Adjudicator  that  she  was  a  Muslim  ethnic
    Albanian from the district of Peje in Kosovo.  She said her  house  had
    been raided in 1999 and she and her son had been beaten up, after which
    they left Kosovo.  She said that soon after she left her  husband,  who
    had joined KLA, was killed by KLA members because they believed he  had
    collaborated with the Serbs.   The  Adjudicator  considered  a  medical
    report by Dr E Shehadeh.  Credibility was not in issue in  the  appeal.
    The Respondent had accepted the Appellant's history and  that  she  had
    had to flee her village in Kosovo because of the  war.   There  was  no
    evidence to corroborate her claim that her husband had been  killed  or
    for what reason.  Having considered the evidence, the Adjudicator found
    that as KLA had been  demilitarised  and  there  was  an  International
    Peacekeeping  Force,  KFOR,  in  Kosovo,  the   Appellant's   fear   of
    persecution was  not  well-founded.   The  Adjudicator  considered  the
    medical report in evidence, but was not satisfied that the  Appellant's
    human rights would be at risk on return to Kosovo.

4.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal  was  granted  because,  although  the
    Adjudicator had directed herself in  the  traditional  way  as  to  the
    appropriate standard of proof in  asylum  cases,  she  chose  twice  in
    paragraph 21 of her determination to state that she was not "convinced"
    in relation to aspects of the evidence.

5.    In her submissions to us Ms Dajani said the Appellant's fear  was  not
    of KLA; it was of former members of KLA or other  Albanians  who  would
    perceive her as a collaborator. Ms Dajani also submitted that,  in  the
    now all too common absence of a representative for the Respondent,  the
    Adjudicator had breached the Surendran guidelines in making her adverse
    credibility findings at paragraph 21.  We say at once that  we  see  no
    justification whatever for that submission.

6.     In  his  submissions  Mr  Pichamuthu  for  the  Respondent  said  the
    Appellant's claimed  fear  was  of  former  members  of  KLA  and  some
    Albanians, but he submitted there was a sufficiency  of  protection  by
    KFOR and UNMIK, as the Adjudicator had found at  paragraph  20  of  the
    determination.  The Appellant's stated fear  derived  solely  from  her
    relationship to her husband, whose fate was now sadly unknown, but that
    fact removed the basis for her fear.

Decision and Reasons

7.    We agreed to admit in evidence  in  this  appeal  a  message  from  Dr
    Shehadeh,  submitted  for  the  Appellant,  and  the  ICMPD-IOM  Kosovo
    Information Project fact sheet on the health system in Kosovo.

8.    This appeal is before us because of the  Adjudicator's  misguided  use
    of a phrase which calls into question whether she applied  the  correct
    standard of proof.  We do not understand why Adjudicators  continue  on
    occasion to use expressions which give rise to this risk.  The Tribunal
    has authoritatively stated that the appropriate way of  assessing  risk
    in relation to a fear of persecution or  breach  of  human  rights,  is
    whether there is a real risk.  The evidence must  be  considered  as  a
    whole according to the guidelines stated by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271.

9.    We have considered the evidence afresh.   We  accept  Mr  Pichamuthu's
    submission that the Appellant's asserted fear of former members of  KLA
    and of some Albanians who would perceive her to be a collaborator falls
    with the death or disappearance of her husband.  In the  light  of  the
    totality of the  evidence  we  unhesitatingly  find  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection in  Kosovo  and  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed in her claim that her return would expose her to a real risk of
    persecution  for  any  reason  within  the   United   Nations   Refugee
    Convention.

10.   We agree with the Adjudicator that the human rights  claim  stands  or
    falls with the asylum claim in  this  case.   We  have  considered  the
    message from Dr Shehadeh, who states that he  is  not  the  Appellant's
    General  Practitioner.   He  insists,  however,  that  as   a   General
    Practitioner, he is more than adequately qualified to diagnose PTSD and
    depression.  He states that he is convinced that the Appellant's mental
    state fulfils the ICD-10 diagnosis of depression and PTSD.  We  do  not
    consider it necessary to judge Dr Shehadeh's qualifications to diagnose
    these conditions.  For the purpose of the appeal, we  are  prepared  to
    accept that his diagnosis  is  correct.   Of  itself,  that  determines
    nothing.  The KIP fact sheet on the health system in Kosovo  which  has
    been put before  us  satisfies  us  that  there  are  adequate  medical
    facilities for treatment of these conditions in Kosovo.  The facilities
    are not perfect, but  it  is  trite  to  observe  that  there  are  few
    countries in which perfection is achieved.  We find nothing to  suggest
    that return to Kosovo would expose the Appellant  to  conditions  which
    would attain the high threshold of breaching her rights protected under
    Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  or  that  there  would  be  an
    interference with her rights protected by Article 8.  In  our  judgment
    there is no evidential basis upon which this appeal could succeed.

      The appeal is dismissed.




                                                                  D B CASSON
                                                       ACTING VICE PRESIDENT
