
ar                                                           Appeal No.
HX44559-01
            BS (Liberty Party-CIO-Airport) Zimbabwe CG    [2002]  UKIAT
06461

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 6 December 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                          11th February 2003

                                   Before:


                            Mr G Warr  (Chairman)
                               Mr R Baines, JP
                                 Mr A. Smith





                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                             BHEKISIPHO  SIBANDA

                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr P.D. Birkby) who allowed on human rights grounds the appeal of  Mr
      Sibanda, a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
      appellant, against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  12
      December 2000  to  refuse  his  asylum  application.  The  Adjudicator
      dismissed the asylum aspect of the appeal.

2.    Mr M. Davidson appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State  while  Mr  M.
      Schwenk, of counsel, instructed by Tahir solicitors appeared  for  the
      appellant.

3.    The appellant arrived in this country in October 2000 and applied  for
      asylum.  he claimed to have had problems with the Central Intelligence
      Organisation (CIO) after the parliamentary vote in August 2000. He had
      demonstrated against the unlawful occupation of the farms by  the  war
      veterans and had suffered as a  result.    He  was  a  member  of  the
      Liberty Party and he came from the Ndebele tribe.

4.    The appellant gave evidence before the Adjudicator who found that  the
      appellant was an intelligent young man (he was  born  on  14  February
      1980) and that he was able  to  answer  questions  about  politics  in
      Zimbabwe.   He  accepted  that  he  might  have  been  a  follower  of
      politics.  However, the Adjudicator did not accept that the  appellant
      was an active member of the Liberty Party and he did not  accept  that
      he had been mistreated by the CIO after the demonstration.  In  short,
      the appellant had not satisfied  the  Adjudicator  that  there  was  a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant had  left  Zimbabwe
      because of his political activities or because  of  any  mistreatment.
      The Adjudicator was further not satisfied that the appellant had  been
      persecuted because of his  ethnic  origin.  The  Adjudicator  did  not
      accept that as a failed returning asylum seeker the appellant would be
      at real risk because of any imputed political belief.

5.    The Adjudicator relied on a UNHCR statement on 14 January 2002 to  the
      following affect:

             'The United Nations High Commission for  Refugees  is  gravely
             concerned  about  the  serious  human  rights  violations   in
             Zimbabwe.  Those who have sought asylum in the  UK  should  be
             offered a safe haven  and  all  deportations  stopped.   Their
             return  to  Zimbabwe  under   current    circumstances   could
             seriously jeopardise their physical safety, their liberty  and
             their life.'

6.    The Adjudicator  also  had  before  him  the  views  of  the  Zimbabwe
      Association concerning removal procedures:

             'The passport of the deportee is put in an envelope  addressed
             to the Chief Immigration Officer  (Harare),  together  with  a
             passenger list.  These  documents  are  taken  to  immigration
             before the  passengers  disembark.  The  Central  Intelligence
             Organisation at Harare see the passenger  list  in  the  Chief
             Immigration Officer's office before the passengers  come  into
             immigration. For deportees the passport will be with the Chief
             Immigration Officer, meaning that the CIO will have  knowledge
             of the deportee.  This results in the  deportees  being  in  a
             very   vulnerable   position.   The    Central    Intelligence
             Organisation  have  an  office  at  the  airport,  they  watch
             arrivals and departures, they have free access to every office
             at the airport. The Chief Immigration Officer is also directed
             by the Central Intelligence Organisation.'

7.     The  Adjudicator's  determination  concludes   with   the   following
paragraphs:

           '26. With regard to the appellant's asylum appeal, the  appellant
                has not satisfied me that there is a  reasonable  degree  of
                likelihood that he has a genuine or objectively well-founded
                fear of persecution for reasons of his political opinions or
                his ethnic origins were he to return to Zimbabwe. I  do  not
                believe there is a serious  possibility  that  he  has  been
                persecute for such reasons in the past.  I  do  not  believe
                there is a reasonable degree of likelihood therefore that he
                would be persecuted for such reasons in the future.  He  has
                not satisfied me that he was ever involved in politics in  a
                way that would  have  brought  him  to  the  notice  of  the
                authorities and cause them to take  adverse  action  against
                him. Furthermore, I do not believe that were he to return to
                Zimbabwe as a failed asylum seeker in the  UK  it  would  be
                imputed to him that he had a political view opposed  to  the
                government in Zimbabwe, and therefore  a  likely  target  of
                persecution. I accept that there is a reasonable  degree  of
                likelihood  that  the  evidence  produced  by  the  Zimbabwe
                Association as to  the  treatment  of  returnees  at  Harare
                Airport is accurate.  However  I  do  not  accept  that  the
                appellant has satisfied me that such returnees would  be  at
                real risk because of any imputed political belief. The  CIOs
                may apprehend the appellant at the airport in Harare  simply
                because  the  appellant  was  a  failed  asylum  seeker.   I
                therefore dismiss this appellant's asylum appeal.


           27.   In respect of the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal,  Mr
                Walsh has said that  Articles  3,  5,  6  and  14  would  be
                breached were this appellant to return to Zimbabwe.  I  have
                considered carefully the most recent pronouncements  of  the
                United Nations High Commissioner for  refugees  and  I  have
                cited the  general  risks  to  failed  asylum  seekers  from
                Zimbabwe when they are  forcibly  returned.  The  UNHCR  has
                recommended that the United Kingdom  government suspend  its
                policy of returning people to Zimbabwe.  The United  Kingdom
                has stated through the Home Secretary in a press release  on
                14 January 2002 that all returns are to be  suspended  until
                after the March  2002  presidential  elections  in  Zimbabwe
                after  which  the  situation  will  be  reviewed.   I   have
                considered the general situation in Zimbabwe  from  all  the
                background evidence before me and I have cited some  of  the
                dangers that are faced by people return to Zimbabwe.  I have
                cited the evidence  of  the  Zimbabwe  Association.  Without
                further evidence, there is clearly a  reasonable  degree  of
                likelihood that  what  is  being  asserted  in  their  press
                release as to the activities of the CIO at Harare airport is
                accurate. I have no reason to believe that a  return  of  an
                asylum seeker forcibly to any other part of  Zimbabwe  by  a
                different route would be safer.  Mr Halliday  at  one  point
                suggested that a way round the  problem  would  be  for  the
                appellant to return to Zimbabwe voluntarily. That  may  well
                be, but the decision  which is being appealed before me is a
                decision  to  return  this  appellant  to  Zimbabwe   as   a
                consequence of a failed application for asylum.  I  have  to
                consider whether there are substantial grounds for believing
                the appellant would be at real risk of his rights under  the
                ECHR being breached as a consequence of the decision of  the
                Secretary of State. As at the moment the Secretary of  State
                has temporarily suspended returns. The inference I  have  to
                draw from this is that there is a real  risk  of  some  kind
                which has been accepted by the Secretary of State.  There is
                no date set as to when returns can commence  save  that  the
                matter  will  be   reconsidered   after   the   presidential
                elections. There is nothing in the evidence which  leads  me
                to conclude that in the foreseeable future matters  will  be
                any different  from  what  they  are  now.  Of  course,  the
                political  situation  may  change  after  the   presidential
                elections, but I am in no position  to  forecast  what  that
                change might be.  Clearly the CIOs in  Zimbabwe  operate  at
                times in an irrational way and are a  law  unto  themselves.
                It is well documented that they have committed a  number  of
                human rights abuses. This appellant, were he  to  return  to
                Zimbabwe Airport as a returned asylum seeker either  now  or
                in the foreseeable future, may well be interrogated  by  the
                CIO agents in respect of the  failed  asylum  claim  in  the
                United Kingdom. Those agents could  well  detain  him.  They
                could maltreat him, they could treat him inhumanely or  even
                torture him. Those risks are real and well  documented.  The
                recent pronouncements of the UNHCR Amnesty International and
                the inference  I  draw  from  the  temporary  suspension  of
                returns to Zimbabwe via the Home Secretary lead  me  to  the
                conclusion that this appellant  must  be  at  real  risk  of
                treatment which could well be contrary to his  rights  under
                Article 3 of the ECHR.   I  also  think  that  he  could  be
                unlawfully detained in breach of his rights under Article 5.
                 In all the circumstances therefore I allow the  appellant's
                human rights appeal.


           28.   Consequently, I direct that this appellant should  not  be
                removed from the United  Kingdom  to  Zimbabwe.   I  further
                direct that he should be given leave to remain in the United
                Kingdom until such time as there is no real  risk  to  those
                returning to Zimbabwe having failed  in  their  applications
                for asylum in the United Kingdom.'

8.    Mr Davison submitted that the Adjudicator had found that there was  no
      previous persecution and the appellant would simply be returned as  an
      ordinary member of the public. There was not real risk  for  him.  The
      UNHCR  letter  was  a  general  warning  and  referred  to  opposition
      supporters.   The  appellant  was  not  one  of  those.  The  Zimbabwe
      Association simply referred to routine entry procedures. The receiving
      country were always notified of the return of a  deportee.  There  was
      nothing signficiant about it.  The Home Office suspension of  removals
      did not indicate that all  persons  were  at  risk.   For  example,  a
      citizen  to Zimbabwe  who  supported  the  government   would  not  be
      returned although there would be no question of  him  being  at  risk.
      Reference was made to the Tribunal decision of  Mpemba.  Any  question
      under Article 5 fell to be determined in the  light of the outcome  of
      the Article 3 point.

9.    Mr Schwenk submitted that the Adjudicator had  rejected  all  features
      of the  asylum  claim  although  he  had  not  dealt  with  a  Liberty
      membership card that the appellant said he had had  handed  over  upon
      arrival.  Mr Schwenk  conceded  that  the  Adjudicator  findings  were
      illogical since he should have allowed the asylum appeal  as  well  as
      the human rights appeal.

10.   The appellant was more than an ordinary member of the public.  He  was
      a young man and of the Ndebele tribe.  He was also intelligent  and  a
      follower of politics.  The UNHCR letter was a general application. The
      CIO in Zimbabwe  frequently  harassed  individuals  and  the  Zimbabwe
      letter gave cause for concern. The Adjudicator's conclusions were  not
      speculative. The Tribunal in Mpemba had not got the  same  information
      as was before this Adjudicator.  Mr Schwenk accepted that the  Article
      5 claim fell to be determined in the  light of the success or  failure
      of the Article 3 claim.

11.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      The Home Office has apparently suspended returns to Zimbabwe  for  the
      time being but that does not mean, in  our  judgment,  that  the  Home
      Office accepts that everyone would  be  at  risk  if  returned.     Mr
      Schwenk relies principally on the same piece of  documentary  material
      as impressed the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator noted that the plea  of
      the UNHCR  had  been  endorsed  by  Amnesty  International  which  had
      complained  that  Immigration  Officers   had   ignored   the   recent
      intensification of attacks 'on opposition supporters'.  To  a  certain
      extent the Home  Office  has  heeded  the  UNHCR  call  by  suspending
      removals but for the same reasons as we gave earlier,  that  does  not
      mean that the Home Office accepts that all returnees are at risk.

12.   We accept Mr Davidson's submissions that the Adjudicator was wrong  to
      find the statement of the Zimbabwe Association to be of  significance.
      The statement merely confirmed a  standard procedures for  the  return
      of deportees.
13.   Counsel submits that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  not  simply
      because he was an ordinary citizen. He was a young,  intelligent  man,
      who followed politics, and he would also be in trouble because of  his
      ethnic origin.

14.   The Adjudicator found that the appellant had not suffered  because  of
      his ethnic origin and he sets out his reasons in paragraph 25  of  his
      determination.  He concluded in paragraph 26 of the determination that
      no opinion would be imputed to him on his return to Zimbabwe and that,
      notwithstanding the views of the Zimbabwe Association,  the  appellant
      would not be at real risk because of any imputed political belief.

15.   Counsel criticises the Adjudicator for not dealing expressly with  the
      points about the appellant's Liberty membership  card.  The  appellant
      claims to have handed this over on arrival to an Immigration  Officer.
      The Adjudicator states that he did not believe that the appellant  was
      an active member of the Liberty Party although he was accepted to have
      followed politics.  We do not feel that the determination is  arguably
      vitiated because of any failure expressly to deal with the question of
      the membership  card.  It  was  not  necessary  on  the  Adjudicator's
      findings to deals with the issue. Whether the appellant had a card  or
      not, he was  not an  active  member.   The  appellant  did  not  leave
      Zimbabwe because of political activities or because  of  the   claimed
      mistreatment.

16.   Counsel invites us  not  to  place  reliance  on  Mpemba  because  the
      Tribunal in that  case  had  different  material  before  it.   It  is
      important to consider each case on its merits  and  we  consider  this
      case on its merits and on the material which counsel has placed before
      us.

17.   Counsel did not draw our attention  to  any  material  in  the  bundle
      before us. He relied, as we have observed, on the same material as was
      before the Adjudicator.

18.   We do not consider that the appellant would be returned other than  as
      an ordinary citizen.  The factors alluded to by counsel would not,  in
      our opinion, mark him out in any way. The  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      come to the conclusion on the material before him that the appellant's
      Article 3 rights would be breached by his return to Zimbabwe.  Counsel
      complains that the determination was illogical. It was illogical,  but
      not in the way  counsel  maintains.   The  Adjudicator  was  right  to
      dismiss the asylum appeal and wrong to allow the human rights  appeal.
       There was no proper evidence before him to justify that course. There
      is similarly no evidence before us to justify that course.

19.   For the reasons we have given, the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State
      is allowed and the decision of the Adjudicator  on  the  human  rights
      appeal is reversed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


