
XT
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO: HX34015-2001     |
|On 16 April 2002           |        |AZ (Risk-Ahmadi) Pakistan CG|
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 02642          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|15 July 2002                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr T B Davey (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|AURANG ZEB                                                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Decision:        Appeal dismissed

Appearances:
Appellant:       Mr P Walsh, Counsel instructed by Thronhill Ince
Respondent:      Mr C Buckley, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant a citizen of Pakistan born on the 1 January 1957 appeals
      the decision of an Adjudicator (Mrs A K  Simpson)  who  dismissed  his
      appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  to  issue   removal
      directions following the refusal of an asylum claim  on  the  11  July
      2001.


   2. Leave to appeal was given by the Tribunal on the 26 February 2002

           "on the basis that it is arguable that the basis on which on the
           Adjudicator finds that there is a sufficiency of protection  for
           the appellant, an Ahmadi, is not clear."

   3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he grew up as a  Muslin  in
      the area of Gujranwala with his wife and child.  But  at  the  age  of
      nearly 40 years he became Ahmadi.


   4. The Adjudicator accepted that this was a  genuine  conversion  to  the
      Ahmadi faith but went onto consider whether or not there was a risk of
      persecution or mistreatment contrary to his Human Rights  were  he  to
      return  to  Pakistan.   The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  within  the
      appellant's home village there was a real risk that  he  would  suffer
      ill treatment at the hands of his brothers and fellow  villagers  were
      he to return there.  The Adjudicator concluded that even if the  local
      police to his village were unsympathetic to his plight it did not mean
      that as a generality that was true throughout Pakistan and that  there
      was no basis for his fear that he would not be protected were he to be
      elsewhere in within Pakistan.  The Adjudicator set out in summary form
      at paragraphs 16 -  26  information  that  had  been  put  before  her
      concerning Ahmadi's and their treatment in Pakistan.  The  Adjudicator
      correctly refers to the relevant case law and reached a judgement that
      there was a sufficiency of protection through  the  structure  of  the
      legal system and recourse to the authorities. Accordingly there was no
      basis for his claim to succeed.


   5.  The   Adjudicator   acknowledged   that   Ahmadi's   were   generally
      discriminated against and suffer religious intolerance. She also noted
      that Ahmadi's were not exempt from the protection of the criminal  law
      and perpetrators of violent attacks upon them  would  be  punished  if
      apprehended.  The Adjudicator in summary form stated at  paragraph  34
      "in the light of the improving situation in Pakistan and the Pakistani
      government's appeal for religious  tolerance  and  respect  for  Human
      Rights, I find that there is in Pakistan a sufficiently of  protection
      as will  enable  the  appellant  to  return  there  in  safety".   The
      Adjudicator therefore rejected the appellant's claim under the Refugee
      Convention but correctly went on to  consider  at  what  risk  of  ill
      treatment there might arise on return to Pakistan.

   6. The appellant's representative before us cited a significant number of
      references in the background material provided through the CIPU Report
      on Pakistan, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch Report of  2002
      and the US Department of State Report 2002.  In particular it is  said
      that whatever may have been an upbeat or optimistic  approach  to  the
      possibilities of change for example over the  controversial  blasphemy
      laws those nevertheless had not come about.  In fact  the  Adjudicator
      in paragraph 25 of the determination herself noticed this  point.  The
      significant number of references to the issues of Ahmadi's set out  in
      the determination demonstrate that she had full and proper  regard  to
      the submissions made on the background information that  the  position
      was improving one.  The Adjudicator had also taken  into  account  the
      substantial community of  Ahmadi's  and  their  numbers  generally  in
      Pakistan.

   7. It is apparent from a fair  reading  of  the  determination  that  the
      Adjudicator  has  addressed  the  position  wider  than   simply   the
      appellant's home area and while the language of paragraph 38 is not as
      wholly clear as  it  ought  to  be  it  is  quite  apparent  that  the
      Adjudicator is addressing the sufficiently of protection  in  Pakistan
      as well as the issue of what might happen in his home village.  It  is
      well recognised that there are particular concentrations  of  Ahamdi's
      in Pakistan for example in the city  of  Rabwah  Punjab  now  know  as
      Chenab Nagar.  However the  Pakistani  government  in  2001  undertook
      major  effort  to  curb  religious  extremism  and  to   address   the
      intimidation of religious minorities.  Certain extremist  groups  were
      banned and an extensive crack down  by  the  Pakistan  government  was
      bought against members of several extremist groups.

   8. The United States Department  of  State  Report  obviously  highlights
      problems of one kind or another in Pakistan for  Ahmadi's.  However  a
      fair reading of the report does not suggest  that  the  government  is
      encouraging sectarian violence or public disorder or civil disturbance
      albeit its recognised it could do more to take effective  measures  to
      counter prevalent public prejudices against religious minorities.   It
      would appear that President Musharraf and  several  cabinet  ministers
      publicly condemned efforts by  some  clerics  to  ferment  hatred  and
      sought to constrain Islamic religious  schools  from  being  used  for
      extremist purposes.  Again the overall position does not suggest  that
      the police are failing to give protection to Ahmadi's.  What is  clear
      is that the blasphemy laws are, on the basis of  the  material  before
      us, used both  against  Ahmadi's  but  more  significantly  against  a
      greater number of Muslims.  In these  circumstances  whilst  there  is
      acknowledgement that there can be incidents, where the government  has
      failed to act sufficiently quickly,  in  cases  of  societal  violence
      directed at minority religious groups, that is not the overall picture
      in Pakistan.  Section 2 of the US Department of  State  Report  fairly
      represents the picture.


   9. Section 5 of the same report, which was  provided  to  us  incomplete,
      shows that there are certainly claims of  police  inaction  at  larger
      demonstrations for example in Chenab Nagar. We therefore find  on  the
      evidence, not withstanding the extensive citations of deficiency,  the
      overall picture was fairly presented by the Adjudicator and shows  why
      she was entitled to reach the view that there  was  a  sufficiency  of
      protection such as to enable the appellant to return to Pakistan  even
      if he chose not to return to his village because of his fears.  It was
      said that the appellant would also not conceal  his  faith.    In  the
      past he did not deny publicly that he was an Ahmadi.  It seems  to  us
      that whilst it might be a matter that was particularly provocative  in
      his home village or area given the number of Ahmadi's in Pakistan that
      did not detract from the conclusion there was elsewhere he could  live
      in Pakistan and a sufficiency of protection to  which  he  could  have
      recourse.  In any event the appellant only disclosed his  faith  after
      discovery (Annex B6 paragraph 3) an indicator  of  the  likelihood  of
      further revelation.

  10. We had cited to us the decision in  Tariq  Ahmed  Shar  "01/TH/03653".
      Plainly there are factual differences between the two  cases  and  the
      conclusions of that Tribunal concerning the general state  of  affairs
      for Ahamdis. To this extent paragraph 24 thereof chimes  in  with  our
      own conclusions that there is no sustainable  evidence  that  Ahamdi's
      whether  it  be  as  a  social  group  or  for  their   religion   are
      discriminated  against  by  the  state  so  as  to  be  excluded  from
      protection which the law affords all citizens  of  Pakistan.   Further
      the fact of the matter remains that being an Ahamdi is not in itself a
      basis to entitle a person to be treated as a refugee.    Simply be  an
      apostate to his faith does not inexorably mean he faces death nor that
      it is reasonably likely nor a real risk (see US  Department  of  State
      Report: Section 2(c)).


  11. The Adjudicator's findings are  plainly  sustainable  and  acknowledge
      efforts being made by the authorities in Pakistan to protect Ahmadis.

  12. The appeal is dismissed.



                                                                   T B Davey
                                                             Chairman

