
H-AKM-V1
  AH (Sufficiency of Protection - Sunni Extremists) Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       05862


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  4 October 2002                          |                    31       |
|                                              |December 2002                |
|Delivered in Court                            |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                           Mr J Barnes - Chairman
                               Mr F T Jamieson


between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




1.    The Appellant was represented before us by Mr V McCusker, a  solicitor
    of MCauley McCarthy and Co.  The Secretary of State was represented  by
    A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer.

2.    The Appellant is citizen of Pakistan born on 15 June 1970 who  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 30 March 2001 using a valid Pakistani passport
    and UK visa and was given six months leave to enter the United  Kingdom
    on the usual visiting conditions.  On 7 June 2001 during  the  currency
    of that lawful entry the Appellant claimed asylum and was  subsequently
    interviewed on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   His  wife  and  his
    daughter who had accompanied him were treated as his dependants.

3.    For the reasons set out in a letter dated 6  August  2001  the  asylum
    application was refused.  On the same day, leave having been  curtailed
    on the basis of deception on entry, the Secretary of State gave  notice
    of his decision for the removal of the Appellant to Pakistan  following
    refusal of the asylum application.

4.    The Appellant appealed against that decision on both asylum and  human
    rights  grounds  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  8  May  2002  by  an
    Adjudicator, Mrs S M Agnew. She dismissed his claims under the  Refugee
    Convention and in relation to claimed breach of  his  human  rights  by
    removal under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention.   He  now
    appeals with leave against that decision to us.

5.    In support of his appeal he had produced a very substantial volume  of
    documents, which in general terms were rejected by the Adjudicator  for
    reasons which she very carefully sets out in her determination, and the
    first part of the very  substantial  grounds  of  appeal  are  directed
    towards what are claimed to be errors of approach on the  part  of  the
    Adjudicator, in relation to her treatment of these documents.

6.    At the commencement of the hearing, we put it to the parties that  if,
    taking the Appellant's claims at their highest  he  could  not  succeed
    before us, then there was no necessity to analyse the  lengthy  grounds
    of appeal in relation to the  documents  and  their  treatment  by  the
    Adjudicator because it would ultimately make no difference.

7.    We took the view, which was  accepted  by  both  advocates,  that  the
    approach, then, was to consider whether on the  facts  so  taken  there
    could arguably be a lack of sufficiency of protection for the Appellant
    in Pakistan.  That formed the subject of an alternative  and  secondary
    finding on the part of the  Adjudicator,  who  then  went  on  also  to
    consider the human rights issues.

8.    The factual background of the Appellant's  claim  is  it  is  accepted
    fairly summarised at paragraph 4 of  the  Adjudicator's  determination.
    This reads as follows:

      "A Statement of Evidence Form (SEF) was completed  by  the  Appellant
       which enclosed a statement  and  various  translated  documents.   He
       stated that the basis of his claim for asylum was his religion  (B4).
       In the statement he claimed that he was a follower of  the  religious
       group, the Imamia Organisation (IO).  Whilst  at  university  he  was
       promoted within the IO to social secretary.  The IO  was  opposed  by
       various Sunni groups.


      He left university at the age of 27  with  a  law  degree  and  began
       practicing as a lawyer.  He was  promoted  by  the  IO  to  secretary
       general for the Azad Kashmir Region in 1998 which he  held  until  23
       March 2000.  He  was  in  charge  of  training  the  IO  members  and
       resolving any problems which arose.  After he  had  stepped  down  as
       secretary general he opened his own legal practice.  He continued  to
       work for the IO, doing free legal work and making plans  to  build  a
       mosque in his village.  The IO workers were  threatened,  threatening
       telephone calls were made, stones were thrown at their houses  (B14).




      On 27 November 2000 2 or 3 people  fired  shots  at  the  Appellant's
       home.  The firing went on for about 10 to 15 minutes.   He  knew  the
       shooting had been carried out by one of the opposing groups,  Anjuman
       Sepai Saba, which had a head office nearby.  The  Appellant  reported
       the matter to the police but they did  not  do  anything.   They  had
       nowhere else to go and stayed on in the village living in fear  until
       the Appellant's wife's sister invited them to London for a  visit  to
       get away from the situation.  They wanted to avoid the month of March
       in which Muharram took place.  They came to the United Kingdom on  30
       March 2001.


      On 12 April 2001 the Appellant received a phone call from his parents
       saying that the situation in Pakistan had deteriorated  and  that  it
       was not safe for them to return.  Opposing groups were still  looking
       for him, had found out he had come to the United Kingdom and had made
       threats to kill him if he returned".


9.    The Adjudicator then went  on  to  summarise  the  country  background
    evidence before her at paragraph 11 of her determination and 12 in  the
    following terms:

      "11. Whilst the majority of the Muslim population of Pakistan  belong
       to the Sunni    sect, some  20%  are  Shia  and  they  are  generally
       protected  by  the       government  and  are  well  integrated  into
       Pakistani society but there have        been  outbreaks  of  violence
       between the two sects.  Most Sunni  Muslims  live    peacefully  with
       Shia Muslims (5.77 CIPU Report).   Pre-emptive  action  has      been
       taken by the Pakistani authorities on occasion to detain  leaders  of
       one  group who  they  believed  were  contemplating  violent  actions
       against    members of the other group.  The Pakistani Government  has
       been quick to   respond to outbursts of sectarian  violence  although
       their action has not  effectively curtailed sectarian murders (5.78).
        Shias are  not  systematically     discriminated  against  by  other
       elements in Pakistani society.  They  are  not       an  economically
       disadvantaged group.  They are found in all of the       professions,
       in  government  and  the  army  (5.79).   However,  it  appears  that
       sectarian violence by  extremists  of  both  sects  is  a  continuing
       problem and     whilst the anti-terrorism Act was  introduced  in  an
       attempt to curb the   problem, a ban was also imposed on 5 groups  in
       January 2002 in a further   attempt by the  government  to  stop  the
       problem.  Troops were put on high      alert during Moharram."




      12.  Police corruption is reported to be widespread  and  in  general
       the police      continue  to  commit  serious  abuses  with  impunity
       despite efforts to redress  police excesses.  Police  professionalism
       is low.  They accept money for   registering cases on  false  charges
       and may torture innocent citizens"


10.   The issue before us is whether, assuming that  the  factual  basis  of
    the Appellant's claim is credible, it can be said that he is at risk in
    Pakistan because there is a lack of sufficiency of state protection for
    him.

11.   There is no suggestion on his  part  that  he  has  any  fear  of  the
    authorities as such.  His fear is of extremist Islamic Sunni movements,
    such the Sepai Saba.  We accept that there is a record that  this  sect
    have carried out a series of assassinations of those to whom  they  are
    opposed, including both Shia Muslims, Ahmadi's and Christians.   It  is
    the Appellant's case that the Anjuman Sepai Saba are  a  similar  group
    who have sought to target him.

12.   The Adjudicator came to the conclusion at paragraphs 33 to 36  of  the
    determination that there was a sufficiency of protection in  the  sense
    set out in Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  HL  6
    July 2000.  She referred specifically to the recent  Tribunal  decision
    in Said Zahoor Ali 01/TH/3067, promulgated on 9 January 2002 where  the
    Tribunal had held, following Horvath, that there was a  sufficiency  of
    protection in that case for the Appellant against the  adverse  actions
    of extremist Sunni Muslim groups.

13.   It was the burden of Mr McCusker's submissions to us  that  the  state
    did not take sufficient steps to provide  for  the  protection  of  its
    inhabitants and in particular that there was not an adequate system  of
    witness protection support to overcome the difficulties in  prosecuting
    the actions of the extremists where witnesses were  often  said  to  be
    afraid to come forward.

14.   That entails a consideration  of  what  is  required  to  satisfy  the
    protection test under the Horvath doctrine.  It does not  require  that
    there should be a guarantee of safety to an individual  in  the  state.
    No state can hope to provide that.   It  requires  essentially,  simply
    that there be an effective criminal system, operative within the state,
    which will usually result in criminal process being taken against those
    who break the law and in respect of which the state does not operate on
    a discriminatory basis against particular groups of which an  applicant
    for asylum forms part.

15.   The background evidence as summarised by the Adjudicator supports  the
    clear conclusion that there is no discriminatory approach on  the  part
    of the state.  On the contrary, it is quite clear that they are acutely
    aware of the difficulties posed by extremists of  both  the  Sunni  and
    Shia  Muslims  and  that  they  take  steps  to  pre-empt  violence  at
    particular  times  of  the  year   or   when   there   are   threatened
    demonstrations which they fear will breach  public  order.   They  are,
    therefore, not solely concerned with dealing with  such  matters  under
    criminal process but in fact in taking pre-emptive  action  to  prevent
    trouble arising.

16.   We bear in mind also that there is a population of  some  150  million
    in Pakistan of whom 20 to 25 million are Shia Muslims and the  recorded
    attacks of groups such as Sepai Saba must be looked at in terms of  the
    very small percentage of the Shia Muslim population affected by them.

17.   Mr McCusker pointed to the lack of adequate victim protection  support
    and witness protection support as inhibiting the process, but  it  does
    not seem to us that this is a substantial attack on the existence of  a
    sufficiency  of  protection  within  the  Pakistan  state.   It  has  a
    functioning system of criminal law and  criminal  acts  are  prosecuted
    albeit that there may be difficulties which will  arise  in  individual
    cases in successfully doing so.  The degree  of  protection  which  the
    state is required to provide to its subjects is clearly illustrated  in
    the approach of the European Court in Strasbourg to the  need  to  have
    regard to the difficulties involved in policing  modern  societies  and
    resources.

18.   This was dealt with in some detail in the case of Osman  v  UK  [1998]
    29 EHRR 235, which was referred to with approval by Lord Clyde  in  the
    course of his judgement in Horvath as  assisting  and  identifying  the
    practical level of protection which Appellants are entitled  to  expect
    from their home state.  To illustrate the difficulties which Appellants
    will meet in seeking to establish that there is a lack  of  sufficiency
    of protection for operational reasons, it is helpful to review the case
    of Osman.

19.   In that case Ahmed Osman and his father, Ali, were shot at by  Ahmed's
    former teacher who had developed an obsessional interest in  him  which
    had led to the teacher's  dismissal.   There  were  complaints  to  the
    school, the education authority and the police  about  his  activities.
    He was suspected of a related theft at the school of certain files  and
    of responsibility for graffiti referring to Ahmed.   He  her  on  three
    occasions sent threats which could have  been  seen  as  presaging  his
    later attack in which Ahmed was wounded and his father Ali  died.   The
    Osman family  complained  of  a  failure  by  the  police  properly  to
    investigate their claims over a long period or to  provide  appropriate
    action in breach of their Article 2 rights.

20.   The  Court  accepted  that  the  Article  2  obligations  extended  to
    "putting in place  effective  criminal  law  provisions  to  deter  the
    commission of offences against the person backed up by law  enforcement
    machinery for the prevention, suppression and sanctioning  of  breaches
    of such provisions" and that each case must be considered  on  its  own
    facts.   The  judgment  contains  the  following  informative   general
    passages:

      "... bearing in mind the difficulties  involved  in  policing  modern
       societies, the unpredictability of human conduct and the  operational
       choices which must be made in terms of priorities and resources, such
       an obligation must be interpreted in a way which does not  impose  an
       impossible   or   disproportionate   burden   on   the   authorities.
       Accordingly, not every claimed  risk  to  life  can  entail  for  the
       authorities a Convention requirement to take operational measures  to
       prevent that risk from materialising.  Another relevant consideration
       is the need to ensure  that  the  police  exercise  their  powers  to
       control and prevent crime  in  a  manner  which  fully  respects  due
       process and other guarantees which legitimately place  restraints  on
       the scope of their action to investigate crime and bring offenders to
       justice, including the guarantees contained in Articles 5  and  8  of
       the Convention.


      In the opinion of the court, where there is an  allegation  that  the
       authorities violated their positive obligations to protect the  right
       to life in the context of their above mentioned duty to  prevent  and
       suppress offences against the person ... it must  be  established  to
       our satisfaction that the authorities knew or ought to have known  at
       the time of the existence of a real and immediate risk to the life of
       an identified individual or individuals from the criminal  act  of  a
       third party, and that they failed to take reasonable measures  within
       the scope of their powers, which judged reasonably, might  have  been
       expected to avoid that risk."


21.    There are other passages in the judgement which go  on  to  elaborate
    on those basic propositions, and the decision was that there  had  been
    no breach of the human rights of the Osman  family  by  reason  of  the
    conduct of the authorities and the police are in that particular  case,
    even where it was know that there was a specific risk of  attack  which
    had been threatened by an identified third party.

22.   Since this European judgement has  specifically  referred  to  in  the
    course of the judgments in the House of Lords,  it  must  be  taken  to
    assist any Tribunal in identifying the level  of  protection  which  is
    required under Horvath in order for it to be  regarded  as  sufficient,
    given the fact that there is an existing and operative criminal  system
    of justice within the country concerned.

23.    Approaching  matters  on  this  basis,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant cannot discharge the comparatively low burden of  proof  upon
    him to show that there is no sufficiency of protection provided to  him
    by the Pakistan state and since his fear is only of  non-state  actors,
    it follows that in our judgment, he cannot succeed in this appeal, even
    taking all the facts at their highest from his point of view.

24.   We are therefore satisfied that the findings of  the  Adjudicator,  in
    relation to the asylum and Articles 2 and 3 claims cannot  be  regarded
    as unsustainable on the evidence which was before her.  And the  appeal
    fails in this respect.

25.   Mr McCusker also made submissions to us in relation to the  Article  8
    claim, which relied effectively upon the proposition that  there  would
    be a lack of sufficient medical  care  for  the  Appellant's  wife,  if
    returned to Pakistan with him and their children as part of his family,
    and which is dealt with by the  Adjudicator  at  paragraph  47  of  her
    determination.

26.    At  paragraph  40  the  Adjudicator  makes  it  clear  that  she  has
    considered the legal position bearing in mind a number of decided cases
    including  that  of  Bensaid  v  UK  [2001]  INLR  325,  which  clearly
    illustrates the very high threshold which has to be reached before  any
    medical provision for  those  known  to  be  suffering  from  a  mental
    condition under current treatment might be said to lead to a  potential
    breach either of Article 3 or of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    by their removal.

27.   The CIPU Country Assessment makes clear at  paragraphs  4.72  to  4.74
    that there are extensive medical facilities within Pakistan,  and  that
    in the larger cities there are well reputed  hospitals  with  excellent
    facilities  and  well  respected  internationally  experienced  medical
    specialist, many of  whom  either  trained  or  obtained  post-graduate
    qualifications in the United Kingdom or the United States.

28.   The Adjudicator dismissed the Article 8 claim on the  basis  that  the
    decision did not amount to a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    Appellant's right to respect for family and private life,  taking  into
    account the consideration of the necessity of maintenance of a  regular
    immigration policy under Article 8(2).  When we put the matter in  such
    terms to Mr McCusker and invited him to say on what basis he  submitted
    that the Adjudicator's findings in this respect were unsustainable,  he
    very properly conceded that  he  was  unable  to  advance  any  further
    argument to this effect before us.

29.   We say that not in any sense as a criticism of Mr  McCusker,  who  has
    put forward every argument which  could  properly  be  put  forward  on
    behalf of the Appellant in the course of this hearing,  but  simply  to
    reflect the professionalism which he has shown throughout.

30.   For the reasons which we have set out above,  we  are  satisfied  that
    this appeal should be dismissed.

31.   The findings and conclusions of the Adjudicator are not  unsustainable
    in relation to the approaches which we have identified  above  and  the
    Appellant cannot therefore hope to succeed even were his criticisms  of
    her findings in  relation  to  the  supporting  documents  produced  of
    validity.


32.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.








                                                                    J BARNES


                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



