
Heard at FIELD HOUSE
On 24th July 2002
By Video-link from Glasgow                AS (Risk-Return-Sikh-Separatists)
India                                   CG [2002] UKIAT 05994

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date determination notified

                 ..........10 January 2003..................................

                                   Before:
                         Mr. D. J. Parkes (Chairman)
                             Mr. P. Rogers J.P.

      BETWEEN:

                               MR. AJIT SINGH

                                                                   Appellant

                                   - and -

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India.    He  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr. I. M.Scott, promulgated  on  13th
      February  2002  dismissing  his  appeal  against  Directions  of   the
      Secretary of State on the 6th August 2001 for  his  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    The Appellant was represented before us by Mr. C. McGinley of  Messrs.
      Gray & Co., and the Respondent by Senior  Presenting  Officer  Mr.  A.
      Mullen.

3.    The Appellant, a native of the Punjab, supports the  idea  that  there
      should be a Sikh homeland of Khalistan  and  he  follows  a  religious
      institution which teaches Sikh orthodoxy and advocates an  independent
      Sikh State and which is called  Khalistan  Dam  Dami  Taksal.      The
      Appellant's brother is the deputy leader of that organization but  was
      arrested by the Indian authorities in December 1988,  March  1989  and
      finally in November 1990 and has been granted refugee  status  in  the
      United States of America.

4.    As for the Appellant he was in the service of the  authorities  as  an
      Officer in the paramilitary border security force.   Whilst  on  leave
      in the Punjab he was twice  arrested.      On  each  occasion  he  was
      detained for three days  tortured  and  beaten.    The  first  was  in
      December 1994 and the second in June 1995.     He was accused of being
      involved with the movement to establish Khalistan and  on  the  second
      occasion he suffered a shoulder fracture and a back injury  for  which
      he required  surgery.      When  he  reported  these  matters  to  his
      superiors he says that he was harassed by them also,  and  so  it  was
      that he resigned his position in July 1995.

5.    Rather than return home to the Punjab where  he  had  been  previously
      arrested the Appellant went to Delhi where he maintained a low profile
      and experienced no further troubles.   He was  able  to  apply  for  a
      passport and for a Visa to visit the United Kingdom and he left  India
      without  apparently  experiencing  any  particular  problems  in  that
      regard.    He arrived here on 11th February 1999.

6.    The Appellant's Visa expired on 18th June 1999 although we would  have
      thought that he might have been given, upon arrival,  leave  to  enter
      for six months.    Nevertheless he must have been an overstayer  when,
      if it happened as he claims, he was informed by relatives and  friends
      in December 1999 that an arrest warrant had been  issued  against  him
      requiring him to attend Court on 15th December.

7.    The Adjudicator came to the conclusion that  what  the  Appellant  had
      said about his arrest  in  India  had  been  consistent  and  was  not
      implausible and he therefore decided that his evidence in that respect
      was credible.    The Adjudicator did  not  believe  that  the  warrant
      which was shown  to  him  was  genuine.     Documents  were  typed  on
      unheaded notepaper, there was no adequate explanation as  to  how  the
      Appellant had obtained them and even to an inexpert eye they seemed to
      the Adjudicator to have been typed on the  same  typewriter  as  three
      other  documents  produced  by  the  Appellant,  that  is  to  say   a
      certificate concerning his religious connections and  affidavits  from
      his father and the head man of his village respectively.

8.    The Appellant claimed asylum on 17th March 2000.

9.    The grounds of appeal in effect submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      been inconsistent in finding the Appellant credible in regard to  what
      he said had happened to him in India and yet  in  then  not  believing
      that the warrant was what it appeared to be and it was claimed that  a
      finding of forgery ought not to be found unless  he  who  alleged  it,
      that is to say the Secretary of State in this case, proved  it  to  be
      so.

10.   The Vice President who granted leave to appeal to  the  Tribunal  took
      the view that on the face of it the decision of the Adjudicator seemed
      to be sustainable upon the totality of the evidence before him but  he
      was concerned that the question of the warrant should be considered in
      the light of the Tribunal determination in Tanveer Ahmed.

11.   Mr. McGinley  addressed  us  upon  the  effect  of  that  case.     He
      referred us to the Appellant's answer to question 21 at interview that
      he had tried to live in Delhi at four  different  places  but  because
      they had issued arrest warrants he could not go back  to  the  Punjab.
       The Appellant had said that he could not remember  exactly  when  his
      relatives told him that the police were looking for him  but  he  only
      found out about the warrant when his Solicitor asked for the  records.
        They had obtained the Court Order on 15th December 1998.

12.   Mr. McGinley referred  us  to  paragraphs  5.6.69  to  5.6.74  of  the
      Assessment of the Country Information  and  Policy  Unit  for  October
      2001.    That relates to the question of internal flight within  India
      for Sikhs.    The constitution guarantees citizens the right  to  move
      freely throughout the territory of India and to settle and  reside  in
      any part of the country.   Punjabi  Sikhs  are  able  to  relocate  to
      another part of India and Sikhs outside Punjab are feeling more secure
      now than at any other time since the 1984  riots.     There  are  Sikh
      communities all over India.    Sources  disagree  whether  the  Punjab
      police would pursue an individual  they  wanted  to  another  part  of
      India.   Some say it is unlikely, unless the  individual  had  a  very
      high profile or the Punjab  police  secured  the  involvement  of  the
      Central Bureau of Investigation or the Central Reserve  Police  Force.
         Other sources indicate that the Punjab police would  be  likely  to
      pursue someone they wanted outside the State.   People at  risk  would
      include militants or perceived militants and their families and  close
      supporters.

13.   Mr. Mullen suggested that the Adjudicator accepted what  had  happened
      to the Appellant in the past in the Punjab but that this had  happened
      clearly not on the patch of the Delhi police.   The incentive was  not
      there for them to  bother  to  trace  the  Appellant.      As  to  the
      question of the genuiness of the warrant the Appellant had  been  able
      to leave on his own passport and it was to be expected that when  that
      was issued a check would have been made with the Punjab police.

14.   We have paid due regard to the determination in the  case  of  Tanveer
      Ahmed.     When considering whether to attach weight to a document  it
      is appropriate to consider the totality of the evidence with which  it
      may be consistent or inconsistent and we have done that.

15.   The Appellant was a man who had been in the service of the  authority.
        He told the Adjudicator that when  he  moved  to  Delhi  he  had  no
      trouble there.     He gave a date to the Adjudicator as to when he had
      learned about the claimed warrant which was some  time  after  he  had
      arrived in this country and which might be thought the explanation, if
      it was true, as to why he did not seek asylum until  very  long  after
      his arrival.    On the other hand at interview he claims to have known
      about the police interest before he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
      which case it would be his possible incentive  for  coming  here  that
      would afford him no explanation as to why, if he  thought  himself  at
      risk, he simply came as a visitor and spent many  months  here  before
      seeking international protection.    If  the  authorities  are  really
      interested in the Appellant and if his account of why he seeks  asylum
      has any truth in it then it is extraordinary, it might be argued  that
      he took no step for so long and furthermore that he was able to obtain
      a passport and leave India in his own name  without  encountering  any
      problems whatever.

16.   It would not be appropriate for the Tribunal  to  interfere  with  the
      findings of the Adjudicator if those findings were open  to  him  upon
      the totality of the evidence.    The only reason thought arguable, and
      a slim one at that, when leave was granted was whether the Adjudicator
      had properly considered the weight to be given to the  warrant.     We
      have considered that in the light of Tanveer Ahmed and the totality of
      the evidence and in our view, bearing in  mind  what  the  Adjudicator
      himself observed about it and the other documents, he was entitled  to
      accord it little weight in the totality of the evidence before him and
      was similarly entitled to come to the decision which he did.

17.   In those circumstanes this appeal is dismissed.









                                                                D. J. Parkes
                                                       Acting Vice-President


