
H-TH07-AB-V2
                                                     Appeal No: CC56902-2001
                                      PO (Risk-Return-General) Sierra Leone
                            CG [2002] UKIAT 03285


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on:  13 May 2002                              |                             |
|Dictated: 28 May 2002                         |30/07/02                     |


                                   Before:


                       Mr A R Mackey - Vice President
                                Mr C Thursby


between
                                  PAUL OWEN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Refugee Legal Centre (London)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Green, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Sierra  Leone,  appeals,  with  leave,
    against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mrs  C   J   Lloyd),
    promulgated 1 February 2002 wherein it was conceded that there  was  no
    Refugee Convention reason for an asylum claim and an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds was dismissed.

2.    Leave was granted on  the  one  point  which  it  was  considered  may
    survive  the  Adjudicator's  fairly  comprehensive  rejection  of   the
    Appellant's individual case.  That point  was  whether  any  home  that
    might otherwise have been available to the Appellant  was  inaccessible
    owing to the continued  fighting  or  rebel  activity  in  the  Eastern
    Province of Sierra Leone.  The Vice President Mr  Freeman  went  on  to
    state that:-

             "Even if he succeeds on this, he will need  to  show  that  it
             would be unduly harsh to expect him to return to the  Freetown
             area, if he is to have any reasonable prospect of  success  on
             the appeal as a whole."


The Adjudicator's Determination

3.    The Appellant had claimed that he was born in January 1980,  was  from
    Sierra Leone and that he had been a servant or a house-boy for a family
    in a village in eastern Sierra Leone.  There  was  no  direct  evidence
    produced as to the Appellant's original family  home,  apart  from  the
    reasonable surmise that it must have been close to his  master's  house
    in the village of Tafoma.

4.    The Appellant claimed that his master's house and Tafoma village  came
    under an attack by soldiers from what were assumed to be rebels of  the
    Foday Sankoh Forces.  His master's wife was killed in  the  attack  but
    the Appellant and his master had managed to escape.   Subsequently  the
    Appellant, helped, he claimed, by a pastor, was taken  to  Liberia  and
    ultimately was able to  make  his  way  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Adjudicator rejected  a  birth  certificate,  purportedly  from  Sierra
    Leone, which the Appellant claimed he had produced  to  an  Immigration
    Officer, although this was not mentioned in  Home  Office  papers.   In
    addition, the Adjudicator rejected the method of travel to  the  United
    Kingdom as lacking in credibility.

5.    In relation to his own family, the Appellant claimed that  his  father
    was dead and he did not know the whereabouts of his mother or the  rest
    of his family.  He had only heard that his own village had  been  burnt
    down.  He therefore stated that he would be homeless if he returned  to
    Sierra Leone.  The Adjudicator did not accept that he had no family  or
    home.  She did accept, however, that  the  Appellant  had  visited  his
    mother and brothers some time in July 2001 and that his departure  from
    Sierra Leone had taken place  shortly  afterwards.   In  addition,  the
    account of the attack on  his  employer's  village  by  soldiers  which
    caused the family to disperse was accepted.

6.    On the issue of nationality the Adjudicator found after  investigating
    the possibility of Nigerian nationality that she was prepared to accept
    the Appellant, who had a reasonable knowledge of Sierra Leone  and  was
    an uneducated young man, was from Sierra Leone.

7.    On the issue of the Article 3 claim the Adjudicator,  after  referring
    to the decision in Hamid Ali Husain v Asylum  Support  Adjudicator  and
    Secretary of State [2001] EWHC Admin 852 (an  appeal  relating  to  the
    withdrawal of financial support for an asylum seeker), found that while
    the country information indicated huge problems because  of  the  sheer
    numbers of displaced people in Sierra  Leone,  she  was  not  satisfied
    there was a real risk to this Appellant if returned.   The  Adjudicator
    accepted the generally poor conditions in the country as  a  whole  but
    given the cease-fire, the efforts to restore stable government and  the
    presence of international agencies  and  UN  Forces,  considered  there
    would not be a violation of Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

The Appellant's Submissions

8.    Central to the appeal by the Appellant made under Section  65  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 was the accessibility  to  a  home  for
    this Appellant on return.  It was submitted that if he could not access
    any form of home then the  decision should  be  decided  in  accordance
    with the principles laid down in  Husain.    This  Appellant  had  left
    Sierra Leone following an attack by people he thought were rebels  from
    across the border in Liberia.  The situation in  that  part  of  Sierra
    Leone where he came from was not markedly changed since he left, in  Mr
    Nicholson's  submission.   He  referred  us  to  a  report  from   "All
    Africa.com" dated 7  December  2001  which  was  sourced  from  the  UN
    Integrated Regional Information Networks  relating  to  disarmament  of
    rebels in eastern Sierra Leone.  This reports that the areas of  Kenema
    and Kailahun (a district near where the Appellant had  lived)  are  the
    last two remaining  districts  to  disarm  in  Sierra  Leone.   The  UN
    officials were having discussions with the rebels to  try  and  resolve
    outstanding difficulties which they  hoped  would  be  settled  in  the
    future.  The report states that some 366 former fighters of the RUF had
    handed over weapons in Kailahun but the disarmament process had stalled
    with other rebels refusing to disarm because they were unhappy about  a
    number of issues.  We  were  also  referred  to  an  article  from  the
    'Independent' dated 9 December 2001  "Civil  War  in  Sierra  Leone  is
    Over". This reports meetings between the Sierra Leone President and the
    leader of the RUF with the President reporting that  he  was  convinced
    the war was over. The article, however,  goes  on  to  state  that  the
    declaration that hostilities are over is no guarantee  that  they  are.
    The RUF had signed peace accords three times in the past only to resume
    fighting.

9.    Next, Mr Nicholson submitted to us that the Adjudicator had  not  made
    clear findings in relation to  the  Husain  decision,  which  had  been
    submitted to her, but appeared to dismiss the submissions  in  relation
    to this point by concluding that she did not believe the Appellant  had
    no family and no home (although no  reasons  for  this  conclusion  are
    provided).

10.   He stressed that from  the  objective  country  information  that  was
    known, at least until December 2001, the situation in the eastern  area
    of Sierra Leone, where this Appellant apparently came from,  was  still
    one of instability with the RUF still largely in control.   He  stated,
    however, that it was not part of the Appellant's case that despite  the
    RUF presence the international organisations were  not  functioning  in
    the area but that all available country information indicated that  the
    border area between Liberia and Sierra Leone  was  still  unstable  and
    that there were  significant  problems  in  returning  people  to  that
    district.  In summary, therefore, he  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    home district was not an area that should be treated as  accessible  to
    this Appellant.  Thus consideration had to be given as  to  whether  he
    could relocate to another part of Sierra Leone and, if so, would it  be
    unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to do so.  In this regard we
    were referred to reports on the  situation  for  returnees  in  transit
    centres in Freetown.  The very extensive global IDP Report "Profile  of
    Internal  Displacement:  Sierra  Leone"  compiled  by  the  Global  IDP
    database of the Norwegian Refugee Council (dated 7 July 2001) was  also
    before us.  Under a section entitled "Camps  Overcrowded  as  escalated
    conflict caused IDP influx" (page 82 of the report) it is stated that:-

             "The latest situation aggravates an existing problem resulting
             from many years of destruction and  displacement.   Over  5000
             houses and public facilities were burnt down in  the  AFRC/RUF
             invasion of Freetown in January 1999.  Hundreds  of  thousands
             of Freetown residents were made homeless  during  the  looting
             and burning.  Although shelter reconstruction programmes  were
             initiated by a number of agencies, the scale of  damage  meant
             that opportunity  for  re-entry  into  accommodation,  whether
             owned or leased, was limited,  leading  to  an  increased  and
             prolonged demand for temporary shelter or assistance."


    Later in the same part of the report it is stated  that  despite  noble
    efforts from the UN agencies, the  International  Red  Cross  and  NGOs
    assisting internally displaced persons (IDPS), the conditions  in  most
    IDP camps in the country are deemed  sub-human,  due  to  a  number  of
    reasons.  The reasons are then set out in the report.


11.   Conditions in transit centres are covered at page 102  of  the  report
    where  it  states  that  transit  centres  in  Freetown  have   reached
    saturation point and many returnees are reluctant to move  on,  thereby
    disrupting the admission of new arrivals.  The UNHCR had then organised
    convoys from Freetown to the provinces to temporary resettlement sites.
     The report states, however,  that  the  use  of  camps  for  temporary
    resettlement could perpetuate the dependence of returnees and  IDPs  on
    outside assistance.

12.   It was thus submitted that conditions shown in  2000  and  2001,  from
    which there was no evidence of improvement, established that  it  would
    be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect the Appellant to re-establish
    himself in Freetown.  He would only receive  what  the  agencies  could
    make available to him and it appeared there was no room for anyone more
    in Freetown.  In support of this we were referred to a  summary  report
    from "Global IDP" (www.Idp project) published with  information  as  at
    February 2002.  This sets out that many IDPs who returned to areas safe
    for resettlement found a critical lack of basic community services  and
    infrastructure, causing some drift-back to the major urban centres.  It
    also reports the outcome of the fragile security  situation  has  meant
    additional  internal  displacement  as  well  as  the  return  flow  of
    refugees, with many of them ending up  internally  displaced  as  their
    home areas remained exposed to RUF terror.

13.   The same report sets out that improvements in the  security  situation
    in many parts of the country coupled with, at the same time, insecurity
    in neighbouring Liberia and Guinea has lead  to  further  movements  of
    IDPs.  As a result of this the strategy was now one of trying to assist
    communities in border areas, who host the displaced, rather than add to
    over-stretched camps or create new ones.  It also states:-

             "Overall, shelter remains a priority need, with up to  90%  of
             houses  destroyed  in  many  areas  (UN-November   2001)   the
             population in general is reported to be the most vulnerable to
             ill-health in the world, with high levels of malnutrition  and
             wide-ranging needs (UN November 2001; MSF September 2001)"

    The same report also sets out extreme difficulties in the  delivery  of
    humanitarian aid.

14.   We were then referred to a comparative situation between  the  present
    United Kingdom policy on extended  leave  to  remain  for  people  from
    Sierra Leone as opposed to the United States/INS Policy,  published  in
    September 2001, which extended  the  temporary  protection  status  for
    nationals of Sierra Leone for a further year  until  2  November  2002.
    This report from the INS states that:-

             "In the case of Sierra Leone there is still an  ongoing  armed
             conflict and, due to such  conflict,  requiring  nationals  of
             Sierra Leone to return home would pose  a  serious  threat  to
             their personal safety."


15.   Mr Nicholson submitted  that  the  application  of  the  current  Home
    Office approach was a mistaken one in the light of current evidence and
    the implications could be more dangerous than the Home Office stated.

16.   In summary, therefore, he submitted that for this Appellant  his  home
    area was simply inaccessible and it would be dangerous  to  attempt  to
    send him there.  An internal flight alternative was  not  available  to
    him in Freetown as it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable for him  to
    be relocated to Freetown given the huge problems that exist  there  for
    returnees.  Thus, on the facts of  this  case,  this  Appellant  should
    succeed and it would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR for him to be
    returned.

The Respondent's Submissions

17.   Miss Green requested that we  consider  up-to-date  documentation  she
    submitted to us in the form of a BBC news  article  dated  9  May  2002
    "Election Boom in Freetown".  As this was new information we allowed Mr
    Nicholson time to consider it. He was happy to do so and reply in final
    submissions.

18.   This BBC report appeared ahead of presidential  elections  which  took
    place on 14 May 2002.  It stated that in driving  around  Freetown  the
    reporter had seen no war only commerce, and that most  Sierra  Leonians
    may still be very poor but the end of the war has given them  a  chance
    to change the state of affairs and they were working hard at  it.   The
    rest of the report however does not cover issues relating to  returnees
    or conditions in eastern Sierra Leone.

19.   We were also referred to  the  October  2001  CIPU  Report  paragraphs
    5.44, 5.45 and 5.46.  These refer to the international assistance being
    given to Sierra Leone and outline a number of the aid  programmes  that
    are now in operation.  We were  also  referred  to  paragraph  7.18  in
    relation to freedom to travel and internal flight where it is  set  out
    that thousands of Sierra Leonians have returned from Guinea because  of
    attacks and ill-treatment by RUF forces and Guinean forces.  The report
    goes on to state:-

             "Some of these IDPs were housed in  camps  but  many  live  in
             Freetown.  This  large  influx,  together  with  the  lack  of
             resources to deal with them, caused tension between the  local
             residents and returning IDPs."


20.   In relation to  the  determination,  Miss  Green  submitted  that  the
    Adjudicator had accepted the Appellant was from Sierra  Leone  but  had
    largely rejected credibility in other areas. The directions were  given
    to return the Appellant to Sierra Leone and this would be  carried  out
    within operational guidelines of the Home Office.  She agreed that  the
    policy granting ELR had ended and that despite a  positive  outlook  to
    the return of people to Sierra Leone the policy included  an  exception
    based  on  trauma  grounds.   However  this  would  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant's situation.

21.   She agreed that the prime issue before us  was  one  on  the  risk  of
    return and then, in the alternative, if the Appellant could not  access
    his home area then could he return to Freetown.  Based  on  information
    such as the BBC report, it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect  this
    Appellant to return to Freetown.  In  her  submission,  protection  was
    available from international agencies in Freetown and that we should be
    cautious in considering reports on Sierra Leone as many of  these  were
    dated.  We were referred to a Tribunal decision in Kapela [1998] Imm AR
    294.  Also  she  submitted  that  the  decision  in  Husain  should  be
    distinguished as the issue before the courts in that case  was  one  of
    asylum support and not the decision that was before this Tribunal.

22.   In his reply Mr Nicholson did not consider the BBC report altered  the
    situation.  He agreed that it indicated optimism in the  country  about
    the election but it  did  not  cover  the  situation  relating  to  the
    Appellant's  home  town  nor  his  personal  situation  on   return  to
    Freetown.  We should therefore refer to the situation in the camps  and
    the problems for not only returnees but internally  displaced  persons.
    He submitted that the situation in Freetown was one of  saturation  and
    that even attempts to return people to their original homes was  not  a
    programme that was working out satisfactorily as they could not  access
    genuine protection.  He reminded us of the comments in  the  UN  Report
    that conditions in the camps were "sub-human" and given this  situation
    and the comments in relation to problems for returnees and IDPs  facing
    the worst health situation in the world, we should find it unduly harsh
    to expect the Appellant to relocate to the Freetown area.

23.   We reserved our determination.

The Issues

24.   We found the issues before us to be:-

             (a) Given the country information before us,  is  it  possible
                  for this Appellant to access his home district in  eastern
                  Sierra Leone at all, let alone with any degree of  safety?
                  In reaching this conclusion it was relevant for us to take
                  into account not only findings of the Adjudicator but also
                  the fact that no reasons appeared to be provided as to why
                  the  Adjudicator  considered  the  Appellant  had   family
                  members and a home available to him in Sierra  Leone.   We
                  also  should   be   guided   by   appropriate   Strasbourg
                  jurisprudence such as Hilal v UK (45276/99) ECHR, [6 March
                  2001] unreported.


             (b) If we consider his home area is inaccessible to him, is an
                  internal  flight  or   internal   protection   alternative
                  (IFA/IPA) available to him  within  Sierra  Leone  and  in
                  particular would it be unduly  harsh  or  unreasonable  to
                  expect him to relocate to Freetown?


Decision

25.   In respect of issue (a),  we  found  that  the  situation  in  eastern
    Sierra Leone near the border with Liberia is,  from  the  best  country
    information available to us, still relatively unstable.  We assess this
    at the level of a real risk  of  him  suffering  torture,  inhumane  or
    degrading treatment on return.  We consider that it would be  extremely
    difficult to achieve in reality, let alone  expect  this  Appellant  to
    return to his home district.  This conclusion is reached regardless  of
    determining whether or not he has family members who may  make  a  home
    available to him in that district.  The country information referred to
    above along with the problems for returnees  and  internally  displaced
    persons in the border  areas  does  not  yet  indicate  that  risks  of
    maltreatment in terms of Article 3 to returnees (from the RUF still  in
    the border areas) are below the level of a reasonable  likelihood.   In
    addition it would appear that the likelihood of him finding a  home  or
    accommodation or any form of support in this district is highly remote.



26.   Accordingly we find that if the Appellant were returned  to  his  home
    district there is a substantial basis for concluding that  there  would
    be a real risk there would be an infringement of Article 3 of the ECHR.
     We therefore turn to consideration of a possible IFA/IPA.

27.   We have closely considered the latest country  of  origin  information
    available in respect of Freetown, including the latest BBC reports.  We
    also note the Appellant's own  personal  situation.   He  is  a  young,
    independent and fit man who would be returning to a city  that  appears
    to be going through the benefits of  a  period  of  peace  and  growing
    commercial activity.  Set  against  this  he  is  a  returnee  with  no
    apparent home to return to or any other  family  support  systems.   He
    would thus be thrown into the general mele of  expecting  support  from
    international  agencies,  along  with  the  mass  of  other  internally
    displaced persons and returnees.  He would thus be, at best, placed  in
    a camp where conditions are described as "sub-human" and  face  medical
    conditions described as some of the worst in the  world.   Beyond  this
    the possibility of being relocated to other camps outside  of  Freetown
    does not, on the current information, look to be a viable alternative.

28.   Given the totality of the situation we find that he would need  to  be
    an extremely resourceful  young  man  with  considerable  resource  and
    intelligence to  survive  in  Freetown  at  this  time.   We  therefore
    consider that it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to
    relocate to Freetown at this time.  With the improving situation it may
    be that within a year or so our decision  would  be  a  different  one,
    however we must make the decision at this time and we conclude that the
    risks to him are still real and that relocation to Freetown  would  not
    provide him with meaningful protection and it would be unduly harsh.

28.   The appeal is therefore allowed.


                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


