

Khan (Disputed Nationality - Removal Directions) Afghanistan * [2002] UKIAT
04412





                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 29th August 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                              ......26th September 2002.....................

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Mr J R A Fox
                               Mr S L Batiste


Between:


                                  ASIF KHAN


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant's  nationality  is  unknown.   He  has  claimed  at  all
     material times to be a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   He  appeals,  with
     leave,  against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J  J  B
     Nicholson,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision   of   the
     Respondent on 5th October 2001 to give directions for his  removal  to
     Afghanistan as an illegal entrant.  Before us he is represented by  Mr
     Kumi, instructed by Sriharans, and the Respondent is represented by Ms
     Paddick.

  2. The heart of the Appellant's claim  is  that  he  is  a  refugee  from
     Afghanistan. He gave  to  the  Secretary  of  State  a  circumstantial
     description of his past.  It was that history that he repeated  before
     the Adjudicator.  Neither the Secretary of State nor  the  Adjudicator
     believed that his story was the truth. Neither the Secretary of  State
     nor the Adjudicator believed that the Appellant is from Afghanistan.

  3. In the course of refusing his claim,  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote
     this, at paragraph 15 of the letter of refusal:

           "As a result of your obvious lack of knowledge  about  the  area
           that you claim to have lived in,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
           concluded that you are not from Nengahgar.   This  in  turn  has
           given the Secretary of State cause to doubt  that  you  are,  in
           fact,  an  Afghan  as  claimed.   The  Secretary  of  State  has
           therefore considered all the  available  evidence  presented  in
           your asylum claim, but has concluded that you are not  genuinely
           of Afghan nationality."


      And then at paragraph 20:


           "The Secretary of State is not satisfied that you are an  Afghan
           and has refused your claim for  asylum  and  your  human  rights
           claim  on  the  basis  that  you  are  not   from   Afghanistan.
           Directions will be given for your  removal  to  Afghanistan,  as
           this is the country of which you claim to be a  national.   This
           is being done solely in order to enable  you  to  appeal  to  an
           Adjudicator and enable to decision  to  refuse  your  claim  for
           asylum to be reviewed.  If you appeal  against  the  refusal  of
           your claim for asylum and the Special Adjudicator also concludes
           that you are not from Afghanistan, we  will  seek  to  establish
           your true nationality."


  4. The Appellant did appeal, as we have said.  The Adjudicator  concluded
     as follows:

           "I note the arguments put by Mr Kumi on the Appellant's behalf -
           they were ably put but they do not persuade me that there is any
           truth to this Appellant's story.  Having weighed the evidence, I
           am not persuaded that this Appellant is from  Afghanistan.   His
           knowledge of the country was very limited and I am not persuaded
           that he was a credible witness."


      Later, the Adjudicator wrote as follows:


           "The onus lies on the  Appellant  to  persuade  me  that  it  is
           reasonably likely that he is a  refugee  within  the  definition
           given in Article 1A of the Refugee Convention. He has failed  to
           do so because  he  has  not  persuaded  me  either  that  it  is
           reasonably likely that he comes from Afghanistan or that  it  is
           reasonably likely that he would come  to  any  harm  if  he  was
           returned there."


      And later, the Adjudicator emphasises his position as regards  to  the
      Appellant's nationality when he says that another issue "of course  is
      academic as he does not come from Afghanistan".


  5. The Adjudicator went on to consider whether, in  those  circumstances,
     the Secretary of State's notice of decision that the Appellant  should
     be removed to Afghanistan was valid and he concluded  that,  (although
     the matter was not strictly speaking for  him)  as  a  result  of  his
     decision, the notice would not be regarded as valid.

  6. Before us, Mr Kumi has raised three principal matters.  The  first  is
     that the Adjudicator's determination was defective in that  it  failed
     to identify the Appellant's nationality.  The second is that,  in  any
     event, the notice of decision to remove to Afghanistan is invalid  and
     cannot be acted upon because the Appellant is  not  from  Afghanistan,
     which appears to be what the Adjudicator decided.  The third  is  that
     the notice of removal is unlawful because of the terms  in  which  the
     Secretary of State indicated that he was  giving  that  notice  (those
     terms are the ones we have set out in paragraph 20 of  the  letter  of
     refusal).  We deal with each of those points in turn.

  7. First, nationality.  Mr Kumi submitted that it was  the  Adjudicator's
     task to assess the Appellant's nationality.  He acknowledged  that  no
     country of nationality for the Appellant had been offered, other  than
     Afghanistan.  He  acknowledged  also  that  the  burden  of  proof  of
     nationality was on the Appellant and that it was not  for  either  the
     Adjudicator or for the Secretary of State to establish the Appellant's
     nationality.  Mr Kumi referred us to the decision of the  Tribunal  in
     Tikhonov, [1998] INLR 737.  In that case, the Tribunal, constituted by
     the then President and two legal members, decided  that  "It  was  not
     possible to decide an asylum claim without identifying the country  or
     countries of nationality of the claimant, or alternatively  concluding
     that  the  claimant  was  stateless.   The  burden  of  proving   such
     nationality  or  statelessness  was  upon   the   claimant   and   the
     identification of the relevant country or countries had to be  decided
     on the evidence".

  8. Tikhonov, however, was  a  case  in  which  the  basic  facts  of  the
     Claimant's history were not in serious doubt.  He was a person who, in
     terms both of ancestry and  in  terms  of  the  changing  politics  of
     Eastern Europe, was of doubtful nationality.  In order to  assess  his
     claim under Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, it was  evidently
     necessary to determine his country of nationality from  the  available
     options.  In those circumstances, the Tribunal felt able to  take  the
     view  that  an  Adjudicator  should  always  decide   which   of   the
     nationalities was relevant for the purposes of the claim. We have some
     doubts whether the rule in Tikhonov is expressed too widely.  It  does
     appear to us that if an Appellant's claim is of such a nature that  it
     gives no rise to a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  whatever  his
     nationality, it cannot in principle be right to say that it cannot  be
     assessed without determining his nationality.  But that is perhaps not
     of immediate relevance to the present appeal.

  9. So far as the present appeal is concerned, the position  is  that  the
     Adjudicator had precisely two choices on the evidence before him.   He
     had  the  opportunity  of  deciding  that  the  Appellant   was   from
     Afghanistan as he said:  and he had the opportunity of  rejecting  the
     Appellant's account, in which case there was no alternative country of
     nationality that he could properly offer.  We do not accept Mr  Kumi's
     submission that, in those circumstances, an Adjudicator is obliged  to
     find a country of nationality for the  Appellant.   If  the  Appellant
     offers only one country and  is  not  believed  in  his  account,  the
     determination that he does not come  from  that  country  is  entirely
     adequate as a determination of his nationality for the purposes of the
     appeal which the Appellant is raising.  For those reasons, so  far  as
     the question of nationality is concerned, we regard the  determination
     as entirely appropriate.  We have to say that had it been suggested to
     us that the Adjudicator erred in  the  reasoning  he  brought  to  the
     determination of nationality, we should have said that  there  was  no
     merit at all in any  such  argument.   It  is  quite  clear  that  the
     Adjudicator dealt with this issue with the greatest of care.

 10. Secondly, then, is the question of whether, given that  the  Appellant
     is found by the Adjudicator not be of Afghan nationality, it is  right
     that the removal directions are invalid.   Removal  directions  of  an
     illegal entrant are made under paragraphs 8 and 9 of Schedule 2 to the
     1971 Act.  We do not need to set them out in full.  As is well  known,
     they provide that removal directions of  an  illegal  entrant  may  be
     made, broadly speaking, to a country or territory which falls into one
     of four categories.  They are set out in sub-paragraph 8(1)(c).   They
     are a country of which he is a national or citizen, or  a  country  or
     territory in which he has obtained a passport  or  other  document  of
     identity, or a country or territory in which he embarks for the United
     Kingdom, or a country or territory to which there is reason to believe
     that he will be admitted.  In  the  present  case,  it  has  not  been
     suggested that any category other than the first is applicable.  There
     can be a notice of removal to a country of which he is a  national  or
     citizen.

 11. The centrepiece of Mr Kumi's argument on this  point  is  that,  given
     that the Appellant has been found by  the  Adjudicator  not  to  be  a
     national or citizen of Afghanistan, the  removal  directions  must  be
     void:  and that, as we understand it, was the  Adjudicator's  view  as
     well.  The issue of whether the removal directions are or are not void
     cannot be considered by us in isolation from the Appellant's rights of
     appeal.  It is only if the Appellant has  a  valid  appeal  against  a
     notice that an Adjudicator or the Tribunal can determine the  validity
     of the notice.  It is common ground between the parties in this appeal
     that the validity of the directions for removal is  capable  of  being
     questioned by an Appellant under s66 of the  1999  Act,  the  relevant
     parts of which are as follows:

           "66.  Validity of directions for removal
                 (1)   This section applies if directions are  given  for  a
                       person's removal from the United Kingdom
                         a) on the ground that he is  an  illegal  entrant;
                            ...
                 (2)   That person may appeal to an Adjudicator against  the
                       directions on the ground that on  the  facts  of  his
                       case there was in law no power to give  them  on  the
                       ground on which they were given.
                 (3)   This section does not  entitle  a  person  to  appeal
                       while he is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unless  he  is
                       appealing under s65 or 69(5)."

 12. The present case is one in which the Appellant is  appealing  under  s
     69(5), so he has a right of appeal under s  66  while  he  is  in  the
     United Kingdom and that right of appeal is limited.  It is  an  appeal
     against the directions on the ground that, on the facts of  his  case,
     there was in law no power to give them on the  ground  on  which  they
     were given.  We emphasise that the right  of  appeal  under  s  66  is
     limited because the general right of appeal to  an  Adjudicator  under
     paragraph 21(1) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act is on the basis  that  a
     decision was not in accordance with the law, but the  next  succeeding
     sub-paragraph of that paragraph makes it clear that the general  right
     of appeal on that ground is subject to any limitation on the rights of
     appeal.  Such a limitation is to be found in s 66(2).

 13. The Appellant then has or had or might have  had  a  right  of  appeal
     against the directions for removal on the ground  that  they  directed
     removal to a country of which he was not, as found by the Adjudicator,
     a national.  Mr Kumi suggests that,  under  those  circumstances,  the
     removal  directions  are  invalid.   Afghanistan  is,  following   the
     Adjudicator's decision, not a country authorised by paragraphs 8 and 9
     of Schedule 2 as a destination for the  Appellant's  removal.   Again,
     though, it seems to us that the question must  be  determined  in  the
     context of an actual appeal.  In fact, there was no appeal under s  66
     before the Adjudicator, as he recognised.  Indeed, it is difficult  to
     see how  there  could  be  because,  so  far  as  the  appeal  to  the
     Adjudicator is concerned, the Appellant's claim was that he  was  from
     Afghanistan.

 14. We firmly take the view that an Appellant cannot be  heard  to  claim,
     for the purposes of his asylum appeal, that he comes from a particular
     country and, in the same proceedings, for the purposes of s  66,  that
     he does not come from that country.  That should be sufficient to deal
     with any case in which, in the same appeal, an Appellant  claims  that
     he is from a particular country  but,  if  the  Adjudicator  does  not
     believe that, then he claims for the purposes of an appeal under s  66
     that he is not from that country.  To do so is simply an abuse and  we
     will not tolerate it.  It follows that an appeal under s 66, based  on
     the falseness of the information given for the purposes of  any  other
     grounds of appeal in the same appeal, will not succeed.

 15. We pause, in passing, to note the case of Zecaj [2002] UKIAT 00232, to
     which we have been referred.  That was a case in which  there  was  no
     inconsistency in what the Appellant had said.  He was  a  Kosovan  who
     had been, by only one of a series of errors  which  the  Secretary  of
     State had made in his case, issued with notice of removal to  Albania.
     He had always said he was Kosovan and one of the things that  he  said
     on his appeal was that the directions for his removal were invalid  as
     they were for Albania.  The Tribunal's  acceptance  of  that  argument
     does not in any sense undermine what we have said about  an  Appellant
     who maintains inconsistent countries of origin for various purposes in
     his appeal.

 16. As we have indicated, the Adjudicator did not formally have before him
     an appeal  under  s  66  and  the  question  then  arises  whether  an
     Appellant, who is found by the Adjudicator not to be from the  country
     which he claims to be from, has a subsequent right of appeal  under  s
     66.  Might he say, "Following the Adjudicator's determination which  I
     accept, I appeal against the removal directions on the basis that,  as
     has now been established as a fact, I am not from the country which is
     mentioned in them"?  It would appear at first sight as though he could
     do so under s 66.  If he has not previously raised the issue,  then  s
     66 ought to give him a right of appeal.  But we note that by then  the
     decision for his removal, against which he appeals, will  be  of  some
     age and under Rule 6 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)
     Rules 2000, where an Appellant  makes  an  appeal  within  the  United
     Kingdom, notice of appeal has to be given  not  later  than  ten  days
     after the notice of the decision was received.  So any such appeal  is
     in practice certain to be out of time and we cannot see that it  would
     generally speaking be right to enable a person to raise a late  appeal
     when the reason for the lateness is that he has previously  sought  to
     deceive everybody who has considered his case.

 17. It follows from the foregoing that  an  appeal  under  s  66  will  be
     unsuccessful it is raised on the basis of inconsistent  facts  in  the
     principal appeal;  and it cannot be raised later because  it  will  be
     out of time.  The effect of s66 must, in our view, be limited to cases
     such as Zecaj where there has been some factor which does not  involve
     a judgement prejudicial to the Appellant,  but  simply  that  in  fact
     there has been an error in the directions given.  It follows  that  we
     reject Mr Kumi's second principal submission.

 18. The third submission was that, given the terms of paragraph 20 of  the
     Respondent's letter  of  refusal,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
     entitled to give the directions which he did give.   We  have  to  say
     that paragraph 20 does give us pause for thought.   The  Secretary  of
     State was, in our view, entirely entitled to  reject  the  Appellant's
     claim to  be  from  Afghanistan,  but  nevertheless  to  give  removal
     directions  for  Afghanistan.   The  reason  for  that  is  that   the
     appropriate course of action for an Appellant would be to appeal under
     s 66 or s 69, or indeed s 65.  The  Appellant  could  no  doubt  chose
     whether to say that he was not from Afghanistan or to say that he  was
     from Afghanistan.  The tactics of the Appellant's  appeal  are  not  a
     matter for the Secretary of State.  In making the removal  directions,
     it appears to us that the Secretary of State was  entitled  for  those
     purposes to accept what  he  had  been  told  by  the  Appellant.   In
     reaching that conclusion we are following  the  determination  of  the
     Tribunal in Ali [2002] UKIAT 01437.

 19. The difficulty arises in the present case because of the  use  of  the
     word "solely".  As Ms Paddick acknowledged, the use of that  word  was
     ill-advised  because,  if  the  Adjudicator  had  concluded  that  the
     Appellant was from Afghanistan but not a refugee, he would  have  been
     removed in accordance with the removal directions.   It  follows  that
     the giving of the removal directions was not solely in order to enable
     an appeal.

 20. Reading the paragraph as a whole, it  appears  to  us  that  the  word
     "solely" properly interpreted applies to the insertion of a particular
     country in the notice, rather than to the issuing of the notice  as  a
     whole.  What is being said is that the Secretary of  State  is  giving
     removal directions, and the removal  directions  are  to  Afghanistan.
     The choice of Afghanistan is done on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
     story and that is the only reason why that country  has  been  chosen.
     Following the giving of the directions for removal, the Appellant  has
     an appeal which he has indeed argued.

 21. In any event,  it  appears  to  us  that  Mr  Kumi's  third  principal
     submission is doomed to failure for the reasons that we  have  already
     given.  He has no general right to  assert  that  the  directions  for
     removal are given not in accordance with the law.  He has  that  right
     only under s 66.  The ground on which the directions for removal  were
     given is the ground that the Appellant is  an  illegal  entrant.   The
     directions are for removal to Afghanistan, a country which  he  cannot
     in these proceedings be heard to say that he is not from.  It  follows
     that whatever may be  the  merits  of  Mr  Kumi's  argument  based  on
     paragraph 20, they are not capable  of  being  raised  in  proceedings
     before the Adjudicator or before the Tribunal.

 22. We are aware that there are many cases where Appellants  have  claimed
     to be from a country which the Secretary of  State  does  not  believe
     that they are from and where the Adjudicator shares the  Secretary  of
     State's incredulity.   For  that  reason,  we  briefly  summarise  our
     conclusions in this appeal.

 23.  First,  an  Adjudicator  who  considers  the  evidence  properly  and
     concludes that an Appellant is not from the country which he claims to
     be from is entitled simply to say so.  Second, an Appellant who claims
     to be from one country for the purposes of his asylum  appeal  is  not
     entitled in the same appeal to claim to be from  another  country  for
     the purposes of raising a claim under s 66.

 24. In the present case,  the  determination  looked  in  some  detail  at
     everything which could possible be said on the Appellant's behalf.  Mr
     Kumi has, very properly, not sought to have us set it  aside  for  any
     reason other than those which we have mentioned.  For the  reasons  we
     have given, we dismiss the Appellant's appeal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

