
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX21529-2002      |
|On 7 November 2002         |        |BK (Risk-Return-General)    |
|                           |        |Sierra Leone CG [2002] UKIAT|
|                           |        |05842                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 December 2002                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Mr J B Wilson                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Brima Kamara                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who has been  granted  leave
     to appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an  Adjudicator,
     Mr David Bartlett, who dismissed his appeal  against  the  respondent's
     decision of 17 November 2001 refusing  to  grant  leave  to  enter  and
     refusing asylum.

  2. The hearing before us took place on 7  November  2002.   There  was  no
     attendance by or on behalf of the appellant.  Ms A Holmes  appeared  on
     behalf of the respondent.  We are satisfied  that  notice  of  hearing,
     setting out the time, place and date was sent out by first  class  post
     to both the appellant and his representative on 29 September 2002,  and
     accordingly consider that it is proper for us to go ahead and hear  the
     appeal.

  3. The grounds of appeal take issue  with  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
     findings.  It is argued that the findings in paragraph 9 contradict the
     findings in paragraph 16.  In paragraph 9 the Adjudicator accepted  the
     appellant's evidence as given  to  the  immigration  officer  which  he
     adhered to in evidence, the effect of which was that  he  was  required
     under duress to work for a  rebel  Colonel.   At  paragraph  5  of  his
     determination he noted the evidence of the appellant during the  appeal
     which in view of the new situation in Sierra Leone his fear was that if
     he were returned he might be regarded as a person who had  collaborated
     with the rebels and that would result  in  him  being  in  danger.   At
     paragraph 16, with regard to this aspect of the appellant's claim,  the
     Adjudicator considered  his  evidence  vague,  lacking  in  detail  and
     unconvincing and that he was only able to say that he had heard that  a
     report had been made to the police, but if such a report had been  made
     there was no evidence as to its nature or details or the likely  action
     the police might take.  At paragraph 12 the Adjudicator also considered
     the risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  being  regarded  as  having
     collaborated with the rebels.  The Adjudicator found  the  evidence  in
     this regard to be improbable and  not  credible.   He  noted  that  the
     objective evidence showed that a large number of people in Sierra Leone
     were placed in the same position as that of  the  appellant,  of  being
     required to work under duress for the rebels, but that he had not  been
     shown any evidence indicating that people who assisted the rebels under
     duress  were  subjected  to  any  harassment  or  ill  treatment.   The
     objective  evidence  only  indicated  that  only  actual  ex-rebels  on
     occasions faced difficulties.  The Adjudicator therefore, in  our  view
     quite properly, rejected the essence of the appellant's  claim  as  set
     out at paragraph 5 of the determination.

  4. We have read the account of events as given to the immigration  officer
     which at paragraph 9 as indicated above  the  Adjudicator  proposed  to
     accept.  Insofar as  findings  at  paragraph  16  are  adverse  to  the
     appellant's credibility in this connection, i.e. the statement that  it
     was unlikely that  the  rebel  Colonel  would  have  legally  held  the
     diamonds  nor  that  he  would  have  changed  into  civilian  clothes,
     travelled into  Freetown  and  reported  the  diamond  theft,  then  we
     consider that there is force in the grounds  of  appeal.   There  is  a
     contradiction in the Adjudicator's credibility findings to that extent.
      However the claimed fear of being regarded as a collaborator with  the
     rebels was not made at interview.  As we have noted above  we  consider
     the Adjudicator's adverse  credibility  findings  in  that  regard  are
     sound.  Also as regards the claimed risk  of  arrest  on  return,  that
     again was not something mentioned by the appellant at interview.   When
     asked there why he was afraid he said that Sierra Leone was not safe as
     yet.  As we have noted we consider that there are contradictions in the
     regards we have set out  in  the  Adjudicator's  credibility  findings.
     These however relate to whether or not the  rebel  Colonel  would  have
     held the diamonds legally and whether or not he would have changed into
     civilian clothes and travelled into  Freetown  to  report  the  diamond
     theft and in our view these are not matters which go to  the  heart  of
     the appellant's claim.  Accordingly though we reiterate  our  agreement
     with the criticism of the Adjudicator's findings in this regard, we  do
     not consider  that  this  is  material  to  the  determination  of  the
     essential issues in the appeal.  In this regard we note also  ground  2
     which rightly  criticises  the  Adjudicator  for  employing  the  wrong
     standard of proof in his assessment of the likelihood that the  Colonel
     would have gone to Freetown as a civilian to report the  theft  of  the
     diamonds.  Again however we consider that this is not a matter which is
     material to the  essence  of  the  appellant's  claim  as  put  to  the
     Adjudicator.

  5. The remaining issue is that of  risk  arguably  not  addressed  by  the
     Adjudicator in his home area of Makeni from RUF rebels.  This is ground
     3 of the grounds of appeal.  The grounds point to  aspects  of  the  US
     State Department Report for 2001 as indicative of the risk on return in
     this regard.  Specifically the claim is that the  Adjudicator  did  not
     address the risk that the appellant feared in his home area  of  Makeni
     from RUF rebels who had previously forced him to work for them and from
     whom he had then escaped stealing their diamonds.  In  this  regard  we
     bear in mind that the evidence cited in this  regard  is  from  the  US
     State Department Report for 2001 which  of  course  significantly  pre-
     dates the subsequent very significant improvement in the  situation  in
     Sierra Leone involving such matters as a ceasefire agreed  between  the
     government and rebels which came into force, the existence of  a  large
     United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Sierra Leone and the  presidential
     elections for May 2002 together with the disarmament and demobilisation
     and re-integration process.  The Adjudicator also noted at paragraph  3
     the fact that the government  had  recently  regained  control  over  a
     number of major towns including the one in which the appellant resided.
      It is in this context that such matters as the mention  in  the  State
     Department Report for 2001 and unconfirmed reports in March (2000 as it
     must be) that RUF fighters forcibly  conscripted  civilians  in  Makeni
     into the PORO society, one of several secret societies in  the  country
     tied to native beliefs and rituals, and that civilians reportedly  were
     forced to join the RUF, has to be seen.  Likewise the  mention  of  RUF
     rebels manning roadblocks to extort money and goods from travellers  in
     the area of Makeni has to be seen  as  being  part  of  the  historical
     background rather than reflecting the situation as of today.  There  is
     mention of RUF members killing ex-combatants who  had  fled  the  group
     although the number of reports declined significantly during the  year,
     and similar significant decline is noted in the  RUF  rebels  abuse  of
     civilians.  Other matters referred to in ground 3 relate to  events  in
     Tongo, Mansumbiri and the Kono district.

  6. As against this we have considered the April 2002 CIPU report on Sierra
     Leone.  Among other things this contains a section on the Revolutionary
     United Front (RUF).  We note from paragraph  5.46  that  Medicins  sans
     Frontieres were allowed into RUF-held  areas  in  March  2001  and  MSF
     carried out what it described as an  "exploratory  mission"  to,  among
     other places, Makeni and re-started activities at the  Makeni  hospital
     in March 2001.  The RUF was still reported to use forced labour in  the
     areas it held especially in the diamond mining areas and also to  abuse
     civilians, this again  relates  back  to  March  2001.   We  note  from
     paragraph 5.49 of that report that  the  fifth  tripartite  meeting  of
     Sierra Leone's joint committee on disarmament, demobilisation  and  re-
     integration convened in Makeni on 18  September  2001  and  that  these
     talks involve the government  of  Sierra  Leone,  UNAMSIL  (the  United
     Nations Mission in Sierra Leone which is an international  peacekeeping
     force deployed to Sierra Leone mandated by the UN Security Council) and
     the RUF.  This group meets periodically to review the implementation of
     decisions on the disarmament, demobilisation and re-integration process
     together with issues hampering its progress and next steps.  It is said
     that the  meetings  are  also  reviewing  issues  related  to  national
     recovery and stabilisation and that as a result of this meeting the CDF
     (the Civil Defence Force which was organised to resist the RUF) and RUF
     propose to create a conflict resolution committee  to  be  made  up  of
     members nominated between the two groups  and  which  will  attempt  to
     redress local differences between the two groups and discourage revenge
     attacks.  In the light of this evidence, and in particular in the light
     of  the  most  up-to-date  evidence,  we  consider  that  although  the
     Adjudicator did not directly address the risk referred to in ground  3,
     it has been possible for  us  to  do  so  and  we  find  that  had  the
     Adjudicator  considered  this  properly  on  the  up-to-date  objective
     evidence he would have found  that  there  was  no  real  risk  to  the
     appellant in that regard.

  7. In conclusion  therefore,  although  we  do  not  entirely  uphold  the
     Adjudicator's adverse credibility  findings,  we  consider  that  those
     matters which display inconsistent reasoning are not matters which  are
     germane to the central issues in this case and even  if  one  took  the
     more favourable finding with regard to  the  relevant  matters  claimed
     before the immigration officer, these would not give  rise  to  a  real
     risk on return.  Likewise we do not consider that the  point  at  which
     the Adjudicator mis-stated the proper standard of proof  relates  to  a
     matter material to his determination and did not flaw the overall sound
     findings on risk on return.  Finally we have been able to  address  the
     issue not covered by the Adjudicator set  out  in  ground  3  and  have
     concluded that there is no real risk on return in that regard either.

  8. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                                                   D K Allen
                                                              Vice President









