
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX25265-2001      |
|On 11 June 2002            |        |RN (Risk - Connections with |
|                           |        |Mobutu) Democratic Republic |
|                           |        |of Congo CG [2002]UKIAT     |
|                           |        |03662                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.13.08.2002..                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J R A Fox (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Ms S S Ramsumair JP                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ROKA SILVAIN NIMI                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representations:
For the appellant:     Ms D O'Rawe of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr P Graham of the Home Office.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo. He was
      born on 10 April 1969.


   2. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  1  September  1997  and  claimed
      asylum immediately.

   3. He was interviewed, made a  statement  which  was  recorded.  He  then
      supplied a witness statement, a copy of a letter from the UNHCR.

   4. The respondent then considered the application and  refused  the  same
      and the reasons for refusal are set out in a letter dated 28  November
      2000.  The  appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by   an
      Adjudicator  Miss  S  Jhirad  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  3
      September 2001 who dismissed the appeal.

   5. The appellant applied for leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal  and  the
      grounds of appeal were as follows:

           "1. The appellant is a refused asylum seeker from the Democratic
           Republic of Congo ("DRC").


           2. The Learned Adjudicator, Miss S Jhirad, heard  and  dismissed
           the appellant's appeal.


           3. At paragraph 12 of her determination the  Adjudicator  stated
           that she  did  not  find  the  appellant's  credibility  "to  be
           intact". However it may be noted that  the  credibility  of  the
           appellant's evidence was not totally rejected. At  paragraph  13
           the Adjudicator  states  that  she  accords  the  appellant  the
           benefit of the doubt that he was a supporter of the MPR, "albeit
           at a low level".


           4.  At  paragraph  17  of  the  determination  the   Adjudicator
           recommended that the appellant be granted exceptional  leave  to
           remain giving the following reason:


           "DRC country background information in the public domain suggest
           that the conditions in all sectors is dire,  the  government  is
           repressive, the economic slide grows even steeper,  the  victims
           inevitably being innocent civilians."



           Ground 1



           5. The Adjudicator has failed to make a clear finding  accepting
           or rejecting the appellant's claim his father, Mr  Nimi  Senior,
           was a former government minister, prominent member  of  the  MPR
           and collaborator with former President Mobutu. It may  be  noted
           that the Adjudicator made no finding  concerning  the  political
           status of the appellant's father.


           6. It is submitted that a central issue in  this  claim  is  the
           risk of persecution for reason of  membership  of  a  particular
           social group, the appellant's family. The matter was  raised  in
           the skeleton argument before the Adjudicator (see copy  attached
           to these grounds).



           Ground 2



           7. The Adjudicator in paragraph 14 when  considering  the  UNHCR
           document  adduced  by  the  appellant  failed  to  consider  the
           explanation provided by  the  appellant  of  political  problems
           preventing  his  remaining  for   the   determination   of   his
           application  (see  paragraphs  16  to  19  of  the   appellant's
           statement).



           Ground 3



           8. The Adjudicator has failed to consider whether  the  evidence
           that led her to make a recommendation (see above) indicates that
           there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real
           risk of the appellant facing be inhuman or  degrading  treatment
           in violation of Article 3 upon return to DRC.

           9. It is submitted that the rejection of an asylum  appeal  does
           not necessarily mean that there are no ground to consider for  a
           human rights appeal.

           10. Accordingly it is submitted that the Adjudicator has  failed
           in her duty to give this appeal the most anxious  scrutiny.  The
           determination is not  in  accordance  with  the  weight  of  the
           evidence before her.


           11. In all the circumstances it  is  submitted  that  there  are
           arguable grounds of appeal and that leave should be granted."

   6. The crux of this appeal was whether the  three  documents  which  were
      adduced by the appellant in support of his appeal are  genuine.  Those
      documents are as follows:

         . A  document  from  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for
           Refugees from his field office in Brazzaville, dated 22 May 1997
           certifies that they are examining his claim for refugee status.


         . The second document, a Safe Conduct issued by  the  Republic  of
           the Congo to the appellant, issued on 3 June 1997 Brazzaville.


         . The third document, a document issued  by  the  Red  Cross,  the
           Republic for the Congo dated 31 May 1997 describes the appellant
           as the son of Maitre Nimi Mayidika Ngimbi described as  Chef  de
           Cabinet et Conseiller Prive du Chef  de  L'Etat  de  Nationalite
           Congolaise (ex Zairoise) that was issued at  Brazzaville  on  31
           May 1997.


      All those documents have a photograph of  the  appellant  attached  to
      them.


   7. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 4 December 2001,  it  was
      adjourned for one month for the  Home  Office  and  the  appellant  to
      supply further evidence the Home Office was given  an  opportunity  to
      check the documents with the appropriate authorities, the  appellant's
      solicitors supplied evidence that the appellant had three brothers who
      were claiming asylum in the United Kingdom and a sister.


   8. The matter was listed again on  15  January  2002,  the  Tribunal  was
      advised that the Home Office had written to the Foreign Office and  it
      was agreed that the matter would be listed for mention  in  six  weeks
      for both parties to make further inquiries.

   9. The matter was again listed before the Tribunal on 25  February  2002,
      it was stated  that  the  Foreign  Office  was  still  making  further
      inquires.

  10. At the hearing, Mr  Graham  advised  the  Tribunal  that  the  Foreign
      Officer was still endeavouring to  make  enquiries  and  the  Tribunal
      advised the parties that the respondent had had ample time in which to
      check the authenticity of the  documents.  The  Tribunal  would  treat
      those three documents as being genuine.

  11. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he had resided in a  family
      house in Kinshasa with his wife, two children, parents, three brothers
      and a sister. The basis of his claim is that he fears  persecution  if
      he is returned to the DRC by the pro-Kabila authorities.

  12. In evidence before the Adjudicator he told her that his father,  three
      brothers and to a certain  extent  his  sister  had  been  active  and
      prominent members of the MPR. He claimed that he was a member  of  the
      MPR between 1990 and 1997. His role had  been  to  lead  followers  in
      singing and chanting songs and slogans in praise of  Mobutu  prior  to
      rallies and party meetings and actively campaigning  during  elections
      by distributing leaflets, billposting and encouraging  the  electorate
      to vote for Mobutu. In cross-examination he had  stated  that  he  had
      been placed in charge of propaganda and  political  entertainment  for
      his area.

  13. Before the Adjudicator he gave an account of incidents experienced  by
      the family between February and May 1997.

  14. He told her that his father who was said to be a Cabinet  Director  in
      the Mobutu Government received a number of death threats and  his  car
      was stoned by Kabila supporters. As a result his parents had fled  the
      DRC and the appellant had told  her  that  he  was  unaware  of  their
      current whereabouts. He also gave an account that his brother  Laurent
      was a General Treasurer of the MPR and in March 1997 escaped  what  he
      believed to be an attempt by the Kabila supporters to assassinate him.
      Two days after this he was invited into accompanying two men on a site
      visit and they handcuffed him,  detained  him  and  tortured  him.  He
      escaped from that detention with the help of soldiers loyal to Mobutu.
      He brother Jean-Paul was an electrician in Mobutu's  palace  and  like
      his father and Laurent, was alleged to be acquainted with Mobutu on  a
      personal level. The appellant told the Adjudicator that Jean-Paul  was
      beaten unconscious by anti-Mobutists. He also said  that  his  brother
      Papi-Tuko was the Secretary of the MPR  and  was  beaten  up  and  was
      mugged by Kabila soldiers.

  15. He stated that in April 1997 the Kabila soldiers mounted a raid on the
      family house and held them there for five hours. During that time  the
      soldiers allegedly amputated the tip of the appellant's right toe. His
      sister  Jeanne,  who  was  a  party  singer  and  dancer  and  readily
      identifiable as a Mobutu supporter from film footage of her activities
      at MPR events was allegedly gang raped by soldiers.

  16. They sought refuge in the Tshatchi camp where they stayed for two days
      before returning home having been assured by Mobutu's  officials  that
      it was safe  to  do  so.  However,  continuous  harassment  by  Kabila
      supporters drove them back to Tshatchi camp on 1 May 1997. In May 1997
      the appellant and siblings  left  the  camp  and  went  to  the  Congo
      (Brazzaville) where they sought asylum. The Field Office of the  UNHCR
      issued a letter on 22 May 1997 with a validity of three months pending
      examination of their case. On 31 May 1997 the Red Cross provided  them
      with a document that secured them a travel permit  issued  on  3  June
      1997 by the Congolese Government enabling them  to  leave  Brazzaville
      for the UK.

  17. The appellant then gave an account of the circumstances  in  which  he
      travelled to the United Kingdom.

  18. The Adjudicator did not believe this account. It is  quite  clear  and
      with regard to the Tribunal ruling in relation to the  documents  that
      the appellant  produced,  the  appellant  and  his  family  had  close
      personal connections with Mobutu,  the  events  as  described  by  the
      appellant are true.

  19. It is clear from the objective evidence if the appellant was  returned
      to the Congo and because of his  families  close  associations  namely
      that his father was Chef de Cabinet to President Mobutu he would  have
      a well founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason. There is a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be persecuted if he  was
      so returned.

  20. In those circumstances and having regard to the Tribunal's finding  in
      relation to the authenticity  of  the  documents  and  the  particular
      circumstances of this particular case, the appeal is allowed.





                                                                   J R A Fox

                                                              Vice President
