


       OS (Sufficiency of Protection-Sikh-Separatists) India CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       00843

                                HX58313-2000




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of hearing: 20 February 2002

                                                Date Determination notified:


                                 20.02.2002
                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)

                             Mr. A. G. Jeevanjee


                            Mr C. A. N. Edinboro



                                   Between


                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                                 ONKAR SINGH

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State.  The Respondent is a  citizen
      of  India.  The  Appellant  has  been  given  leave  to   appeal   the
      determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr  R.  J.  C.  Ince)  allowing  the
      Respondent's appeal against the  Appellant's  decision  to  refuse  to
      grant him leave to enter the United Kingdom and to refuse asylum.


   2. Mr M. Pichamuthu, who is a Home Office Presenting Officer, represented
      the Appellant.  Mr  L.  Jackson  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Herwald
      Seddon, Solicitors, appeared for the Respondent.


   3. The Respondent arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  1  July  1999  and
      claimed asylum.  The notice containing the decision against  which  he
      appeals is dated 11 June 2000.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 16
      March 2001 and leave to appeal was granted on 10 December 2001.


   4. The Respondent is a Sikh.  The Adjudicator found him to be a  credible
      witness.  The Respondent  and  before  him  his  father  supported  an
      independent state for Sikhs.  His father  was  killed  in  1985  after
      torture by the police. The family home was used as a refuge for  those
      who were fighting for an independent state.  The Respondent became  an
      active member of  the  organisation,  organising  demonstrations  from
      1993.  He was arrested by the police on a number of occasions,  beaten
      and then released.  In 1994 the frequency of arrests increased and  by
      1999 he was being detained about six times a year  on  an  average  of
      five days at a time.  He was detained for more than one period of  two
      months in early 1999.  In June 1999 he was  seriously  beaten  by  the
      police and only released after  his  mother  paid  a  bribe.   On  his
      release the police made it clear to him that if they ever found him in
      a police station in India he would not get out of  prison  alive.   He
      was beaten again, to reinforce the message.  An agent  was  found;  he
      travelled to Delhi, and then left the country.


   5. The Adjudicator made a careful review of the country  information  and
      concluded that the Respondent had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
      in the Punjab.  Whilst we are by no means certain that we  would  have
      reached the same conclusion there is no appeal against  this  part  of
      the determination, which, as a result, forms the starting point of our
      deliberations.


   6. The Adjudicator went on to consider the question of  internal  flight.
      He asked himself whether, in the light of the country information, the
      Respondent was a "history sheeter" and/or a "habitual  offender".   He
      recorded that, on the country information,  there  appeared  to  be  a
      discrepancy as to whether these two categories were  effectively  one.
      Paragraph 15 of the determination bears repetition;


        "I consider that the Appellant falls  within  this  category.   His
        evidence is that  he  was  detained  on  an  increasing  basis  and
        suffered more and more physical abuse by the police.  This suggests
        that they regard him as a recidivist.  Having said this, it appears
        that, for instance, the authorities in Delhi are not informed about
        those wanted in the Punjab and on  this  basis  there  is  a  clear
        divergence of opinion as to whether  "history  sheeters"  would  be
        sought in, for example, Delhi.  (Certainly, I do not think that  it
        would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate to  Delhi.   He
        has managed to relocate to the United Kingdom and obtain employment
        for himself, and his appearance indicates that  he  is  willing  to
        blend into his surroundings and would not necessarily be identified
        as a Sikh even if he returned  to  India  and,  more  specifically,
        Delhi).   This  contradiction  in   the   objective   evidence   is
        unfortunate and the answer, I believe, is to proceed with  caution.
        I consider this to be a situation where, as there is a conflict  in
        the objective evidence before me, the doubt should be  resolved  in
        favour of the Appellant and consequently I conclude  that  internal
        flight is not a realistic possibility  as  there  is  a  reasonable
        likelihood or risk that he will be targeted as a "history sheeter".




   7. In paragraph 16 the Adjudicator said,


             "Accordingly, as I consider that  the  Appellant  is  credible,
        that he has a well founded fear of persecution in Punjab  and  that
        there is a serious possibility that he would  be  sought  in  other
        parts of India, I allow this appeal and  direct  the  Secretary  of
        State to grant the Appellant leave to enter the United Kingdom as a
        refugee".

   8. Mr Pichamuthu submitted that  these  conclusions  turned  on  internal
      flight.  Mr Jackson's submitted that the Adjudicator  had  found  that
      the Respondent had a well founded fear of persecution for a Convention
      reason throughout India, not just in  the  Punjab.   After  a  careful
      reading of paragraphs 15 and 16 we find that the Adjudicator is likely
      to have intended to say that the Respondent  had  established  a  well
      founded fear of persecution throughout India because, if  he  returned
      to a part of India other than the Punjab, the police would be  looking
      for him and would either arrest and seriously ill treat him or  return
      him to the Punjab where the  same  thing  would  happen.   If  we  are
      mistaken and  the  Adjudicator  intended  to  say  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable or unduly harsh to return the Respondent  to  a  part  of
      India other than the Punjab  it  would  appear  to  be  for  the  same
      reasons.  We draw these inferences from the phrases, "will be targeted
      as a "history sheeter"" and "he would be  sought  in  other  parts  of
      India".


   9.  Leave to appeal was not granted on the ground that the  determination
      was unsafe because it  was  prepared  outside  the  usual  three-month
      period.  It was only just outside this period and  the  Appellant  did
      not seek leave to reopen the issue at the hearing.


  10. None of Mr Pichamuthu's submissions persuade us that the second ground
      of appeal in respect of which leave was granted can make any  material
      difference to the determination or our  conclusions.   Sufficiency  of
      protection is not a relevant consideration in circumstances where  the
      persecution feared, and found, is at the hands of the authorities,  in
      this case the police in the Punjab and elsewhere in India.


  11.  The only other ground of appeal is that, "the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      his findings in (sic) internal flight.  There is no  evidence  of  any
      charges having been issued against the Appellant or  any  convictions.
      In the circumstances it is argued that the Appellant is not a "history
      sheeter".


  12. The only country information  before  us  is  the  Home  Office  India
      Country Assessment dated October 2001.  It would appear that this  was
      the main source of  information  before  the  Adjudicator.   The  most
      important paragraph is 5.6.74 which states,


        "Other sources indicate that the Punjab police would be  likely  to
        pursue someone they wanted outside the State.  People at risk would
        include militants or perceived militants  and  their  families  and
        close supporters.  "History sheeters" i.e. those with a  record  of
        previous arrests and detentions and "habitual  offenders"  -  those
        who are rounded up whenever anything untoward happens - might  also
        be at risk.  Lists of habitual offenders are apparently distributed
        across India by the police computer system".

The conflicting evidence to which the  Adjudicator  refers  comes  from  the
preceding paragraph in which the last sentence states, "Reference  was  made
to the fact that the authorities in  Delhi  are  not  informed  about  those
wanted in Punjab".


  13. The Adjudicator addressed the question of whether  "history  sheeters"
      and "habitual offenders" fell within one  composite  or  two  separate
      categories.  He  appears  to  have  concluded  that  they  formed  one
      composite category.  We do not agree.  We interpret  paragraph  5.6.74
      to contain two categories. History sheeters are those with a record of
      previous arrests and detentions. Habitual offenders are those who  are
      rounded up whenever anything untoward happens.  We accept  that  there
      may be an overlap. It is likely that the Respondent comes within  both
      categories.  Whilst he may not have a record of being  charged  and/or
      convicted the definition of history sheeters refers  to  a  record  of
      previous arrests and detentions, which he suffered, not  a  record  of
      previous charges or convictions.  In the light  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings of fact the Respondent was rounded up  at  regular  intervals
      and it is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  this  would  have  included
      occasions on which something untoward had happened.


  14. The last sentence in paragraph 5.6.73 of  the  Country  Assessment  is
      difficult to reconcile with paragraph 5.6.74. In the circumstances the
      Adjudicator was correct to resolve the  ambiguity  in  favour  of  the
      Respondent.  Paragraph 5.6.74 is clear.


  15. We agree with the Adjudicator's conclusions and dismiss the  Secretary
      of State's appeal.







   ......................................
   P. R. Moulden
   Vice-President

