
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX51796-2000      |
|On 2 September 2002        |        |16 (Return - Kabul -        |
|Dictated 2 September 2002  |        |Pashtun) Afghanistan cg     |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 06507          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....13.02.2003....                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr T Davey                                                        |
|Mr A Jeevanjee                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|THE SIXTEENTH MAN                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Decision:        Appeal dismissed


Appearances:


For the appellant:           Mr N Oakeshott, Refugee Legal Centre

For the respondent:          Mr  Blundell, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan of Pashtun ethnicity,  appeals
      the decision of the respondent  who  refused  the  appellant's  asylum
      claim on 26 February 2000.  The appeal was made under the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Act 1993 Section 8(1).  The appellant arrived along with a
      number of other persons on an Ariana airlines flight which was subject
      of a claimed hi-jack leading to the arrival in the United Kingdom on 7
      February 2000.  The appellant is not identified by name at the request
      of the parties and to some extent it would appear  that  part  of  the
      basis of his claim, namely, a fear of the Taliban, has in  the  events
      that have occurred, been superseded.


   2. In any event at the hearing of the appeal the Tribunal considered  the
      appellant's claim entirely afresh hearing evidence from the  appellant
      together with a written statement and  oral  evidence  from  Mr  Peter
      Marsden who is an information co-ordinator for BAAG (British  Agencies
      Afghanistan Group).

   3. The appellant's claim, before a legal panel of Adjudicators led by His
      Honour Judge Dunn QC, was rejected.  The claim then made  was  on  two
      main bases.  First some 40 years previously the appellant's father had
      killed two family members  and  injured  a  third  for  which  he  was
      sentenced to  and  served  10  years  imprisonment.    Although  these
      matters occurred before his birth, the appellant feared a vendetta  or
      blood  feud  against  himself  by  certain  relatives.   Secondly  the
      appellant had a fear of the Taliban following his detention by them in
      August 1999.

   4. The appellant claimed to be of interest to the Taliban because of  his
      father's  employment  as  a  soldier  in  the   army   controlled   by
      Najibullah's government:  the evidence accepted was that the appellant
      had never supported that regime.   The  appellant  claims  that  after
      being detained and ill-treated for 15 days in 1999 by the Taliban  his
      release had been secured on the strength of representations  of  local
      villagers who knew his true background and who persuaded  the  Taliban
      that there was no need to have any interest in him.

   5. Before the panel of Adjudicators the appellant had also  claimed  that
      the Taliban had come searching  for  him  some  10  times:  the  panel
      rejected the credibility of that element  of  the  claim  albeit  they
      accepted on the face of it that he had been the subject of interest on
      that one and only occasion.  Thus, on the face of  the  chronology  as
      accepted by the  panel  not  only  had  the  incident  of  the  father
      murdering other family members occurred, 40 years, previously, but his
      father's 10 years imprisonment for murder had  been  served  and  that
      thereafter the father had "worked" for Najibullah for  some  10  years
      until some 8 or 9 years prior to the hearing before the panel in 2000.
       The appellant's father had died of natural causes in the early 1990s.
       Accordingly, it would appear from the  chronology  that  at  no  time
      after the release of the father from prison was he then the subject of
      a vendetta by other  family  members  nor  prior  to  the  appellant's
      fortuitous shopping expedition to Masar-i-Sharif was the appellant the
      subject of adverse attentions in pursuit of the vendetta.

   6. The claim now put in relation to the vendetta, is that notwithstanding
      the old history of the matter there is nevertheless the prospect  that
      those other family members, who still nurse adverse  feelings  towards
      the  appellant's  father,  would  use  the  device  of  making   false
      accusations against him to the authorities or the American  forces  or
      any other security forces seeking to  find  the  Taliban  or  Alquaeda
      fighters.  The appellant said that this way would be used in order  to
      avoid the possibility of further vendetta  being  taken  against  that
      other part of the family.  We did not see how this would, in  reality,
      conceal the matter from members of the appellant's family  willing  to
      preserve the vendetta.

   7. On the evidence before us we found, that notwithstanding  the  opinion
      expressed by the appellant as to his fears on  return  or  indeed  the
      necessary speculation that formed the basis of Mr Marsden's opinion of
      these matters, that the vendetta was an old issue which had  never  in
      itself given rise to any real or actual threat to the appellant  prior
      to his departure.  Further, whilst we cannot dispute  the  possibility
      of the vendetta reviving, the evidence did not show that there was the
      reasonable likelihood of this happening either by direct  or  indirect
      steps being taken using the authorities to bring about  the  death  of
      the appellant or some other ill fate.

   8. It was accepted by the appellant's representative that if was directly
      from by family relatives against the appellant  that  that  would  not
      amount to persecution for a Convention reason.  In order to bring  the
      claim  within  the  Convention  the  appellant's  representative   was
      essentially forced to argue that the ill-treatment would arise from an
      imputed political opinion, through  the  false  allegation,  that  the
      appellant was against the current authorities or regime now in control
      of Afghanistan or a Taliban supporter  or  alternatively  a  terrorist
      associated with the Alquaeda organisation.  Even if it was possible to
      bring the claim within  Refugee Convention through third parties we do
      not find on the evidence that the appellant has discharged the  burden
      of proof that  there  is  the  reasonable  likelihood  of  persecution
      because of the vendetta whether by relatives  directly  or  indirectly
      through false allegations.




   9. The next basis of claim is the connection with his father and the army
      run by the Najibullah government.  The evidence is  less  than  clear,
      perhaps not surprising given the appellant's age at relevant times, as
      to what his father did or if it was of  any  significance.   There  is
      nothing  to  suggest,  given   the   appellant's   relatively   humble
      background, that his father was either high ranking or serving in some
      particularly sensitive role such as to attract adverse attention.   It
      is noteworthy that the appellant's father who survived the fall of the
      Najibullah regime did not become the subject of adverse attention from
      the Mujahadeen or possibly Taliban prior to his death.


  10. Likewise, other than the single incident  involving  the  Taliban  the
      appellant did not through family connection become of any interest  to
      the authorities.  It is noteworthy that  the  appellant  was  released
      and, even though he claimed at various stages to be  in  hiding,  felt
      able to use internal flights and travel  to  the  north  east  of  the
      country for his shopping expedition.

  11. In these circumstances, we find that the alleged connection  with  the
      Najibullah regime is so distant as  to  give  rise  to  no  reasonable
      likelihood of persecution through either any imputed political opinion
      to the appellant or for any imputed religious opinion (in relation  to
      the secular society that the communist regime of Mr Najibullah  sought
      to  bring  about)  or  from  the  Taliban   hereafter   or   religious
      fundamentalists  or  extremists  who  espouse  similar  Islamic  views
      opposed to a secular state in Afghanistan.

  12. A further element  of  the  claim  relates  to  the  presence  of  the
      appellant on board the aircraft which was hi-jacked.  It is said  that
      the appellant by refusing to return and making an asylum claim will be
      imputed with  anti-Taliban  or  anti-religious  views  such  that  the
      attempts to re-group by the Taliban or other religious  extremists  or
      indeed Alquaeda would lead to him being subject to persecution  for  a
      Convention reason namely, opposition to an Islamic state.  Further  or
      in the alternative it is said that the appellant would, through having
      stayed in the United Kingdom, have become tainted by  western  culture
      and the secular society: he would  not  be  tolerated  on  his  return
      because he was so tainted by non Islamic experiences.

  13. There is no evidence before us, other than in respect of the air crew,
      that any difficulties have arisen for those  on  board  the  hi-jacked
      aircraft who returned either during  the  period  of  the  Taliban  or
      thereafter.  We cannot find any evidence, in the  written  submissions
      and material given  to  us,  which  demonstrates  that  failed  asylum
      seekers either before the events in question or  since,  if  returned,
      have been or were likely to be the subject of adverse attention either
      from of the government of Afghanistan at a national or local level.

  14. We see no basis why this appellant, who has  apparently  done  nothing
      whilst in the United Kingdom, to draw himself to the attention of  the
      present  or  former  authorities  in  Afghanistan,  should  face   any
      continuing interest in him now or on return or thereafter.

  15. We are satisfied on the evidence, on the basis  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's undertaking that the appellant would only be removed to Kabul,
      that there is no evidence which goes to show that the appellant  could
      not safely journey to his home area  in  Khost  (at  a  small  village
      nearby) in the area  of  Paktia.   It  may  be  that  there  are  some
      checkpoints on the route and  bribes  might  be  sought  for  passage.
      Those bribes would be paid simply on the  basis  of  criminal  actions
      rather than arising  from  any  Convention  reason.   The  appellant's
      evidence was clearly that he  had  made  enquiries  (in  an  extensive
      telephone conversation lasting some 20 minutes) and so far as  he  was
      aware his wife, three children and other family relatives continued to
      live on what he described as a big farm.    They  had  remained  there
      since his departure  and  indeed  claim  there  had  been  no  adverse
      attentions by any authorities in connection with his presence  in  the
      UK.   The  appellant,  by  his  further   statement,   produced   some
      generalised evidence relating to a cousin (Gharsie) who had telephoned
      him, and warned him that he (Gharsie) had been the  subject  of  false
      allegations which had caused him to flee and that he  Gharsie  thought
      that similar risks might arise in respect of the appellant.  The whole
      basis of this element of the evidence was vague, generalised  and  did
      not show the basis of the  false  accusation  had  been  made  against
      Gharsie.  It was  simply  speculative  as  to  what  might  happen  in
      relation to the appellant.  On the face of it therefore  we  were  not
      satisfied that  the  evidence  disclosed  any  basis  for  a  fear  of
      persecution founded on the appellant's ethnicity as a Pashtun.

  16. The evidence of Mr Marsden was that Pashtun in Kabul had a  subjective
      fear of the northern alliance forces not least given the experience of
      Pashtuns in Masar-i-Sharif.  Nevertheless, the  general  evidence  did
      not show that indeed  those  fears  are  born  out  by  the  objective
      evidence relating to Kabul.  For those reasons we are  satisfied  that
      there is no reason why the appellant on  return  to  Kabul  could  not
      safely make his way from there  to  the  home  area  in  the  east  of
      Afghanistan.

  17. For these reasons the internal flight alternative does not fall to  be
      considered nor the issue of whether such would be unduly harsh.

  18. The appeal is dismissed.




                                                   T B Davey

