
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX48247-2001      |
|On 15 November 2002        |        |AA (Failed Asylum Seeker)   |
|                           |        |Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 05894 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........7 January 2003.................................          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                   |
|Mr C A N Edinboro                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ALAELDIN RABIE SAAD ABDULLAH                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant, a citizen of The Sudan, appeal the determination  of
        an Adjudicator (Miss C M  Mather)  who  dismissed  the  appellant's
        appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his
        application for asylum.

     2. The appellant was represented  before  us  by  Mrs  P  Maudsley  of
        Counsel instructed by A S Law, Solicitors.  Mr  J  McGirr  appeared
        for the Secretary of State.

     3. Leave  was  granted  on  the  question  whether  the  Adjudicator's
        credibility findings sufficiently covered the issues in the case.

     4. The appellant claimed he had been arrested in 1990 because  of  his
        involvement in the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP).   He  undertook
        military service between 1992 and 1994.   He  then  absconded.   In
        1997 he claimed that the authorities attempted to recruit him as  a
        spy.  In 1998 he was arrested attempting to leave the  country  and
        sentenced to a term of 6  months  imprisonment.   On  a  subsequent
        attempt to leave the country he was  detained  for  3  months.   He
        finally left Sudan on 13 June 2000 and claimed asylum on  the  same
        day in the United Kingdom.

     5. The appellant gave  oral  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
        appellant's history is fully  summarised  in  paragraph  6  of  the
        determination. The Adjudicator  meticulously  details  the  various
        versions of events given by the appellant.   In  paragraph  11  the
        Adjudicator states that she was concerned  as  to  the  appellant's
        credibility.  She notes conflicting accounts being given about  his
        claimed arrest in 1997.  She found the evidence  to  be  inherently
        implausible and she gives reasons for her conclusions.

     6. The Adjudicator dealt with the attempt to leave Sudan  on  a  false
        passport.  The Adjudicator rejected  the  suggestion  that  he  was
        concerned that after his release the security forces would continue
        to search for him because of his failure to act as a spy for  them.



     7. The Adjudicator noted the discrepancies about the dates of  release
        from the term of  imprisonment  that  the  appellant  said  he  had
        served.  There was a further discrepancy about the time it took for
        him to have another attempt to leave Sudan.   There  was  indeed  a
        discrepancy about which border he was going to cross.  In paragraph
        25 of the determination the Adjudicator stated  that  she  did  not
        accept that the appellant had  been  persecuted  in  the  past  for
        political opinion and that she did not  accept  that  he  would  be
        persecuted in the future.

     8. Counsel submitted that the Adjudicator had failed  to  address  the
        major issues in the case and had not rejected the appellant's story
        in  its  entirety.   Further,  the  Adjudicator  had  not  put  the
        appellant's account into the context  of  the  objective  material.
        It was apparent  from  the  UNHCR  Report  in  February  2001  that
        suspected opponents of the regime were beaten and the human  rights
        record of the Sudan  was  poor.   There  was  a  risk  of  harm  to
        returning asylum seekers as appeared from an expert's report  which
        had been before the Special Adjudicator compiled  by  Peter  Verney
        and dated 5 November 2001.  Reference was also  made  to  the  Home
        Office Country Assessment and the Tribunal case of Abdullah.

     9. Mr McGirr, while acknowledging that the Adjudicator's findings were
        not as clearly expressed as they might be, submitted that  she  had
        made it clear that she had rejected the account of past persecution
        or the claim that persecution might arise in future in paragraph 25
        of her determination.  She had carefully gone through the  evidence
        and reached a logical decision.  The question of  the  1998  prison
        sentence was covered in the  determination  at  paragraph  26,  for
        example, and the Adjudicator had gone into the  matter  adequately.
        It was unnecessary to remit the matter as Counsel had requested  as
        the Adjudicator had gone through the evidence so  thoroughly.   The
        evidence had been rejected and accordingly Counsel's  reference  to
        the objective material  had  to  be  seen  in  that  context.   The
        expert's report had been compiled in respect of another  individual
        and was somewhat out of date.  The Home Office  Country  Assessment
        provided more up to date information.  Reference was made to a June
        2002 Bulletin.  The case of Abdullah should be  distinguished.   In
        that case the appellant's uncle had been a prominent member of  the
        Umma Party.  In this case the appellant's credibility had not  been
        accepted.

    10. In reply, Counsel submitted that it had  been  acknowledged  by  Mr
        McGirr that the determination was inadequate.  The  observation  in
        paragraph  25  was   very   general   and   insufficient   in   the
        circumstances.

    11. At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination.
         We will not reproduce the Adjudicator's determination herein  but,
        suffice it to say, that the Adjudicator did go through the evidence
        with great care in paragraph 6 of  her  determination  highlighting
        various differences in the appellant's accounts as she did so.  She
        then  goes  through  the  evidence  after  paragraph  12   of   her
        determination explaining why she had concerns about the appellant's
        credibility.  It does appear clear to us that on any  fair  reading
        of this  determination  the  Adjudicator  was  rejecting  what  the
        appellant had to  say  and  she  has  given  more  than  sufficient
        reasoning to support her conclusions.  She makes it clear that  she
        did not accept that the appellant had been persecuted in  the  past
        as he claimed.  It must be  recalled  that  the  burden  in  asylum
        appeals, light though it is, remains with the appellant and  it  is
        plain in our view  that  the  Adjudicator  felt  that  he  had  not
        discharged that burden.

    12. We regard it as completely unarguable that the  Adjudicator  failed
        to have regard to the objective material before her.  We note  that
        it was submitted to her (see paragraph 8 of the  determination)  by
        the appellant's representative that the appellant's case should  be
        looked at in the light of the background material  and  submissions
        were made on it and the Adjudicator states in paragraph 10 that she
        had taken into account of all the evidence before her including the
        background information.   She  refers  expressly  to  the  expert's
        report in paragraph 24 of the determination.  The  one  matter  the
        Adjudicator appears to have been prepared to accept  was  the  fact
        that the appellant had got into trouble for attempting to leave the
        country illegally.

    13.  The  submission  is  made  that  the  appellant  will   get   into
        difficulties on return as a  failed  asylum  seeker.   Reliance  is
        placed on an expert's report compiled for another  individual,  not
        this appellant.  Counsel also attempted  to  persuade  us  to  have
        regard to a UNHCR message dated 11 February 2002 although this  was
        not in the bundle before us.  A copy of that  document  accompanied
        the grounds of appeal but it has to  be  clearly  appreciated  that
        copies of all documents relied on must be submitted with the  Court
        bundle in triplicate and served on the respondent.   In  this  case
        the most up to date Bulletin we  have  is  June  2002  and  we  are
        satisfied that this gives an appropriate up to  date  statement  of
        the position.  This Bulletin reads as follows:

        "Treatment of Failed Asylum Seekers


        1. The question of the safety of returning failed asylum seekers to
           Sudan often comes up in asylum appeals.  The current Home Office
           policy is to return failed asylum seekers to Khartoum  only.   A
           Danish Immigration Service fact-finding mission  to  Kartoum  in
           2001 looked at the subject of the  safety  of  returning  failed
           asylum  seekers  to  Sudan.   Foreign  embassy  and   diplomatic
           officials,  government  officials,  members  of   human   rights
           organisations and other NGOs  were  interviewed  and  consulted.
           The fact-finding mission found out from the  people  interviewed
           and consulted that:

               . In  general,  failed  asylum  seekers  with  proper  travel
                 documentation encounter no problems when returned to Sudan.
                  Sudanese nationals, in general,  are  free  to  enter  and
                 leave Sudan although  an  exit  visa  is  needed  before  a
                 Sudanese national can leave the country.


               . The Sudanese authorities do not have a specific  policy  on
                 returning  failed  asylum  seekers.   They  are   generally
                 treated in the  same  way  that  other  returning  Sudanese
                 nationals are  treated.   It  is  therefore,  not  official
                 government policy to harass or persecute  returning  failed
                 asylum seekers on the basis  that  these  individuals  have
                 applied for asylum abroad.

               . The airport security police at Khartoum  have  register  of
                 persons wanted by the police.  These  are  individuals  who
                 have had  civil  proceedings  made  against  them  and  are
                 therefore criminals or suspect criminals.

        Government Decree No 4/B307 Issued to Border Control Guards


        2. In some asylum  appeal  cases,  appellants  and/or  their  legal
           representatives have stated that  the  above  decree,  allegedly
           issued by the Government to border control guards, is in  force.
           It is alleged that this decree authorises the security forces to
           detain and question any Sudanese national returning to Sudan who
           has been abroad for more than one year or more.  It is not clear
           whether this decree has ever been in force at some point in  the
           past but it is no longer in force at the present time.
        3. Sudanese nationals who have been aboard for more than one  year,
           however, do have to report to the tax authorities  in  Sudan  on
           their return.  This is because  Sudanese  nationals  abroad  are
           required to pay tax on  foreign  income  for  the  period  spent
           abroad."

    14. We believe that the Adjudicator made  sufficient  adverse  findings
        concerning the  appellant's  general  credibility  to  warrant  her
        conclusion that he had not suffered persecution  in  the  past  nor
        would he receive persecution in  the  future.   We  find  that  her
        factual assessment was adequate in the circumstances  and  properly
        arrived at in the light of the  background  material.   So  far  as
        returning a failed asylum seeker is concerned, the UNHCR message on
        which  Counsel  attempted  to  place  reliance  indicates  that  in
        principle the UNCHR is not opposed to the return of  failed  asylum
        seekers to Sudan.  They must  of  course,  have  a  full  and  fair
        hearing and we believe that the appellant had that.  The note makes
        mention of several potential sources of risk but we  consider  that
        the  June  2002  Bulletin  sets  out  the  position   clearly   and
        objectively and it is a properly sourced document.  In  any  event,
        the UNHCR message was not properly placed before us.

    15. For the reasons we have given, the appellant  has  not  established
        his case under either the 1950 or 1951 Conventions to the  required
        standard and this appeal is dismissed.




                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President











