

Appeal No. HX 27815-02
      SF (Sufficiency of Protection-KAA-Michigan Guidelines ) Iraq CG [2002]
                                                                 UKIAT 07376

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date heard:   27 February  2003
                                                  Date notified : 24/03/2003

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                              MR A  A  LLOYD JP

                                                       Between

                           MR SALAR MOHAMMAD FARAJ

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national  of  Iraq,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mrs C M Graham,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State giving  directions
for removal having refused asylum.  Mr S  Vokes  of  Counsel  instructed  by
Rais Solicitors appeared for the appellant. Mrs G Collinge appeared for  the
respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The adjudicator found  the  appellant  credible.  He  accepted  that  the
claimant came from Jalawla,  an  area  inside  Baghdad-controlled  Iraq.  Of
Kurdish ethnic origin, he had joined the PUK in 1995. The Iraqi  authorities
discovered this. In September 2001 they arrested, detained and  ill  treated
him. His father, a wealthy man,  engaged  a  friend  of  his  to  bribe  the
authorities to secure the appellant`s release. The  appellant  escaped  from
custody on 25 October 2001 and after hiding for four days  at  his  father`s
friend's house  in  Monsul,  he  left  Iraq  illegally.  In  view  of  these
experiences  the  adjudicator  accepted  the   appellant   had   experienced
persecution and would face a risk of  further  persecution  if  returned  to
Central Iraq.

4. The appellant said he was unable  to  relocate  to  the  KAA  because  of
tribal difficulties which had arisen following his father`s  inheritance  of
a large piece of  land  in  the  Kalar  region  of  Kurdistan.  Neighbouring
families from a different tribe claimed ownership.  The  appellant's  father
realised that to contest ownership would mean  engaging  in  a  blood  feud.
Since these families had powerful connections in the PUK and  the  KDP,  the
appellant would be at risk from these families against which  he  would  not
receive effective protection.

5. However, the adjudicator did not accept that it  would  be  unduly  harsh
for the appellant to  relocate  within  the  KAA.  He  considered  that  the
appellant`s life would only be  in  danger  if  he  returned  to  Kalar  and
attempted to claim ownership of the land. Since the appellant`s  father  had
left Kurdistan before there was any confrontation with the rival  tribe,  he
did not accept that a blood feud  existed.   Whilst  he  accepted  that  the
rival tribe had powerful relatives in the PUK and KDP  and  that  the  rival
tribe was a very large  one  with  members  spread  out  over  the  KAA,  he
considered  that  this  presented  no  risk  to  the  appellant  since   any
confrontation was avoided by the father  removing  himself  and  his  family
from Kurdistan before any tribal confrontation began.

6. Given the  evidence  that  the  appellant  and  his  family  had  had  no
difficulties with the PUK authorities in moving from  Central  Iraq  to  the
Kalar region, we see no basis in this case to consider  that  the  appellant
would be someone  who  the  KAA  authorities  would  not  admit  into  their
territory as a former resident. Mr Vokes did  not  adduce  any  evidence  to
demonstrate that the appellant would not be admitted back.

7. Mr Vokes challenged the adjudicator`s findings on a number of grounds.

8. Mr Vokes maintained that the adjudicator should not have  concluded  that
the appellant would be safe in the KAA since he  would  face  two  different
sources of harm. One was that from Iraqi agents who were known to be  active
within the KAA. The other was from members of the  powerfully-connected  and
widely spread Nauroli tribe who had  taken  over  the  appellant`s  father`s
land in the Kalar region. In relation to  both  these  sources  of  harm  he
asked us to view the adjudicator`s reasoning as flawed.

9. We would accept that the adjudicator failed to address the issue of  harm
from Iraqi agents active within the KAA, although  since  nothing  was  said
about this in the grounds of appeal Mr Vokes has left it  somewhat  late  to
raise now. We would also accept that there is  objective  evidence  to  show
that Iraqi agents do  operate  to  some  extent  within  the  KAA.  Equally,
however, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that they have been  able
to prevent the PUK or KDP from effectively  protecting  its  own  population
against harm from such agents, except in unusual circumstances. In the  case
of this appellant, he was a member of the PUK and so in our  view  would  be
in a better position to gain protection from the PUK  than  members  of  the
population in that  area  who  were  not  former  or  present  PUK  members.
Furthermore, on the appellant`s own account, the reason why  he  had  fallen
foul of the Iraqi authorities was because they had come to learn he  was  an
active PUK member. There was no indication that  they  perceived  him  as  a
high-profile  opponent  of  the  Baghdad  regime.  Furthermore,  the   Iraqi
authorities had been prepared to release him on payment  of  a  bribe.  That
again was a clear indication that he was not considered a serious threat  to
the regime.  Whilst  the  adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  if
returned to Iraq the authorities might again target him for  his  PUK  past,
the adjudicator was also entitled to conclude that  it  was  not  reasonably
likely that the interest of the Iraqi authorities would  extend  beyond  the
territory they controlled.

10. As regards the issue of harm from members of the Nauroli  tribe  in  the
KAA, we are  not  at  all  persuaded  by  Mr  Vokes`  submissions  that  the
appellant faced any real risk from them, certainly  not  outside  the  Kalar
region. If the appellant did not relocate within the Kalar  region,  members
of this tribe would have no reason to perceive him as a threat to  them.  In
this regard it must be recalled that it was  the  appellant`s  own  evidence
that his father had not pursued his claim to the disputed  land.  To  assert
as did Mr Vokes that members  of  this  tribe  might  view  the  appellant`s
return to anywhere in the KAA save for the Kalar region as evidence that  he
would try and win back the land  - and so would be at real risk  of  a  pre-
emptive strike by them - was far too speculative. Any such risk was  remote,
not real. Insofar as Mr Vokes sought to argue that the wrongful  deprivation
of the appellant`s  property  amounted  to  a  violation  of  his  right  to
property and so was a factor showing undue hardship, it seems to us that  if
the appellant`s father had decided not to  pursue  it,  there  was  no  real
basis for considering that the appellant would; and he did not say  that  he
would. In any event, we do not see that deprivation of this  property  would
wholly extinguish the appellant`s right to acquire and own  property  within
the KAA.

11. We also consider the adjudicator was right to conclude  that  relocation
would not be unduly harsh for any other reasons. There was no evidence  that
the appellant was in poor health. He was a young single male.  He  had  some
familiarity with the PUK region through prior residence there and was a  PUK
member. His family, being wealthy, could be expected to do what they  could,
even if at a distance.

12. Given that the appellant had failed to establish he would  face  a  real
risk from any source within the KAA, it is  not  necessary  to  consider  as
such whether the authorities in the KAA could  effectively  protect  against
such harm.  But  accepting  as  we  do  that  in  the  context  of  internal
relocation, a claimant establishing risk in  his  home  area  satisfies  the
fear test, we recognise that the extent to which  an  appellant  can  access
meaningful protection in an alternative site remains a central  issue.  Such
an  approach  is  in  conformity  with  that  adumbrated  by  Brooke  LJ  in
Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271 at 294 and by  the  Tribunal  in  the  starred
determination AE and FE [2002] UKIAT 05237 at paragraph 17.  It is  also  in
conformity with that adopted in the  Michigan  Guidelines  at  paragraph  13
which identifies three remaining stages of inquiry once the first  stage  of
establishing a well-founded fear of persecution in at  least  some  part  of
the country of origin has been established:

      "(a) Does the proposed site of internal protection afford the  asylum-
      seeker a meaningful "antidote" to the identified risk of persecution?
      (b) Is the proposed site of internal protection free from other  risks
      which either amount to, or are tantamount to, a risk of persecution?
      (c) Do local conditions in the proposed site of internal protection at
      least meet the Refugee Convention`s  minimalist  conceptualisation  of
      'protection'?"


13. Essentially what we have concluded  in  this  case  is  that  relocation
within the PUK area would afford the appellant a meaningful antidote to  the
identified risk of persecution from agents of  the  national  government  in
control in Central Iraq. We have further concluded  that  the  PUK  area  is
free from risks of serious harm from the Nauroli tribe. And  we  have  found
no evidence to show that the local conditions in the PUK region  would  deny
the appellant`s fundamental human rights.

14. On the protection issue, Mr Vokes nevertheless contended  that  in  view
of the acceptance by the Secretary of State that there  was  at  present  no
practical way to implement removal directions, it could  not  be  said  that
the  appellant  could  genuinely  access  KAA  territory.  In  the  Michigan
Guidelines and elsewhere the requirement of realistic access  was  seen,  he
said, as an essential  part  of  the  internal  flight/relocation/protection
test.

15. Mr Vokes is quite correct in our view to describe genuine  or  realistic
access as a prerequisite to showing  the  existence  of  a  viable  internal
relocation alternative.

16. The Michigan Guidelines, whose full text is published  as  an  annex  to
the New Zealand case, Refugee Appeal No. 71684/99 reported  in  [2000]  INLR
165, put the matter this way:

      "9. Because the prospective analysis of internal protection occurs  at
      a point in time when the asylum-seeker has already  left  his  or  her
      home state, a present possibility of meaningful protection inside  the
      home state exists only if the asylum-seeker can  be  returned  to  the
      internal  region  adjudged  to  satisfy   the   'internal   protection
      alternative' criteria.  A  refugee  claim  should  not  be  denied  on
      internal protection grounds unless the putative  asylum  state  is  in
      fact able safely and practically to return the asylum  seeker  to  the
      site of internal protection." (Emphasis added).


17. We also note that to very similar effect paragraph 3 of the UNHCR`s  2ND
Track Global Consultations on International Protection, San  Remo  September
2001  Summary  Conclusions  on  the  Internal   Protection/Relocation/Flight
Alternative states:

      "The individual whose claim to refugee status is  under  consideration
      must be able -  practically,  safely  and  legally  -  to  access  the
      proposed IPA/IRA/IFA. This  requires  consideration  of  physical  and
      other barriers to access, such as risks that may accrue in the process
      of travel or entry; and any legal barriers to travel, enter or  remain
      in the proposed IPA/IRA/IFA."

18. However, it is clear from principles enunciated by  higher  courts  that
the test  of  genuine  access  cannot  in  the  UK  context  extend  to  the
practicalities of implementing removal.  The  effect  of  the  judgments  in
Saad, Diriye and Osorio [2002] Imm AR 471 and  Hwez [2002]  Imm  AR  491  is
that  assessment  of  whether  a  person  qualifies  as  a  refugee   is   a
hypothetical exercise which focusses on whether removal  would  be  contrary
to the Refugee Convention at the time of hearing. It is an assessment  which
has to be made even if the Secretary of State has no intention to remove  in
the immediate future for practical reasons. Applying this  approach  to  the
situation in Iraq, it then becomes necessary to take account  of  the  March
16, 2001  undertaking  given  by  the  Secretary  of  State  not  to  remove
nationals of Iraq to  the  KAA  via  Baghdad  or  any  other  part  of  Iraq
controlled by  its  Government,  unless  and  until  a  Convention-compliant
method of doing so can be achieved or a means is found of  achieving  access
to the KAA which avoids Iraqi-controlled territory altogether.

19. Thus in assessing the viability of internal relocation, it is not  valid
in the UK context to take account  of  any  difficulties  prior  to  arrival
which are covered by a Secretary of  State`s  undertaking.  It  remains,  of
course, valid to assess difficulties as from the point of return,  including
difficulties  of  physical  or  safe  access  to  the  alternative  site  of
protection. As the Court of Appeal made clear in  Robinson   [1997]  Imm  AR
568 and Karakaran [2000] Imm AR 271, such in-country difficulties of  access
go directly to the issue of whether return would be unduly harsh. But  prior
difficulties covered by the undertaking are of a different order.

 As we have sought to clarify by citing from  the  Michigan  Guidelines  and
the UNHCR Global Consultations document, that approach does not in our  view
distort the international jurisprudence, since the appellant is  effectively
guaranteed by the UK government that return will not  take  place  unless  a
safe and practical and legal method is found to return the  appellant  to  a
part of the territory of his or her country.

13. Mr Vokes secondly asked the Tribunal to  take  the  same  view  as  Lord
Justice Keene in Gardi and the Tribunal in Magdeed and conclude that the  de
facto authorities in control  in  the  KAA  were  not  entities  capable  of
furnishing protection within  the  meaning  of  Art  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee
Convention. As we explained to Mr Vokes, we consider that on  this  question
we should follow the starred determination of the Tribunal in  the  case  of
Dyli [2002] INLR 372 whose reasoning  was  not  contradicted  by  either  Mr
Justice Dyson (as he then was) in Vallaj [2001] INLR 455  or  the  Court  of
Appeal in Canaj and Vallaj [2001] INLR 342. The judgment of Gardi  [2002]  1
WLR 2755 was now a nullity and  the  remarks  of  Lord  Justice  Keene  were
obiter. It remains, of course, that the  views  of  a  senior  judge  should
carry weight. However, despite being asked to follow the views of  Professor
Hathaway, it does not appear that his lordship's attention was drawn to  the
fact that the paper written by Professor  Hathaway  and  Ms  Foster  was  of
recent origin and did not reflect the position the same  Professor  together
with several refugee law experts  took  in  the  far  more  widely  accepted
Michigan Guidelines at paragraph 10 where  it  was  stated  that  return  on
internal protection grounds to a region controlled  by  a  non-state  entity
could be contemplated, albeit only where there was  compelling  evidence  of
that entity's ability to deliver durable  protection.  Nor  does  it  appear
that his attention was drawn to the fact that UNHCR`s position  is  that  de
facto entities are at least in principle  capable  of  affording  protection
under the Refugee Convention. Moreover, taking a line through the  House  of
Lords judgment in Adan [1997] 2 All ER 723, we  consider  there  are  cogent
reasons for taking a pragmatic or functional  approach  according  to  which
the issue of whether a de  facto  entity  could  afford  Refugee  Convention
protection is essentially a question of fact. Such  an  approach  also  best
reflects  the  principle  of  surrogacy  according  to  which  international
protection should only be  granted  when  there  is  in  fact  a  denial  of
domestic protection.

14. In the alternative Mr Vokes asked us to consider that in the context  of
a claim in which it has been accepted that the appellant has a  well-founded
fear of persecution in the area of the country in which  the  government  is
the only internationally recognised government, it  should  be  regarded  as
much easier for a claimant to satisfy the unduly harsh test.

15. We would agree with Mr Vokes that when assessing whether as a matter  of
fact de facto authorities  can  protect  it  is  relevant  to  consider  the
political geography of the state as a whole. It is  relevant  in  this  case
that the appellant is at risk in all parts of the country under the  control
of the national government. However, we do not see that this  is  enough  to
make out this appellant`s case. From the objective  country  materials,  the
October 2002 CIPU Assessment at paragraphs 5.26-5.47  in  particular,  there
is sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  both  the  PUK  and  the  KDP  have
established institutions of  government  which  are  capable  of  protecting
their own populations against serious harm. And as we  have  already  noted,
the appellant in this case was a PUK member and so  would  be  in  a  better
position than some other members of  the  population  to  access  protection
from the authorities and favourable treatment.

16. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




