

                        GA (_Risk-Bihari__) Bangladesh CG [2002] UKIAT 05810
                                                                HX49280-2001


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                           Date heard:  15 November     2002
                  Date notified:......20 December 2002......................
                                   Before:-

                            MR M W RAPINET (Chair)
                                DR H H STOREY
                                 MRS E HURST





                                                               Between


                                                   MR GALAM AZAM


                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a Bihari from Bangladesh, has appealed with leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Dr R Kekic, dismissing  the
appeal against the decision by the respondent giving directions for  removal
following refusal to grant asylum.  Mr B Banerjee of Counsel  instructed  by
Malik  &  Michael  Solicitors  represented  the  appellant.  Miss  J  Sigley
appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he had been arrested 3  times
in 1998, had had his  shop  burnt  down  in  March  1999  by  miscreants  or
terrorists and had then been attacked in March  1999.  He  claimed  that  if
returned he would face  further  difficulties  at  the  hands  of  the  same
miscreants or terrorists as well at the hands of the authorities.

4. The adjudicator accepted that the appellant was of Bihari ethnic  origin.
She made no finding on his claim  to  past  arrests,  but  accepted  he  had
become the targets from attacks  from  extortionists.  She  concluded  that,
since he had now lost his business  and  savings,  these  persons  would  no
longer have an adverse interest in him. She  did  not  accept  his  evidence
that he had had a false case registered against him  or  that  he  had  been
pursued wherever he went. She did not think his position  could  be  equated
with that of most other Biharis in Bangladesh in that he  was  educated  and
had better chances of obtaining work.

5. The grounds complained that the adjudicator had wrongly  disregarded  the
systematic attacks on the appellant by members of the Awami League  and  had
failed to recognise that anti-Bihari sentiment is very grave  in  Bangladesh
and that the government and administration instigate the miscreants and  the
police to persecute the Bihari people.

6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Banerjee sought to raise  one  additional
argument first alluded to by the Vice  President  in  granting  leave.  That
concerned the appellant's nationality or lack of it. He contended  that  the
appellant was stateless.

7. However, although being identified by the respondent  as  a  national  of
Bangladesh, the appellant had not challenged  this  before  the  adjudicator
and no nationality issue  was  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
Tribunal. Furthermore, we cannot see that such a  ground,  even  if  we  had
been prepared to treat it as such, assisted the  appellant  in  establishing
his case either on asylum or human rights grounds. Even if he were  accepted
as stateless, he could still not succeed in his appeal unless  he  was  able
to establish a well-founded fear of persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to
his human rights  in  his  country  of  former  habitual  residence.  As  Mr
Banerjee conceded, the appellant's country of former habitual residence  was
Bangladesh.

8. Mr Banerjee sought to argue further that if the appellant  was  stateless
and without a passport the  Bangladesh  authorities  would  not  accept  him
back. He referred  in  this  connection  to  a  1999  determination  of  the
Tribunal in the case of Dubchenko (21863).  However,  as  the  Tribunal  has
made plain in a number of cases, most  recently  in  Sensitev  (01/TH/01351)
and Pavlov  [2002] UKIAT 02544, if a country of origin will not take back  a
claimant, then he will not be at risk  of  persecution  because  in  such  a
situation Home Office policy is that he  will  be  returned  to  the  United
Kingdom.

9. Insofar as the grounds raised objections to the  adjudicator`s  principal
findings of fact, we do not think they have substance. The adjudicator  gave
sound reasons based squarely on the  evidence  for  reaching  her  principal
conclusions. The appellant claimed persons from the  Emon/Iaman  group  whom
he variously called miscreants, terrorists and also  members  of  the  Awami
League had targeted him. However, as the adjudicator noted he had failed  to
produce any independent evidence to show that the Emon/Iaman  group  existed
and he was unable to satisfactorily explain how the Awami League would  have
been  complicit  in  the  attacks  made  on  him.  The  most  the   evidence
established was that his attackers were extortionists.

10. The appellant claimed that his attackers targeted him not  only  in  his
home area but also in other places he moved to,  i.e.  Narajanganj,  Rangpur
and Iswardi. The adjudicator did  not  accept  this  because  he  found  the
appellant's account in this regard implausible and  contradictory.  He  gave
highly inconsistent accounts as to whether  he  had  been  traced  to  these
places.

11. The appellant claimed that a false  case  has  been  registered  against
him. However, he had not mentioned this fact in his  witness  statement  and
had failed to explain why. It was also  unclear  why,  if  they  had  really
wanted to press charges, the authorities would have released him  when  they
did. Essentially, therefore, all the appellant had established was  that  he
was of Bihari ethnicity, and that he  had  been  targeted  by  extortionists
who, among other misdeeds, had burnt down his shop.

12. The question then arises, do these facts establish  that  the  appellant
would have a well-founded fear of persecution?

13. Two observations are salient  here.  Firstly,  the  background  evidence
does not establish that all Biharis are at risk of persecution or  treatment
contrary to their human rights. The CIPU Bulletin of October 2002  on  which
Mr Banerjee placed some reliance, albeit noting certain  difficulties  faced
by Biharis, states at paragraph 6.44 that they have not been persecuted  nor
do they have any reasons to fear persecution. It is true that in  this  same
paragraph there is mention of them being considered by the US Committee  for
Refugees to be in "refugee-like circumstances",  but  that  is  primarily  a
reference to the conditions they have  had  to  face  inside  Bangladesh  as
persons  refused  repatriation  to  Pakistan  having   declined   Bangladesh
nationality.

14. Secondly this same body of evidence makes clear  that  not  all  Biharis
are in the same situation. The CIPU report informs us that  whilst  as  many
as 300,000 Biharis still live in  various  camps  around  the  country,  the
total  Bihari  population  is  in  the  order  of  500,000.  Furthermore  at
paragraph 6.43 it is stated that some  have  moved  out  of  camps  and  are
living and working alongside local people.

15. These two observations assist us when we come to consider the  facts  of
this particular case.  The  letter  from  the  Stranded  Pakistanis  General
Repatriation Committee (SPGRC) dated 12 July 1998  does  make  reference  to
the appellant  living  in  a  camp  in  Mirpur,  Bangladesh  and  leading  a
miserable life. Since  this  letter  makes  no  specific  reference  to  the
appellant's claimed difficulties arising from having set up a shop and  been
targeted as a result, we feel unable to place reliance on this  document  as
evidence of his past  difficulties.  It  does  appear  from  this  document,
however, that he had lived in a Bihari camp up till 1998 and was  officially
recognised as a Bihari. His earlier status as a camp Bihari is confirmed  by
other documents. But whether, however, he remained living inside  camp  once
he became a shopkeeper is less clear. When  he  described  moving  to  other
areas he made no mention of living inside Bihari camps in any  of  them.  In
any event, even if we had considered that he had always lived in  camps,  it
was still the case that the appellant was unusual in several  respects.  One
was that his name was common in Bangladesh and so would not distinguish  him
from other Biharis. Another was that he was educated. A further  reason  was
that he had experience of working.

16. Bearing in mind these circumstances we  consider  that  the  adjudicator
was fully justified in concluding that the appellant did not  have  a  well-
founded fear of persecution in Bangladesh nor of treatment contrary  to  his
human rights. His proven ability to move around Bangladesh, to work and  his
good level of education would mean that he would  not  have  to  endure  the
same level of difficulties as camp-bound Biharis with no  education  and  no
familiarity  with  the  wider  Bangladesh  society.  Furthermore,   as   the
adjudicator noted, he was young, fit and healthy and without dependants.

17. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.



                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




