
H-PA-V1
                    TT (Risk-Return- Snakeheads) China CG [2002] UKIAT 04937
                                                               HR/06254/2002

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  9th July 2002                           |                             |
|Dictated : 23rd July 2002                     |.....22/10/2002..............|


                                   Before:


                         Mr N H Goldstein - Chairman
                               Dr A U Chaudhry


between
                               Tein Yung TSENG
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:     Mr A Yuen an authorised representative from Phoenix
                   Nova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Davidson, Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of China has been granted leave to  appeal  to
    the Tribunal against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  P  J
    Bryant) dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  that
    removal would not lead to a breach of his human rights.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29th November  1995  and
    claimed asylum upon arrival.  The application was refused on 10th March
    1999 and his appeal against that refusal was subsequently dismissed.

 3. The Appellant then instructed new Solicitors on whose behalf an  appeal
    was brought under Section 65(1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999
    alleging that the Respondent's decision  to  return  the  Appellant  to
    China would breach his human rights.  The appeal was heard before Mr  P
    J Bryant, Adjudicator on 6th March 2002 and dismissed by  determination
    notified on 21st March 2000.

 4. The Appellant, a Buddhist made plans with a friend in  his  village  to
    build a temple.  A collection was made  from  the  villagers  for  this
    purpose.  Work on the temple began in March 1998 but it was  torn  down
    by the authorities on 20th March 1998.  The Appellant was  not  present
    at the time.  He claimed to have been  in  hiding  in  another  village
    having been aware that the Chinese authorities were seeking  to  arrest
    him for collecting the contributions.  A friend then  arranged  for  an
    agen,t and the Appellant left China travelling via Vietnam to  Bangkok.
    In so doing the Appellant  left  his  wife  and  two  children  in  his
    village.

 5. The Appellant maintained that the Chinese authorities still  wished  to
    arrest, detain and torture him in connection with his fund raising  for
    the temple.  His wife had written to warn him not to  return  to  China
    because the authorities were still  looking  for  him.   The  Appellant
    claimed the Chinese authorities had been to his home on  at  least  ten
    occasions.  The Appellant had spoken to his wife on the  telephone  and
    it was clear the Appellant would be in danger if he returned.

 6. The Appellant claimed that if arrested and detained he would be  locked
    up indefinitely without charge.  It would be known  that  he  had  fled
    China to apply for political asylum.  He would be  ill-treated  if  not
    killed.  His human rights would be violated.

 7. The Appellant expressed a further fear, namely that he was in  debt  to
    the Snakeheads who had brought him to this country.  As the Adjudicator
    stated at paragraph 12 of his determination:

         "They pose a significant threat to his life.  If he returns he will
         not be able to meet the debts that he owes them.   They  charge  an
         extortionate amount of interest and  are  likely  to  use  violence
         against him to enforce the debts that he owes.  They may even  kill
         him if they think he cannot pay the debt.  His  wife  has  informed
         him that the Snakeheads have visited the family home  to  ask  when
         they will be repaid.  On each occasion they have threatened to kill
         his wife and family if it remains  unpaid.   He  thinks  they  will
         therefore kill him and his family as he cannot pay  off  the  debt.
         There is nowhere in China where he can hide from the Snakeheads".


 8. The Adjudicator explained that in assessing credibility he  had  placed
    the Appellant's account into the context of the situation in  China  as
    disclosed by the objective evidence that had been submitted to him  and
    also took into account those conditions that prevailed at the time.

 9. The Adjudicator had reviewed the evidence before  the  Adjudicator  who
    had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal  and  had   read   her
    determination and findings.  She had found that  the  Appellant  feared
    prosecution for building the temple rather than persecution  under  the
    Refugee Convention and that the Appellant's claim had not  engaged  the
    Refugee Convention.

10. Mr Bryant has noted the first Adjudicator had made no  findings  as  to
    the Appellant's credibility because the Appellant failed to attend  the
    appeal and therefore the only evidence before her was the record of the
    Appellant's immigration  interview.   Mr  Bryant  had  considered  that
    interview and the Appellant's statement in support of his human  rights
    appeal  and  the  evidence  at  the  appeal  itself.   The  Adjudicator
    concluded:


         "I am therefore in a better position to assess credibility than the
         previous Adjudicator in the asylum appeal".


11. The Adjudicator went on to conclude that he found the Appellant to be:

         "..wholly incredible, in his evidence as to  the  building  of  the
         temple and therefore that being the reason why he fled China".


12.   At paragraph 31 of his determination the Adjudicator detailed what  he
    described as the "many inconsistencies" within the Appellant's evidence
    which went to his credibility.


13.   At paragraph 32 of the determination the Adjudicator found that:


         "..the discrepancies set above are such that I do not  believe  his
         evidence as to the building  of  the  temple  and  the  authorities
         seeking to arrest him in connection with that building.  I also  do
         not believe his evidence that the authorities there did  not  allow
         him to practise his religion and faith".


14.   The Adjudicator concluded that he did  not  find  that  the  Appellant
    fled China through fear of the authorities seeking to  arrest  him  for
    the building of the temple and that the authorities  had  therefore  no
    interest in the Appellant and accordingly upon the  Appellant's  return
    he would not be charged or prosecuted in relation to  the  building  of
    the temple.

15.   The Adjudicator then turned to the Appellant's other fear relating  to
    that of the Snakeheads who had loaned the Appellant money  to  come  to
    this country.  The Adjudicator believed the Appellant's  evidence  that
    he owed money to the Snakeheads although the actual amount differed  in
    his evidence being either 100,000 or 240,000 Yuan.

  16. In this regard  the  Adjudicator  considered  the  objective  material
      particular paragraph 6.110 of the CIPU Report from which he noted that
      the Chinese authorities had publicly committed themselves to combating
      Snakehead operations and that arrests were made.

17.   No submissions had been made to  the  Adjudicator  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the authorities in China would be unable  to  provide  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant against the Snakeheads  who
    sought repayment of their loan.

18.   The Adjudicator found  that  the  Appellant  might  be  fined  by  the
    authorities for illegally leaving the country and in  this  regard  and
    upon consideration  of  the  objective  evidence  the  Adjudicator  was
    satisfied there was no real risk of the Appellant  receiving  treatment
    which would approach the minimum level of  severity  required  for  the
    terms of Article 3 to be fulfilled or indeed that such treatment as the
    Appellant might receive would place him at risk  of  a  breach  of  his
    human rights such as to engage the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
    the Convention.

19.   At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  before  us,  Mr  Davidson  for  the
    Respondent  clarified  that  given  the  Adjudicator's   findings   the
    credibility of the Appellant's account in relation to his dealings with
    the Snakeheads was accepted,  but  not  the  rest  of  the  Appellant's
    account.  At this  stage  it  was  noteworthy  that  Mr  Yuen  for  the
    Appellant informed us as follows:

         "The Appellant admits and apologises that the Temple  story  was  a
         fabrication which he claims was coached to him by his first set  of
         lawyers and he then followed on with it.  Snakeheads are those whom
         the Appellant really fears".


20.   In the course of Mr Yuen's detailed submissions we had the benefit  of
    a comprehensive bundle that we understand he prepared, and in  relation
    to which Mr Yuen referred us to relevant passages.   We  also  had  the
    benefit of his detailed Skeleton Argument.

21.   Mr Yuen submitted that  we  should  consider  whether  this  Appellant
    could be regarded as a "safe or unsafe arrival".  He explained to us:

         "If the Appellant was 'safe' then according to the Tribunal he  can
         expect harassment which is the view of the Respondent as argued  by
         Mr Graham in Bin Hou (O1/BH/00059).  It is not therefore  now  open
         to the Respondent to argue otherwise.


         This Appellant was a  safe  arrival.   He  was  undetected  granted
         Temporary Admission.  He has been working and sending money home".


22.   Mr Yuen referred us to paragraph  6.112  of  the  CIPU  Assessment  of
    April 2002 which states inter alia:

         "Success is measured in two ways:  safe  illegal  entry  initially,
         plus independence from Snakehead ties ultimately (for the customer)
         and payments (irrespective of source, be it from  the  customer  or
         their families) for the Snakehead.  Experts consulted  by  the  IRB
         say payment is usually broken down into  a  deposit  (typically  of
         about $1,000 to $3,000)  and  a  final  payment  (usually  $33,000)
         payable on a 'safe' (i.e.  undetected)  arrival  in  the  US.   The
         experts consulted by the IRB  gave  similar  accounts  of  how  the
         Snakehead will discount part or  the  full  final  payment  if  the
         arrival is 'unsafe' i.e. the customer is  detected  by  Immigration
         Authorities and returned to China".

23.   Mr Yuen submitted that anyone admitted to  the  country  as  a  'safe'
      arrival was held hostage by Snakeheads and  only  released  after  the
      money due was paid over which signalled completion  of  the  contract.
      He maintained that upon arrival the customer was met by a  Snakehead's
      agent and a lawyer present to secure his release if detained and/or to
      help him apply for asylum.  The Applicant would then  be  taken  to  a
      safe house and held until the balance of monies owed was paid over  to
      the Snakehead in China and only then would such a person be  released.


24.   Mr Yuen continued that on arrival such a  person  would  be  confident
    the debt would be repaid by  himself  through  work.   The  Applicant's
    family in China would wait until it was confirmed that  their  relative
    had arrived at his proposed destination.  They would then  collect  the
    money from the lender who might be another Snakehead or an  independent
    loan shark.  Some could then be used to pay over to the Snakehead  with
    whom the contractual fee was due and the Appellant upon  payment  would
    then be released.  If the balance of the debt was not paid  namely  the
    balance of the 'fee' then  the  captive  would  be  subjected  to  some
    serious harassment by the Snakeheads in for example the United Kingdom.



25.   Mr Yuen referred to objective evidence  within  his  bundle  which  he
      claimed supported his submission that a form of such harassment  could
      include the cutting off of ears to be sent to relatives  at  home  and
      that women were raped.  Mr Yuen continued:

         "The Snakeheads guarantee safe delivery so if  you  do  not  arrive
         safely the fee is not owed as the contract is to gain admission...


         In the present case the Appellant borrowed  80,000  from  the  loan
         shark and  the  rest  of  the  fee  for  the  fee  balance  from  a
         Snakehead...therefore if this Appellant was an  unsafe  arrival  he
         would not be discharged from the debt to  the  loan  shark  but  he
         would be discharged from the debt to the Snakehead.  This Appellant
         was a safe arrival however.  He was granted Temporary Admission and
         he sent money home.  He managed to pay 180,000  Yuan  a  low  price
         because he had paid a high deposit on the fee in order  to  get  an
         overall lower fee".


26.   Mr Yuen explained that the Appellant was now:

         "..free of the smuggling contract with that group of Snakeheads but
         he is tied down for the debt he incurred in paying off the contract
         to the Snakehead who loaned him 100,000  and  the  loan  shark  who
         loaned him 80,000 with which  to  pay  the  fee.   The  Adjudicator
         accepted this account..


    I say to return the Appellant would be in breach of Articles 3,  4  and
         8".


27.   When asked Mr Yuen was unable to  tell  us  of  a  single  case  where
    Article 4 had been upheld by the ECHR  and  could  only  point  to  his
    interpretation of a view expressed by an Adjudicator  in  an  unrelated
    determination, indeed an appeal that the Adjudicator dismissed.


28.   Mr Yuen submitted that the Respondent's conclusion that the  Appellant
    could look to the Chinese authorities for protection was  based  solely
    on two paragraphs 6.120 and 6.121 of the CIPU Assessment  which  placed
    over reliance  on  the  indications  from  Chinese  media  reports  and
    therefore failed to  take  into  account  Chinese  censorship  and  the
    manipulation of news.  Mr Yuen submitted  that  the  reports  concerned
    arrests of Snakeheads for 'smuggling' and there was no indication  that
    the  Chinese  authorities  were  protecting  victims  from  Snakeheads'
    "harassment".

29.    Mr  Yuen  maintained  that  there  was  evidence  that  the   Chinese
    authorities did not act against loan sharks.

30.   Mr Davidson for the Respondent pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 1999.  Therefore four years after  his
    arrival he had still failed to pay the Snakeheads any money.  There was
    nothing in the Appellant's statement or other evidence  to  suggest  it
    was the case that people  would  be  detained  as  Snakeheads  in  this
    country  or  that  this  Appellant  had  actually  undergone  any  such
    detention in this country.  This Appellant had not been ill-treated  in
    this  country  by  Snakeheads.   Indeed  the  Appellant's  own  account
    differed greatly from the picture described by Mr Yuen  with  reference
    to the objective material as to what happened to people  who  had  been
    assisted to travel to this country or elsewhere by Snakeheads.

31.   We were referred to paragraphs 6.143 and 6.144 of the CIPU April  2002
    Assessment which outlined a typical journey of  those  smuggled  across
    Europe and then to their final destination.  The usual mode  of  travel
    was in the back of lorries or  travelling  in  freight  trains  as  was
    revealed in the Perry Wacker/Yang Gou trial held in the United  Kingdom
    on April 2001.  Mr Wacker was a Dutch  lorry  driver  and  Yang  Gou  a
    Chinese translator.  They had given details about Snakehead operations.
     Mr Wacker was the  driver  of  the  lorry  transporting  60  stowaways
    involved in the events of Dover on 19th June 2000 that led to the death
    of 58 people and Gou was charged with being  a  contact  between  legal
    arrivals and various firms of London Solicitors.  Other members of  the
    same operation  had  stood  trial  and  were  found  guilty  of  people
    trafficking offences in May 2001 in the Netherlands.

32.   Mr Davidson pointed out that although this was a  typical  example  it
    was not the only means of travel.  In this regard he referred us to the
    actual circumstances of the Appellant's case.  He had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 29 November 1999  on  a  flight  from  Bangkok.   The
    Appellant had arrived here without any documentation and claimed asylum
    upon arrival.  The  Appellant's  mode  of  arrival  differed  from  the
    account given in  the  objective  material  of  people  being  smuggled
    brutally in captivity and then being detained by Snakeheads on  arrival
    in the United Kingdom until payment of a fee  had  been  received.   Mr
    Davidson continued:

         "I submit that to try and paint this man's circumstances  as  being
         at issue with the objective  material  referred  to  is  a  totally
         unrealistic submission.  The Adjudicator had found at paragraph  35
         of his determination that money was  owed.   He  had  accepted  the
         Appellant did owe money to Snakeheads (whether he meant  Snakeheads
         and/or loan sharks was not entirely clear)."


33.   Mr Davidson referred us to the confusion that appeared to have  arisen
    as to the amount actually owed by the Appellant.  He had claimed at one
    stage that he had borrowed 1,000 Yuan from two friends  in  China.   He
    later claimed that a friend had paid on his behalf 10,000 who  borrowed
    it from someone else.  Mr Davidson continued that this:


      "Exemplified the confusion which the Adjudicator had already noted."


      What we are left with is not knowing how much the  Appellant  owes  or
      even who to?  On his own evidence his claim has not been made  out  to
      the necessary standard when the evidence is examined.


         "The Adjudicator in paragraph 35 has made a finding that it is  the
         Snakeheads whom the Appellant fears.  If he is correct then we turn
         to 'safe' or 'unsafe' arrivals again".


34.   Mr Davidson continued that it was remarkable that  if  the  Snakeheads
    were really operating a business type operation where it  would  be  in
    their interests to secure the safe arrival of  their  clients  in  this
    country that they should simply  put  the  Appellant  on  a  flight  to
    Heathrow where he would undoubtedly have been detected, particularly as
    the Appellant had arrived without any documentation.

35.    Both  parties'  representatives  had  referred  us  to  the  Tribunal
    determination in Bin Hou where we have noted that the learned  Chairman
    Mr D K Allen had gone through much of the same information as submitted
    and had reached the conclusion that those returned would not be at risk
    particularly those of unsafe arrivals.

36.    We  agree  with  Mr  Davidson's  submission  that  in  contrast  this
    Appellant could not be  viewed  as  anything  other  than  an  "unsafe"
    arrival given the manner in which he arrived.  He arrived from  Bangkok
    and claimed asylum on arrival and based upon Mr  Yuen's  definition  of
    "safe" and  "unsafe"  arrivals,  it  followed  on  the  facts  of  this
    Appellant's account that the contract had not been  concluded  and  the
    Snakeheads would not expect payment of their fee.

37.   In relation to the Appellant's claim to have  borrowed  money  from  a
    loan shark we were again referred to the Tribunal decision in Bin  Hou.
    In this regard we have indeed  noted  that  it  was  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal in Bin  Hou  that  there  were  references  in  the  objective
    evidence to government corruption being involved.  The fact that  there
    was no awareness of violence being meted out to non-re-payers  did  not
    mean it did not happen.  Hard evidence was difficult to  find  with  so
    few returnees and even fewer people were in debt to loan sharks.   Loan
    sharks and Snakeheads were ruthless criminals and organised groups whom
    if carrying out reprisals would obviously  not  tell  the  authorities.
    The victims would be unlikely to  report  and  even  the  relatives  of
    people killed as they would fear reprisals.  The most  up  to  date  US
    State Department Reports were silent on the point.

38.   At paragraphs 42 and 43 of his determination the learned  Chairman  Mr
    Allen observed inter alia:

         "We do not consider  that  the  fact  that...the  loan  sharks  and
         Snakeheads are ruthless practitioners of violence  when  those  who
         have successfully reached the United Kingdom and the United  States
         of America or other country of choice failed to repay them, can  be
         said thereby to involve the  same  treatment  being  meted  out  to
         persons who are unsuccessful in their efforts to settle in and earn
         money in a wealthier country.  In this context  we  note  also  the
         comment we have referred to  above  from  Mr  Fisher  of  the  RCMP
         Criminal Intelligence Service that he was not aware of  reports  of
         loan sharks pursuing returnees or their families...


         In conclusion therefore we find the evidence to be such  that  even
         on the basis of a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  we  do  not
         consider that either Respondent has made out his case  for  showing
         that he is at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 on return  to
         China.  We consider the weight of the objective  evidence  is  very
         much against the argument they raised and we do not  consider  that
         that evidence is in any sense outweighed by the wealth of  evidence
         concerning the practice  of  loan  sharks  and  Snakeheads  towards
         people whose contracts with them have succeeded and who have failed
         to repay them.  We therefore allow the Secretary of State's  appeal
         in each case in relation to the Article 3 claim."


39.   We have carefully considered the objective evidence not least that  to
    which Mr Yuen has referred us.  Having done so  we  find  ourselves  in
    agreement with Mr Davidson's submission, that even if money was owed by
    the Appellant to Snakeheads or loan sharks there is indeed  a  lack  of
    evidence that the Appellant would be  actually  pursued  for  the  debt
    particularly in the circumstances of this case.  The Adjudicator  found
    that the Appellant did owe money to Snakeheads.  We find  ourselves  in
    agreement with Mr Yuen  that  he  was  probably  using  the  expression
    "Snakeheads" in the generic sense and was incorporating the possibility
    that money was also owed to a loan shark.  However the  basis  of  that
    finding remains unclear as to the amount that  the  Appellant  actually
    owed and to whom such money was owed.

40.   Mr Yuen described to us his understanding as to how  Snakeheads  could
    detain and mistreat people to whom they were owed money.  It is however
    noteworthy that it does not appear to be the Appellant's claim that  he
    has experienced such treatment whilst in this country.  As Mr  Davidson
    rightly submitted if the Appellant was not being pursued here  for  any
    debt then it would be unlikely that he would be pursued  by  Snakeheads
    upon return for this alleged debt if indeed it was owed in any part  to
    them.

41.   Mr Davidson submitted that if a debt was owed to individuals  or  loan
    sharks there would be a sufficiency of protection  available  from  the
    Chinese authorities were the Appellant to report any problems with them
    that he might experience upon return.  There was  an  effective  police
    force and judicial system in China.

42.   Mr Yuen's submitted that there is a level of corruption  within  China
    which involves collusion  on  the  part  of  elements  of  the  Chinese
    authorities with organised crime.

43.   Mr Davidson submitted this  in  no  way  included  a  failure  in  the
    government to such aextent  as  would  place  the  Chinese  authorities
    outside the terms of the Horvath definition in their effort  to  combat
    crime particularly if it was loan sharks who were the  perpetrators  of
    that crime.

44.   Mr Davidson further submitted that if the Tribunal concluded  that  it
    was other than Snakeheads from whom the Appellant  had  borrowed  money
    such as loan sharks, then there was the issue  of  internal  relocation
    which the Adjudicator had not addressed.  In that regard,  one  had  to
    bear in mind the sheer size and  population  of  China  which  totalled
    1.261 billion people as at the year 2000.  The Appellant could in  such
    circumstances safely relocate elsewhere in China.

45.   Following the appeal hearing the Tribunal received a  letter  together
    with enclosures from Mr Yuen dated 10th July 2002  (the  day  following
    the hearing) which sought to address questions raised at the  close  of
    the hearing as to whether there was  a  time  limit  imposed  upon  the
    Appellant to pay off his loan.  Mr Yuen maintained  that  the  evidence
    that he attached supported his response that a lender was not  normally
    concerned with the repayment of capital as long as he believed that his
    loan was safe.  Further:

         "a  loan  shark's   main   concerns   are   security   and   profit
         maximisation...the loan shark is normally  delighted  to  extend  a
         loan as long as he is convinced of the borrower's ability  to  meet
         his obligations.   Matters  therefore  only  become  nasty  when  a
         borrower is returned to China where he will have no ability to meet
         interest charges let alone to repay the capital.  It  is  what  the
         loan shark would do to him and his family in that eventuality  that
         the Appellant fears."


46.   We are grateful to Mr Yuen for  the  meticulous  manner  in  which  he
    prepared his most helpful bundles of objective evidence together with a
    detailed Skeleton Argument in support of the Appellant's appeal.


47.   We have however concluded that we must dismiss  this  appeal.   We  do
    not  share  Mr  Yuen's  criticisms  of  the  April  2002  CIPU  Country
    Assessment.  We consider it to  be  a  well  sourced  objectively  well
    balanced assessment of the evidence.  Upon our  consideration  of  that
    evidence in conjunction with the objective evidence which Mr Yuen  most
    helpfully  referred  to  us,  there  is  evidence  to   indicate   that
    individuals and their families or guarantors in  certain  circumstances
    in China may be at risk.  That  Snakeheads  are  violent  and  ruthless
    towards those who they believe can repay their debts but fail to do so.



48.   The evidence does not satisfy us that those  who  cannot  pay  because
    they have returned to China would meet with similar treatment.  We  are
    of  course  concerned  with  the  particular  circumstances   of   this
    Appellant.  It is a noteworthy feature of this case that Mr Yuen opened
    his submissions by making clear that this Appellant  had  lied  in  the
    account that he gave to the  Adjudicator  albeit,  he  claims,  on  the
    instructions  of  his  former  Solicitors.   The  Adjudicator  properly
    rejected that  evidence  as  incredible  but  had  found  credible  the
    Appellant's claim to owe money to Snakeheads.  The amount that was owed
    and to whom it was specifically owed is unclear not  least  because  of
    the inconsistencies of the Appellant's evidence in that regard.

49.   Four years have passed since the Appellant's  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it is the Appellant's account that he has  still  not  paid
    the money owed.  As Mr Davidson rightly submitted there was nothing  in
    the appellant's statement or other evidence to suggest that it was  the
    case that people would be detained by Snakeheads  in  this  country  or
    that the Appellant actually had undergone any such  detention  in  this
    country or that he had been ill-treated in this country by  Snakeheads.




50.   Further this Appellant did not fall within Mr Yuen's definition as  to
    the distinction between categories of arrival  which  he  described  as
    either "safe" or  "unsafe".   Mr  Yuen  had  maintained  that  if  this
    Appellant was an unsafe arrival he would not  be  discharged  from  the
    debts to the loan sharks but would be discharged from the debt  to  the
    Snakeheads.  He maintained that the Appellant was a  safe  arrival  who
    had  arrived  undetected  and  subsequently  been   granted   Temporary
    Admission.  We had asked Mr Yuen that if as claimed the Appellant was a
    safe arrival it followed that he would have been  discharged  from  the
    fee owed to the Snakeheads.  Mr Yuen accepted the Appellant was:

         "..free of the smuggling contract with that group of Snakeheads but
         he is tied down for the debt he incurred in paying off the contract
         to the Snakehead who loaned him 100,000  and  the  loan  shark  who
         loaned him 80,000 with which to pay the fee".


51.   We  have  noted  however  that  the  description  given  in  the  CIPU
    Assessment as to the usual manner of travel of those  in  the  debt  of
    Snakeheads upon arrival differs greatly from that of this Appellant who
    travelled by air to this  country  via  a  flight  from  Bangkok.   The
    appellant clearly had not sought to arrive here undetected  and  indeed
    had claimed asylum immediately upon arrival at  Heathrow  Airport.   We
    agree with Mr Davidson who maintained that Mr Yuen  was  attempting  to
    place  this  Appellant's  circumstances  as  being  "at  one  with  the
    objective evidence referred  to...(which  is)...a  totally  unrealistic
    submission".

52.   We do not find that the evidence before us supports Mr Yuen's  attempt
    to establish a distinction between what  he  describes  as  "safe"  and
    "unsafe" arrivals.

53.   There is a lack of any Country information before us to indicate  that
    this Appellant would  be  at  risk  upon  return  but  we  accept  that
    Snakeheads and loan sharks are violent and determined  people  involved
    in lucrative and high profit enterprises.  We find however that as such
    it would fly in the face of logic that they would seek out  debtors  in
    such a way as to place fear in the hearts of those whom they sought  to
    ensnare in their highly profitable loan arrangements.  It follows  that
    to take the kind of action described by Mr Yuen against those  who  are
    returned  would  be  highly  likely  to  result  in  deterring   future
    customers.  We have found no evidence that  indebted  returning  failed
    asylum-seekers have body parts removed or  that  debtors  are  in  such
    circumstances forced into activities  such  as  prostitution  and  drug
    trafficking.  We have  been  unable  to  find  sufficient  evidence  to
    establish a reasonable likelihood that such persons would be forced  by
    the Snakeheads or loan sharks to leave China once  again  in  order  to
    repay the debts owed.

54.   Even if, as Mr Yuen submits this Appellant was  a  "safe"  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom we have concluded that he would not be  at  risk  on
    return.   In  such  circumstances  it  follows  that  the  question  of
    sufficiency of protection does not arise.

55.   We have noted with interest, Mr Yuen's submission at paragraph  55  of
    his Skeleton Argument which seems to place into question the placing of
    the burden of proof upon the Appellant.  He refers to Article 19 of the
    ECHR and argues that it would be  incompatible with the  Convention  if
    the Secretary of State was to return the  Appellant  to  China  without
    first ensuring that it was safe to do so.  We reject that argument.  In
    this regard we refer to  the  findings  of  the  learned  President  Mr
    Justice Collins in Kacaj*.  It is for the Appellant  to  discharge  the
    burden upon him of proving that his human rights  would  be  infringed.
    It is for him to establish the same standard, a  reasonable  likelihood
    to the same standard applicable to both the Refugee  and  Human  Rights
    Conventions.  The Adjudicator had concluded for reasons which we uphold
    that the Appellant had failed to discharge that burden to the requisite
    standard.

56.   The appeal is dismissed.




                                                            Mr N H GOLDSTEIN

                                                                    CHAIRMAN

