
H-ATS-V2
                                                 Appeal Number: HX51774-2001
                                  DI (IFA - FGM) Ivory Coast CG [2002] UKIAT
                                  04437

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on  2 July 2002                               |               27th September|
|                                              |2002                         |
|Dictated  9 July 2002                         |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                        Miss K Eshun - Vice President
                                 Mr A Smith


between
                       Miss Dele Angie Pelagie IKOSSIE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms J Lule of Counsel instructed by Powell & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Ivory Coast, appeals  with  leave  of  the
    Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs C M  Kennedy)
    dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  on  29
    November 2000 to give  directions  for  her  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant  following refusal to grant her asylum.

2.    In this case the Appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally
    and claims to have arrived on 10 October 2000.  She claimed asylum on 1
    November 2000.  She completed an SEF and statement on 13 November 2000.
     She was interviewed on 1 August 2001.  The reasons for the refusal  of
    her asylum application are set out in a  Home  Office  letter  dated  2
    August 2001.

3.    The Appellant's claim to asylum is that she comes from the village  of
    Yopougon in Abidjan.  She has a young son  who  still  lives  with  her
    partner in Abidjan.  He is not the father of  the  child.   The  father
    works in Paris and maintains the child.

4.    She says that it is the custom in her village for young girls  between
    the ages of 18 and 30 to undergo female circumcision.   Her  mother  is
    the head of the group of  village  women  who  perform  the  procedure.
    Parents would force their daughters to be excised on reaching  18.   It
    was the custom  for  excisions  to  be  performed  between  August  and
    December each year.  She said that she and  her  elder  sister  Solange
    were due to be excised in August  2000.   They  had  both  successfully
    avoided it for several years by going to live elsewhere  in  the  Ivory
    Coast four, five to six months at a time.  In August  2000  her  sister
    returned to the village to attend the village feast and was caught  for
    excision.  She died as  a  result.   The  Appellant  produced  a  death
    certificate.  She escaped and claimed that  if  she  returns  to  Ivory
    Coast her mother will force her to be excised.

5.     At  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator   Counsel   requested   an
    adjournment because she said that although the Appellant was in  court,
    she was not fit to give  evidence.   The  appeal  had  previously  been
    adjourned on 29  January  2000  with  standard  directions  and  for  a
    medical/psychiatric  report  to  be   produced.    Counsel   told   the
    Adjudicator that she had not been able to obtain a report but all other
    directions had been followed including a  witness  statement  dated  23
    January 2000.  There were letters in the Appellant's bundle  indicating
    that she had been receiving treatment from a  psychiatrist  for  severe
    mental health problems prior to July 2001 which had been exacerbated by
    being  removed  to  Bristol  under  the   dispersal   programme.    Her
    psychiatrist had arranged for her to be re-housed back in London  close
    to her cousin.  The Adjudicator noted that there was no further medical
    evidence and the appeal could continue on the basis of  the  statement.
    She refused an adjournment and when the appeal was put back in the list
    and recalled at 2  p.m.,  the  Appellant  was  present  and  gave  oral
    evidence.

6.    However the Adjudicator found the Appellant manipulative.   She  twice
    walked out of the hearing resulting in her  cross-examination  and  the
    hearing being curtailed but otherwise she was composed  and  very  well
    able to give evidence and reply to questions.

7.     In  dismissing  the  appeal  the  Adjudicator  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant's story.  She did accept from  the  objective  evidence  that
    female circumcision was prevalent and customary and performed on  young
    girls or at puberty as a right of passage, that since December 1998  it
    is a crime but eradication is proving an uphill struggle.  She found it
    incredible that the age range  is  so  high  and  especially  that  the
    sister's circumcisions would be left as long, as claimed, if her mother
    was the head of the group  who  performed  the  operation  and  it  was
    considered such a point of honour in the family.  The Appellant and her
    sister were able to avoid circumcision for a very  considerable  period
    of time and could  have  continued  to  avoid  circumcision  by  living
    elsewhere and/or that her mother was not as determined as claimed  that
    her daughters be excised.  She found it  totally  incredible  that  her
    sister would be so foolish to return voluntarily to the village for  no
    greater reason than  the  village  feast  during  the  very  time  that
    circumcisions were performed.  The Adjudicator also found it incredible
    that any mother would threaten to kill her daughter if as  claimed  the
    Appellant's sister died as a result of circumcision.   Furthermore  the
    death certificate stated that the sister died as a  result  of  violent
    death.  The death certificate was not signed.  As the original had been
    allegedly lost, the Adjudicator placed no weight on the photocopy.  The
    Adjudicator also found it implausible that the Appellant's brother  had
    witnessed his sister's circumcision in the village and  also  that  her
    mother had called her uncle, with whom the Appellant was living, as  an
    emergency when her sister had bled during  circumcision  and  that  the
    uncle and her brother had gone to the village together  and  taken  her
    sister to hospital.  The Appellant was living an independent life  with
    her partner and son in Abidjan and such evidence  mitigates  her  claim
    adversely.

8.    Although Articles 3 and 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention  were  also
    raised, for the  same  reasons  as  found  in  an  asylum  appeal,  the
    Adjudicator found no likelihood that the Appellant would be  in  danger
    if returned to the Ivory Coast.

9.    The Grounds of Appeal submitted inter alia that the refusal  to  grant
    an adjournment for medical reports prevented the just disposal  of  the
    appeal and also took issue with the Adjudicator's credibility findings.
     It was also submitted that the Adjudicator failed to  have  regard  to
    whether removal to Ivory Coast would be a  breach  of  the  Appellant's
    right to physical and moral integrity in view  of  her  serious  mental
    problems.  It was upon these grounds that leave to appeal was granted.

10.   Counsel told the Tribunal that she was looking for a remittal  due  to
    the  Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings.   Even  though  she
    accepted that the Appellant would not be able  to  give  evidence,  her
    cousin would be able to give evidence concerning matters that arose  in
    relation  to  the  Appellant's  credibility.   She  told  us  that  the
    Appellant's cousin came to the United Kingdom on 25 July 1998  and  has
    been granted asylum.  The reason the Appellant's cousin was not  called
    to give evidence at the Appellant's hearing was that she could not find
    anyone to look after her three children.

11.   Mr Saunders objected to a remittal and the Tribunal were not  disposed
    to remitting this appeal.  The Appellant did give evidence  before  the
    Adjudicator.  We now  had  before  us  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
    Sinclair on the Appellant  dated  18  June  2002  indicating  that  the
    Appellant has symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder  relating  to
    the death of her sister.  She is currently  being  treated  with  anti-
    depressant  medication  and  is  waiting  for  specific   psychological
    treatment.  In the circumstances  to  remit  the  appeal  so  that  the
    Appellant's cousin could give evidence at a time when she was available
    to but did not, would not serve any useful  purpose.   Furthermore,  in
    the Appellant's bundle were statements from two cousins which  we  felt
    we could take into account in our consideration of this appeal.

12.   Counsel asked us to look at this appeal in the light of Dr  Sinclair's
    Psychiatric  Report  which  was  obtained  after  the  hearing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal.   According to the psychiatric report the Appellant
    gets panic attacks  which  might  in  turn  affect  her  attention  and
    concentration to such a degree that she would be unable  to  understand
    court proceedings.  On 27 June 2001 she attempted  to  commit  suicide.
    She has been offered twelve sessions  with  a  team  of  psychiatrists.
    Counsel submitted that the Appellant did not have these problems before
    the death of her sister, on  25 August 2000.   The  Appellant  told  Dr
    Sinclair that she thinks her mother will undertake all possible efforts
    to get her undergo circumcision and even if she lived  in  a  different
    part of the country her mother would eventually  find  her.   She  also
    feels that she would not get adequate treatment  in  Ivory  Coast.   Dr
    Sinclair was not however in a position to comment on how realistic both
    expectations were.

13.   Counsel took issue with the Adjudicator's assertion that it is  common
    knowledge that village girls marry young and that it is incredible that
    the age range of 18 and 30 was so high.  Counsel referred us to a  fact
    sheet issued by  the  UNHCR  entitled  "Harmful  Traditional  Practices
    Affecting the Health of Women and Children".  At page 6 it states  that
    the age at which mutilation is carried out varies from  area  to  area.
    FGM is performed on infants a few days old, on children from  7  to  10
    years old and on adolescents.  Adult women also  undergo  operation  at
    the time of marriage.  Since FGM is performed on  infants  as  well  as
    adults, it can no longer be seen as marking the rights of passage  into
    adulthood.  She also pointed to a report at page 34 of the  Appellant's
    bundle, the source of which is not clear, which states that some  women
    undergo FGM during early adulthood when marrying into a community  that
    practices FGM or just before or after the  birth  of  the  first  child
    (Mali and  Nigeria).   At  page  48  another  report  states  that  the
    procedure is carried out at a variety of  ages  ranging  shortly  after
    birth to sometime during the first pregnancy, but most commonly  occurs
    between the ages of 4 and 8.  According to World  Health  Organisation,
    the average age  is  falling  which  indicates  that  the  practice  is
    decreasingly associated with initiation into  adulthood,  and  this  is
    believed to be particularly the case in urban areas.  In the  light  of
    all this evidence Counsel submitted that FGM is not just carried out at
    puberty.

14.   Counsel  further  submitted  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    cousin, Rose Virginie Tierou, who is from the same village and tribe as
    the Appellant, indicates that even though she had a child she was  also
    pursued for FGM.  The Appellant's sister, who was 30 at the time of her
    death, was older than the Appellant.  In the Appellant's  bundle  is  a
    statement of another cousin Briehe Bertine Tierou who confirms  to  the
    best of her knowledge that what the Appellant said was true.

15.   Counsel submitted that the Adjudicator placed no weight on  the  death
    certificate because it was a photocopy.  This  was  a  wrong  approach.
    The Appellant has submitted a further death certificate.  The one  that
    the Adjudicator referred to simply said  that  the  Appellant's  sister
    died a violent death.  Counsel's instructions are that this certificate
    was provided by the Accident and Emergency Department of  the  hospital
    where the Appellant's sister was taken.  The Appellant has  provided  a
    further death certificate which was issued by the local hospital  where
    the body was transferred to.  It was apparent to the Tribunal that  the
    second death certificate was also issued in Abidjan on 25  August  2000
    and this time the cause of  death  was  shown  as  "following  a  post-
    circumcision haemorrhage".  Counsel took instructions on this  and  was
    told by the Appellant that it is possible for two death certificates to
    be issued in one case by two different hospitals.

16.   Counsel submitted that the Appellant has confirmed  to  her  that  the
    aunt and uncle who were murdered were  her  cousin  Bertine's  parents.
    They were murdered because they refused  to  allow  their  daughter  to
    undergo FGM.  Counsel explained that Bertine and Rose are sisters; they
    have the same father but different mothers.

17.   As to the risk on return, Counsel submitted  that  the  Appellant  has
    provided a statement suggesting that her mother had written to  her  in
    the UK threatening her.  Although the  original  letter  is  lost,  her
    cousin Bertine confirms seeing the letter as it was shown to her by the
    Appellant.  According to the October 2001 CIPU Report, the  courts  and
    police generally view domestic violence as  a  family  problem,  unless
    serious bodily harm is inflicted or the victim lodges a  complaint,  in
    which case  they  may  initiate  criminal  proceedings.   There  is  no
    national plan to assist in the eradication of FGM.  It  is  seen  as  a
    traditional ritual.  The US Stated Department reports that FGM  remains
    a serious problem.  It says the new law on FGM was enacted in  December
    1998, six girls in Abidjan have  been  mutilated.   Police  and  social
    workers neither acted to prevent the mutilation or to arrest the girls'
    parents.  Counsel accepted that there have been  two  arrests  in  July
    2000 of women practising FGM on girls aged between 10 and  14,  but  in
    the context of the law enacted in  1998,  two  prosecutions  is  little
    effort for a huge problem.  The Appellant will not be able to get  free
    legal assistance and she is not able to  work  because  of  her  mental
    state.  Furthermore we have no evidence that  the  authorities  carried
    out any investigations on the death of her sister.

18.   Counsel then distinguished this case  from  that  of  Muchomba  [2002]
    UKIAT 01348 which was decided by a Tribunal which was chaired by me  by
    me in May 2002.  Counsel said that Muchomba concerns Kenya  as  opposed
    to Ivory Coast.  The Kenyan government is doing  more  than  the  Ivory
    Coast Government is,  in that they have a national  plan  to  eradicate
    FGM  through  two  presidential  decrees.   There  are  instances  when
    injunctions have been granted followed by prosecutions.  In Ivory Coast
    as many as 60% of women have  undergone  FGM.   In  Kenya  there  is  a
    decline in FGM.  In Muchomba the  Appellant  did  not  know  where  her
    family were but this Appellant does know  where  her  family  are.   It
    would therefore be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate in  Ivory
    Coast.  In an earlier case the Tribunal said that those undergoing  FGM
    form a social group.  That  Appellant  was  also  from  Yopougon.   The
    Appellant says that all women in Yopougon undergo FGM and therefore  it
    is not voluntary and amounts to an immutable characteristic.

19.   As regards internal flight alternative,  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's mother and people in her tribe wish her to undergo FGM.  If
    she were to reside with other members of the  family,  her  whereabouts
    would immediately become known.  It would be unduly harsh  for  her  to
    relocate because of lack of family for support.  She would not be  able
    to work.  Her mother  is  one  of  the  leaders  who  carries  out  the
    circumcision and it is an embarrassment for her that one  daughter  has
    died and the other refuses FGM.  This is the more reason why she  would
    be determined to have the Appellant do it.

20.   Counsel submitted that FGM would be a  violation  of  the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 3.  Her right  to  physical  and  moral  integrity
    under Article 8 is paramount.  Twelve sessions have been arranged  with
    a psychologist to assist her recovery.

21.   Mr Saunders submitted that if we look at the Appellant's case  on  the
    basis of what she said, her case fails on internal  flight  alternative
    and protection.  It fails on the internal  flight  alternative  because
    the Appellant had already successfully resorted to an  internal  flight
    option for several years and there was no indication of any pursuit  by
    any members of the family or any unforced return to  the  family  home.
    Her sister's return appears to have  been  entirely  voluntarily.   The
    Appellant said in evidence that they were due to be excised  in  August
    2000 and yet her sister Solange went there to attend the village feast.

22.   As for protection, the Appellant has not reported her  mother  because
    they would have  her  up  for  murder.   According  to  the  background
    evidence in the CIPU Report, there have been only six prosecutions  out
    of how many reports, we do not  know.   Although  the  CIPU  Report  at
    paragraph 6.64 says that FGM is practised particularly among the  rural
    population in the north and west and to a lesser extent in the  centre,
    this is not determinative and conclusive.  The Appellant and her people
    live in Yopougon which is part of Abidjan  in  the  southeast.   It  is
    neither rural, northern, western or central.  It is  certainly  not  in
    the area of prevalence of this custom.  The  Appellant's  documents  do
    not generally bear out her account.  It would seem that a date was  set
    in August 2000 although we do not know why this was.  Her sister  would
    have been 30 and the Appellant 22.  According  to  the  UNHCR  document
    adult women undergo FGM at the time of marriage.  We have  no  evidence
    here that the date  was  picked  to  coincide  with  marriage.   It  is
    difficult to find specific  information  about  Ivory  Coast.   To  the
    extent that there is objective evidence,  it  does  not  bear  out  the
    Appellant's account.

23.   As regards the specific points on credibility, Mr Saunders  asked  the
    Tribunal to find that the Adjudicator made perfectly  proper  findings.
    There is always room for doubt when in this case there is no fear of  a
    government agency and yet the person concerned  arranges  an  agent  to
    take her out of the country.

24.   In reply to Mr Saunders submission  that  the  Appellant  successfully
    evaded FGM, Counsel submitted that the Appellant had  been  pressurised
    over a number of years to undergo FGM.  She cannot relocate now.  As to
    the sister going voluntarily to the village, Counsel submitted that the
    Appellant's sister did not anticipate that it would be  so  soon.   She
    knew of the month but not the date.  It should be  taken  into  account
    that the Appellant's evidence has been consistent throughout.

25.   The Appellant's claim, as appears to the  Tribunal,  is  that  on  her
    return to Ivory Coast, she would be forced to undergo FGM  even  though
    she is now 24 years old (Dob 17 July 1978) and cannot relocate in Ivory
    Coast.  This is because her mother who is  leader  of  the  group  that
    performs FGM, has threatened to kill her.   According  to  Counsel  her
    mother's honour is at stake; that  has  been  her  consistent  evidence
    throughout.

26. The Tribunal is of the view that the Adjudicator rightly looked at  the
    Appellant's evidence in the  context  of  the  objective  evidence  and
    properly accepted that FGM was prevalent and customary.
27. Putting aside the issues of credibility, we have  two  main  issues  to
    consider.  The first is whether the Appellant will be offered  adequate
    protection against her mother and the people  in  Yopougon  if  she  is
    forced to undergo FGM;  Secondly whether she  has  an  internal  flight
    option.

28.   As regards protection, the new law, concerning crimes  against  women,
    enacted in December 1998, specifically forbids FGM and makes those  who
    perform it subject to criminal penalties of imprisonment for up to five
    years and a fine.  The Appellant in reply to question 4 (A10) SEF  said
    that she could not report her mother or the group's activities  to  the
    police because her mother would have been arrested for murder.  In  the
    circumstances the Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant was  thereby
    acknowledging that the police would indeed intervene to uphold the  law
    was a proper finding to  make.   Indeed,  according  to  the  objective
    evidence, in July 2000 two Ivorian women were arrested  for  practising
    FGM on girls aged between 10 and 14.  We agree with Counsel  that  this
    may be little effort for a huge problem; but the fact is there is a law
    and it is for those such as the Appellant who fear such practice to use
    the law to prosecute those who practice it.   The  arrest  of  the  two
    Ivorian women does indicate that the authorities will act  when  called
    upon to do so.  Although  eradicating  FGM  it  is  proving  an  uphill
    struggle, the objective evidence does  indicate  that  the  authorities
    will use the law to prosecute practitioners  if  they  are  brought  to
    their attention. The fact  that  the  delegation  went  to  the  remote
    regions of Ivory Coast urging former colleagues to stop  FGM  following
    the revelation that an elderly woman had been  practising  FGM  for  40
    years, does not support the Appellant's evidence in  her  statement  at
    paragraph 5 that the authorities are unable and unwilling to  intervene
    in such practice.  It also belies her statement  that  the  authorities
    would not investigate her position as this is not considered  a  crime,
    but a custom.  The Tribunal does not find that the practitioners in her
    village  can  be  considered  as  agents  of  persecution  because  the
    enactment of the law in December 1998,  shows that the government  does
    not condone the practice.  Therefore the law is there  to  protect  the
    Appellant and we find that the authorities would be willing and able to
    use the law to protect her.

29.   As regards the internal flight alternative, the Appellant,  until  she
    left Ivory Coast, was able to  successfully  evade  circumcision.   The
    Appellant's evidence was  that  she  and  her  sister  both  knew  that
    circumcision would be carried out in August 2000.  We consider that the
    fact that they did not know the actual date was irrelevant.   The  fact
    is her sister did voluntarily return to the village in  that  month  to
    attend the village feast.  Her voluntary return belies the  Appellant's
    claim that they  were  being  pursued  for  female  circumcision.   The
    Appellant was living with her uncle and it would appear that her mother
    knew this.  If indeed she was being pursued for circumcision, she could
    have been caught at anytime.  On such  evidence,  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant cannot relocate in Ivory Coast is not sustainable.

30.   However, there are credibility issues to  contend  with.   A  question
    mark hangs over the cause of death  of  the  Appellant's  sister.   The
    photocopy  of  the  death  certificate  submitted  to  the  Adjudicator
    indicates that she died as a result of violent death on 25 August  2000
    and that her usual  place  of  residence  was  Abidjan.   According  to
    Counsel's instructions this was issued by the hospital that her  sister
    was first taken to.  The second death certificate, which is also a copy
    and which was issued by the Accident and Emergency  Medical  Centre  at
    Yopougon City Abidjan and also dated,  gives  the  cause  of  death  as
    "following  a  post  circumcision  haemorrhage".   We  find  it  highly
    improbable that two death certificates would be issued in  one  day  in
    one case by two different hospitals giving two  different  reasons  for
    the cause of death.  In the circumstances we place  no  weight  on  the
    death certificates.

31.   As to the  age  range  for  circumcision  being  high,  the  objective
    evidence leans towards circumcision being performed on young  girls  or
    at puberty as part of the right of passage.  It may  be  that  in  this
    Appellant's case it could still be performed  even  though  she  is  an
    adult, has a child and was living with her partner.  Nevertheless,  the
    fact remains that the Appellant was able to  avoid  circumcision  while
    she was in Ivory Coast and we have not heard any cogent arguments as to
    why she cannot continue to do so.   We  find  it  incredible  that  the
    Appellant's mother would threaten to kill her as a  matter  of  honour.
    According to the evidence, when her other daughter was bleeding  during
    circumcision, she called the uncle with whom the Appellant was  living,
    as an emergency, in order to take the daughter to the  hospital.   This
    would suggest an attempt to save her  daughter's  life.   It  therefore
    beggars  belief  that  if  indeed  one  daughter   has   died   through
    circumcision,  the  mother  would  then  threaten  to  kill  the  other
    daughter if she returned to Ivory Coast.


32.   Therefore on the totality of the evidence we  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant has established to the appropriate standard of proof that she
    would be persecuted for a Convention reason if she is returned  to  the
    Ivory Coast or that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that
    she would suffer ill treatment in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

33.   We also find on the evidence before us that there would be  no  breach
    of the Appellant's physical and moral integrity were she to  return  to
    Ivory Coast.  Whilst we accept that the Appellant has symptoms of PTSD,
    and is being treated with anti-depressants and is  due  to  undergo  12
    sessions with a ream of psychiatrists, we have no evidence before us to
    indicate that such treatment is not available in the  Ivory  Coast,  or
    that removal would cause a deterioration of her mental condition.   Her
    appeal is therefore dismissed.





                                                                MISS K ESHUN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
