
H-TH15-ATS-V3
           SJ (Article 8 - Proportionality - PTSD - Bosnian Muslim - Medical
                                    Facilities) Bosnia CG [2002] UKIAT 02819
                                                                HX26715-2001

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated:   |
|on :  29th April 2002                         |                             |
|Dictated : 29th April 2002                    |                          18 |
|                                              |July 2002                    |

                                  Before:-


                           Mr D K Allen - Chairman
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Samir JASAREVIC

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




1.    The Appellant has  been  granted  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
      against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  Andrew  Wilson,  who
      allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Appellant's  decision
      directing his removal from the United Kingdom and refusing asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 29th April 2002.  Mr  J  Jones  of
      the Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit appeared on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant, and Ms S Naik for Parker Bird appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent.

3.    The Adjudicator found credible the claim of the Appellant  before  him
    (to whom we shall continue to refer as the Appellant) as set out in his
    initial statement to the Home Office.  In that statement the Appellant,
    who is a Bosnian citizen, said that he was living in Biajc,  which  was
    controlled by the Bosnian Muslims (he being a Muslim) and went to visit
    his family in Kljuc, which was Serbian controlled.  He was  there  with
    his wife and children for fifteen days during  which  time  the  ethnic
    cleansing of the Muslim males began.  His family and others were  taken
    to the barracks by the Serbs and tortured there.   His  uncle  and  his
    uncle's two sons were killed on their doorstep,  and  also  his  wife's
    uncle was killed.  He hid in the cellar to save his  life.   The  Serbs
    asked his wife and mother where he was and his wife said that  she  had
    come on her own with the children and that he was still in  Biajc.   He
    said that the Serbs took the family out of the house and burnt  it  and
    also his uncle's house.  They took  his wife to a place where they kept
    Muslim women and raped them, and were about to  rape  his  wife  but  a
    commander intervened so they let her go.  She ran out and came back  to
    get him out of the burning house, waited until the Serbs had left  with
    all the goods and then took him out.  Subsequently they hid for  a  few
    days in the woods with other survivors and paid a Serb some  money  and
    he took them in his tractor back to Biajc.  The Serbs had  now  started
    to attack Biajc and he was recruited into the Bosnian Muslim Army.  His
    wife had to go and live with a family they did not know.  His wife  was
    hit by a shell and no medical treatment was provided  and  this  caused
    her still to suffer headaches.  His cousin was shot  and  died  but  he
    himself managed to escape the front-line.  During  the  war  Biajc  was
    totally isolated and conditions were very  horrific  and  there  was  a
    severe shortage of food.  They were  forced  to  witness  the  constant
    shelling and a rising death toll everyday.   He  referred  also  at  an
    incident when his daughter fell ill and  they  were  taking  her  to  a
    hospital and noticed that the  Serbs  were  closing  in  to  take  over
    everything in the town and said they would torture  and  rape  everyone
    and as a result he had a gun with bullets in it so that if necessary he
    would shoot himself and the family in preference to  being  caught  and
    tortured by the Serbs.  He referred also to the  children's  continuing
    fear, wetting the beds and fear of uniformed people and the  fact  that
    his daughter as a  consequence  of  not  having  an  injection  at  the
    hospital getting pains and infections in her left eye which swells  up.
    He also referred to having illnesses as a result of all the  sufferings
    in Bosnia.  He referred to  continuing  deaths  and  land  mines  being
    planted and the fact that his wife's cousin was killed in the army last
    year and no-one knew how or why.

4.    The Adjudicator experienced difficulty in assessing  the  reasons  why
    the Appellant left Bosnia.  It seems that the main reason why  he  left
    his flat was because it was repossessed by the Muslim authority and  no
    reasons were said to have been given for this.  As  a  consequence  the
    Adjudicator found the exact reason why the Appellant left Bosnia to  be
    unclear.  He was satisfied that there was still  a  situation  of  some
    discord controversy and violence, from his assessment  of  the  country
    material.  He also noted a death certificate and  photographs  attached
    concerning a relative of the Appellant.

5.    In his conclusions the Adjudicator did not  consider  the  requirement
    to vacate the flat for some uncertain reason to amount to  persecution.
    He found that the ill-treatment suggested by individuals feared by  the
    Appellant was not of sufficient severity  to  cross  the  threshold  of
    persecution and also found that there appeared to be a  sufficiency  of
    protection available to the Appellant from the state and that therefore
    such ill-treatment as there had been from individuals could not  amount
    to  persecution  for  the  purposes  of  the  1951  Convention.   As  a
    consequence he stated at paragraph 25 that he found that the  Appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof of having a well-founded fear of
    persecution for the narrow  definition  of  Article  1  of  the  Geneva
    Convention.

6.    Thereafter the Adjudicator, making  passing  reference  to  the  Human
    Rights Convention, an issue to which we shall have  to  return  in  due
    course, concluded perhaps rather surprisingly in light of his  findings
    at paragraph  25,  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  His reason for this is essentially set out  in  paragraphs
    33 to 35  of  his  determination.   In  essence  this  arose  from  his
    application of Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  and  also
    paragraphs 135 and 136 of the UNHCR Handbook.

7.    Article 1C provides that these Conventions shall  cease  to  apply  to
    any person falling under the terms of Section A if;

      (5)   he can no longer, because the circumstances in  connection  with
              which he has been recognised as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
              exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of the  protection
              of the country of his nationality;

      provided that this paragraph shall not  apply  to  a  refugee  falling
    under Section A(1) of this Article who is  able  to  invoke  compelling
    reasons arising out of  previous  persecution  for  refusing  to  avail
    himself of the protection of the country  of  nationality.   Paragraphs
    135 and 136 of the Handbook, which, as is recognised before us, do  not
    form part of United Kingdom law, refer, in paragraph 135,  to  what  is
    meant by "circumstances" in Article 1C(5) and, in paragraph 136, to the
    nature of the exception to the cessation  provision  contained  in  the
    second paragraph of Article 1C(5).  This contains, among other  things,
    a reference to Article 1A(1) which indicates that the exception applies
    to "statutory refugees".  It is clearly set out at Article  1A(1)  that
    the term refugee applies to a person who has been considered a  refugee
    under the arrangements of 12th May 1926 and to 30th June 1928 or  under
    the Conventions of 28th  October  1933  and  10th  February  1938,  the
    Protocol  of  14th  September  1939  or   the   Constitution   of   the
    International Refugee Organisation.  Clearly this does not apply to the
    Appellant, as we shall continue to refer to him, before us.  The  point
    is made in paragraph 136 of the Handbook that the exception reflects  a
    more general humanitarian principle which  could  also  be  applied  to
    refugees other than  statutory  refugees  and  that  it  is  frequently
    recognised that a person who,  or  whose  family,  has  suffered  under
    atrocious forms of persecution should not be  expected  to  repatriate.
    This is so even though there may have been a complete change of  regime
    in his country.  The  Adjudicator  based  his  conclusions  on  medical
    evidence concerning the Appellant as regards his own  medical  problems
    which in particular involves him suffering from Chronic Post  Traumatic
    Stress Disorder as is made clear in the  report  from  a  Dr  Booya,  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist.  It appeared  from  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that his wife was also receiving treatment from  Dr  Booya,  apparently
    for depression, and that their children had been sufficiently disturbed
    that the GP considered referring them to a  specialist  but  considered
    that with stability and treatment of  their  parents  that  they  would
    respond and it appears that this was increasingly the case.

8.    Mr Jones argued  that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  could  not  be
    sustained.  There was a clear contradiction between  paragraph  25  and
    paragraph 36 of the determination.  The Secretary of State had not been
    asked to exercise discretion in the Appellant's favour.  The  issue  of
    compassionate grounds was not an issue for the Adjudicator.

9.    Ms Naik argued that the Adjudicator was right  on  the  Article  1C(5)
    point.  It would be necessary to determine that as a preliminary issue,
    since she argued that there were also human rights  issues  before  the
    Tribunal.  Though it was true that the Handbook was not part of  United
    Kingdom law, the Tribunal  had  to  consider  whether  removal  of  the
    Appellant and his family would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Convention as a whole.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had not been recognised as a refugee in the past, but his circumstances
    with regard to the Adjudicator's  findings  given  the  compelling  and
    traumatic reasons referred to by the Adjudicator would have made him  a
    de facto refugee in the past.  The Adjudicator was correct to  use  the
    Handbook to seek to interpret the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    the Convention.  The  Adjudicator  found  that  there  were  compelling
    reasons for the Appellant to refuse to avail himself of the  protection
    of his country.  This was set out in  the  determination,  and  it  was
    comprised in his particular mental health condition and especially  the
    reasons for the PTSD.  It was clear that he  suffered  because  of  his
    experiences at the time of the war and hence he sought  refuge  outside
    Bosnia Herzegovina.  She put in a determination of the  Tribunal  in  M
    (01TH03623).  This was of particular  relevance  to  the  human  rights
    issues that would  fall  to  be  argued  as  part  of  the  alternative
    submission.

10.   Mr Jones took us to paragraph 6 in M.  He argued that in the light  of
    the points made by the Tribunal in that paragraph the argument that the
    Adjudicator in  the  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  was  right  in  his
    application of Article 1C(5) was not sustainable.

11.   We have already set out the  provisions  of  Article  1C(5).   As  was
    clearly pointed out by the Tribunal in paragraph 6 in M, the  cessation
    provision of Article 1C(5) had no application in that  case  since  the
    Appellant there had not been recognised as a refugee and  in  fact  her
    application had been rejected by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  same
    point applies equally in the case before us.   The  Appellant  has  not
    been recognised as a refugee by the Secretary of State, and indeed  was
    not found to be a refugee as regards risk of persecution on  return  to
    Bosnia, at paragraph 25 of the determination.  The Tribunal went on  at
    paragraph 6 in M to say that it might be that the  Adjudicator  had  in
    mind the saving proviso to Article 1 C(5) but if so was also  in  error
    in that respect since it applies only to statutory  refugees,  that  is
    those recognised under international law prior to the entry into  force
    of the 1951 Convention.  That is equally true in the  case  before  us.
    As was agreed by the representatives before us, the  Handbook  provides
    guidance only and is not part of  United  Kingdom  law.   Applying  the
    wording of the Convention, and bearing in  mind  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under that Convention, we consider that the Adjudicator was
    wrong to allow this appeal  under  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Convention,
    making the use as he did of paragraphs 135 and  136  of  the  Handbook.
    The Appellant is not a  statutory  refugee  and  his  claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention and, in the light of the  Adjudicator's  conclusions
    at paragraph 25, cannot be sustained.

12.   We go on to consider firstly whether we have jurisdiction to  consider
    his human rights issues in this  case,  and  secondly  if  we  do  what
    conclusions we reach on them.  There was no  cross  appeal  brought  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant   before   the   Adjudicator   against   the
    Adjudicator's findings in any respect.  As was pointed out by Mr  Jones
    in his submissions to us, the Adjudicator did not really come to  clear
    findings on the human rights issues in this case.  Paragraph 31 appears
    to deal with the Article 3 argument but it is inconclusive, and  cannot
    be said to be at all a satisfactory determination of that  issue.   The
    same criticism can be made of paragraph 32 which purports to deal  with
    the claim under Article 8.  The fact  that  there  was  an  absence  of
    evidence should not have precluded the Adjudicator from making findings
    on this point.

13.   We bear in mind our obligations as a public authority under the  Human
    Rights Act.  In our view it would not be proper for  us  to  refuse  to
    hear argument on the human rights issues in this case albeit that there
    is no cross appeal against the Adjudicator's conclusions, if  they  can
    be so described, on the human rights issues in this case.   Accordingly
    we have taken full account of the arguments put  before  us  concerning
    the Human Rights Act which were essentially as set  out  in  Ms  Naik's
    skeleton argument and amplified by her in her submissions to us, and in
    Mr Jones response to  those  points.   In  particular  Ms  Naik  placed
    reliance upon the determination in M to which we have  referred  above.
    That appeal involved an Appellant from Kosovo who  among  other  things
    had been subjected to torture and rape of a particularly brutal  nature
    over a period of hours  by  Serbian  youths  which,  not  surprisingly,
    caused her to be in a severely traumatised state.  The Tribunal did not
    consider that the Appellant was at risk of  treatment  which  could  be
    said to be sufficiently serious  to  amount  to  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment, and therefore dismissed the  appeal  under  Article  3.   As
    regards Article  8,  the  Tribunal  found  at  paragraph  26  that  the
    Appellant had been subjected to treatment in Kosovo  of  such  severity
    that she currently suffered from Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  and
    severe depression as a direct result  of  that  treatment.   There  was
    clear medical evidence that  her  return  at  the  present  time  would
    adversely effect the therapeutic  treatment  which  she  was  currently
    receiving but was also likely adversely to affect  the  progress  which
    had been achieved by returning her to the  country  where  associations
    with her past suffering would be intensified.  Removal of itself  would
    therefore be clinically regressive and there was no realistic  prospect
    of her being able to receive treatment in Kosovo for her  condition  as
    it then existed, let alone as it was likely to  be  aggravated  by  her
    return.  She would be expected to comply with  tradition  by  going  to
    live with her parents-in-law and if she did not  do  so  she  would  go
    against the norms of her society.  There  was  some  evidence  that  it
    would not be easy for her to  return  to  live  with  her  own  parents
    because they feared the stigma attaching to them as parents of a victim
    of Serb rape.  The attitude of her parents-in-law was  not   reasonably
    likely to be more supportive than that  of  her  natural  parents.   It
    could not be excluded that what had happened to her might  become  more
    widely known and it would be seen as a stigma generally in her  society
    and that would substantially inhibit her from seeking  help  in  Kosovo
    outside her immediate  family  in  any  event.   In  paragraph  28  the
    Tribunal expressed the view that whilst it would only  be  rarely  that
    removal pursuant to maintenance  of  a  consistent  immigration  policy
    would not be proportionate, in its view this  was  one  of  those  rare
    cases where it would not  be  so.   In  reaching  this  conclusion  the
    Tribunal took fully into account the horrific nature of the Appellant's
    experiences in Kosovo and that her torture and rape in  September  1999
    was only some two years previously  and  was  particularly  brutal  and
    reprehensible.  It took account of the UNHCR guidelines of March  2001.
    The Tribunal concluded that her removal would be inhumane and in breach
    of her human rights to respect for her  physical  and  moral  integrity
    under Article 8 and that it was not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    aims of the United Kingdom.  This was because of the degree of physical
    and moral detriment that would arise from her  removal  and  return  to
    Kosovo.

14.   The medical evidence concerning the Appellant in the  case  before  us
    can essentially be found in the report of Dr Booya of 6th August  2001.
    Dr Booya is  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  to  whom  the  Appellant  was
    referred by his GP.  The doctor had seen him on  four  occasions  since
    his first consultation, and diagnosed him as suffering from severe  and
    also Chronic Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder.   It  had  taken  three
    sessions before the doctor could complete his assessment and he put the
    Appellant  on  anti-depressants.   He  would  be   assessed   regarding
    suitability for cognitive behavioural therapy and steps had been  taken
    to make a referral in this regard.  The length of treatment was said to
    be very long and difficult to predict.  The doctor said that  he  would
    expect   the   Appellant   to   require   intensive   psychiatric   and
    psychotherapeutic input for at least the  next  twelve  months  and  to
    continue to require psychiatric follow-up for a few years to come.

15.   We have also the benefit of a report  from  Dr  Booya  concerning  the
    Appellant's wife.  This was  obtained  after  the  hearing  before  the
    Adjudicator, although it appears to have been sent to the  Adjudicator,
    it was not taken into account in the Adjudicator's  determination.   It
    may well be that it never in fact reached the Adjudicator.  The wife is
    diagnosed as presenting with  multiple  and  severe  symptoms  of  Post
    Traumatic Stress Disorder.  She is said to suffer from severe PTSD.  It
    is said that she would require treatment for several  months,  no  less
    than one year.  Prognosis  was  generally  poor  and  at  best  it  was
    expected to reduce the severity of the symptoms and help the patient to
    cope with them and try and build a new life.  There was  a  possibility
    of relapse of symptoms when the patient was under stress  or  subjected
    to further trauma.  This report is dated 7th November 2001.

16.   We were referred to the UNHCR report on  health  care  in  Bosnia  and
    Herzegovina which was referred to in paragraph 2.6 of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  At paragraph 5.12.1 which  is  headed  Post  Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder and Mental Health Care, it is said that the specific treatment
    and care of mentally traumatised people is unmanaged.  It is maintained
    mainly by  Non-governmental  Organisations  whose  involvement  is  not
    guaranteed over time.  It is said that stationary  treatment  for  PTSD
    can only be found  in  CC  Sarajevo,  however  psychiatric  specialists
    recognise this group of patients and outpatient therapy is  offered  in
    many hospitals and DZs once or twice per week.   None  of  the  visited
    health  care  institutions  had  a  specialised  mental   health   care
    department  for  stationary  therapy  and  attempts  to   create   such
    departments or wards remained unsuccessful.  There are general comments
    and two conclusion sections in  this  report.   It  is  said  that  the
    conclusion which is prefixed by the number 10 that in order  to  ensure
    the  continued  treatment  of  persons  suffering   from   chronic   or
    potentially life threatening illnesses the possibility for repatriation
    of such individuals should be considered only on a case by  case  basis
    and with full consideration given to the possibilities for such persons
    of accessing satisfactory health care in  their  place  of  return.   A
    thorough assessment of these  possibilities  should  include  not  only
    whether the necessary drugs or treatment facilities  are  available  in
    the persons place of origin but whether or not the person would be able
    to access these facilities.  In the conclusions (by  number  6)  it  is
    said to be undeniable that both the  level  of  services  provided  for
    those who are insured is often well below the levels guaranteed by  law
    and that despite the legal semblance of universal health coverage there
    remains a  significant  number  of  persons  who  either  do  not  have
    insurance or who experienced difficulty in  accessing  health  care  in
    Bosnia  and  Herzegovina.   A  number  of  obstacles  to   the   proper
    functioning in the health system are set out  and  these  are  said  to
    constitute significant deterrents to return.  Ms Naik also took  us  to
    the decision of the European Court of Human Rights  in  Bensaid  [2001]
    INLR 325, particularly at page 337, where it was said, at paragraph 47,
    that mental health must also be regarded as a crucial part  of  private
    life associated with the aspect of moral integrity.  It  is  also  said
    that the preservation  of  mental  stability  is  in  that  context  an
    indispensable precondition to  effective  enjoyment  of  the  right  to
    respect for private life.  We also bear  in  mind  the  quotation  from
    Nhundu and Chiwera (01/TH/00613) at paragraph 6 of Ms  Naik's  skeleton
    argument that even if the private and family life ties  in  the  United
    Kingdom are not strong enough on their own to give rise to a  violation
    of Article 8, a person could nevertheless succeed under that Article if
    removal would expose him to a real risk of significant harms or serious
    obstacles albeit harms falling below the Article 3 threshold.

17.   As is very much emphasised in M, cases of  this  kind  require  to  be
    determined on their own facts.  The Tribunal in  that  case  emphasised
    that it would only be rarely that removal pursuant to maintenance of  a
    consistent immigration policy would not be proportionate.  The Tribunal
    went on to consider carefully the particular facts of  that  case.   In
    our  view  the  proposed  removal  in  the  case  before  us  would  be
    proportionate, bearing in  mind  the  need  to  maintain  a  consistent
    immigration policy.  We have considered carefully the medical evidence,
    and the evidence generally of this family's circumstances while in  the
    United Kingdom, in the light also of the objective evidence  concerning
    the availability of appropriate medical care  in  Bosnia.   The  family
    would return as a unit, and we see the relevance, but attach  no  great
    weight to the fact that a number of the members of  the  wife's  family
    have status in the United Kingdom.  We do not think that  it  would  be
    appropriate to seek to make comparisons  between  our  conclusions  and
    those in M, since as we have noted above, each case must be dealt  with
    on the basis of its own facts.  We consider that the conclusions  in  M
    are  eminently  sustainable,  but  in  our  view  that  was  a   highly
    exceptional case, and we do not consider that the same can be  said  of
    the case before us.  In particular we  note  what  appear  to  be  more
    adequate  medical  facilities  for  the  particular  ailments  of   the
    Appellant and his wife in Bosnia, and, albeit there clearly are general
    problems with  the  health  care  system  in  Bosnia,  it  must  be  of
    particular relevance that  there  is  stationary  treatment  for  PTSD,
    albeit only in CC Sarajevo, but that psychiatric specialists  recognise
    this group of patients  and  outpatient  therapy  is  offered  in  many
    hospitals and DZs once or twice per week.  We  note  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor his wife is or apparently ever has been an  inpatient  in
    the United Kingdom, and that the prognosis for the Appellant in  August
    2001  was   that   he   would   require   intensive   psychiatric   and
    psychotherapeutic input for at least the  next  twelve  months  and  to
    continue to require psychiatric follow-up for a few years to come.

18.   We conclude therefore that the claim under Article 8 is not made  out.
     We agree also with what was said by the Tribunal in M that as in  that
    case so in this the Article 3 claim is not made out.  If this Appellant
    is at risk of anything on return, it is not treatment that  could  give
    rise to a claim under Article 3 in our view,  and  as  we  have  stated
    above, we do not consider that to return him and his family would  give
    rise to breach of his and their Article 8 rights either.  In the  light
    however of the helpful medical evidence from Dr Booya, we consider that
    it is appropriate that we make a recommendation in this case.  We would
    ask the Secretary of State to give serious  consideration  to  granting
    this family a period of twelve months exceptional leave  to  remain  in
    order for the most intensive part of treatment of the Appellant and his
    wife to be concluded, after which time we would expect, in the light of
    the prognosis provided by the doctor in relation to both of them,  that
    their treatment could be continued properly.

19.   This appeal is allowed.




                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                                    CHAIRMAN
