

                                                     Appeal No. HX56352-2001
                                 SS (IFA  -  Relocation)  Kosovo  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 02869

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                    Date heard: 27 June 2002
                                   Date notified:22.7.2002..................

                                  Before: -

                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                 MR A SMITH
                               MR D R BREMMER





                                                       Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                              Appellant



                                     and

                              MR SAZAN SHAHINI

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr  A  C  B  Markham-David,
dismissing the respondent`s appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
State giving directions for removal from the United Kingdom, having  refused
asylum.  Ms M Banwait appeared for the appellant.  Mr  D  Adams  of  Counsel
instructed by Markandan & Co. Solicitors appeared  for  the  respondent.  To
avoid  confusion  the  respondent,  a  national  of  Federal   republic   of
Yugoslavia, is hereafter referred to as the "claimant".

2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal.

3. The adjudicator had allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  claimant,
being of mixed Albanian - Serbian parentage, would have a well-founded  fear
of persecution in his home area of Gjakove. He had further considered  that,
since the claimant`s family lived in Gjakove, the claimant would not have  a
viable internal flight altenative.

4. The adjudicator found the claimant would  face  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution in his  home  area.  This  arose  from  his  acceptance  of  the
appellant's evidence to the effect that in Gjakove he had  been  the  victim
of discrimination from both Serbs and Albanians  on  account  of  his  mixed
ethnic origins and to the effect that, shortly before he left Kosovo in mid-
1999 he had been  taken  by  the  KLA  and,  in  the  course  of  a  two-day
detention, told by them to leave the country.

5. It is to be observed,  however,  that.  in  deciding  he  had  no  viable
internal flight alternative, the adjudicator did not accept  that  this  was
because the claimant would  continue  to  face  a  risk  of  persecution  on
account of his mixed ethnicity. He made specific reference  in  this  regard
to the Tribunal determination in the case  of  Rexhepi  (HX/62256/2000)  and
said:

      "I accept that if he  returned  to  Gjakove,  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that he would be recognised. The appellant was asked  about
      the situation if he went to a different part  of  Kosovo.  He  replied
      that it might happen that somebody might  recognise  him,  such  as  a
      neighbour, a Serb or someone from the KLA or someone he  had  been  to
      school with. This is of course a possibility,  but  in  my  opinion  a
      remote one. It does not amount to a reasonable likelihood.


      ...I do not accept that the appellant has any such  well-founded  fear
      of persecution in a different part of Kosovo."

6. We emphasise this aspect of the adjudicator's findings because  Mr  Adams
on behalf of the claimant sought to argue  that  the  claimant  should  have
been recognised as still facing a  real  risk  of  being  perceived  by  KLA
remnants wherever he went in Kosovo as a traitor or as a Serb  collaborator.
He emphasised that the KLA had told him to leave the country, not  just  his
home area. However, we consider that the adjudicator gave sound reasons  for
rejecting this argument. Even if they had killed the claimant`s  father  and
even if they suspected him of being a Serb, there was no evidence  that  the
KLA in consequence had put him on any kind of list. Given his young age  and
the short period for which they detained him, we do not think it  reasonably
likely the KLA had any great interest in him. It  was  simply  that  it  was
possible he might be recognised as of mixed  parentage  by  a  neighbour,  a
Serb or someone from the KLA or someone he had been to school with.

7. We entirely agree with the  adjudicator  that  on  his  own  account  the
claimant had not shown that this  possibility  was  anything  other  than  a
remote one. In this regard  it  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
appellant had an Albanian name and was happy for his asylum interview to  be
conducted in Albanian.

8. Thus the only question remaining, as the adjudicator  correctly  saw  it,
was whether  it  was  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  claimant  to  relocate
elsewhere in Kosovo, e.g. to Pristina.

9. His conclusion was:

      "The appellant is a young man who is now 19 years of  age.  I  do  not
      think that it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to  relocate  somewhere
      other than Gjakove save for the question of  his  family,  namely  his
      parents and sisters, who were all living at home  in  Gjakove  at  the
      time he left in June 1999. The appellant says he has not succeeded  in
      making contact with his family since then. He has written letters  but
      received no reply. He does not know what has happened  to  his  family
      but there must be a reasonable likelihood that they are  still  living
      in Gjakove. In these circumstances, I have come to the conclusion that
      it would be unreasonable to expect him to relocate elsewhere."


10. We find this conclusion to be unsustainable.

11. Putting to one side the oddity of saying, having accepted no  reply  had
been given to letters, that it was reasonably likely the  family  are  still
living in Gjakove, it seems to us that the  adjudicator  failed  to  make  a
rounded assessment of whether return  to  live  elsewhere  would  be  unduly
harsh. It may be that in certain situations the mere fact of having to  live
separately from one's family can give rise to undue hardship.  But  in  this
case, not only did the adjudicator expressly consider there  were  no  other
significant factors, but the evidence was simply  to  the  effect  that  the
claimant was a young man who was 19 at the date of the  hearing.  There  was
no satisfactory evidence that he suffered from any ill health or  disability
or  that  he  had  been  severely  traumatised.  Given  in  particular   the
adjudicator's specific finding that the claimant was at not at real risk  of
being recognised as of mixed parentage outside  his  home  area,  there  was
therefore plainly an insufficient factual basis on which he  could  conclude
that return elsewhere would cause him undue hardship.

12. For the above reasons the appeal is allowed. On the evidence before  the
adjudicator the claimant had a viable internal flight alternative.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




