


      Gurung (Refugee exclusion clauses especially 1F (b)) Nepal CG * [2002]
                                                                  UKIAT04870




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                            Date heard: 28 May 2002
                          Date notified:........14 October 2002.............

                                  Before: -
                       MR JUSTICE COLLINS (PRESIDENT)
                                DR H H STOREY
                                 MR A MACKEY


                                                       Between

                               MR INDRA GURUNG


                                              Appellant



                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of  Nepal,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  M  E  Curzon  Lewis,
dismissing the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  giving
directions for removal following refusal to grant asylum.  Mr Mark Braid  of
Counsel  instructed  by  Gillman-Smith  Lee  Solicitors  appeared  for   the
appellant. Mrs E Grey of Counsel instructed by Treasury Solicitors  appeared
for the respondent.

2. Although deciding to remit  this  appeal  we  have  starred  it  for  the
purpose of giving guidance to adjudicators on the  proper  approach  to  the
Refugee Convention`s Exclusion Clauses at Art 1F. The  events  of  September
11, 2001 have made the need for  clarity  of  approach  as  regards  Art  1F
imperative.

3. We are grateful to both Counsel for their careful submissions,  including
those sent on our invitation post-hearing. Largely due to their  efforts  we
have been able to consider the relevant  issues  in  the  light  of  a  very
considerable body of material including: The Exclusion  Clauses:  Guidelines
on  their  Application,  UNHCR,  Geneva,  December   1996;   Lisbon   Expert
Roundtable, Global Consultations on  International  Protection  May  2001  -
Summary Conclusions:  Exclusion  from  Refugee  Status;  articles  from  the
Special Supplementary Issue of the International  Journal  of  Refugee  Law,
Vol 12, 2000  on  Exclusion  from  Protection;  the  EU  Commission  Working
Document on the Relationship  between  Safeguarding  Internal  Security  and
complying with International Protection  Obligations  and  Instruments,  COM
(2001)  743  final,  Brussels,  5.12.2001;  UNHCR`s,  ECRE`s   and   Amnesty
International`s comments on the same;  the  Proposed  Council  Directive  on
minimum  standards  for  the  qualification  and  status  of  third  country
nationals and stateless person as refugees or as persons who otherwise  need
international protection COM (2001) 510 final Brussels  12  September  2001;
and ECRE Position on The Interpretation of Art 1 of the Refugee  Convention,
September 2000. In addition to UK court[1]  and  Tribunal[2]  cases  dealing
with Art 1F-related issues, we were also  referred  to  leading  cases  from
Canada, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the United States and  a  very  recent
Australian High Court judgment.

4. The account the appellant gave was as follows. Now aged 33, he came  from
a farming family who lived in  a  village  in  Kaki  district,  West  Nepal.
Before his departure in January 2001, he had been  a  relatively  successful
movie actor. He joined the  Nepalese  Communist  Party  (Maoist)  (hereafter
CPN) in 1997 if not earlier and was also a member of  that  party's  farmer-
oriented Kissan Movement. He attended meetings, rallies  and  demonstrations
up to 5 times a month. Most  of  these  were  to  protest  about  government
corruption and to demand land reform. In 1996 he was involved in a  raid  on
Land Registration offices at Chawil. He was one of 20 who protested  against
corruption by throwing stones and chanting.  In  August  1999  his  brother,
Mohan, who had also joined the Maoists, had been killed when police  invaded
a public meeting in  Besi  Sahar  Lanjung  and  fired  indiscriminately.  In
December 1999 the appellant was  arrested  and  detained  for  5  months  in
Pokhara Central Jail. During his detention he was ill  treated,  the  police
pressurising him to reveal the names of leaders, location of training  camps
and future plans of the Maoists. He was released in April 2000  on  bail  of
400,000 Nepalese rupees on condition that he was never again to support  the
Maoists. However his work for the Maoists continued. On  10  September  2000
he was arrested for a second time, again experiencing interrogation and  ill
treatment. In December 2000 his father procured his release  with  the  help
of a police inspector friend; a bribe was also paid. He  was  told  he  must
leave the country within 25 days or suffer the same  fate  as  his  brother.
With the help of an agent, he left Nepal on January 2001. He claimed he  was
still wanted in Nepal where the authorities were accusing  him  of  being  a
Maoist.


The Secretary of State`s assessment

5. The respondent in his Reasons for Refusal  letter  did  not  believe  the
appellant.  He  did  not  find  credible  the  account  of  two  detentions,
primarily because of its lack of  detail.  He  also  found  implausible  the
appellant`s claim to have been released on condition  he  leave  Nepal  soon
after. He saw no  good  reason  for  the  appellant  claiming  asylum  late.
However,  in  the  alternative  he  concluded  that,  even   accepting   the
appellant`s account, he would at  most  face  a  risk  of  prosecution,  not
persecution. His reasoning in this regard was that the  CPN  (Maoist)  party
was an illegal, armed revolutionary movement which had  openly  admitted  it
has used, and would continue to  use,  violence  in  order  to  achieve  its
goals. He wrote:

      "The Secretary of State considered that were you an active  member  of
      such an armed organisation which is fighting to overthrow the  elected
      Nepalese state it is likely that the Nepalese authorities might have a
      legitimate interest in you. However, he considered that this would  be
      on  account  of  your  actions  as  a  member  of  an  illegal   armed
      revolutionary organisation  rather  than  any  political  opinion  you
      expressed. The Secretary of State considered that you have expressed a
      fear of prosecution, not persecution..."


The adjudicator's assessment

6. The adjudicator's findings of fact were jumbled and  incomplete.  On  the
one hand he rejected the appellant`s credibility  wholesale.  On  the  other
hand he appeared to accept the appellant had been involved with the  Maoists
even before 1997 and, albeit doubting he had heard the full truth about  the
appellant`s account of his release from his second period of  detention,  he
found his claim to have been detained twice `quite  possible`.  He  made  no
findings, however, on whether during these detentions the appellant was  ill
treated and interrogated.  He  speculated  whether  the  appellant,  despite
claims to the contrary, had  had  charges  brought  against  him,  but  then
concluded:

      "I do not know why no charges were ever brought against the  appellant
      but clearly on  his  own  admission,  he  was  involved  in  terrorist
      activities and he has produced an article  from  Janamat  [a  Nepalese
      publication] to prove it."

7. This conclusion followed on  from  his  earlier  observation  that,  when
questioned about the extent of his knowledge of the fact  that  the  Maoists
were engaged in terrorist activities, the appellant had  said  he  knew  the
Maoists were an illegal terrorist organisation.

8. On the strength of these findings the adjudicator  reached  two  distinct
conclusions.

9. One was that the appellant fell under the Exclusion Clauses.  Having  set
out the text of Art 1F, he concluded:

      "The appellant frankly admits to having taken part in the raid on  the
      Land Registration Offices in 1996. Janamat records him as having  been
      involved in a subsequent raid on the Kathmandu Tax Office. He is not a
      person who should be  considered  to  be  deserving  of  international
      protection under the Refugee Convention".

10. The other was that the appellant did not  qualify  under  the  Inclusion
Clauses. Citing paragraph 60 of  the  1979  UNHCR  Handbook,  which  in  the
context of dealing with the prosecution/persecution issue acknowledges  that
sometimes a person fearing  prosecution  or  punishment  can  have  a  well-
founded fear of persecution, he concluded at paragraph 56:

      " In the present case, whatever the deficiencies in  the  police,  the
      fact remains that this  appellant  has  been  engaging  in  anti-state
      activities, for which he is properly liable to prosecution. He  claims
      that no charges have been brought against him, that  (sic)  I  do  not
      necessarily believe his evidence  about  that.  In  my  judgment  this
      appellant has fled from Nepal because he fears  prosecution.  He  does
      not qualify for asylum under the Refugee Convention".

11. The adjudicator also addressed the appellant`s human rights  grounds  of
appeal which made mention of breaches of articles 2,3 and  6  of  the  ECHR.
But, in contrast to the approach he took in relation to  the  asylum  claim,
he did not conduct any analysis  of  them  in  the  alternative:  he  simply
relied on a `want of credibility`.


The appellant`s submissions

12. In his appeal to the Tribunal the appellant  relied  upon  a  number  of
points.  Firstly  he  challenged  the  adjudicator's   adverse   credibility
findings, in particular  his  failure  to  accept  that  the  two  incidents
mentioned by the appellant  - one at the Tax Office  and  one  at  the  Land
Registry offices - were one and the same. He  criticised  the  adjudicator's
rejection of credibility for relying unduly on a disbelief  in  the  account
he had given of the circumstances of his release, an account  shown  by  the
objective country  materials  to  happen  in  some  instances.  Secondly  he
contended that, taking account of the entirety of  the  prosecution  process
likely to face a  member  of  the  Maoist  Party  in  Nepal  currently,  the
adjudicator was wrong to try and distinguish the instant case from the  type
of situation considered by the Tribunal in Rajesh Gurung (01/TH/1371)  which
found that this process would entail persecution.  He  pointed  to  evidence
indicating that the courts are  inefficient  and  susceptible  to  political
pressure and corruption, that the authorities target Maoists  for  arbitrary
detention, torture and beatings in a climate of impunity and that there  has
been a worsening of the situation in Nepal with the declaration in  November
2001 of a state of emergency.

13. The appellant also raised a number of criticisms  of  the  adjudicator's
approach to the Art 1F issues. These can be classified into failure to  deal
properly with inclusion issues on the one hand and exclusion issues  on  the
other.

14. As regards the adjudicator's treatment  of  the  inclusion  issues,  the
grounds contended that the adjudicator failed or  failed  to  deal  properly
with the appellant`s position under the Inclusion Clauses. To the extent  he
did deal with them, the grounds continued, he  was  wrong  to  conclude  the
appellant  would  simply  face  due  process  of   legitimate   prosecution.
Following Sivakumar [2001] EWCA 1196, an appellant should be  recognised  as
at risk of persecution where he would be exposed to excessive  or  arbitrary
punishment. The Nepalese  authorities  not  only  failed  to  respect  human
rights generally, but they  had  a  concerted  policy  of  mistreatment  and
torture of suspected Maoists.

15.  As  regards  the  adjudicator's  treatment  of  exclusion  issues,  the
appellant contended that the  adjudicator  had  been  wrong  to  raise  such
issues of his own motion, when the Secretary of  State  had  not  previously
raised them. Only the Secretary of State should do this because only he  "is
in a position to conduct security checks on  an  individual  and  apply  his
findings to any Art 1F contentions ...". The appellant went to identify  the
following errors in the adjudicator's  treatment:  his  failure  to  specify
which sub -clause of Art 1F he considered applied;  his  blanket  assumption
that mere membership  of  the  Maoist  party  proved  complicity  in  crimes
contrary to Art 1F; his disregard for the "wholly political  nature  of  the
appellant's actions"; his failure to accept that  the  appellant  had  never
defined himself as a terrorist but had merely agreed  that  Maoists  do,  on
occasions, perpetrate violent acts; his reaching of a  conclusion  that  the
appellant was involved  in  terrorist  activities  in  the  absence  of  any
concrete evidence; his failure to make any adequate findings about the  raid
the appellant conducted with 20 others on the  Land  Registry  offices;  and
his failure to adopt a restrictive approach  to  the  Exclusion  Clauses  as
urged by the 1979 UNHCR Handbook, recent EU pronouncements  and  almost  all
commentators.

16. After we had indicated that on the facts of this  case  we  saw  Article
1F(b)  as  the  only  sub-category  of  Art  1F  with  any  real   potential
application, Mr Braid on  behalf  of  the  appellant  argued  further  that,
following the criteria approved by their lordships in T [1996] 2 All ER  443
for analysing Art 1F(b) cases, throwing stones and chanting was not  conduct
sufficiently  serious  to  fall  within  Art  1F(b).  Even  on  the  dubious
assumption that the  appellant`s  actions  could  be  construed  as  serious
crimes,  they  were,  he  said,  plainly  political  and  committed  out  of
political motives. The attack on the Land Registry offices,  he  added,  was
borne out a desire to overthrow an element of state apparatus.


The respondent`s submissions

17. Mrs Grey accepted that it should normally be for the Secretary of  State
to identify and raise any exclusion issues but  that  an  adjudicator  could
raise them of his own motion where such issues  were  obvious.  It  was  now
Home Office policy to consider exclusion where a person is  a  member  of  a
proscribed organisation within the meaning of the Terrorism Act 2000.

18. Mrs Grey submitted there was no requirement as a matter of law  to  make
findings on the persecution feared before considering exclusion. In  support
she cited the Canadian case of Gonzalez v  Canada  (Min  of  Employment  and
Immigration) [1994] 2 F.C. 646 and the UK case of  T,  both  of  which  held
that, in assessing whether someone qualified as  a  refugee,  the  decision-
taker should not weigh the severity of  potential  persecution  against  the
gravity of the conduct said to constitute an Art 1F crime. She  reminded  us
that that principle had now been made a statutory  requirement  by  s.34  of
the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001.

19. Mrs Grey hastened to add that the Secretary of State did not  adopt  the
converse principle that exclusion should  always  be  considered  first.  It
would only be apt in cases where there was an  obviously  serious  crime  or
act at issue. The  position  she  advanced  was  that  in  more  `mixed`  or
marginal  cases,  there  were  pragmatic  reasons  to   do   with   avoiding
unnecessary  remittances  for  ensuring   inclusion   and   exclusion   were
considered and in that order:

      "The order in which issues should be considered will therefore  depend
      on the circumstances. If the application of the exclusion clauses were
      central to the case (if, for example, it was a central ground  in  the
      Secretary of State`s reasons for the refusal of asylum  status),  then
      it would be appropriate to address the issue of `exclusion` first  and
      to rely on one ground only if dismissing the appeal. If, however,  the
      application of Art 1F was one only of a number of issues raised by the
      evidence or its application was  problematic,  the  `inclusion  first`
      approach may be more sensible".

20. As regards the adjudicator's treatment  of  the  inclusion  issues,  Mrs
Grey accepted this was inadequate but pointed out that  the  respondent  did
not accept that in Nepal there was a "concerted policy" of mistreatment  and
torture of Maoists and suspected Maoists.

21. As regards the exclusion issues, Mrs Grey accepted the  adjudicator  had
erred in failing to specify  which  sub-clause  or  clauses  of  Art  1F  he
considered to be engaged. An adjudicator should,  she  said,  make  findings
about the crime or act committed by the claimant and then explain  how  that
fitted within the limbs of Art 1F(a), (b) and (c), i.e. identify  the  legal
category into which the appellant's actions were said to  have  fallen.  The
Secretary of State accepted  that  the  evidential  burden  of  raising  the
exclusion issue was on him. As regards the standard of proof, she  urged  us
to follow the approach of the Canadian Federal Court of Appeal in Ramirez  v
Canada [1992] FC 306 in viewing the test  as  being  whether  there  were  "
serious reasons for considering" that a barred act  had  been  committed,  a
test which required a lower standard of proof than either beyond  reasonable
doubt or the balance of probabilities. This, she submitted,  was  consistent
with the approach of the Court of Appeal in T.

22. Mrs Grey said that the Secretary of State maintained his  position  that
the Maoists` frequent recourse to violent acts meant that there was  a  real
issue in this case of complicity on the part of any CPN (Maoist)  member  in
any acts done by that organisation. An appellant`s claim to  have  disagreed
with, and not to have been  responsible  for,  or  complicit  in,  terrorist
activities, should be assessed rigorously.

23. As regards complicity or association, useful guidance was to  be  found,
she said, in Canadian cases describing the test for complicity as  "personal
and knowing participation in persecutorial acts".  Participation  should  be
widely  construed.  Mere  membership  was  not  enough,  but  complicity  or
association may be inferred from: (i) a leadership role  or  other  position
of authority in an organisation (a proximity test); (ii) the existence of  a
principal or dominant purpose of the organisation concerned  being  that  of
committing acts which would fall within the three  limbs  of  the  exclusion
clauses (a dominant purpose test). In Ramirez v Canada  [1992]  FC  306  the
latter test was said to apply if an organisation was " principally  directed
to a limited brutal purpose", The Secretary of State accepted that this two-
fold test would appear  to  cover  current-day  extremist  terrorist  groups
whether national or international.

24. As regards the nature of the inquiry called for  in  this  context,  the
severity of the crime had to be considered in the context of  the  aims  and
objectives of the group concerned. For example,  acts  of  violence  against
property may be included, if calculated to create a state of terror  in  the
minds of, e.g. government officials or the public at large.

25. Mrs Grey accepted that the failure of the  adjudicator  to  make  proper
findings about the appellant`s activities  necessitated  remittal,  but  she
maintained that, going by the  accepted  evidence,  there  were  reasons  to
doubt: (a) the political purpose of the protest (how it served  the  purpose
of overthrowing or changing the government had not been explained); and  (b)
the closeness of the link between any such purpose and the activities  which
took place. Additionally, given the civilian nature of the  target,  it  was
unlikely the offenders could reasonably have  expected  that  their  actions
would yield any result directly related to the ultimate political goal  they
held. The `seriousness` of the  crime  had  to  be  be  judged  against  the
general background of Maoist violence  and  insurgency;  this  may  make  an
incident which might normally seem relatively minor a  serious  one,  as  it
functions as a reminder and strengthens a more general campaign of  violence
and intimidation.


Relevant principles in assessing exclusion issues under Art 1F

26. Before turning to evaluate the adjudicator's treatment of  this  appeal,
we  propose  setting  out  a  number  of  principles  which  in   our   view
adjudicators should adopt in relation to the Exclusion Clauses.

27. Whilst the provisions of Art 1F are traditionally  referred  to  as  the
"Exclusion Clauses", it must not be forgotten that Articles 1D  and  E  also
exclude certain persons from the scope of the Convention. The first part  of
Article  1D  provides  that  the  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  persons
receiving protection or assistance from organs or  agencies  of  the  United
Nations other than UNHCR. Under Article 1E the  Convention  does  not  apply
"to a person who is recognised by the competent authorities of  the  country
in which he has taken residence as having the rights and  obligations  which
are attached  to  the  possession  of  the  nationality  of  that  country".
Additionally, albeit not an exclusion clause, Article  33(2)  provides  that
the benefit of  Art  33(1),  the  non-refoulement  provision,  "may  not  be
claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for  regarding  as  a
danger to the security of the country, in which he is, or who,  having  been
convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious  crime,  constitutes
a danger to the community of that country".

28. Article 1F states the provisions of the Refugee  Convention  "shall  not
apply to any person with respect to  whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
considering" that:

      a) he has committed a crime against peace, a  war  crime  or  a  crime
      against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up
      to make provision in respect of such crimes;
      (b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country
      of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee;
      (c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles
      of the United Nations.":

29. Paragraph 148 of the 1979 UNHCR Handbook  states  the  rationale  behind
the Exclusion Clauses as follows:

      "At the time the Convention was drafted the memory of  the  trials  of
      major war criminals was still very much alive, and there was agreement
      on the part of States that war  criminals  should  not  be  protected.
      There was also a desire on the part of States  to  deny  admission  to
      their territories of criminals who would present a danger to  security
      and public order".

30. Of course, the resolve to exclude  those  undeserving  of  international
protection is an abiding concern: Grotius writing in De Jure Belli ac  Pacis
Libri Tres commented that whilst international law  for  fugitives  accepted
asylum for those who suffered undeserved enmity, it did not  accept  it  for
those who had done something injurious to human society.

31. The wording of Art 1F makes clear that it is not any crime which  brings
its provisions into play: it would obviously be an error for an  adjudicator
to apply Art 1F to every claimant with a criminal history. Art  1F  is  only
concerned  with  serious  criminality.  Conversely,  Art  1F  is  not   just
concerned with serious crimes committed in the  context  of  war  and  armed
conflict. It also covers common crimes if sufficiently serious.

32. Whilst the subject matter is serious criminality it is not  as  assessed
according to national law criteria:  it  is  as  assessed  according  to  an
international law perspective which seeks to give an autonomous  meaning  to
the acts and crimes specified.

33. In seeking to give an autonomous meaning to  key  concepts  in  Art  1F,
there is as much a need as under Art 1A(2) to adopt a  dynamic  approach  to
interpretation.  Lord Mustill noted over six years  ago  in  T,  that,  even
though the wording of Art 1F has not changed, the world around  it  has.  In
the aftermath of the events of September 11th these thoughtful words  remind
us that, whilst there is nothing new about criminality,  the  precise  forms
and methods used by those who perpetrate violent acts or crimes continue  to
undergo change.

34. But it is not just the world which has changed, so has the  law  dealing
with such crimes. As emphasised by the recent Summary Conclusions  from  the
Lisbon  Expert  Roundtable,  held  as  part  of  the   2001   UNHCR   Global
Consultations  on  International  Protection,  there  is  a  need,  in   the
interpretation and application of Art 1F, to draw on "developments in  other
areas of international law since 1951, in particular international  criminal
law and extradition law as  well  as  international  human  rights  law  and
international humanitarian law." Cases  before  the  International  Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)  and  the  International  Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) have greatly advanced the  jurisprudence.  Basing
interpretation of Art 1F on international law developments yields  the  same
advantage as has accrued from  doing  the  same  in  respect  of  key  terms
contained within Art 1A(2): it enables decision-makers to proceed on a  more
objective footing. In deciding such issues as complicity  we  will  need  to
look more and more to international criminal law definitions.

35. Thus, in respect of the Exclusion Clauses it is particularly salient  to
recall the well-settled principle that the Refugee Convention  is  a  living
instrument whose interpretation requires a dynamic approach which  bears  in
mind the objects and purposes set out in its Preamble, so as to ensure  that
it gives a contemporary response to contemporary realities.

36. The provisions of Art 1F being exclusionary, it will  almost  always  be
appropriate to apply them restrictively. That  is  the  position  stated  at
paragraph 149 of the 1979 Handbook. The basis for  it  is  twofold:  firstly
that the Refugee Convention is quintessentially an  instrument  designed  to
protect those in need of asylum;  and  secondly  that  the  consequences  of
exclusion  may  be  very  serious.  In  all  past  cases  the  Tribunal  has
consistently adopted the same approach. We see no reason to depart from  it,
save to note that we doubt this principle is entirely  unqualified.  In  the
Canadian Supreme Court case, Pushpanathan v MCI [1998]  1  SCR  982,  [1999]
INLR 36,  Bastarache, J said this:

      "What is crucial, in my opinion, is the manner in which the  logic  of
      the exclusion in Art 1F generally, and Art 1F (c)  in  particular,  is
      related to the purpose of the Convention as a whole. The rationale  is
      that those who are  responsible  for  the  persecution  which  creates
      refugees should not enjoy the benefits of  a  Convention  designed  to
      protect those refugees. As La Forest J observes in Ward, above at 66E,
      `actions which deny human rights in any key way` and `the sustained or
      systemic denial of core human rights... se[t] the boundaries for  many
      of the elements  of  the  definition  of  "Convention  refugee".  This
      purpose has been explicitly recognised by the Federal Court of  Appeal
      in the context of the grounds specifically enumerated in Art 1F(a)  in
      Sivakumar v Canada (MEI) [1994] 1 FC 433, where Linden JA  stated  (at
      445):


           `When the tables are turned on persecutors, who suddenly  become
           the persecuted, they cannot claim refugee status.  International
           criminals, on all sides of the conflicts, are rightly unable  to
           claim refugee status`".

 37. If the underlying purpose of the Refugee Convention  is  protection  of
human rights, then it  is  surely  relevant,  when  applying  the  Exclusion
Clauses, to take account of the extent to  which  those  guilty  of  Art  1F
crimes have violated  the  human  rights  of  others.  As  set  out  in  the
Preamble, the  objects  of  the  Refugee  Convention  are  not  confined  to
protection of the rights  of  refugees;  they  begin  by  referring  to  the
principle that "human beings shall enjoy  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms
without  discrimination".  In  our  view,  the  greater  the  scale  of  the
violation of the human rights of others by  those  who  perpetrate  acts  or
crimes proscribed by Art 1F, the less rationale there is for  a  restrictive
approach. To take the example of an  individual  terrorist  who  exploded  a
nuclear device in a large city, in such a case we doubt that  a  restrictive
approach should have any place at all.

38. A further principle of considerable importance  is  that  the  Exclusion
Clauses are in mandatory terms. They stipulate that the  provisions  of  the
Convention  "shall not apply..." to those who fall within Art 1F. It may  be
that at present appeals that come before adjudicators raising  issues  under
the Exclusion Clauses are few and far between. Whether  they  should  remain
quite as rare as they are is a matter we shall return to below. However,  it
is imperative that adjudicators do  not  confuse  the  rarity  of  exclusion
cases with the existence of some discretion as to whether to consider  them.
The mandatory wording admits of no discretion. The question  of  whether  or
not a person falls under the Exclusion Clauses is not an  optional  one:  it
is an integral part of the refugee determination assessment.

39. That brings us to the important principle of the  need  for  a  holistic
approach. The place of the Exclusion Clauses in the overall  schema  of  the
Convention also demonstrates that exclusion issues should never be  examined
in complete isolation  from  the  examination  of  the  appellant`s  overall
claim. The approach must always be holistic.

40. This simple axiom provides the key we think to the proper answer  to  be
given to the question of when, if at all, an  adjudicator  is  justified  in
addressing exclusion issues even when the  respondent  in  his  Reasons  for
Refusal letter has not raised them.

41. If the respondent has raised them prior to the hearing,  then  obviously
the appellant has been put on notice that exclusion  is  in  issue  and  the
adjudicator can and should (unless he thinks the issue is not truly  raised)
require both parties to deal with the issue during any oral examination  and
submissions.  The  adjudicator's  determination  should  then   make   clear
findings on whether the Exclusion Clauses apply or not.

42. What should happen,  however,  when  (as  happened  in  this  case)  the
respondent has not expressly  raised  any  exclusion  issues  prior  to  the
hearing?

43. In our view the first step should be to  scrutinise  what  was  actually
said in the Reasons for Refusal letter.  Even  when  not  expressly  raising
exclusion issues, their contents may sometimes  nevertheless  be  considered
to have effectively put the appellant on notice that exclusion is an  issue.
Here what seems crucial to us is to focus on the subject matter of  what  is
raised in the Reasons for Refusal letter rather than on formal reference  to
Art 1F or the Exclusion Clauses.  The  subject  matter  of  Art  1F  is,  as
already noted, serious criminality. Where, as  we  think  happened  in  this
case,   the   terms   in   which   the    respondent    deals    with    the
prosecution/persecution issue sufficiently indicate that exclusion  subject-
matter is involved (e.g. in this case the Reasons for Refusal  letter  noted
that  the  appellant  claimed  to  be  a  member  of  an   armed,   illegal,
revolutionary organisation committed to armed struggle), that may be  viewed
as enough to put the appellant on notice that his possible criminality  made
Art 1F a live issue.

44. But, assuming there is nothing  in  express  or  implied  terms  raising
exclusion issues by the time of the hearing, what should an adjudicator  do?
It may be he or identifies an  exclusion  issue  immediately  prior  to  the
hearing or at the outset of the hearing or at some point during the  hearing
itself. But at whichever point such identification is made, even  when  late
in the day, the basic question is the same. Can an  adjudicator  ever  raise
such issues of his or her own motion? Mr Braid on behalf  of  the  appellant
argued that an adjudicator should either never raise such issues of his  own
motion or do so only in the most exceptional circumstances.

45. Mrs Grey, by contrast, submitted that  the  adjudicator  may  raise  the
issue of his own motion but that, if  he  does  so,  he  should  inform  the
parties that he considers Art 1F to be relevant during  the  course  of  the
oral hearing, so as to give them an opportunity  to  deal  with  the  issue:
procedural fairness required that an appellant is aware of the issues  under
consideration.  The  same  applied,  mutatis  mutandis,  if   the   Tribunal
considered the issue relevant. As to when it would be  appropriate  for  the
appellate  authorities  to  raise  it  of  their  own  motion,  that   would
inevitably depend on the facts of the case. Guidance  on  the  circumstances
in which such a duty would arise could, she submitted, be derived from  R  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex  p.  Robinson  [1997]  3  WLR
1162, [1997] 4 All ER 210, at para. 39:


      "The appellate authorities should, of course, focus primarily  on  the
      arguments adduced before them, whether these are to be  found  in  the
      oral argument before  the  special  adjudicator  or,  so  far  as  the
      tribunal is concerned, in the written grounds of appeal on which leave
      to appeal is sought. They are not required to engage in a  search  for
      new points. If there  is  readily  discernible  an  obvious  point  of
      convention law which favours the applicant although he has  not  taken
      it, the special adjudicator should apply it  in  his  favour,  but  he
      should feel under no obligation to prolong the hearing by  asking  the
      parties for submissions on points which they have not taken but  could
      properly  be  categorised  as  merely   `arguable`   as   opposed   to
      `obvious`... When we refer to an obvious point we mean a  point  which
      has a strong prospect of success if it is argued.  Nothing  less  will
      do."

46. Although the Court of  Appeal  was  here  discussing  the  duty  of  the
appellate authorities to consider points which, although not raised  by  the
asylum-seeker, were in his favour,  the  same  logic,  submitted  Mrs  Grey,
should apply with equal force to points which are not so  favourable.   Thus
if an adjudicator considers that on the facts that have emerged (whether  on
the papers or at the hearing) there is a "strong prospect" that one  of  the
three limbs of the exclusion clause might apply, he should raise the  issue.


47. We find ourselves in agreement  with  Mrs  Grey`s  submissions  on  this
point. Because Art 1F is in mandatory terms, the answer an adjudicator  must
give to the overall question of whether someone is a  refugee  can  only  be
made by reference to the elements of the definitions variously  set  out  in
Articles 1A - IF. So long as the Art  1F  issues  are  "obvious"  they  can,
indeed must, be raised.

48. When raised in this  way  by  an  adjudicator  (or  the  Tribunal),  the
difficult issue then arises of whether  an  adjournment  should  be  granted
(or, if so, for  how  long)  so  as  to  ensure  the  parties  have  had  an
opportunity to deal with the issue. We  do  not  propose  to  lay  down  any
separate guidelines on this issue here save to emphasise  that  adjudicators
will no doubt bear in mind that after the events of  September  11,  the  EU
Commission has echoed UNHCR`s call to States to apply the Exclusion  Clauses
scrupulously and rigorously.


49. That brings us to the contentious issue that has arisen  as  to  whether
consideration of the inclusion clauses should always  precede  consideration
of the exclusion clauses.

50. Mr Braid has raised or adverted to a number of arguments  in  favour  of
his argument that it would be an error  of  law  not  to  address  inclusion
issues first. We have  identified  the  following  arguments  in  favour  of
inclusion first.

51. Firstly it is said that "logically" one cannot exclude someone  who  has
not first being included.

52. Secondly it is said that the fact that the Exclusion Clauses are  listed
last within the schema of Article 1  indicates  they  should  be  approached
sequentially.

53.  Thirdly  it  is  said  that  exclusion  being  exceptional  it  is  not
appropriate to consider an exception first.

54. Fourthly it is said there are textual reasons why  exclusion  should  be
dealt with first, most  notably  the  reference  within  Art  1F(b)  to  the
appellant being a refugee: he  is  said  to  be  excluded  where  there  are
serious reasons for considering that:

      "he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of
      refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee"  (emphasis
      added).

55. In  Re  SK,  Refugee  Appeal  No.  29/91,  New  Zealand  Refugee  Status
Authority, 17 February 1992, it was arguably implicit in  the  reasoning  of
the Authority that Art 1F(b) was only to be applied after the applicant  had
been found to be a refugee.

56.  Fifthly  it  is  said  that  inclusion  first  conforms  to  the  long-
established UNHCR approach: paragraph 141 of the  UNHCR  Handbook  propounds
that it will normally be during the determination process  under  Art  1A(2)
that the facts leading to exclusion under  Art  1F  will  emerge.  The  1996
UNHCR Guidelines on Exclusion  also  recommend  (chiefly  because  cases  of
exclusion are "inherently complex") that the Exclusion Clauses  should  only
be applied "after the adjudicator is satisfied that the  individual  fulfils
the criteria for refugee status".

57.  Sixthly  it   is   said   that   exclusion   before   inclusion   risks
"criminalising" refugees. Given that Art 1F speaks of "crimes" and  "guilt",
it is argued that refugee decision-makers  should  adopt  a  presumption  of
innocence and apply Art 1A(2) first. To apply Art 1F before  Art  1A(2),  so
it is said, involves  an  erroneous  presumption  that  all  applicants  for
refugee status are potentially excludable.

58. Inclusion first is also seen as the only approach  which  is  compatible
with a holistic approach to the assessment of a refugee  claim.  The  Global
Consultation Conclusions state that: "Interviews which  look  at  the  whole
refugee definition allow for information to be collected  more  broadly  and
accurately". Allied to this argument is the concern that exclusion first  is
too akin to an admissibility test. In its 1996 Guidelines UNHCR stated  that
exclusion  should  not  be  used  to  determine  the  admissibility  of   an
application or claim for refugee status:

      "A preliminary  or  automatic  exclusion  would  have  the  effect  of
      depriving such individuals of an assessment of their claim for refugee
      status. By their very nature, the exclusion clauses relate to acts  of
      an extremely serious nature.  As  such,  the  refugee  claim  and  any
      related  exclusion  aspects  should  in  every  case  be  examined  by
      officials trained in refugee law."

59. Another contention has been that dealing  first  with  inclusion  issues
can help avoid having to address complex criminality issues. In this  regard
inclusion before exclusion is said to allow proper distinction to  be  drawn
between  prosecution  and  persecution.  It  is  argued  that  dealing  with
exclusion first could encourage adjudicators to fail to  see  that  a  claim
may not even get to first base under the Inclusion Clauses in  any  event  -
because the appellant`s apparent criminality in fact amounts to  a  case  of
prosecution as opposed to persecution. Particularly in countries  of  origin
where there is no reason to think that the laws of the  country  are  unjust
or that the appellant will not receive a fair trial, at least  in  its  bare
essentials, a finding of prosecution should be all that is  necessary.  When
such a finding is made and an appellant has not shown he can  bring  himself
within the Inclusion Clauses, there is then  no  basis  for  an  adjudicator
proceeding to consider the Exclusion Clauses. If,  however,  an  adjudicator
is satisfied the appellant has shown  persecution  rather  than  prosecution
and so comes within the Inclusion Clauses, then  plainly  the  appellant  is
entitled to succeed in his appeal unless he is caught  by  the  Convention`s
(Cessation or) Exclusion Clauses.

60. A point is also made regarding the situation of family  members.  It  is
said that inclusion before exclusion enables consideration to  be  given  to
protection obligations to family members. The 1996 UNHCR Guidelines state:

      "The exclusion of  an  applicant  can  have  implications  for  family
      members. Paragraph 185 of the Handbook states that  the  principle  of
      family unity generally operates  in  favour  of  dependants,  and  not
      against them. In cases where the head of a family is  granted  refugee
      status, his or her  dependants  are  normally  granted  ("derivative")
      status in accordance with this principle. If a  refugee  is  excluded,
      derivative  refugee  status  should  also  be  denied  to  dependants.
      Dependants and other family  members  can,  however,  still  establish
      their own claims to refugee status. Such claims are valid  even  where
      the fear of persecution  is  a  result  of  the  relationship  to  the
      perpetrator of excludable acts.  Family  members  with  valid  refugee
      claims  are  excludable  only  if  there  are  serious   reasons   for
      considering that they, too, have knowingly participated in  excludable
      acts".


61. There is one final argument we need to  consider.  Mr  Braid  implicitly
raised it although in order to properly evaluate it we shall put it  in  our
own words. It is one specific to countries such  as  the  UK  which  feature
parallel systems of legal protection of  asylum-seekers  under  the  Refugee
Convention and international human rights treaties.  Since  2  October  2000
provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
1999 (and  other  pieces  of  legislation  dealing  with  appeals  involving
national  security  that  come  before  the  Special   Immigration   Appeals
Commission) require that, even if a person is found to be excluded from  the
Refugee Convention for Art 1F reasons, the decision against  him  may  still
be unlawful if  it  exposes  the  claimant  to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
prohibited by Art 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights:  Art  3
prohibits in absolute terms torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  and
punishment.

62. Thus it can be  argued  that,  since  adjudicators  must  address  human
rights issues in any event, it makes doubly bad sense for them to deal  with
exclusion first. One way or another, whether under the Refugee  Convention`s
Inclusion Clauses (which focus on real risk of  persecution)  or  under  the
ECHR (whose Art 3 focuses on real risk of  ill  treatment),  an  adjudicator
has to make findings on the issue of serious harm.

63. What are we to make of these various arguments in  favour  of  inclusion
first? Plainly some simply concern the order in which the two issues are  to
be tackled; others have wider implications for whether,  regardless  of  the
order, both issues or only one need tackling.

64. It seems to us that the primary question here must be whether or not  to
deal with exclusion first constitutes an error of law.  We are satisfied  it
does not. Whilst in our view  (for  reasons  we  shall  come  to)  exclusion
should only be dealt with first in  limited  circumstances,  an  adjudicator
will not err if he or she goes  straight  to  the  exclusion  issue  in  the
appropriate case. Indeed for an adjudicator not to go straight to  exclusion
is certain types of cases would frustrate the objective set out at  Rule  30
of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2000  of  securing
"the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals..." We  would  echo  the
words of Kirby, J when considering this issue in  Minister  for  Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Singh [2002] HCA 7 at paragraph 87:

      "The Convention is expected to operate in the real  world  of  speedy,
      economical and efficient decision-making.  Where  there  is  a  choice
      between a construction of the Convention that would further  decision-
      making  of  that  character  and  one  that  would   frustrate   those
      objectives, the former construction should be preferred".

65. We are not persuaded by the arguments advanced in  favour  of  inclusion
first as a general principle.

66. The argument that "logically" one cannot exclude unless  one  has  first
included  does  not  withstand  examination.  Art  1F  states   that:   "The
provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect  to
whom ...". It does not state that, having  applied  the  provisions  of  Art
1A(2), a person is to be excluded. To illustrate by use of the  metaphor  of
a garden gate, it would only be illogical to  talk  about  excluding  people
from entering through a gate if they were already inside the garden.

67. Nor do we see  any  force  in  the  argument  that  Art  1F  dictates  a
sequential treatment of a refugee claim. Apart from Art 1C  which  specifies
that the Convention shall cease to apply to any  person  falling  under  the
terms of Art 1A, there is no apparent reason why, if  someone  falls  within
Art 1D or IE, there would be any reason to have first considered Art 1A(2).

68. As regards  the  exceptionality  argument,  it  is  true  the  Exclusion
Clauses amount to an exception to the rule that if one  has  a  well-founded
fear of persecution one qualifies as a  refugee.  But  it  does  not  follow
that, in order to apply an exception one  has  first  to  decide  whether  a
person falls within the rule.

69. The reference to "refugee" in Art 1F(b) does  at  first  sight  poses  a
real difficulty. However, again we find  ourselves  in  agreement  with  the
judgment of the justices of  the  Australian  High  Court  in  Minister  for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Singh [2002] HCA 7 (7  March  2002).
Gleeson, CJ, albeit dealing with  the  issue  in  the  context  of  how  the
Convention operates within Australian law, noted  at  paragraph  5  that  to
read Art 1F(b) literally, so it can only apply to someone already  found  to
be a refugee, would involve an internal inconsistency, since:

       "Art 1F is expressed  as  an  exception.  If  it  is  satisfied,  the
      provisions of the Convention are said not to apply to  the  person  in
      question. If the provisions of the Convention  do  not  apply  to  the
      person,  the  person  cannot  be  entitled  to  protection  under  the
      Convention".

70. We note that in ex parte Adimi [1999] Imm AR 560 at 566 Simon  Brown  LJ
held, no doubt for similar reasons, that  the  reference  in  Art  31(1)  to
refugees included "presumptive refugees".

 71. He concluded that the "preferable solution is to read the reference  to
admission...as a  refugee'  as  a  reference  to  putative  admission  as  a
refugee". We do not see that the New Zealand case of Re SK  - said  to  have
implicitly decided that inclusion should always come first  -  assists  very
much at all. It simply does not address the issue.  The  same  can  be  said
about the judgment in O v Immigration Appeal Tribunal  [1995]  Imm  AR  494.
However, if indeed the New Zealand position is  inclusion  first,  we  would
prefer the position set out by the Australian High Court.

72. We recognise that UNHCR has long urged that  inclusion  should  normally
be considered first. However, as use of the  word  "normally"  makes  clear,
UNHCR`s position has not been that exclusion can never be considered  first.
As regards the primary decision-making stage,  we  would  agree  with  their
analysis that normally exclusion issues will  only  come  to  light  in  the
course of assessment of a claim under Art 1A(2). However,  once  it  becomes
clear that a claim raises a definite issue  about  serious  criminality,  it
seems to us that different considerations have already  kicked  in  and  the
use  of  the  adverb  "normally"  simply  confuses  things.  It  erroneously
suggests that inclusion  should  come  first  even  when  exclusion  subject
matter has been plainly identified. All that is  necessary  to  operate  the
inclusion and exclusion clauses of the Refugee  Convention  holistically  is
to bear in mind that there are two types of cases: ones  that  raise  issues
of serious criminality and ones that do not.

73. We would accept, however,  that  if  in  assessment  of  refugee  claims
generally it would be wrong  for  decision-makers  to  adopt  an  "exclusion
culture". If exclusion were to be considered first as a matter  of  routine,
there would be a risk of criminalising refugees. If  the  first  substantive
question an asylum-seeker is asked is not " What do you  fear?"   but  "Have
you committed a serious crime?"  he might well lose  confidence  his  asylum
claim was going to be considered fairly. But we fail  to  see  that  dealing
with exclusion issues first  - once it is manifest that serious  criminality
is  an  issue  -  involves  any  kind  of   stereotyping   as   such.    The
"criminalising" argument at best goes to the  need  to  avoid  dealing  with
exclusion first when serious criminality is not involved.

74. Does the evident need for a holistic approach to  refugee  determination
dictate that inclusion should be dealt with before exclusion? We think  not.
As we have already noted,  it  is  essential  when  examining  any  type  of
refugee claim to consider the particular circumstances in the round and  not
to examine any issue in isolation. However that  is  really  a  point  about
what facts one takes into account. It is not a point  about  what  one  must
legally decide bearing in mind the full picture. There seems  nothing  wrong
in principle with deciding in respect of any case where serious  criminality
is involved to apply Art 1F criteria first, so long as when doing  so  sight
is not lost of the individual`s particular circumstances.

75. That brings us  to  the  argument  that  it  is  only  by  dealing  with
inclusion first that one can ensure proper distinction  between  prosecution
and persecution. In favour of this argument it is  also  sometimes  asserted
that dealing with inclusion first can avoid having to  deal  with  exclusion
issues which are "inherently complex".

  76.  It  is  a  valid  point  to  make  that  certain  claims  potentially
excludable under Art 1F  might  not  qualify  under  the  Inclusion  Clauses
anyway. And in cases in which the  evidence  about  serious  criminality  is
quite unclear, it may serve little or no purpose  to  broach  the  exclusion
issues at all, particularly as they can be complex. But if the  evidence  is
sufficiently clear that there is an issue of serious  criminality,  then  an
adjudicator is obliged by the mandatory terms of Art 1F  to  decide  whether
an appellant is excluded: it is not enough simply to say that in  any  event
he does not qualify under Art 1A(2). Moreover, we cannot  see  that  dealing
with exclusion  first  distorts  proper  consideration  of  the  prosecution
versus persecution issue. Both issues have to do with criminality, but  they
stand to be determined according to quite distinct legal  criteria.  Certain
differences are readily apparent. Under Art 1F the focus  is  on  the  past:
whether the person has committed excludable crimes or acts. Under Art  1A(2)
(even though past experiences may be relevant) the focus is by  contrast  on
current risk: whether the claimant faces a real risk of  persecution  rather
than  simple  prosecution.  Furthermore,  the  concept  of  prosecution   as
developed by case law for use in certain  Art  1A(2)  cases  covers  a  much
broader spectrum of crimes and acts than those proscribed by Art  1F.  There
may be cases where the crime involved is not sufficiently serious  to  bring
it within Art 1F confines.  And even when the crime concerned  is  also  one
falling under Art 1F, its relevance under Art 1A(2) has to be considered  by
reference to a much wider range of factors than  those  relevant  under  Art
1F. The issue of the proportionality of punishment, for example, is  not  at
all relevant under Art 1F, except possibly  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
expiation.  Ultimately, therefore, the only sustainable point this  type  of
argument yields in favour of inclusion  first  is  that  the  decision-maker
must ensure that he makes consistent findings of fact  in  relation  to  any
criminality issues, whether they arise under Art 1A(2), Art 1F or both.

77. At a general level, UNHCR`s concerns about the problems which can  arise
in the case of family members of an excluded person are entirely  valid.  In
principle, the sins of the father are not to be visited  on  the  sons.  But
resolving the issue of whether or not family members who are not  themselves
implicated in excludable acts should get refugee status simply requires  not
applying to such cases the logic of  determining  claims  by  dependants  in
line with those of  the  principal  family  member.  Avoiding  in  this  way
negative application wholly preserves the  principle  of  family  unity  and
also accords with the common-sense need  to  consider  the  claims  of  such
dependants separately. Disapplying the normal approach to dependants is  far
preferable to turning matters on their head and  letting  the  situation  of
family dependants dictate how refugee law should apply to persons who  apply
in their own right.

78.That brings us to the last argument we have noted in favour of  inclusion
first, which was that since adjudicators need to address  Article  3  issues
anyway, it makes sense for them to deal with inclusion first.  We  recognise
that persons who are caught by the provisions of Art 1F can form one of  the
limited exceptions to the general rule set out in Kacaj [2002]  Imm  AR  213
that asylum claims and Art 3 claims stand or fall together. It is  perfectly
clear from leading cases in Strasbourg, Chahal v UK (1997) 23  EHRR  413  in
particular, that even a terrorist excluded from the Refugee  Convention  may
be able to succeed in an Art 3 claim if he can show his return would  expose
him to a real risk of treatment contrary to Art 3. It is  a  consequence  of
having acquired a human rights jurisdiction, therefore,  that  asylum  cases
involving serious criminality have also to be examined under Article 3.

79. But that does not necessarily mean in our  view  that  inclusion  issues
should be addressed first or at all.  It  does  mean  that  in  cases  where
exclusion is dealt with first and a claimant is found  to  be  excluded,  an
adjudicator must go on to address the issue of Art 3 risk  on  its  own.  He
will when examining Art 3 issues cover some of the same type  of  ground  as
he would  under  Art  1A(2),  but  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  him  not
addressing Art 1A(2) issues as such.  Dealing with a common  or  overlapping
subject matter does not require an adjudicator to apply two  sets  of  legal
criteria to it when only one is called for. If one says of  a  war  criminal
that, without  considering  Art  1A(2)  he  is  excluded  from  the  Refugee
Convention by the terms of Art 1F(a) but nevertheless qualifies under Art  3
of the ECHR by virtue of the nature of the harm likely to  befall  him  upon
return, what is  the  legal  error  in  that?  Nothing  is  said  about  the
Inclusion Clauses as  such,  that  is  all.  What  is  said  about  the  ill
treatment concerned may or may not have amounted to  persecution  under  the
Refugee Convention, but that has simply  become  an  academic  question.  No
distortion of the relevant legal concepts has  occurred.  No  injustice  has
been done to the claimant.

80. It may be asked, given that a claimant who is excluded  under  the  1951
Convention can nevertheless succeed under the Human Rights  Convention,  why
is it necessary for an adjudicator to deal with the  Refugee  Convention  at
all? One part of the answer is that he is required to decide the  appeal  on
the grounds brought.  Another  is  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
international community and the integrity of the Refugee Convention,  it  is
highly desirable that in such a case the host asylum state has made  crystal
clear that such a person is not a refugee. Currently in the  UK  significant
differences in status flow from a person being recognised as a  refugee  and
someone only considered to be an Art 3 risk. The former possesses  a  number
of civil, political, social and economic rights guaranteed by Arts 2- 30  of
the Refugee Convention; there is  also  currently  a  policy  to  grant  him
indefinite leave to remain (previously it was limited leave to remain).  The
latter may in certain circumstances possess nothing more  than  a  guarantee
of non-removal for so long as his return would place him at Art 3 risk.

81. Although we have concluded that exclusion first  is  a  legally  correct
approach in appropriate cases, we are bound to say we were not persuaded  of
such by the logic of  Mrs  Grey`s  principal  argument  in  favour  of  this
position. She  contended  that  this  was  deducible  from  the  fact  that,
following the case of T and s. 34 of the Anti-terrorism, Crime and  Security
Act 2001, it was an error of law, when considering whether an act  or  crime
fell within Art 1F, to consider the gravity of the  persecution  a  claimant
might face upon return. However, that seems to  us  to  simply  confuse  the
issue.  All one is doing when assessing the gravity or severity of  acts  or
crimes in the context of  Art  1F  is  deciding  whether  they  are  thereby
excludable. One is not saying that those who have committed them face  (more
or less grave) persecution. Nor is one laying down anything about the  order
in which inclusion and exclusion issues are to be dealt  with.  For  similar
reasons we see no merit in the argument that s. 34  of  the  Anti-terrorism,
Crime and  Security  Act  2001  effectively  requires  the  exclusion  first
approach as enjoined by s. 33 of the Special Immigration Appeals  Commission
(SIAC) cases to apply outside  the  special  context  of  national  security
cases.

82. Having concluded that to deal with exclusion first is not  an  error  of
law, it remains to clarify when it is appropriate  to  deal  with  exclusion
issues and in what order.

83. We consider that adjudicators  should  first  deal  with  the  issue  of
exclusion  whenever  the  claim  discloses  an  obvious  issue  of   serious
criminality. We emphasise that the  issue  must  be  one  that  is  obvious,
since, if there is no clear evidence of serious criminality, there  is  then
too great a danger of being unnecessarily  diverted  away  from  examination
under the Inclusion Clauses.


84. In attempting to give guidance we would distinguish between the  hearing
stage and the determination stage.

85. So far as the hearing stage is concerned, whilst there would be  nothing
wrong in a case  raising  an  obvious  issue  of  serious  criminality  with
requiring the parties  to  confine  their  examination  and  submissions  to
exclusion issues,  that  would  only  be  appropriate  in  cases  where  the
evidence strongly pointed to the appellant falling within the terms  of  Art
1F. Much will depend at what stage the adjudicator forms  a  view  that  the
evidence strongly points to exclusion. If for example it emerges during  the
appellant`s oral testimony that in fact he participated in  violent  actions
against  unarmed  civilians,  there  would  be  nothing   wrong   with   the
adjudicator then confining  the  parties  to  submissions  relating  to  the
exclusion issues.

86. If the exclusion issues are not obvious or  manifest  and  the  evidence
does not strongly point to exclusion, then the  hearing  should  proceed  in
the normal way, covering examination and submissions on both  inclusion  and
exclusion issues.

87. So far as the determination itself is concerned, so long as there is  an
obvious exclusion issue, the adjudicator should address this first.

88. The question next arises, when is it  appropriate  for  an  adjudicator,
having dealt with exclusion issues first, to go on  for  "belt  and  braces"
reasons to consider the inclusion issues?  Obviously,  if  he  does  so,  it
follows from all we have said that  he  should  approach  the  issues  in  a
structured way which clearly separates  their  treatment.  To  approach  the
issues in an unstructured way may well mean his decision falls  between  two
stools dealing with neither issue satisfactorily.

89. The main argument advanced in favour of the "belt and  braces"  approach
is that it is in general desirable in the interests of avoiding  unnecessary
remittal for an adjudicator  to  decide  all  potentially  relevant  issues.
However, we do not see that that statistically limited concern  should  take
precedence over the need to ensure just, timely and  efficient  disposal  of
appeals. There is no sound basis for requiring a "belt and braces"  approach
in all exclusion cases.

90. Obviously if an adjudicator,  having  considered  the  exclusion  issues
first, concludes that Art 1F does not apply, he must go on to  consider  the
case under the Inclusion Clauses in the normal way.

91. What should he do, however, if he decides Art  1F  does  apply?  In  our
view he need only go on to  consider  the  appellant`s  position  under  the
Inclusion Clauses if  he  considers  that  his  decision  under  Art  1F  is
problematic or turns on a narrow factual  or  legal  point  concerning,  for
example, whether the appellant concerned is in fact an active or  a  willing
member of an armed struggle organisation or whether his  crime  is  properly
to be classed as non-political.  In  such  circumstances,  there  are  sound
reasons for a saving approach. But we would emphasise that in  our  view  it
should only be used when the factual or legal issues are considered in  that
particular case to be finely balanced.


Treatment of the Exclusion Clauses

92. If the adjudicator considers there  is  an  issue  under  the  Exclusion
Clauses, he should identify which sub-paragraph applies. There are two  main
reasons for this. First  the  parties  are  entitled  to  know  the  precise
exclusionary basis (es) on which the appellant  has  been  excluded,  be  it
1F(a), (b) or (c). To say simply (as the adjudicator did in this case)  that
he is excluded under Art 1F leaves quite unclear whether it  is  because  he
is considered simply as a serious common criminal or as a  war  criminal  or
as someone who has offended  the  principles  and  purposes  of  the  United
Nations. Given that the terms of Art 1F allow for odd bedfellows, those  who
fall within its terms are entitled not to be unnecessarily  associated  with
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes of all. The  second  reason  has
to do with the scope of Art 1F.  The wording of Art 1F makes clear  that  an
appellant must be excluded even if caught by only  one  of  the  three  sub-
paragraphs. Hence to say simply that an appellant does not  fall  under  one
or two sub-paragraphs, as  the  Tribunal  did  in  Amberber  (00TH01570)  in
respect of Art 1F(a), will not suffice.

93. An adjudicator should also make clear that when the issue  is  exclusion
the evidential burden of proving that an appellant comes within one or  more
of the Exclusion Clauses rests on the Secretary of State. We adopt  in  this
regard what was said by the Tribunal in Thayabaran (12250):

      "It appears to us that the  use  of  the  phrase  "there  are  serious
      reasons for considering that" in Art 1F relates to the  state  of  the
      evidence on the issue in question. The phraseology makes it  difficult
      to speak of a burden of proof. Clearly, however, the exclusion  clause
      cannot be brought into play unless  there  is  some  evidence  of  the
      alleged crime and of K`s nature. If there is  not  such  evidence,  it
      must follow the claimant is not excluded by Art  1F,  and  the  result
      would be that in an appeal contested on this point, the claimant would
      win and the Secretary of State would lose. We have tentatively reached
      the conclusion that it follows that the Secretary of  State  bears  at
      least an evidential burden on this issue".

94. We did consider whether there was also a legal burden of  proof  on  the
Secretary of State.  Given  that  in  an  examination  under  the  Exclusion
Clauses there is much that is  akin  to  a  criminal  examination,  such  an
approach could be said, by analogy, to ensure that there  is  a  presumption
of innocence. But by  the  same  token  an  examination  under  the  Refugee
Convention is not a criminal examination and its purpose is not as  such  to
establish an appellant`s guilt or innocence,  although  assessment  must  be
made of whether acts or crimes have been committed. It would be  obvious  to
any subsequent prosecution process that was brought  against  the  appellant
(whether in the country of origin,  the  country  of  asylum  or  before  an
international court) that what an adjudicator had found within  the  context
of a refugee determination was neither binding  nor  necessarily  conclusive
of whether the appellant had committed an offence  for  their  purposes.  We
consider, therefore, that the decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  the  case  of
Thayabaran remains good law.

95. As regards  the  standard  of  proof,  we  find  ourselves  entirely  in
agreement with Mrs Grey`s submissions. In isolation one could state, as  did
the Canadian Federal Court in Ramirez v Canada [1992] 2 FC 306  at  311-313,
that the phrase implied something less  than  proof  on  either  a  criminal
standard of beyond reasonable doubt  or  a  civil  standard  of  balance  of
probabilities. However, in accordance with the  approach  of  the  Court  of
Appeal in Karanakan [2002] 3 All ER 449,  rigid  application  of  the  civil
approach to "standard of proof" has to give way  in  any  event  to  a  more
rounded approach taking into account the possibility  that  doubtful  events
may have taken place. Thus there is no need to go beyond the  words  of  Art
1F, i.e. "...serious reasons for considering..."

96. In assessing whether the act or crime  committed  by  the  appellant  is
sufficiently severe to bring an appellant within the  Exclusion  Clauses  an
adjudicator  should  not  conduct  any  type  of   balancing   exercise   or
proportionality test between this act or crime and the extent  of  the  risk
the appellant faces of persecution. In this regard it is important  to  note
that paragraph 156 of  the  1979  UNHCR  Handbook  no  longer  represents  a
correct understanding of the law. In the case of T their lordships held  per
Lord Mustill that:

      "The gravity of the offence is relevant to the question of whether  it
      is "serious" for the purposes of Art 1F (b). But the crime  either  is
      or is not political when committed, and its character cannot depend on
      the consequences which the offender may afterwards  suffer  if  he  is
      returned".

97. In  Mukhtiar  Singh  (SC  4/99,  para  46(c),  unreported)  the  Special
Immigration  Appeals   Commission   also   held   that   no   principle   of
proportionality or balancing fell to  be  applied  under  Art  1F  (c).  The
conclusion in these cases was in accord with that expressed earlier  by  the
Canadian case of Ramirez. Furthermore the position in  the  UK  is  now  the
subject of statutory regulation. Section 34  of  the  Anti-Terrorism,  Crime
and Security Act 2001 states:

   "(1) Articles 1(F) and 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusions:  war
   criminals, national  security  &  c)  shall  not  be  taken  to  require
   consideration of the gravity of -
   a) events or fear by virtue of which Article 1(A) would or  might  apply
      to a person if Article 1(F) did not apply, or
   b) a threat by reason of which Article 33(1) would or might apply  to  a
      person if Article 33(2) did not apply".


98.  One of the most difficult issues arising under  the  Exclusion  Clauses
is that of terrorism. It  is  plainly  wrong  to  equate  automatically  the
serious criminality which the Exclusion  Clauses  exist  to  proscribe  with
terrorism. As the Tribunal said in Thayabaran:

      "The question is not whether the appellant can be characterised  as  a
      terrorist, but rather whether the words of the exemption clause  apply
      to him".

99. Yet it is equally clear from the judgment of the House  of  Lords  in  T
that increasingly many of the acts and crimes proscribed  by  the  Exclusion
Clauses are seen  under  a  number  of  treaties  cataloguing  international
crimes as terrorist in nature.

100. Precisely how to balance these considerations is no easy matter.  On  a
general level we consider that until  such  time  as  we  have  an  accepted
international definition of terrorism and one which clearly matches up  with
definitions contained within sub-clauses of Art 1F, it remains important  to
note material differences between Art 1F offences  and  terrorist  offences.
Categories within Art 1F(a), e.g. war crimes, will  not  always  qualify  as
terrorist crimes. Art 1F(b) proscribes serious  crimes  which  may  have  no
terrorist  element  (e.g.  "common"  serious  crimes  such  as  murder   and
robbery). Furthermore, whilst it  is  clear  from  the  Special  Immigration
Appeals Commission decision in Mukhtiar Singh v SSHS SC 4/99, para 68  (p.47
transcript) that terrorism can be taken to be "contrary to the purposes  and
principles of the UN" within the meaning of  Art  1F  (c),  that  remains  a
matter of continuing controversy within and outside the EU. Thus it  remains
crucial not to equate Art 1F with a simple  anti-terrorism  clause.  Regular
use of the concept of terrorism as a tool for  identifying  crimes  contrary
to  Art  1F  must  await  definitive  codification  by   the   international
community.

101. At the same time, it may be obvious in a particular  case  that  active
involvement in crimes which have been or can properly be described  as  acts
of terrorism will be serious enough to fall within Art 1F(b).

102. In certain  cases  raising  Art  1F  issues,  an  adjudicator  will  be
confronted with someone who has acted on  his  own,  having  committed,  for
example, an ordinary serious crime such as murder. However,  in  many  cases
involving exclusion issues an adjudicator will be faced with  evidence  that
an individual is a member of an organisation committed to armed struggle  or
the use of violence as a means to  achieve  its  political  goals.  To  take
typical examples, the appellant may  have  been  a  member  of  the  PKK  in
Turkey, the LTTE in Sri Lanka, the FLN or GIA  in  Algeria  or,  as  in  the
instant case, the CPN (Maoist) in Nepal. Or he may be  linked  to  a  multi-
national organisation vowing armed struggle such as Al-Qaeda.  How  relevant
is it that that  sometimes  armed  struggle  organisations  abandon  violent
methods or enter into peace agreements which  result  in  the  cessation  of
violent  struggle?  In  contrast  with  the  adjudicator`s  task  under  the
Inclusion Clauses  where  the  test  is  one  of  current  risk,  under  the
Exclusion Clauses what is required in an historic inquiry.  Hence  the  fact
that since the appellant left his country  of  origin  his  organisation  no
longer pursues armed struggle, will  not  be  relevant  to  whether  he  did
commit proscribed acts or crimes before he left. Nor  will  it  be  relevant
that, as the Tribunal  noted  in  Thayabaran,  an  appellant  has  become  a
reformed character.

103. But in such cases the question arises, is mere membership at  the  time
of the commission of acts or crimes proscribed by Art 1F enough  to  entitle
an adjudicator to conclude an appellant is excluded under this provision?

104. The Tribunal has consistently  stated  that  mere  membership  of  such
organisations is not enough to  bring  an  appellant  within  the  Exclusion
Clauses: see for example, Amirthalingam  (11560,  March  1994),  Nanthakumar
(11619 Dec 1994), Arulendran (11827 Feb 1997).  In  the  light  of  previous
case law and the further materials now before us,  we  would  highlight  two
further  principles  that  should  be  borne  in   mind   when   considering
complicity.

105. One is that it would be wrong  to  say  that  an  appellant  only  came
within the Exclusion  Clauses  if  the  evidence  established  that  he  has
personally participated in acts contrary to the provisions of  Art  1F.   If
the  organisation  is  one  or  has  become  one  whose  aims,  methods  and
activities are predominantly terrorist in character, very little  more  will
be necessary. We agree in this regard with the  formulation  given  to  this
issue by UNHCR  in  their  post  September  11,  2001  document,  Addressing
Security  Concerns   without   Undermining   refugee   Protection:   UNHCR`s
Perspective, at paragraph 18:


      " Where, however, there is  sufficient  proof  that  an  asylum-seeker
      belongs to an extremist international terrorist group, such  as  those
      involved in the 11 September attacks, voluntary  membership  could  be
      presumed to amount to personal and knowing participation, or at  least
      acquiescence amounting to complicity in the  crimes  in  question.  In
      asylum procedures, a rebuttable presumption  of  individual  liability
      could be  introduced  to  handle  such  cases.  Drawing  up  lists  of
      international terrorist organisations at the international level would
      facilitate the  application  of  this  procedural  device  since  such
      certification at the  international  level  would  carry  considerable
      weight in contrast to lists established  by  one  country  alone.  The
      position of the individual in the  organisation  concerned,  including
      the  voluntariness  of  his  or  her  membership,  as  well   as   the
      fragmentation of certain groups would, however, need to be taken  into
      account".

106. That complicity in this type of case should be sufficient to  bring  an
appellant within the Exclusion Clauses is necessary in order  to  adequately
reflect the realities of modern-day terrorism. The  terrorist  acts  of  key
operatives are often possible  only  by  virtue  of  the  infrastructure  of
support provided by  other  members  who  themselves  undertake  no  violent
actions. As the US Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit noted in McMullen  v  INS
685F 2d 1312 (9th Cir 1981) at 599:

      "We interpret both the Convention and the [A]ct to permit  deportation
      of individuals who commit serious, non-political crimes, and  we  have
      concluded that this includes terrorist acts against ordinary citizens.
      We refuse to interpret these documents to  apply  only  to  those  who
      actually  "pulled  the  trigger",  because  we   believe   that   this
      interpretation is too narrow. In our  judgment,  the  only  reasonable
      interpretation of the exception  is  that  it  encompasses  those  who
      provide the latter with the physical, logistical support that  enables
      modern, terrorist groups to operate".

107. Likewise the Tribunal noted in Ozer (10922, May 1994) when  considering
the appeal of a person who had voluntarily  joined  and  supported  Dev  Sol
which,  with  reference  to  objective  country  materials  on  Turkey   was
described as then being an illegal party dedicated to violence,

      "...then it is no use his asserting  that  he  does  not  support  its
      policy or methods. If he does not endorse  a  central  policy  of  the
      party he should not be a member of it: in any event his membership and
      contribution to the life of the party  is  indirect  support  for  its
      violent acts".

108. The other principle to be borne in mind is that whilst  complicity  may
arise indirectly, it remains essential in all cases to  establish  that  the
appellant has been a voluntary member of  such  an  organisation  who  fully
understands its aims, methods and activities, including  any  plans  it  has
made to carry out acts contrary to Art 1F. Thus  for  example  it  would  be
wrong to regard the mere fact that an appellant has provided  a  safe  house
for LTTE  combatants  as  sufficient  evidence  that  he  has  committed  an
excludable offence. If, however, he  has  transported  explosives  for  LTTE
combatants in circumstances where he must have known what they  were  to  be
used for, there may well be a serious IF issue.

109.  We  would  also  observe   that   international   criminal   law   and
international humanitarian law, which in our view should  be  the  principal
sources of reference in  dealing  with  such  issues  as  complicity,  adopt
similar although more detailed criteria in respect  of  those  who  for  the
purpose of facilitating  an  international  crime  aid,  abet  or  otherwise
assist in its commission or its attempted  commission,  including  providing
the means for its commission (see  Art  25  of  the  International  Criminal
Court Statute and Art 7(1) of the ICTY Statute as analysed in  the  case  of
Tadic Case No.IT-94-1-T, 7 May 1997). Of course such reference will need  to
bear in mind the lower standard of  proof  applicable  in  Exclusion  Clause
cases.

110. However, as the passage just cited from  UNHCR  highlights,  even  when
complicity is established  the  assessment  under  Art  1F  must  take  into
account not only evidence about the status and level of the  person  in  the
organisation and factors such as duress and  self-defence  against  superior
orders as well  as  the  availability  of  a  moral  choice;  it  must  also
encompass evidence about the nature of the organisation and  the  nature  of
the society in which it operates. Such evidence will  need  to  include  the
extent to which the organisation is fragmented.

111. Observing as we do that in certain past Tribunal  cases,  Karthirpillai
(12250) being an unhappy example, adjudicators and  the  Tribunal  have  not
always taken a contextual approach, we think it  useful  to  consider  cases
along a continuum.

112. On the one end of the continuum, let us postulate an organisation  that
has very significant  support  amongst  the  population  and  has  developed
political aims and  objectives  covering  political,  social,  economic  and
cultural issues. Its long-term  aims  embrace  a  parliamentary,  democratic
mode of government and safeguarding of basic human rights. But it has  in  a
limited way or for a limited  period  created  an  armed  struggle  wing  in
response to atrocities committed by a  dictatorial  government.  In  such  a
case  an  adjudicator  should  be  extremely  slow  to  conclude   that   an
appellant`s mere membership of such an organisation raises  any  real  issue
under Art 1F, unless there is  evidence  that  the  armed  actions  of  this
organisation are not in fact  proportionate  acts  which  qualify  as  "non-
political crimes" within Art 1F(b) and, if they are not, that he has  played
a leading or actively facilitative role in the commission of acts or  crimes
undertaken by the armed struggle wing.

113. At the other end of this continuum, let us  postulate  an  organisation
which has little or no political agenda or which, if it did originally  have
genuine political aims and objectives, has increasingly  come  to  focus  on
terrorism as a modus operandi. Its recruitment  policy,  its  structure  and
strategy has become almost entirely devoted to the  execution  of  terrorist
acts which are seen as a way of winning the war against the enemy,  even  if
the chosen targets are primarily civilian. Let us further suppose  that  the
type of  government  such  an  organisation  promotes  is  authoritarian  in
character and abhors the identification by international  human  rights  law
of certain fundamental human rights. In the case of  such  an  organisation,
any individual who has knowingly  joined  such  an  organisation  will  have
difficulty in establishing he or she is not complicit in the  acts  of  such
an organisation.

114. In operating this continuum, we agree with Mrs Grey that,  so  long  as
it is informed by reference to international criminal law and  international
humanitarian  law  developments,  useful  guidance  has  been  furnished  by
several Canadian cases, Ramirez in particular, where the test is  formulated
as a two-fold one of assessing firstly, whether  an  individual  occupies  a
leadership role or other position of  authority  in  the  organisation;  and
secondly, whether the organisation's principal or dominant purpose has  come
to be one of the commission of acts contrary to Art 1F.

 Application of these principles to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
case.
115. As we have already intimated, the adjudicator's principal  findings  of
fact were inadequate and in parts contradictory. For that reason we  see  no
real  alternative  to  remitting  the  case  to  be  heard  by  a  different
adjudicator. A remittal will also ensure that consideration of the  evidence
takes account of the letter  from  the  British  High  Commission  in  Nepal
alleging that the newspaper article  is  not  authentic.  That  may  have  a
significant bearing on assessment of credibility.

116. However, in order to illustrate the principal points made  earlier,  it
is appropriate for us to  set  out  various  other  respects  in  which  the
adjudicator failed to approach this case properly.

117. It is apparent that in this case the adjudicator raised  the  issue  of
the Exclusion Clauses of his own motion. The  Secretary  of  State  had  not
raised this issue, nor had the grounds of appeal anticipated that  it  would
be raised at the hearing. Given however that the  Reasons  for  Refusal  did
plainly identify what we have earlier described as obvious  Art  1F  subject
matter (the appellant's membership of an illegal organisation  dedicated  to
armed struggle), we think that the adjudicator was entitled to  assume  that
both parties  would  have  given  some  thought  to  the  potential  Art  1F
implications of the appeal.

118. Even so, he was clearly wrong, once he had decided Art 1F  issues  were
raised, not to have at least discussed  with  the  parties  whether  in  the
circumstances  they,  the  appellant  in  particular,  had  had   sufficient
opportunity to consider exclusion issues. Procedural fairness dictated  that
he should have done  so.  Whether  in  this  case  he  should  have  granted
anything more than a very short adjournment, we doubt very much, because  of
the fact that it had been raised  in  substance  if  not  expressly  in  the
Secretary of State's refusal letter.

119. Having decided Art IF was in issue, the adjudicator  should  also  have
raised with the parties which  sub-clause(s)  he  considered  relevant.  The
Secretary of State should of course have  identified  the  exclusion  issues
earlier, but, given that he had failed to do so, it  was  incumbent  on  the
adjudicator, having decided to deal  with  the  issue  himself,  to  specify
whether one or more sub-clause of Arts 1F(a), (b) or (c)  were  engaged.  He
failed to do this.

120. Despite deciding Art 1F was involved the  adjudicator  failed  to  give
any indication as to what he saw as the  relevant  burden  and  standard  of
proof. We have set out what we  consider  these  are  at  paragraphs  84-86.
Nevertheless, although it was remiss of him not to have specified these,  we
are not persuaded that this failing on its own would have been fatal to  his
determination, had he gone on to effectively apply the  correct  burden  and
standard.

121. Nor did the adjudicator indicate his recognition  that,  being  clauses
whose effect was to exclude someone who otherwise might be viewed as  facing
a  real  risk  of  persecution,  such  clauses  called  for  a   restrictive
interpretation. Certainly there was no exceptional circumstance in the  case
he was dealing with to warrant not applying such a restrictive approach.

122. Notwithstanding such failings in the adjudicator's  treatment  of  this
case, Mr Braid has urged us to find that in  practice  the  adjudicator  had
properly dealt with both the inclusion and exclusion clause issues.  He  had
in effect adopted a "belt and braces" approach.

123. As we clarified earlier, there may be cases where it is safest  for  an
adjudicator to adopt a "belt and braces" approach. And we would accept  that
the adjudicator in this case did examine both issues.  But  because  he  did
not differentiate between his  treatment  of  the  inclusion  and  exclusion
clause issues and did not furnish any adequate  explanation  as  to  why  he
dealt with them in the way he did, his approach  failed  to  do  justice  to
either set of issues.


The Adjudicator's treatment of the Exclusion Clauses

124. Given that the adjudicator did address  the  Exclusion  Clauses  albeit
not in a structured way, what is to be said about his  conclusion  that  the
appellant was caught by  the  Exclusion  Clauses  because  he  was  a  self-
confessed Maoist? At paragraph 20 the adjudicator recorded  the  appellant`s
evidence as follows:

      `Mr Dawodu  (the  respondent`s  representative)  asked  the  appellant
      whether he was aware  that  the  Maoists  were  an  illegal  terrorist
      organisation in Nepal. The appellant challenged  that  definition.  It
      was not  right  to  describe  the  Maoists  as  an  illegal  terrorist
      organisation, because they were working  within  the  law.  Mr  Dawodu
      pressed his point. The appellant agreed. He knew that the Maoists were
      an illegal terrorist organisation`.

125. Mr Braid submitted to us that the  appellant  had  never  himself  been
involved in any Maoist atrocities.

126. For the adjudicator the  point  was  a  very  simple  one.  If  we  may
paraphrase his logic, it was to maintain the syllogism that "A is  a  member
of organisation X. Organisation X  is  an  illegal  terrorist  organisation.
Therefore A is involved in terrorist activities".

127. However for reasons explained above we consider  the  circumstances  of
this case called for a more careful assessment in the first instance of  the
nature of the organisation in question, in this case the CPN (Maoist).

128. Whilst materials placed before us dealing with the  Maoists  have  been
considerable in number, they nowhere give a precise account of the  history,
structure and aims and objectives of  this  organisation.  However,  on  the
basis of what has been placed before us, we can summarise  the  position  as
follows. Maobadi is a generic Nepali term meaning "the Maoists" and as  such
does not refer to a specific party organisation, although it is  often  used
interchangeably with the  term  Communist  party  of  Nepal  (Maoist)   (CPN
(Maoist) who are said to be ideologically close to the  Communist  Party  of
Peru (Shining Path). The CPN (Maoist) declared a  `people's  war`  in  1996.
Since then the insurgency has resulted in the deaths of  over  2,100  people
including more than 200  civilians.  In  addition  to  suspected  informers,
Maoists have mainly targeted political leaders and local  elites,  including
representatives of the more moderate Marxist-Leninist (UML)  party  and  the
Nepal Congress Party (NPC). They have looted banks  and  bombed  or  set  on
fire government offices, hospitals  and  the  homes  of  political  leaders.
Their targets have included socio-economic targets  such  as  factories  and
telecommunications centres. They have attacked  landowners,  civilians,  and
government officials in a number of districts. On occasions they  have  also
attacked international non-governmental organisations. In  October  1998  it
announced the start of a `fourth phase`  involving  establishment  of  `base
zones` or captured territory. In one report dealing with  the  situation  in
2000 the Maoists were said to now  control  a  sizeable  proportion  of  the
country. In July 2001 the country  was  said  to  have  been  brought  to  a
standstill by a widely observed general strike called by the  Maoists.  When
it further escalated its level of armed  attacks  in  2001,  the  Government
responded in November 2001 by declaring a state of  emergency.  It  declared
the CPN  (Maoist)  and  its  sister  organisations  and  any  individual  or
organisation that support the Maoist Party and its activities as  terrorist.
It also began to employ the army directly in operations against the  Maoists
for the first time.  The  Maoists  responded  by  extending  their  list  of
targets to including military personnel.   Echoing  major  NGO  assessments,
the US State Department reports have consistently recorded  the  Maoists  as
being  responsible  for  numerous  human  rights  abuses  and  international
humanitarian  law  violations,  including  the  deliberate  kidnapping   and
killing of civilians and the forced abduction of children to turn them  into
armed soldiers. EU sources have described the Maoists campaign  of  violence
as taking place on a carefully planned and systematic basis.

129. At the same time the background materials also disclose  that  the  CPN
(Maoist) has a  detailed  political  programme  known  as  the  "40  points"
covering a wide range  of  subjects,  land  reform  and  anti-corruption  in
particular. Furthermore, it has a number of "wings", including  a  political
wing (Samyukta Jana Marcha,  United  People`s  Front  (Bhattarai)  (SJM),  a
cultural wing and a student`s wing.  It  was  able  in  2001  to  bring  the
country to a standstill with a widely observed general  strike,  it  or  its
subsidiary organisations has some considerable  level  of  popular  support,
even if to some extent those who observed the strike did so out of  fear  of
reprisal. The fact that there have been  several  unsuccessful  attempts  by
the government to negotiate peace further indicates  that  it  is  far  from
being purely a  military  cadre  or  vanguard  devoted  exclusively  to  the
pursuit of armed struggle.

130.  Had the adjudicator considered these features of the CPN  (Maoist)  as
it has operated in Nepal in recent years, it is  likely  his  inquiry  would
have led to two main conclusions. One, which he did  allude  to  at  several
points (albeit by using the unhelpful epithet, "terrorist") would have  been
that the CPN (Maoist) is indubitably an  organisation  which  has  committed
serious violations of international humanitarian law. That is  to  say,  the
organisation's  evident  involvement  in  terrorist  activities   could   be
identified in terms of acts plainly contrary to Articles  1F  (a),  (b)  and
(c). (We make mention of Article 1F(a) here advisedly, because  although  in
large part the focus of this sub-clause is crimes committed  in  the  course
of war between countries,  crimes  against  humanity  are  now  regarded  as
covering acts committed in the course of internal armed conflicts).

131. However the other  main  conclusion  of  any  careful  inquiry  by  the
adjudicator into this organisation would have been  that  the  CPN  (Maoist)
party is clearly not an organisation at the out-and-out `terrorist`  end  of
the continuum.

132. Given the diversified (if not in some cases fragmented) nature  of  the
activities of the Maoists in Nepal, we do not think  the  adjudicator  could
easily have come to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  himself  an
excludable "terrorist" simply because he was a  CPN  (Maoist)  member.  That
does not mean, however that such a conclusion would not have  been  open  to
him  if  there  was  specific  evidence  of  the  appellant`s  own  personal
involvement in acts or crimes proscribed by Art 1F.

133. The legal criteria to be applied to cases falling under Art 1F(b)  have
been clarified by their lordships in  the  case  of  T.  But  what  was  the
evidence relating  to  Art  1F(b)  crimes  in  this  case?  So  far  as  the
appellant`s own activities in the context of  his  CPN  (Maoist)  membership
are  concerned,  we  have  already  commented  on   the   paucity   of   the
adjudicator's findings of fact in respect of the raid on the  Land  Registry
offices. Even  assuming  he  was  right  to  discount  the  appellant`s  own
evidence that he had only been involved in one incident (the Tax  Office/and
Registry offices raid being treated as one and the  same),  the  adjudicator
did  not  make  any  specific  findings  as  to  whether  he  thought  these
activities and the appellant`s part in  them  amounted  to  acts  or  crimes
contrary to Art 1F.

134. Had the adjudicator gone on to evaluate these activities, we  think  it
most unlikely - assuming he did not think  the  appellant  was  involved  in
much more than he was letting on - he could have concluded these did  amount
to crimes contrary to Art 1F.

135. It is  consistent  with  the  criteria  set  out  in  T  that  in  some
circumstances stone throwing could amount to  a  serious  crime  within  the
meaning of Art 1F(b):  in certain circumstances the mere threat of  violence
can also amount to a serious crime. We doubt that Mrs Grey can be  right  in
saying that a raid on a set  of  government  offices  cannot  be  an  action
sufficiently  related  to  the  purpose  of  overthrowing  or  changing  the
government to  qualify  as  "political".   However,  there  was  a  lack  of
concrete evidence on most salient matters: whether  the  stone-throwing  and
chanting in this case seriously threatened persons or property; whether  the
Land Registry offices were occupied by anyone at the particular time of  the
protest or, if there were people there, whether they were solely  government
officials or a mixture  of  government  officials  and  ordinary  civilians;
whether the effect of the raid was to create terror in the  minds  of  those
attacked. Also lacking was evidence concerning  the  applicant`s  particular
role in this raid. It is true the appellant himself at one  point  described
this incident as an `implementation` of Maoist policy and it  is  true  that
objective country materials do mention, amongst the targets  chosen  by  the
Maoists,  government  offices.   But   there   is   insufficient   evidence,
particularly given that it would now appear little or  no  reliance  can  be
placed on the newspaper article, to infer that this  incident  was  in  fact
part of any armed struggle enterprise. We remind ourselves  again  that  the
objective country materials appear to indicate that the Maoist  party  is  a
multi- faceted organisation with various wings and that not everything  done
in its name emanates from a co-ordinated central command.

136. It remains sufficiently clear, however, that the appellant  had  joined
the CPN (Maoist) voluntarily and  had  not  done  anything  for  them  under
coercion. It is also sufficiently clear that he must  have  known  that  the
CPN (Maoist) did engage in armed struggle activities  and  had  committed  a
number of atrocities. On his own  account  and  having  regard  to  his  own
written statements, he was a relatively educated person.  Although  we  have
concluded there is not enough evidence to equate his own role in  the  party
and his own activities in support of it with acts or crimes contrary to  Art
1F, we have not done so because we believe his  erstwhile  claims  that  the
Maoists in general were working within the law. It is  simply  that  in  the
particular circumstances of his  case  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
establish that he was working so far outside the law  as  to  bring  himself
within the scope of Art 1F(a) or IF (b) or Art 1F(c).

137. We have thus found that the  adjudicator  was  wrong  to  conclude  the
appellant was excluded by Art 1F. Of course, if  the  evidence  had  clearly
warranted treating the appellant as  excluded  under  Art  1F(b),  then  the
adjudicator would not have needed -  indeed  it  would  only  have  confused
things - to go on and consider the Inclusion  Clause  issue  of  prosecution
versus persecution.  He  would  have  been  entitled,  having  set  out  his
reasons why Art 1F(b) applied, to  dismiss  the  asylum  grounds  of  appeal
without more. He would then, of course,  have  had  to  go  on  to  consider
whether nevertheless the appellant faced a real risk of  treatment  contrary
to Article 3: indeed, for reasons we will mention  in  a  moment,  he  might
very well have concluded (always assuming acceptance  of  credibility)  that
there would be a breach of that guarantee.


The Adjudicator's treatment of the Inclusion Clauses

138. But since Art 1F should not have been applied against  this  appellant,
the issue of whether he qualified under the Inclusion Clauses needed  to  be
addressed. A central question was prosecution  versus  persecution.  Insofar
as the adjudicator also sought to deal with this issue, can we say he  dealt
with it properly? We think  not.  Assuming  acceptance  of  credibility,  he
should have found in our view that the appellant would face a real  risk  of
persecution. If the Nepalese authorities saw the appellant as  a  member  of
the CPN (Maoist) party, it was  difficult  to  see  that  they  would  limit
themselves to a legitimate process of prosecution. Going  by  the  objective
country materials placed before us, we see no  reason  to  differ  from  the
conclusions reached by the Tribunal in Rajesh Gurung  and  subsequent  cases
such as Prakesh Sharma [2202] UKIAT  02943  and  Hane  [2002]  UKIAT  03945.
Indeed, in our view the more comprehensive and in some respects more  recent
objective materials placed before us serve only to confirm the  findings  of
fact reached by the Tribunal in these  cases  to  the  effect  that  someone
currently viewed as a Maoist  would  face  persecution  rather  than  simple
prosecution. It is true these materials no longer bear  out  in  unqualified
fashion that the government makes systematic use of  torture  and  such-like
abuses. It is also true these reports fall well short of demonstrating  that
ordinary civilians are systematically denied basic standards of justice  and
fair trial.  The courts, particularly at  a  lower  level,  continue  to  be
susceptible to political pressure and there remain  lengthy  delays  in  the
trial process particularly at the higher level. Yet the  Supreme  Court  and
increasingly the appellate courts have shown themselves to  be  independent.


139.  However,  these  materials  do  indicate  that  the  use  of  torture,
disappearances, and arbitrary detention remains widespread, particularly  in
areas affected by the Maoist insurgency. Whilst extrajudicial killings  have
not been widespread,  most  of  those  concerned  were  suspected  of  being
sympathisers with the Maoists. In December  2001  the  government  announced
abandonment of its policy of releasing imprisoned Maoists. It must  also  be
borne in mind that with the implementation of the Public Safety  Regulations
2001, the ability of the  courts  to  check  the  acts  of  the  police  and
security forces has been considerably circumvented. There is  no  suggestion
that the National Human Rights Commission or the operation  of  the  Torture
Compensation Act 1996 or the government's accession to  major  international
human rights instruments or the  existence  of  several  human  rights  non-
governmental organisations have  been  significantly  able  to  check  these
types of abuses. Reports of  government  excesses  against  Maoists  in  the
early part of 2002 in the context of police and military drives against  the
Maoists are particularly alarming.

140.  In view of the considerable body of evidence showing that Maoists  are
far more likely to experience torture and ill treatment in  detention,  such
persecution would also demonstrably be for a Convention reason of  political
opinion.

141. Assuming the adjudicator had correctly concluded the appellant faced  a
real risk of persecution for a Convention reason  and  so  came  within  the
Inclusion Clauses, what should he have said about the human  rights  grounds
of appeal. In our view he would  have  only  needed  to  record  -  applying
criteria set out in Kacaj and basing himself on the same  findings  of  fact
he had made in respect of the Art 1A(2) issues -  that  the  appellant  also
faced a real risk of ill treatment contrary to Art 3.

142. We  would  re-emphasise  that  we  have  only  included  the  foregoing
analysis of  the  adjudicator's  determination  for  illustrative  purposes.
Whether   the adjudicator next looking  at  the  case  takes  a  similar  or
different view as to the credibility of the appellant's account  has  to  be
entirely a matter for that adjudicator.


The position of the Secretary of State

143. Although our direct concern is with the proper approach to be taken  by
adjudicators to  cases  raising  Art  1F  issues,  it  is  salient  that  we
underline what we think is the  proper  approach  to  be  taken  by  primary
decision-makers.

144. We hope we have already made clear our dismay at  the  relative  rarity
with which the Secretary of State raises Art 1F issues  in  appeals  brought
before adjudicators. As we have already noted, there are many asylum  claims
brought by persons who claim some degree of  connection  with  organisations
whose  involvement  to  some   degree   in   violations   of   international
humanitarian law has been amply documented.  We  have  already  mentioned  a
number of typical examples. It may be that in many cases there  is  no  need
to consider Exclusion Clauses issues  because  of  lack  of  credibility  or
because on the appellant`s own account his  level  of  involvement  in  such
organisations is too remote from acts contrary to Art  1F.  The  person  who
claims to have been a supporter of  the  LTTE  merely  assisting  them  with
digging bunkers is perhaps a classic example.  However,  once  the  evidence
extends to involvement in activities  directly  related  to  armed  struggle
activities,  e.g.  (to  stay  with  the  LTTE  example)  such  as  knowingly
transporting arms intended to be used by LTTE combatants against  civilians,
then it is plainly inadequate to assume that this can always be confined  to
the issue in terms of prosecution  versus  persecution.  For  the  decision-
maker an alarm bell should ring at this point.

145. If one consideration in the mind  of  interviewing  officers  inclining
them not to raise exclusion clauses issues is the fact  that  the  appellant
may have a separate potentially successful claim under Article 3,  we  would
hope that such a consideration ceases to play  any  role.  An  appellant  is
entitled to a separate decision  on  his  asylum  claim  under  the  Refugee
Convention and his human rights claim under  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
Furthermore, there remains in UK law some important  differences  in  status
outcome. A successful claimant under the Refugee  Convention  is  recognised
as a refugee, which is a status existing at the level of international  law.
It is also a status which confers on him certain  civil,  political,  social
and economic rights specified in Arts 2-33 of the Refugee Convention.  As  a
matter of current UK policy it also entitles him to a  grant  of  indefinite
leave to remain. By contrast, a successful claimant under the  Human  Rights
Convention, even if found to be  unremovable  unless  Article  3  is  to  be
violated, is not entitled to receive any status.  As  a  matter  of  current
policy only he is granted certain  civil,  political,  social  and  economic
rights and he may also get exceptional leave to remain for varying  periods.
In the case of someone found to fall  within  the  Exclusion  Clauses,  i.e.
someone who because of serious criminality has been found to be  undeserving
of  international  protection,  and  someone  who  may  well  have  been   a
persecutor, it would seem to us to make very good sense  not  to  assimilate
his or her position to that of the persecuted.

146. We are conscious from the  contents  of  Mr  Braid`s  submissions  that
there is some anxiety that greater attention by the Secretary  of  State  to
exclusion issues may lead to genuine asylum seekers  wrongly  been  labelled
as terrorists. However, we see no real danger of any such  result  happening
from the type of closer attention that we  advocate.  Given  that  very  few
asylum-seekers ever own to knowing  involvement  in  acts  contrary  to  the
Exclusion Clauses, even a significantly redesigned approach  to  examination
so as to better identify possible exclusion cases is unlikely to  cause  any
real changes except in cases where there is some real evidential  foundation
for such identification.

147. We understand from Mrs Grey`s submissions that the Secretary  of  State
is in the process of redesigning the assessment procedures  to  ensure  that
interviewing officers undertake examinations in  the  light  of  EU-oriented
guidelines for the recognition of Art 1F cases. We are given  to  understand
that a start-point for  such  assessment  has  already  become  whether  the
appellant is a member of an organisation proscribed under the Terrorism  Act
2000. Cases raising national security issues  are  already  the  subject  of
statutory regulation through the Special Immigration Appeals Commission  Act
1997 as amended.

148. Apart from cases which are identified as falling within  the  scope  of
the SIAC procedures, we see nothing wrong in principle - for  reasons  given
earlier -  whenever  exclusion  issues  are  seen  to  be  involved  in  the
Secretary of State deciding first about the appellant`s position  under  the
Exclusion Clauses. However, at the primary decision-making stage there is  a
considerable value in the decision identifying in "belt and braces"  fashion
even potentially applicable issues. Only such an approach  can  ensure  that
at any further appeal stage the adjudicator knows the Secretary  of  State`s
overall position. Mrs Grey`s submissions accepted this  point.  Accordingly,
we expect it would be rare for exclusion  solely  to  be  addressed  in  the
reasons for refusal letter.

149. Obviously special considerations may apply in at least  three  sets  of
exceptional circumstances,  namely  when  the  appellant  is  identified  as
(potentially) being the subject of extradition proceedings  or  of  criminal
proceedings  under  national  (UK)  law  or   of   proceedings   before   an
international court  exercising  international  criminal  law  jurisdiction.
Such cases are likely to be "frozen" before they get  to  the  appeal  stage
anyway.

150. To our mind the primary  objective  behind  the  Secretary  of  State's
examination of asylum claims should be to ensure that  all  salient  issues,
including but not limited  to  any  exclusion  issues,  have  been  properly
identified in the Reasons for Refusal letter. Although  we  have  not  ruled
out that the adjudicator can properly address Exclusion  clause  issues  not
previously  raised  of  their  own  motion,  the  less   adjudicators   find
themselves having to confront this dilemma the better.

151. Summary of Conclusions.
In order to resolve some of the issues in this case it  has  been  necessary
to go into detail. Now that we have done that,  however,  we  consider  that
guidance can be given in relatively short form:


      1.  Bearing in mind the need to adopt  a  purposive  approach  to  the
      interpretation of the  Exclusion  Clauses,  they  are  to  be  applied
      restrictively. In contrast to the focus under  Art  1A(2)  on  current
      risk, the focus under Art 1F is on past crimes or acts.


      2.  In any case in which an adjudicator intends to apply the Exclusion
      Clauses, he should avoid equating Art 1F with a simple  anti-terrorism
      provision. He should make findings about  the  serious  crime  or  act
      committed by the claimant and then explain  how  that  fits  within  a
      particular sub-category (or particular sub-categories) of  Art  1F   -
      1F(a), IF (b) or 1F(c). As the Tribunal held in Thayabaran (12250), he
      should treat the evidential burden  of  proving  that  a  claimant  is
      excluded by Art 1F as resting on the  Secretary  of  State.  The  test
      specified in Art 1F of "serious reasons for considering" that a barred
      act had been committed was one requiring a  lower  standard  of  proof
      than either beyond reasonable doubt or the balance  of  probabilities.
      No other wording than "serious  reasons  for  considering"  should  be
      introduced.


      3. In relation to cases raising issues under Art 1F(b), the principles
      enunciated by their lordships in the case of T remain valid.  However,
      in deciding whether a person`s membership of an  organisation  amounts
      to complicity in any crimes or acts proscribed by Art  1F,  it  is  of
      crucial importance to examine  the  particular  circumstances,  taking
      account not only of factors concerning the individual and his specific
      role in the organisation but also that organisation's place  and  role
      in the society in which it operates. The more  an  organisation  makes
      terrorist acts its modus operandi, the more difficult it will be for a
      claimant to show his voluntary membership of it  does  not  amount  to
      complicity.


      4. It would be wrong for adjudicators to adopt an "exclusion  culture"
      and go searching in every case for  exclusion  issues  under  Art  1F.
      Pragmatism is called  for.  However,  the  Exclusion  Clauses  are  in
      mandatory terms and where obvious issues arise under them  these  must
      be addressed by an adjudicator, even if the Secretary of State has not
      raised them expressly or by implication in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
      letter. That may happen prior to the hearing, at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing or during it. This approach is subject only  to  the  need  to
      ensure procedural fairness.


      5. It  is  only  necessary  to  consider  exclusion  issues  in  cases
      obviously involving serious criminality as defined by Arts  1F(a)-(c).
      However, once the  case  is  identified  as  one  obviously  involving
      serious criminality,  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  an  adjudicator
      dealing with exclusion issues first.


      6. So far as the hearing stage is concerned,  whilst  there  would  be
      nothing wrong in a case involving  an  obvious  exclusion  issue  with
      requiring the parties to confine their examination and submissions  to
      exclusion issues, that would only be appropriate in  cases  where  the
      evidence strongly pointed to the appellant falling within   the  terms
      of Art 1F. In all other cases,  e.g.  where  exclusion  issues  albeit
      relevant are not obvious or  manifest,  then  the  hearing  should  be
      conducted so as to cover evidence and  submissions  relating  to  both
      exclusion and inclusion issues.


      7. So  far  as  the  reasons  part  of  the  determination  itself  is
      concerned, whenever there is an obvious exclusion issue, it should  be
      dealt with first. Not to go straight to  the  exclusion  issues  could
      frustrate the objective set by Rule 30 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
      Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000  of  securing  the  "just,  timely  and
      effective disposal of appeals".


      8. If, having dealt with  exclusion  first  in  the  determination  an
      adjudicator decides that Art 1F does not apply, he or she must then go
      on to deal with the appeal under the Inclusion Clauses  in  the  usual
      way.


      9. If Art 1F is found to apply, adjudicators  should  only  go  on  in
      "belt and braces" fashion to consider the Inclusion Clause issues when
      the decision to exclude is seen to be problematic  or  to  turn  on  a
      narrow or finely balanced point.


      10. But where an  adjudicator  (in  a  post  2  October  2000  appeal)
      concludes that an appellant falls within  the  Exclusion  Clauses,  it
      will be necessary in any event for him to go on  to  consider  whether
      the decision to remove the  appellant  would  violate  Art  3  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights. In this  regard  exclusion  cases
      form one of the very limited exceptions  to  the  rule  enunciated  in
      Kacaj that asylum and Article 3 claims stand or fall together.


      11.  So far as the Secretary of State is concerned, however, different
      considerations should apply. Even if exclusion  issues  are  addressed
      first, it is highly desirable in the interests of justice that at  all
      stages of his examination of an asylum claim he  adopts  a  "belt-and-
      braces" approach and that he sets out in his Reasons for  Refusal  his
      decision on the appellant`s position  under  both  the  Inclusion  and
      Exclusion Clauses.


152. For reasons already given this appeal is thus  to  be  remitted  to  be
considered afresh  by  an  adjudicator  other  than  Mr  Curzon  Lewis.  The
adjudicator who hears this case  can  now  treat  the  exclusion  issues  as
having been raised. He or she  will  need  to  consider  in  particular  the
credibility of the appellant`s claim  in  the  light  of  all  the  evidence
including the letter which has now been submitted by  the  British  Embassy,
Nepal. If the adjudicator decides that the appellant`s account  of  being  a
member of the Maoist party is credible, then he will need  to  approach  the
exclusion issues in a structured way and,  in  relation  to  any  Art  1F(b)
issues, he will need to consider the appellant`s role in it in the light  of
the objective  evidence  about  the  history,  structure,  organisation  and
activities of that organisation in the context of present-day Nepal.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




                                                     -----------------------
[1] Baljit Singh [1994] Imm AR 42; O v Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  [1995]
Imm AR 494; Raziastaraie [1995] Imm AR 459 (on Art 33(2);  T  v  Immigration
Officer [1996] AC 742, [1996] 2 WLR 766 (hereafter "T");  Mukhtiar  Singh  v
SSHD (SC 4//99 unreported); Sivakumar [2001] EWCA Civ 1196, judgment  of  24
July 2001.
[2]  Abwedi  (11974,  March  1995);  Amberber  (00TH01570,  13  June  2000);
Amirthalingam (11560, 2 March 1994); Arulendran (11827,  February  1997);  B
(13827, August 1996); Bulut (18078, August  1998);  De  Silva  (13668,  July
1996);  Hua  (G0077,  April  1999);  Jesuthasan  (01TH01444,   July   2001);
Kathirpillai (12250); King (13452, May  1996);  Mete  (17980,  April  1998);
Nackereen (6419, 1989 (a  case  in  which  the  UNHCR  was  an  intervenor);
Rajkumar (11562, November 1994);  Randhawa  (10694,  February  1994);  Re  Y
(14847,  January  1997);  Singh  (10866,  April  1994);  Sivayogan   (22437,
December 1999); Timatine (12250, August 1998); Woldamichael (17633).

