
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO  HX/48836/2001    |
|On 13 August 2002          |        |WF (Internal Relocation -   |
|                           |        |Christian) India CG [2002]  |
|                           |        |UKIAT 04874                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|15th October 2002                                                 |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|PROFESSOR D B CASSON                                              |
|MR C A N EDINBORO                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Winston Farrer                                                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  W  D  Mark-Bell)
      allowing on asylum grounds an appeal by Mr Winston Farrer,  a  citizen
      of India, against the decision of the respondent on  2  July  2001  to
      give directions for removal to India as an illegal entrant.  Before us
      the Secretary of State was represented by Mr M Davidson,  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer.   Mr  Farrer  was  represented  by  Mr  A  Stedman
      instructed by Asghar & Co.

   2. There is no record  of  Mr  Farrer's  lawful  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  At his asylum interview  he  said  that  he,  his  wife  and
      daughter, had left their  home  in  India  and  gone  into  hiding  in
      Gujarat, where they stayed with a friend.  He said he did not have his
      own passport but his friend made all the arrangements when  they  paid
      him a sum of money.  He said he had left India by air from  New  Delhi
      but had no idea where the flight was heading.  His friend  accompanied
      them and eventually he was in the United Kingdom  but  he  never  knew
      where he was going.  He claimed asylum on 26 February 2001,  with  his
      wife and daughter as his dependants, and said he had  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom five  days  earlier.   Mr  Davidson  told  us  that  no
      passport had ever been produced.

   3. Mr Farrer said he was a Christian and  as  a  result  had  experienced
      attacks from an un-named anti-Christian group who  had  also  come  to
      look for him at his house.  He and  his  family  were  Roman  Catholic
      Christians who lived in Gujarat where he and his wife were employed as
      teachers at a Roman Catholic school called St Xaviers.   He  told  the
      Adjudicator that on 11 December 2000 a mob, which he described as anti-
      Christian  terrorists,  attacked  the  school.   He,  his   wife   and
      colleagues were physically attacked and witnessed the  murder  of  the
      school priest Patrick Eaton.  The mob destroyed  Christian  images  in
      the church.  He and his colleagues reported the incident to the police
      and made statements.  On 14 December 2000 the family  were  away  from
      their home.  His cousin  brother  was  in  their  house  when  it  was
      attacked by the same mob.  They beat his cousin brother so badly  that
      he died shortly after having been taken to hospital;  before  he  died
      he told Mr Farrer the identity of his assailants  and  said  they  had
      threatened to kill him and his family.  He and his family then hid  in
      various places in extreme secrecy and employed  the  agent  to  effect
      their departure from India.  Mr Farrer said it was a condition of  the
      contract with the agent that  he  did  know  his  destination  and  he
      insisted that he did not know the United Kingdom would be the family's
      destination.  He asserted that the Indian authorities were  unable  or
      unwilling to offer him protection after he reported the attack on  the
      church and the murder of the priest.  He told the Adjudicator that  he
      believed the anti-Christian group that attacked him  were  members  of
      the ruling party  who  alleged  that  Christians  were  attempting  to
      convert Hindus.  He said that in fact Christians were being persecuted
      all over India.  He agreed that he had  had  no  problems  in  Gujarat
      before  the  incidents  he  had  described.   Having  considered   the
      background material, the Adjudicator found Mr Farrer to be a  credible
      witness and accepted his account in full.  The Adjudicator noted  that
      Christians in India accounted for between two and three percent of the
      population.  Christianity had existed in  India  for  many  centuries,
      perhaps since the fourth century.  Relations  between  Christians  and
      other religious groups had in  recent  history  been  almost  entirely
      cordial, but this had  changed  for  the  worse  very  recently.   The
      Adjudicator found that attacks on Christian churches had increased  at
      an enormous rate;  the increases coincided "in  perfect synchronicity"
      with the rise to power of the BJP, a  Hindu  nationalist  party.   The
      Adjudicator described the BJP as apparently between on  the  one  hand
      acting in the truly  national  interest  but  on  the  other  hand  on
      occasions acting in response to its Hindu nationalist roots.

   4. The Secretary of State had submitted that Mr Farrer could  live  in  a
      different area of India where there would be no well founded  fear  of
      persecution:  it was suggested at the hearing that  India  was  a  big
      place, and that Gujarat was not typical of a nationwide problem.   The
      Adjudicator said at paragraph 37:   "Neither  the  respondent  in  his
      refusal letter nor (the Presenting Officer) at  the  hearing  actually
      told me where in India there would be no real risk of the  persecution
      feared by (Mr Farrer).  It is  not  for  me  to  do  the  respondent's
      homework and these  proceedings  are  essentially  adversarial."   The
      Adjudicator said that he had read the objective material and, while it
      was clear that certain areas, Gujarat in  particular,  have  a  higher
      incidence of anti-Christian activity than  others,  nevertheless  this
      activity appeared to occur throughout India.  The Adjudicator referred
      to a report apparently taken from the internet which showed that anti-
      Christian attacks had occurred  in  many  states  across  India.   The
      Adjudicator concluded his consideration at paragraph 37 as follows:

           "The  objective   material   seems   to   suggest   that   Hindu
           nationalists'  violent  anti-Christian  activities  is  (sic)  a
           response to an actively pursued policy of  Hindu  conversion  to
           Christianity promoted by  United  States  Evangelical  Christian
           organisations.  The objective material suggests  that  these  US
           organisations concentrate their conversion policy in poor  rural
           areas.  There are many  such  areas  throughout  India  -  I  am
           therefore satisfied that there is a real risk that  (Mr  Farrer)
           could be  persecuted  for  his  religious  beliefs  anywhere  in
           India."

   5. We admitted in evidence  background  documentation  including  the  US
      State Department report released 26 October 2001 on internal religious
      freedom in India.  In his submissions, Mr Davidson for  the  Secretary
      of State relied on two main aspects of the grounds of  appeal:   first
      the Adjudicator's statement at paragraph 34 of his determination  that
      he had read not only the material put before him  but  "more  widely".
      Mr  Davidson submitted that it was clearly wrong for  the  Adjudicator
      to fail to give both representatives  an  opportunity  to  comment  on
      material which had not been  put  before  him.   Mr  Stedman,  for  Mr
      Farrer,  acknowledged  the  difficulty  posed  by  the   Adjudicator's
      approach  but  he  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  was  not  to  be
      criticised because all the information was available to the  Secretary
      of State.  We do not with respect consider that to be  an  appropriate
      reaction to the Adjudicator's approach, which we consider to be  wrong
      and which  must  plainly  call  into  question  the  validity  of  his
      conclusions.

   6. Mr Davidson's second submission was  that  the  Adjudicator  had  been
      wrong in his  approach  to  the  question  of  internal  flight.   His
      statement at paragraph 37 that neither the Secretary of State nor  the
      Presenting Officer at the hearing had told him where  in  India  there
      would be no risk of persecution was simply incorrect.  At paragraph  7
      of the refusal letter the Secretary of State had expressly  said  that
      there were no reports of increases in attacks  against  Christians  in
      parts of India other than Gujarat,  Maharashtra,  Madhya  Pradesh  and
      Uttar Pradesh.  At the hearing the Presenting Officer had pressed  the
      argument that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  in  the  southern
      states of India.  Moreover, the  Adjudicator  seemed  to  require  the
      Secretary of State to say where Mr Farrer would be safe.  The evidence
      was that he had moved from Delhi to Gujarat, but the evidence did  not
      disclose his reason for doing so.  Mr Davidson  submitted  that  while
      the BJP controlled Gujarat, the southern states of India had a history
      of support for religious minorities.  Mr Stedman in response submitted
      that Mr Farrer feared persecution throughout India and  that  acts  of
      violence against Christians were widespread.

   7. We have considered the helpful submissions by both representatives  in
      the light of the background material before us.  There is no challenge
      to the credibility of the account of his experiences in Gujarat  given
      by Mr Farrer.  The Adjudicator accepted his story in its entirety.  We
      proceed on the basis that the account of his experience in India given
      by Mr Farrer was truthful.  The sole basis of his claim is that he has
      been persecuted, and fears persecution because he is a Roman  Catholic
      Christian.  He says that the government  is  unable  or  unwilling  to
      protect him from Hindu  nationalist  anti-Christian  groups  and  that
      there is nowhere in India where he would be safe.  It is common ground
      that the question before us is whether the option of  internal  flight
      is available to him.  That question must be considered in the light of
      the decision of the Court of Appeal in Karanakaran [2000]  Imm  AR271,
      where the Court of Appeal held that, in considering whether  it  would
      be unduly harsh for an asylum seeker to relocate to  another  part  of
      his country of nationality, no question of burden or standard of proof
      arose.  It is a question of looking at the evidence  as  a  whole  and
      asking whether in the light of all  the  circumstances,  it  would  be
      unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to  relocate.   Insofar   as   the
      Adjudicator in this appeal appeared to place the burden of  indicating
      precisely where Mr Farrer would be safe, his approach was incorrect.

   8. We acknowledge the difficulty posed by the decision of  the  Court  of
      Appeal, but we are bound to follow it.  The absence  of  a  burden  of
      proof does  not  facilitate  the  decision-making  process.   We  have
      considered the background evidence before us.  We bear  in  mind  that
      there is a very long history of good relations between Christians  and
      other religious groups in India.  The US State Department report gives
      illustrations of attacks against Christians, including  explosions  in
      the southern states of Karnataka and Andra Pradesh, which caused minor
      damage and in which no one was killed.  The report  notes  at  page  6
      that  the  outbreak  of  societal  violence  against  Christians  that
      occurred during the  previous  reporting  period  and  was  apparently
      sparked by rumours of forced conversions of  Hindus  to  Christianity,
      was not repeated during the period covered by  the  report.   However,
      tensions persist and the underlying resentment of Christians by Hindus
      sometimes leads to violent confrontation.  In  our  judgment,  neither
      the State Department report nor the other documents before us give any
      reason to believe that Mr  Farrer,  as  a  practising  Roman  Catholic
      Christian, would find it unduly harsh  to  relocate  from  Gujarat  to
      other areas of India where sentiment against Christians is not strong.
       He is entitled to international protection only if the country of his
      nationality is unable or unwilling to provide protection for him.   We
      disagree with the Adjudicator's conclusion.  We find that  the  option
      of internal relocation is available to Mr Farrer.

   9. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.



                                                                  D B Casson
                                                       Acting Vice President







