
Chawish (Section 65 1999 Act - Removal - Destitution) Iraq * [2002] UKIAT
01376

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:        |19 March 2002      |
|Date Determination      |2 May 2002         |
|notified:               |                   |


                                   Before:

                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                            Mr. C. M. G. Ockelton
                              Dr. H. H. Storey

|Secretary of State for the Home       |APPELLANT    |
|Department                            |             |
|And                                   |             |
|Majid BEHRI CHAWISH                   |RESPONDENT   |

|For the Appellant:|Miss P. McMonagle, HOPO          |
|For the           |Mr. Ferrell, Solicitor           |
|Respondent:       |                                 |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The respondent is an ethnic Kurd from the Kurdish Autonomous  Area  (KAA)
   in North Iraq.  He  apparently  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  17
   February 2001 and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused on 15  May  2001
   and removal directions were set since he was  an  illegal  entrant.   The
   usual undertaking was given that no removal would take place until a safe
   means of getting the respondent to the KAA could be found.   It  was  not
   safe to remove him  to  any  part  of  Iraq  over  which  Saddam  Hussain
   exercised control.

2. He appealed to an adjudicator on the grounds that to remove him would  be
   contrary to the Refugee Convention and would  breach  Article  3  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights.  His claim to fear  persecution  was
   based on the issue of a fatwah against him  for  having  taught  children
   that men and women were equal.  The adjudicator (Mr. F.  Pieri)  did  not
   believe him.  We need not go into any  detail  or  consider  his  reasons
   since there is no appeal against those findings.  Suffice it to say  that
   the adjudicator's conclusions are clearly in accordance with the evidence
   and they could not be successfully attacked.  Mr. Ferrell did not attempt
   to do so.  It followed that the respondent failed to establish that there
   was a real risk that he would be persecuted or treated so  as  to  breach
   his human rights on return to the KAA.

3. Despite this, the adjudicator allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on  the
   ground that his treatment in the United Kingdom which would result from a
   dismissal of his appeal would be such as to establish a real  risk  of  a
   breach of Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   In
   Paragraph 32 of his determination, the adjudicator said:-

           "The [respondent] has satisfied me that there is at least a real
           risk that the decision to issue removal directions which are not
           in the meantime to be  enforced  will  result  in  his  enduring
           treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention".



4. This remarkable conclusion has been reached  by  other  adjudicators  and
   the argument is regularly raised.  We have therefore  decided  to  'star'
   this decision so that the argument can be put to rest.

5. There were two claims in the  appeal  to  the  adjudicator.   First,  the
   respondent was asserting that his removal in pursuance of the  directions
   would be contrary to the Refugee Convention: see s.69(5) of the 1999 Act.
    Secondly, he was raising a claim under s.65(1) of the  1999  Act  which,
   so far as material, reads:-

           "A person who alleges that  an  authority  has,  in  taking  any
           decision under the Immigration Acts relating  to  that  person's
           entitlement to ... remain in the United  Kingdom  ...  acted  in
           breach of his human rights may appeal to an adjudicator  against
           that decision ..."

6. We have referred to two claims following the approach  of  the  Court  of
   Appeal in Zenovics v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.   The
   first claim has been rejected and, as we have said, there is no appeal to
   us  against  that.   The  adjudicator  was  persuaded  that  the   second
   succeeded.

7. The adjudicator decided that the wording of s.65(1) was  wide  enough  to
   cover the consequences within the United Kingdom to  an  appellant  of  a
   decision to remove him from the United Kingdom. This meant  in  his  view
   that if the removal was to be deferred  the  situation  in  the  meantime
   while removal could not take place was within s.65.  If a real risk of  a
   breach of art 3, or of any Article was established, that would mean  that
   the appeal against the decision to remove would have to be allowed.

8. The decision in question is that the respondent should be removed.   That
   is in the circumstances of this case the decision referred to in s.65(1).
    Indeed, the whole basis of immigration control rests on leave  to  enter
   or remain and the corollary that if leave is  not  granted  removal  will
   follow.  The existence of any status  appeal  in  terms  of  the  Refugee
   Convention, which may be in issue under s.69(3) but, despite the Court of
   Appeal decision in Saad v Secretary of State for the Home Department,  is
   difficult to apply to the other subsections, does not affect this  point.
   If a person is a refugee he cannot be refouled;  thus, if  he  is  to  be
   removed, it is necessary first to decide whether he is a  refugee.   This
   does not stop removal being the  decision  which  is  in  issue  for  the
   purposes of s.65(1).

9. In those circumstances, it is somewhat strange  to  find  it  being  said
   that removal would not constitute a  breach  of  human  rights  but  non-
   removal would.  We are satisfied that s.65 was not intended  and  is  not
   apt to enable the consequence of an inability to remove for a time to  be
   considered by an adjudicator.  There is a present inability to remove  to
   the KAA.  Furthermore, in many other cases it  will  be  likely  that  no
   immediate removal will occur.  If the adjudicator's approach is  correct,
   in virtually all cases the point could be raised.

10. Having said that, we recognise that we have also to have regard  to  s.6
   of the Human Rights Act 1998, since the  adjudicator  and  we  are  both
   public authorities within the meaning of that  Section:  see  s.6(3)(a).
   But our decision cannot itself be incompatible  with  a  person's  human
   rights.  S.6 involves a direct breach of a human right by  the  decision
   maker.  Merely to decide that an appeal  under  s.65  does  not  succeed
   because the Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain  and
   to direct removal cannot be incompatible with any  human  right  of  the
   appellant in question (once, of course, any breach  falling  within  the
   scope  of  s.65  is  negatived)  does  not  itself  breach  any  of  the
   appellant's human rights.

11. However, all this may be somewhat  academic  because,  even  if  we  are
   entitled to consider the matter in the way the  adjudicator  suggests  we
   should, there is no  basis  for  deciding  that  to  dismiss  the  appeal
   notwithstanding that removal will be deferred will result in a real  risk
   of treatment contrary to any Article of the European Convention on  Human
   Rights, let alone Article 3.  The adjudicator was persuaded to decide  as
   he did because dismissal of the appeal would mean that the respondent was
   no longer to be regarded as an 'asylum seeker' within the meaning of Part
   VI of the 1999 Act: see s.94(1) and (4).  The consequence of  that  would
   be that he was not entitled to support under that Part.

12. In Paragraph 29 the adjudicator paints a picture of what  would  in  his
   view happen to the respondent.  We should set it out  in  full  since  it
   explains why the adjudicator reached his conclusion.  He says:-

           "It appeared to me to be accepted that  the  [respondent]  would
           not be allowed to work while waiting to  be  removed.   At  best
           therefore he would be resigned to living in  bed  and  breakfast
           accommodation for an indefinite period with nothing  other  than
           his board being paid for.  Unless he were to beg he  would  have
           no money to do anything.  He would have no money to buy a change
           of clothing.  He could not stop for a  coffee  when  out  for  a
           walk.  He would have to travel everywhere on foot.  He would not
           even have the money for a book or a newspaper.  There  would  be
           total uncertainty as to how long this  state  of  affairs  would
           continue.  There seems to me to be a real danger that  he  would
           consider his dignity to be diminished.   In  my  judgment  these
           circumstances amount to treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the
           Human Rights Convention.  Matters would be  quite  different  if
           the appellant were to  be  allowed  to  look  for  work.   As  I
           understand it however that option would not be open to him".

13. In the previous paragraph, he  referred  to  the  so-called  'Hard  Case
   Criteria' issued by the appellant which recognise that those whose claims
   have been determined so that they are not covered by Part VI of the  1999
   Act may need to be provided with assistance because through no  fault  of
   their own they cannot for the time being be removed.  The existence of  a
   discretion led the adjudicator to  conclude  that  the  criteria  offered
   little comfort and did not exclude the reality of the risk.  But that was
   to look at the problem the wrong way round.  It is incorrect  to  suggest
   that any of the difficulties imagined by the adjudicator would arise from
   the appellant's failure to  remove  the  respondent.   Such  difficulties
   could only arise if the appellant, faced with the respondent's  continued
   presence in this country, decided to act  in  a  way  that  breached  the
   respondent's human rights.  Not  only  is  there  no  evidence  that  the
   appellant proposes to act in such a way  but  the  'Hard  Case  Criteria'
   suggest the contrary.

14. What the adjudicator appears  to  have  overlooked  is  that  the  Human
   Rights Act 1998 incorporates articles of the European Convention on Human
   Rights into the law of this country.  It would therefore be unlawful  for
   the appellant to act in such a way as  breached  the  respondent's  human
   rights or indeed those of anyone seeking to enter or  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom.  If he did act in such a way, a legal challenge could  be
   brought and the decision would be overturned.  The law would not tolerate
   anyone being left destitute, as a number of decisions  of  the  Court  of
   Appeal have made clear: see for example R v Secretary  of  State   ex  p.
   JCWI [1996]: 4 All ER 385. And it is pertinent to cite  the  observations
   of Lord Ellenborough CJ made as long  ago  as  1803  in  R  v  Eastbourne
   (Inhabitants)(1803) 4 East 103 at 107:-

           "As to there being no obligation for maintaining poor  fugitives
           before  the  statutes  ascertaining  the  different  methods  of
           acquiring settlements, the law of humanity, which is anterior to
           all positive laws, obliges us to afford them relief to save them
           from starving .."

  The law of human rights is no less powerful.

15. It follows in our judgment that there can be no  real  risk  that  there
   will be any breach of the respondent's human rights if he has  to  remain
   in this country following the  dismissal  of  his  appeal.   The  picture
   painted by the adjudicator owes more to fancy than to reality.

16. This appeal must accordingly be allowed.  We express the hope  that  the
   argument which appealed to this adjudicator will never again  be  raised.
   If it is, it should be rejected.






Sir Andrew Collins
President
