
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX10353-2002
On 4 November 2002
  HF (Persecution-Discrimination-Yibir-Occupation-Caste) Somalia  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 05520


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . 29 November 2002 .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe


                            HIDAYA ABDULLA FARAH
                              (and 1 Dependant)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Somalia, appeals, with leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C M Graham, dismissing her  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent to refuse  leave  to  enter  and
     refuse asylum

  2. Mr A Rhys-Davies, instructed by Messrs White  Ryland,  represented  the
     Appellant. Mr D Ekagha, a Home Office Presenting  Officer,  represented
     the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant's family comes from Hargeisa, the capital of  Somaliland,
     an area of Somalia. They are members of a  minority  clan,  the  Yibir,
     which is also one of the small group of clans known as the occupational
     castes.  These clans suffered during the civil war in Somalia, and  the
     Appellant's family suffered in particular  from  the  activities  of  a
     major clan in Somaliland, known as  the  Isaaq  clan.  The  Appellant's
     father was severely beaten and her mother  and  sister  were  raped  on
     another occasion. The Appellant was herself and beaten and burned.  The
     family was forced to flee from  Somalia  in  1988  when  they  went  to
     Ethiopia, remaining there until March 1991.  On their return to Somalia
     they were harassed until they left again  in  June  of  that  year  for
     Dubai.  They remained in Dubai until 1997 when they were deported  back
     to Somalia.  In 1999 members of the Isaaq clan killed  the  Appellant's
     mother during a robbery, and the family returned to Dubai,  where  they
     remained until May 2001. The  Adjudicator  accepted  this  evidence  as
     credible and held that this treatment  in  aggregate  constituted  past
     persecution. Mr Ekagha has not been challenged this.

  4. The Adjudicator did not  accept  however  the  Appellant's  account  of
     events in and from  May  2001,  when  the  family  was  in  Dubai.  The
     Appellant claims that on 12 May her father and brothers  were  arrested
     on their way to the mosque.  They were  in  Dubai  illegally  and  were
     detained pending deportation back to Somalia. The Appellant and her two
     sisters were not detained with the others.  Whilst  in  detention,  her
     father allegedly arranged through a friend to obtain from an  uncle  in
     the United States the money  needed  to  send  the  Appellant  and  her
     younger sister to the UK. Their older sister did not accompany them, as
     there was insufficient money to pay her passage. There is  no  evidence
     of what happened to her. The Appellant and her younger sister, who  was
     then only 17, arrived in the UK on 18 May and claimed asylum a few days
     later. The Adjudicator did not accept  the  Appellant's  father  could,
     whilst in detention and within five days of  being  so  detained,  have
     made contact with his friend in Dubai and the uncle in the US, obtained
     the passage money, and made the arrangements for the Appellant and  her
     younger sister to travel to the UK. Nor did she accept that  the  money
     from the uncle in the US would have been used to enable  two  daughters
     to escape to the UK, leaving the  third  on  her  own  unprotected  and
     without funds. Furthermore she did not  accept  the  Appellant's  claim
     that she does not now know the whereabouts of her father, brothers  and
     older sister and has  made  no  effort  to  locate  them.  Finally  she
     concluded that, in her home area in Hargeisa in Somaliland,  there  had
     been sufficient improvements that the Appellant and her sister would no
     longer have a well founded fear of persecution there if returned.

  5. Leave to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     little evident regard to the skeleton argument  before  her.  Mr  Rhys-
     Davies relied on his grounds of appeal and also the skeleton  argument,
     which he amplified  in  oral  evidence.   There  were  essentially  two
     distinct limbs to his submissions.

  6. The first is that the Adjudicator's adverse credibility finding was  in
     error because she did not follow the Surendran guidelines and,  in  the
     absence of any representative for the Respondent at the hearing, failed
     to put the issues relating to  credibility  to  the  Appellant  direct.
     However this is  a  misconception  of  what  the  Surendran  guidelines
     actually require.  They state that
           "Whilst a special Adjudicator is under no positive duty to point
           out to an  Appellant  inconsistencies  in  accounts  given,  the
           overriding duty in asylum cases is to ensure that  on  Appellant
           has  a  hearing  conducted   to   the   highest   standards   of
           fairness....... The concept of fairness is not  rigid  and  will
           vary according to the circumstances of a particular  case.......
           Where a party is legally represented by competent practitioners,
           consideration of the presentation  of  a  party's  case  is  not
           normally a matter in which a Tribunal should intervene

  7.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  Maheshwaran  C/2001/1631  considered  when
     credibility issues must be put to a party and held that
           "Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to litigation  a  point
           which is decided against him can be grossly unfair and  lead  to
           injustice.  He must have a proper opportunity to deal  with  the
           point. . . .  Where much depends on the credibility of  a  party
           and that party makes several inconsistent statements  which  are
           before the decision maker that party manifestly has  a  forensic
           problem.  Some would  choose  to  confront  the  inconsistencies
           straight on and make evidential or forensic submissions on them.
            Others will hope that "least said, soonest mended" and consider
           that forensic concentration on the point will only make  matters
           worse and  that  it  would  be  better  to  try  to  switch  the
           Tribunal's  attention  to  some  other  aspect  of   the   case.
           Undoubtedly it is open  to  the  Tribunal  expressly  to  put  a
           particular inconsistency to a witness because it considers  that
           the witness may not be alerted to the point or because it  fears
           it may have perceived something is inconsistent with an  earlier
           answer which in truth is not inconsistent.  Fairness may in some
           circumstances require this to be done but this will not  be  the
           usual case.  Usually the Tribunal, particularly if  the  parties
           represented, will remained silent and see how the case  unfolds.
           The requirements of fairness of very  much  conditioned  by  the
           facts of each case."

  8. In this appeal, as Mr Ekagha  pointed  out,  all  the  material  issues
     relating to credibility were raised by the Respondent  in  his  refusal
     letter.  If Mr Rhys-Davies had wanted the Appellant  to  give  evidence
     concerning these matters he was on notice to do  so.   The  Adjudicator
     could not engage in cross-examination and there was only one point that
     required clarification in  accordance  with  the  Surndran  guidelines,
     which in fact she did raise. Moreover as the Tribunal  observed  to  Mr
     Rhys-Davies but without effective response, there is  no  new  evidence
     before us to suggest what answers the Appellant might have been able to
     give at the hearing had she been asked, or could give now, which  might
     cast a different light on the matters which formed the substance of the
     adverse credibility finding.

  9. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Adjudicator acted  fairly  in
     the conduct of the hearing and  her  adverse  credibility  finding  was
     properly justified on the evidence. In particular, we  agree  that  the
     Adjudicator was justified in her belief that the Appellant's claim  not
     be  in  continuing  touch  with  her  family   in   Somaliland   lacked
     credibility. The Appellant is now only 24 and her sister is younger and
     will have a powerful and natural wish to be in touch with their family.
     The Appellant  could  have  discovered  further  information  from  her
     father's friend in Dubai, who arranged for her journey to the UK.   She
     could have contacted her uncle in the United States who  paid  for  her
     journey.  Both are obvious points of contact and  could  reasonably  be
     expected to have information about the family's current whereabouts. It
     is not credible that the Appellant would not have made  any  effort  to
     discover this information from either or both of them,  and  would  not
     even have made an approach for information through the Red Cross.  This
     was true in the period up to the hearing before  the  Adjudicator,  and
     the absence of any such enquiries after the Adjudicator's dismissal  of
     their appeal is even more incredible, given the  observations  made  in
     the determination. Mr Rhys-Davies could offer  us  no  explanation  for
     this  failure  to  make  enquiries.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the
     Appellant is in contact with her  family,  who  according  to  her  own
     evidence must be in Somaliland if they were to be deported from  Dubai,
     but she is seeking to conceal this information in order to enhance  her
     claim. In particular we conclude that were she and her  younger  sister
     to return to Somaliland, it would be to her own family  and  she  would
     not therefore be without the support of her  male  relatives.  We  also
     conclude that if there were any evidence from her family of  continuing
     difficulties experienced by them in Hargeisa, they would have  informed
     the Appellant and she would have  raised  this  in  evidence.  On  this
     basis, we have moved on to assessing the second limb of the appeal.


 10. The second limb of the appeal is whether the Appellant has now  a  well
     founded fear of persecution or a breach of  her  Article  3  rights  if
     returned to Somaliland in the light of the current evidence  concerning
     the situation there.

 11. Mr Rhys-Davies accepted that the Adjudicator applied  the  right  test,
     given her finding of past persecution, of assessing whether  there  had
     been significant change.  As the president of the Tribunal noted in the
     case of Sijakovic 01/TH/0632
           "The Appellate authority  in  question  must  look  at  all  the
           evidence and decide whether at the time of the hearing any  fear
           of persecution is well founded.   If  there  is  no  significant
           change in the situation and the Appellant was persecuted  for  a
           Convention reason before he left, it would be difficult  to  see
           how the decision could not be favourable to him."

 12. Mr Rhys-Davies criticised the Adjudicator for her heavy  reliance  upon
     the CIPU material, but as Mr Ekagha observed,  Mr  Rhys-Davies  himself
     relied upon the CIPU material quite extensively in his  submissions  to
     us. The reason of course is that the CIPU reports draw upon many  other
     sources, representing a variety of opinions and is properly sourced  so
     that the conclusions can be evaluated in the light of their provenance.
     That is why CIPU reports are so  useful  and  why  they  are  so  often
     quoted.

 13. The Adjudicator made an extensive assessment of the objective material.
     It is contained in paragraphs 22 to 27 of the determination. As we have
     indicated, her conclusion was that there would  no  longer  be  a  well
     founded fear on return.  However there was little specific reference to
     the items referred to in Mr  Rhys-Davies'  skeleton  argument  and  the
     Tribunal has accordingly made its own  analysis  to  see  whether  this
     conclusion is justified on the basis  of  the  current  evidence  as  a
     whole. In doing this we have had regard to all  the  relevant  material
     before us and are grateful both to Mr Rhys-Davies  and  Mr  Ekagha  for
     their valuable assistance in referring us to the relevant passages.

 14. Somalia has had a very troubled history.  It  has  a  small  population
     estimated variously to be somewhere between seven and nine million.  It
     has been without a central government since  its  last  president,  the
     dictator Mohammed Barre, fled the country in 1991. Subsequent  fighting
     among rival faction leaders resulted in the  killing  displacement  and
     starvation of thousands of persons. The  UN  intervened  militarily  in
     1992, and following this periodic attempts at  national  reconciliation
     were made but did not succeed.  In  March  2000  a  new  reconciliation
     effort began with small focus group meetings  of  various  elements  of
     Somali society in Djibouti. In  May  2000  delegates  representing  all
     clans  and  a  wide  spectrum  of  Somali  society  were  selected   to
     participate in a conference  for  national  peace  and  reconciliation.
     More than  900  delegates  attended  the  conference.   The  conference
     adopted a charter for a three-year transitional government and selected
     a 245 member transitional national assembly, which included 24  members
     of Somali  minority  groups.   In  August  2000  the  assembly  elected
     Abdiqassim Hassan as transitional  president.   A  Prime  Minister  was
     appointed in October 2000 and he appointed a 25 member cabinet. However
     the country remained  fragmented.  Administrations  in  Somaliland  and
     Puntland, important areas of the country, did not recognise the results
     of  the  Djibouti  conference.   Various  problems  arose  within   the
     transitional assembly.  A new Prime Minister was appointed in  November
     2000.  According to the US State Department report, serious  inter-clan
     fighting continued to occur in parts of the country in 2001  though  no
     indication was given  as  to  the  parts  of  the  country  where  this
     occurred, as the report  does  not  differentiate  between  Somaliland,
     Puntland and the rest of the country. No group  controls  more  than  a
     part of the country's overall territory.  There is no national judicial
     system.

 15. It is however in Hargeisa in Somaliland, where the Appellant lived, and
     to where she will be returned, and it is therefore on this area that we
     must focus. Lying in the north-west of the country,  the  "Republic  of
     Somaliland" has continued  to  proclaim  its  independence  within  the
     borders  of  the  former  British  Somaliland.  Somaliland  has  sought
     international recognition since  1991  without  success.   Somaliland's
     government includes a parliament, a functioning  civil  courts  system,
     executive departments organised as ministries, six regional  governors,
     and municipal authorities in major towns.  During 2001, 97%  of  voters
     in a referendum  voted  for  independence  for  Somaliland  and  for  a
     political party system.  Presidential and Parliamentary elections  were
     scheduled to be held in February 2002.  However the president requested
     and parliament granted a one-year  extension  to  the  next  elections.
     After the withdrawal of the last UN  peacekeepers  in  1995,  clan  and
     factional militias, in some cases supplemented by local  police  forces
     established with UN helping the early 1990s, continued to function with
     varying degrees of effectiveness.  In Somaliland more than 60%  of  the
     budget was  allocated  to  maintaining  a  militia  and  police  forces
     composed of former troops. Of particular significance  in  ascertaining
     what is happening on the ground is the fact  that  in  Hargeisa,  local
     NGOs continue to operate freely and without harassment.

 16. An independent expert, acting on behalf of the United Nations,  visited
     Hargeisa in Somaliland from 18 to  20  November  1999  and  prepared  a
     report. It was her fourth such visits since December 1996.  The  report
     observed inter alia that
           "Although the international community and United Nations,  which
           upholds  the  territorial  integrity  of   Somalia,   have   not
           recognised the separate status of Somaliland, the  international
           community has acknowledged with deep appreciation the good level
           of security and stability that Somaliland has achieved over  the
           years.  The continued increase in the  level  of  stability  and
           improvement  in  the  quality  of  life  of  the  residents   of
           Somaliland impressed the independent expert.
           However  it  was  also  observed  that  human  tights  defenders
           reported to the independent expert that there are many cases  of
           sexual abuse of  women  and  children,  particularly  among  the
           internally displaced population.

 17. Freedom House, an American human rights organisation, reported in  June
     2001 that the local administrations in  Somaliland  and  Puntland  have
     conducted some  form  of  elections  and  installed  apparently  stable
     governments with functioning legislative arms and  courts.   Somaliland
     is far more cohesive the rest of the country, although reports of  some
     human rights abuses persist. The CIPU report records that conditions in
     Somaliland are considered favourable for the return  and  reintegration
     of large numbers of displaced persons that originate from there.  UNHCR
     reached an agreement with the Somaliland authorities to provide for the
     return of 25,000 Somalis  during  1999.   48,100  Somalis  returned  to
     Somaliland from Ethiopia in 1998.

 18. All this presents a  positive  picture  of  the  current  situation  in
     Somaliland. The Appellant and her  family  are  however  of  the  Yibir
     minority  clan  and  their  position  requires  careful  and   specific
     attention. They are described in the CPU report on minority  groups  in
     the following terms.
           "In traditional Somali society a number of  occupational  castes
           live scattered in a client status among the  majority  of  noble
           Somali   clans.    The   northern   Somali   pastoral    society
           distinguishes three occupational casts, the  Midgan,  Tumal  and
           Yibir. They are collectively referred to as  Sab  [though  other
           names are used] .... The Sab have a  reputation  for  witchcraft
           and magic.  The Midgan's poisoned  hunting  arrows  are  feared.
           The Yibir are despised by all Somali's, who never speak to  them
           if they can avoid doing so, and are feared for their  skills  in
           witchcraft.  Whenever a son is born to a  noble  Somali  and  at
           marriages, a Yibir has the right to a  gift  in  return  for  an
           amulet and blessing....... In  Somaliland,  their  role  in  the
           conflicts between Barre  and  the  Isaaq-based  Somali  National
           Movement earned them the hostility of the SNM rebels and of  the
           Isaaq as a group.  Also, whereas  other  former  adversaries  in
           this area have been reconciled, the Midgan, Tumal and Yibir have
           not been party to any peace agreement.  They have found recovery
           after the war especially difficult and  consider  themselves  as
           being discriminated against, in  spite  of  the  one  seat  they
           obtained in Somaliland Parliament.

 19. The report goes on to observe that
           "During the civil war from 1991, the occupational castes were in
           general not specifically targeted, although  as  groups  without
           natural clan allies they were sometimes attacked with  impunity.
           Moreover particular individuals and  families  who  had  visibly
           supported  the  Barre  regime  were   vulnerable   to   targeted
           retaliation........   Many  fled  in  fear  of  retaliation   to
           Ethiopia and Puntland. In recent years they have started to come
           back and returnees have been able to reclaim some  of  the  land
           and property taken from them during the civil war.  In 1998  for
           example some 2000 returned to Somalia from Ethiopia  are  mostly
           to Hargeisa......  There are no indications that their  security
           is at risk from targeted actions by other  clans.  At  the  same
           time indications are that their  relationships  with  the  major
           Somali clans have not improved much from traditional  times  and
           that they are still discriminated  against  in  the  social  and
           economic spheres.

 20. From the information before us, it is apparent that  the  situation  in
     Somaliland is far more stable and secure than in most  other  parts  of
     Somalia, where there is still inter-clan violence. For this reason many
     of the passages in the objective material referring  to  Somalia  as  a
     whole are of little assistance in helping us in our specific assessment
     of  the  current  situation  in  Somaliland.  The   administration   in
     Somaliland operates the main functions of a  government  and  spends  a
     large proportion of its annual budget on security and  law  and  order.
     Whilst it is  not  recognised  as  an  independent  state  because  the
     international community still  recognises  the  integrity  of  Somalia,
     nevertheless there has been appreciation from the  United  Nations  for
     what they have achieved. UNHCR has entered  into  agreements  with  the
     administration to facilitate returns of refugees.  There  have  been  a
     substantial number of returns  to  the  country  of  refugees  who  had
     previously fled abroad to avoid  the  fighting.  Of  these,  some  2000
     returnees in 1999  came  from  the  three  occupational  castes,  which
     include the Yibir. This has  to  be  seen  in  perspective.  The  total
     population of Somalia is only between 7  and  9  million  people.   The
     occupational castes in all comprise less than 1%  of  that  population.
     This means that the three castes have between no more  than  70,000  to
     90,000 members. Some of them fled from Somalia to escape the civil  war
     and some remained. There is  no  information  about  the  size  of  the
     respective groups.  However by any reckoning 2000 returnees in one year
     to Hargeisa is a very substantial proportion of the overall  membership
     of  those  clans.  With  the  independent  and  fully  functional  NGOs
     operating in that area, one would expect reports from them if  material
     problems had emerged relating to the returnees or any particular  group
     of them. If there were such problems, one would  expect  evidence  from
     UNHCR advising against such returns. Instead there is agreement between
     UNHCR and the Somaliland  administration  to  actively  assist  returns
     there. The  UNHCR  report  from  its  visiting  expert  considered  the
     position of the occupational castes specifically  and  considered  that
     they  were  socially  discriminated  against  but  did  not  give   any
     indication of more serious problems affecting their security, save that
     some recent cases of inter-clan marriage had resulted in some  communal
     violence, but the police had intervened to resolve it.

 21. We appreciate that the Appellant's family did themselves return briefly
     in 1999 and then left again after the murder of the Appellant's  mother
     in a robbery. However  violent  robberies  and  murders  occur  in  all
     countries. We have to  assess  the  real  risk  on  return  of  conduct
     sufficiently severe to constitute persecution or a breach of Article  3
     rights. The objective material as a whole shows that the  situation  in
     Somaliland is now, and has been for several years, safe  for  returnees
     including returnees, including those from the occupational castes.  The
     Appellant and her younger sister will on return be reunited with  their
     family and will not be young single women  on  their  own.  As  we  had
     previously indicated, it is not credible that  the  Appellant  has  not
     been in touch with her family over the last 18 months since she came to
     the UK and they returned to Somaliland. If the family had faced further
     problems in Somaliland after their return, they would have informed the
     Appellant. We conclude that the Appellant and her younger  sister  will
     face traditional caste based social discrimination on their  return  to
     their home area of Hargeisa, but that discrimination falls far short of
     constituting persecution or a breach of Article 3.

 22. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
