
ar                                                            Appeal    No.
HX07455-02
                  MD (Medical Facilities) Sierra Leone CG [2002] UKIAT 07187


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 17 February 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                      12...03...2003........

                                   Before:

                      Professor D B Casson  (Chairman)
                                Mrs W Jordan


                      MARIE  WINIFRED GEORGANIA DECKER

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant    : In person
For the respondent : Mr L. Parker, Home Officer Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.  This  is  an  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Sierra  Leone  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs P.M.  Skitmore)  notified  on  11
      July 2002, dismissing her appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
      against the decision by the respondent  on  9  October  2001  to  give
      direction  for  removal  to  Sierra  Leone  as  an  illegal   entrant.



2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 May  2000.  She  had
      travelled by air from the Gambia (where she  had  spent  some  fifteen
      months). On arrival at Gatwick Airport she presented her valid  Sierra
      Leone passport, which contained a visitor's visa, and was given  leave
      to enter for six months. She claimed asylum on  7  August  2001,  some
      nine months after  the  expiry  of  her  leave  to  enter.  An  asylum
      interview was held on  21  September  2001  but  her  application  was
      refused for reasons given in  a  letter  dated  4  October  2001.  The
      appellant had been accompanied by her brother,  Arthur  Cecil  Obafemi
      Decker, whose date of birth was given as 31 December 1984, and who was
      treated as her dependant.

3.    The appellant gave evidence at the hearing of her  appeal  before  the
      Adjudicator on 20 June 2002. The Adjudicator also received  a  witness
      statement by her brother, who was treated as a minor.  The Adjudicator
      found the appellant not to be a credible witness  and  dismissed  both
      the asylum and  the  human  rights  appeals.  The  Adjudicator  noted,
      however, medical evidence relating to her  brother  (known  as  Cecil)
      and, at paragraph 32 of her determination, said:

             '32. I ask that the respondent satisfies  himself  that  Cecil
                 receives whatever treatment is necessary for  his  scarring
                 and any possible heart/blood pressure problems here  before
                 returning him to  Sierra  Leone  in  view  of  the  minimal
                 medical services there at the present time.'

4.    In granting leave to appeal to the Tribunal, the Vice President  said:



             'Ground 1 relating to the medical condition and  treatment  of
             the applicant's brother and failure to give  reasons  for  the
             rejection of an Article 3 ECHR  claim  in   his  regard,  does
             appear to have merit.  The remaining grounds do  not  indicate
             an arguable basis for an appeal. Leave is granted therefore in
             respect of grounds 1, 2 and 3 only.'

5.    The appellant appeared before us  without  representation.   She  said
      she could not afford to pay her solicitor's fees, but  a  letter  from
      her solicitors, Ratnam & Co. dated 14 February 2003, states that their
      letters to the appellant asking her to  attend  for  appointment  have
      been ignored and that she cancelled an appointment the previous  week,
      saying that she was  going  to  see  her  counsellor.   We  asked  the
      appellant about that, and she agreed that she had indeed cancelled  an
      appointment  with  her  solicitor  and  that,  as  disclosed  by   the
      documentary evidence, she had cancelled  or  failed  to  keep  several
      appointments  with   the   counsellor.    We   determined   in   these
      circumstances that it was appropriate for us to  hear  the  appeal  as
      listed, but we did not call upon Mr Parker to make any submissions.

6.     The  medical  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  relating   to   the
      appellant's brother, Cecil (who is now an adult) concerned 'large  and
      very ugly keloid scars on his chest and arm' which were being treated.
      The Adjudicator noted: 'While there is nothing in the medical evidence
      to suggest that these scars are life threatening, the effect  of  them
      on such a young man is possibly damaging from the point of view of his
      self-confidence and self-esteem.  I am  aware  from  the  respondent's
      CIPU Report that there are minimal medical facilities in Sierra  Leone
      at the moment.'  The  Adjudicator  also  referred  to  a  letter  from
      Professor Wilkins at the Hammersmith Hospital in relation  to  Cecil's
      cardiac condition, stating: 'It is likely that he is normotensive' and
      his cardiomegaly is a feature of his ethnic group.'

7.    Ratnam & Co. put before us a letter dated 10 February 2003 from Mr  M.
      Philips, a  consultant  surgeon  at  Charing  Cross  Hospital,  giving
      further information as to Cecil's health condition. The report  states
      that he has a 'slight abnormality on the renal  artery  of  his  right
      kidney, which may be the cause of his  high blood pressure, and  which
      is  being  investigated'.   The  reports  states  that  this  kind  of
      abnormality is very rare on people  of  his  age  and  could  lead  to
      serious health (cardiovascular) disorder if not treated appropriately.
       He has been put on a three weeks course of beta  blockers,  has  been
      advised to keep away from stressful activity and to take regular  rest
      and to make some dietary changes.

8.     No  up-to-date  background  evidence  has  been  put  before  us.  We
      therefore accept the position as described  by  the  Adjudicator  that
      'there are minimal medical facilities in Sierra Leone at the  moment.'
      We consider the position in the light of the decision of the  European
      Court of Human Rights in Bensaid [2001] INLR325, where  the  appellant
      was suffering from a long  term  mental  illness,  schizophrenia,  for
      which he was currently receiving medication  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      The evidence was that if he returned to his own country, Algeria, that
      drug would no longer be available to him free as  an  outpatient.   At
      paragraph 40 of its judgement, the Court said:

             'The Court accepts the seriousness of the applicant's  medical
             condition. Having regard, however, to the high  threshold  set
             by Article 3, particularly where the case  does  not   concern
             the direct responsibility of the  contracting  state  for  the
             infliction of harm, the Court does not find that  there  is  a
             sufficiently real risk that the applicant's removal  in  these
             circumstances would be contrary to the standards of Article 3.
             It does not disclose the exceptional circumstances  of  the  D
             case, where the  applicant  was  in  the  final  stages  of  a
             terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical care or
             family support on expulsion to St Kitts.'

9.    Although Cecil is currently being treated  without  charge  under  the
      National Health Service and would  not  be  likely  to  enjoy  similar
      facilities in Sierra Leone, we do not regard the evidence  as  to  his
      medical condition and treatment as  falling  within  the  'exceptional
      circumstances' of the appellant in D v United Kingdom.  Cecil would be
      returned to Sierra Leone accompanied by a  sister,  the  appellant  in
      this appeal, and we take note of the  fact  that  removals  to  Sierra
      Leone are to Freetown. Medical facilities there may not be  the  equal
      of those in London, but we are not persuaded that his removal would be
      contrary to the standards of Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights.

10.   We add that leave to appeal appears  to  have  been  granted  also  in
      respect of the Adjudicator's lack of clarity at paragraph  32  of  her
      determination as to whether she was in fact making a recommendation to
      the respondent. A decision to make or not  to  make  a  recommendation
      when dismissing an appeal is not itself appealable to the Tribunal. It
      has been made clear in  numerous  cases  that  Adjudicators  who  make
      informal recommendations  to  the  Secretary  of  State  are  stepping
      outside their statutory functions and should consider  making  such  a
      recommendation only in the most exceptional  circumstances.   This  is
      not such a case. We have ourselves considered the position but  we  do
      not wish to make any recommendation to the respondent.

11.   The appeal is dismissed.




                                 D.B. CASSON
                            ACTING VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


