
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
TH06649-2002
On  5  November  2002    KO  (Article  8-Deportation-Kehinde)   Nigeria   CG
[2002]UKIAT 06038


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . . . .14 January
2003 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                   Before

                            Miss K Eshun (Chair)
                               Mr S L Batiste
                                Mrs J Harris


                              KESTER OVIASOGIE

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appeals, with leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J H H Cooper, dismissing his appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 27 December 2001  to  make  a
     deportation order and issue removal directions to  Nigeria.  In  making
     his decision, the Adjudicator considered separately the position  under
     the Immigration Rules, and in particular paragraph 364 of HC  395,  and
     also in respect of the rights  comprised  in  Article  8  of  the  1950
     Convention This appeal is made under section 63(1) of  the  Immigration
     and Asylum Act 1999 against the deportation decision under  the  Rules,
     and under section 65(1) on the basis that the decision is  contrary  to
     the Appellant's human rights under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

  2. Ms F Webber, instructed by Birnberg Pierce & Partners, represented  the
     Appellant. Mr S Walker, a Home Office Presenting  Officer,  represented
     the Respondent. We are grateful to them both for their assistance.

  3. Ms Webber indicated that the Appellant still maintained that he  had  a
     well founded fear of persecution in Nigeria but she accepted that  this
     appeal had long since been dismissed and she could not  rely  on  these
     matters now. The relevant facts relating to the deportation and Article
     8 issue, which are before us, are not in dispute and may be  summarised
     as follows.

  4. The Appellant entered the UK in 1990 on a passport to which he was  not
     entitled. In 1993 he met Dawn Corrick (now Niazi) in Bristol and  began
     a relationship with her. She then had three children and was  a  single
     mother. When she discovered she was  pregnant  by  the  Appellant,  she
     wanted to marry him but the relationship broke down. The Appellant left
     her and she lost touch with him. Ms Niazi decided not to terminate  the
     pregnancy and gave birth to twins on 9 April 1994. She  gave  them  the
     Appellant's surname. She heard nothing from  the  Appellant  until  the
     twins were seven months old, when he spent a few hours  with  them  and
     brought gifts. In the years that followed, he saw them only twice more,
     on brief visits, when he came to Bristol from London for  their  second
     and third birthdays.

  5. It was not until 1996 that he  made  a  claim  for  asylum,  which  was
     refused, and his appeals were dismissed. On  1  December  1997  he  was
     arrested, held on remand in custody, and on 24 July 1998  convicted  of
     an aggravated burglary. He was sentenced to six years in prison, having
     been given credit for a guilty plea. There was no  recommendation  from
     the judge concerning deportation. It was the Appellant's first and only
     offence but it was of a very serious nature and attracted a substantial
     custodial sentence. He assaulted a 70 year old  woman  in  an  abortive
     robbery on business premises. He squeezed her around the neck,  causing
     her nose to bleed, and then shut her in a freezing unit. As recorded in
     the sentence, this had a devastating effect on her  life  and  she  has
     rarely since ventured out of her home.  The Appellant was  released  in
     July 2002, having served some four years plus the period on remand.

  6. Whilst the Appellant was held on remand, Ms Niazi and the twins visited
     him. He expressed a wish to see them more often, but she was unable  to
     make the journey from Bristol to London having regard to  the  need  to
     obtain a childminder for her other children.  In  fact  throughout  the
     period of his detention, there were only a couple of other  visits.  Ms
     Niazi said that she tried to make up for lack of visiting,  by  writing
     detailed letters to him about the  children  and  sending  photographs.
     The Appellant wrote back and phoned frequently.

  7. The Respondent wrote to the Governor of  the  prison  on  22  May  2001
     inviting the Appellant to make submissions as to why in  the  light  of
     his conviction and his immigration status he should  not  be  deported.
     Submissions in writing were made by his solicitor on 25 July 2001.  The
     basis of the  Appellant's  representations  to  the  Respondent,  since
     developed  before  the  Adjudicator,  and   again   subsequently   with
     additional evidence before the Tribunal, is that he became  a  reformed
     character in prison.  He has shown remorse for his  crime.   He  became
     religious. He became aware of his responsibilities to his children,  to
     whom he became  increasingly  attached.  He  had  a  low  risk  of  re-
     offending. Nevertheless the Respondent decided  on  27  December  2001,
     whilst the Appellant was still  in  prison,  to  make  the  deportation
     order. The Adjudicator heard the appeal  on  8th  March  2002  and  the
     determination was  promulgated  on  10  April  2002,  also  whilst  the
     Appellant was in prison.

  8. On leaving prison, the Appellant was  detained  by  the  Respondent  in
     anticipation of deportation. However he  successfully  applied  to  the
     Tribunal for  bail  on  5  July  2002  and  on  release  went  to  live
     temporarily at Ms Niazi's home in Bristol. He was living there  at  the
     time of the hearing before the Tribunal on 5 November 2002, but we were
     told that on 11 November 2002, a few days after the hearing,  he  would
     be leaving as he had found a job as a sous  chef  in  a  restaurant  in
     Bristol and would be living in accommodation above it.

  9.  Those  essentially  are  the  facts.  For  the  sake  of  a   complete
     understanding of these facts in context, it should be added that  since
     the breakdown of her relationship with  the  Appellant,  Ms  Niazi  has
     married a Pakistani, who has himself been  deported  to  Pakistan.  She
     travelled to visit him there and indeed was there at the  time  of  the
     hearing before the Adjudicator.  The fact that the Appellant  has  been
     living in Ms Niazi's home since his release on bail does not mean  that
     any personal relationship between them  has  been  resumed.  Ms  Webber
     indicated  to  us  that  there  were  still  unresolved  tensions   and
     resentments between the Appellant and Ms Niazi and that she  might  not
     be willing to give oral evidence on his behalf, though it has not  been
     put to her that such oral evidence might be of considerable  importance
     to him.

 10. Apart from the written statements by the Appellant and Ms Niazi,  there
     is other corroborative evidence of the claim  that  the  Appellant  has
     significantly  changed  and  reformed  in  prison.   There   are   some
     photographs, letters, drawings and cards, illustrative of  what  passed
     between the Appellant and his children whilst he  was  in  prison.  His
     Probation Officer wrote a report on 28 June 2001 to the effect that  he
     considered the Appellant's risk of re-offending to  be  low.  There  is
     also a reasonably positive report  from  the  tutor  of  his  offending
     behaviour course in prison, which includes the observation  "it  became
     obvious that he was aware of  the  effects  of  his  offending  on  his
     family." There are various certificates relating to a number of courses
     taken by the Appellant in prison. The  prison  chaplain  wrote  on  his
     behalf on 23 July 2001 to confirm that he  was  a  key  member  of  the
     chaplaincy band and is a talented singer, guitarist and  drummer.   She
     believes  that  he  has  an  innate  faith  and  does  not  doubt   the
     authenticity of his commitment to his children.  She states "they  give
     meaning to his existence and are his investment in the future in a very
     real way.  He deeply wants a central place in his sons' development and
     this is a strong motivation for him."  After his release  from  prison,
     but in the context of his continued detention by the Respondent pending
     deportation, the chaplain wrote again on 28 January 2002 in support  of
     a bail application and stated "he frequently spoke about his own  sons,
     and I am convinced that he was speaking the truth when he told me  that
     they are his fundamental motivation in life.  I do not believe he would
     abscond if given the opportunity to be near his  sons.   What  he  most
     wants is the authorisation to give them the input they need from  their
     father." There are some medical reports, but these  are  predicated  on
     the events in Nigeria, which the Appellant claimed  gave  rise  to  his
     asylum claim. Nevertheless, Dr Rowton-Lee in a report of 17 July  2001,
     gave an impressive endorsement of Appellant's conduct and deportment in
     prison.   Finally Mr Ray Sefia, the ex-Managing Director of the  Centre
     for Employment and Enterprise Development  in  Bristol,  and  a  former
     Bristol City Councillor, wrote on 29 October 2002 to the effect that he
     is opening a West African restaurant in Bristol  and  will  employ  the
     Appellant as a sous chef and provide  him  with  accommodation  on  the
     premises. He is aware of the Appellant's background but wishes to  give
     him a chance, and hopefully mentoring and direction.

 11. Some of this material  postdates  the  decision.  However  it  was  all
     reasonably foreseeable at the time of the decision. Also in  accordance
     with section 77 (4) (b) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, it  all
     relates back to the submissions made to the  Respondent  prior  to  the
     decision, as it  purports  to  demonstrate  the  genuineness  of  those
     submissions in the context of his subsequent actions. All the  material
     can therefore properly be taken into account  and  Mr  Walker  has  not
     sought to challenge this.

 12. Finally there is an expert report from a Dr B A Oyatede, a lecturer  in
     Yoruba Language and Culture at  the  School  of  Oriental  and  African
     Studies, dated 13 July 2001. He also accepts the factual basis  of  the
     Appellant's asylum claim. However, he goes on to state  to  state  that
     the Nigerian Government takes a poor view  of  its  citizens  who  have
     committed serious crimes abroad. If he returns  without  proper  travel
     documents or if they know he has been in prison, there is a possibility
     he could be arrested at the airport. He could be questioned  about  his
     offence here, and detained in poor prison conditions, in which case  he
     would need a lawyer, which he may not be able to afford.  However  this
     aspect of the opinion is rather general in nature and contains no  real
     assessment of the prospects of this Appellant being  so  questioned  or
     detained were he to be returned on emergency travel documents and if he
     did not volunteer information about his  crime.  Democratic  government
     has been established in Nigeria  and  the  Appellant  left  during  the
     period of military dictatorship as did  many  other  Nigerians  at  the
     time. His crime in the UK does not suggest  that  he  is  part  of  any
     international crime network, such as the drugs traffickers mentioned by
     Dr Oyatede. Ms Webber rightly did not place any emphasis on this  point
     in her submissions and nor do we.

 13. As we have indicated, the Respondent did not accept that any  of  these
     matters  were  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  serious  nature  of   the
     Appellant's offence and his poor immigration history.  The  Adjudicator
     essentially reached the same conclusion.

 14. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal argued that the Adjudicator erred
     when considering the deportation on  its  merits  by  failing  to  have
     regard to the impact of the Appellant's deportation on his children. He
     further failed, in the context of Article 8,  to  have  regard  to  the
     Appellant's children's rights to have family life with their father and
     the effect on  them  throughout  their  childhood  on  the  Appellant's
     deportation. Finally it was argued that the Adjudicator had misdirected
     himself  in  confining  his  assessment  to  the  family  life  already
     established without considering the potential relationship which  might
     developed between the natural father and a child born out  of  wedlock.
     Ms Webber very helpfully provided us with a detailed skeleton argument,
     which she supplemented with oral submissions.

 15. Ms Webber argued first that as this was a  deportation  appeal  a  much
     wider analysis was permitted than under Article 8 alone. In particular,
     there was a material difference as to whether third party rights can be
     taken into account, as between a review of the merits of a  deportation
     decision and the assessment of proportionality in an Article  8  claim.
     She argued that in assessing the merits of a decision  to  deport,  the
     effect of  the  deportation  on  third  parties  and  their  rights  is
     relevant. She relied upon the  judgement  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
     Bakhtaur Singh [1986] Imm AR 352 at 358, the starred  decision  of  the
     Tribunal in Kehinde (01/TH/02668)*, and the Tribunal  decision  in  Met
     Sula [2002] UKIAT 00295.

 16. In assessing this observation we had regard to the very practical point
     raised by the Tribunal in Kacaj [2002] Imm AR 213* at 223. The Tribunal
     was considering whether there was a difference between the standard  of
     proof applicable in Asylum and Article 3 appeals. It concluded
           "There is nothing in the jurisprudence of the Human Rights Court
           or Commission which requires us to adopt a different approach to
           the standard applicable to the Refugee Convention; indeed in our
           view, there is every reason why  the  same  approach  should  be
           applied. Different standards  would  produce  confusion  and  be
           likely to resulting inconsistent decisions:"

 17. Of course we are not  now  considering  potential  differences  in  the
     standard of proof, which has been settled in  the  terms  described  in
     Kacaj, but rather the relevant range and focus of the matters that  can
     be considered. A more appropriate parallel is between  the  substantive
     assessment of persecution under the 1951 Convention  and  the  separate
     assessment under Article 3 of the 1950 Convention, which  is  expressed
     in different and broader terms.

 18.  The  relevant  matters  to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  a
     deportation decision are set out in paragraph 364 of HC 395.
           "Before a decision to deport is reached the Secretary  of  State
           will take  into  account  all  relevant  factors  known  to  him
           including age;  length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom;
           strength  of  connections  with  the  United  Kingdom;  personal
           history, including  character  conduct  and  employment  record;
           domestic circumstances; previous criminal record and the  nature
           of  any  offence  which   the   person   has   been   convicted;
           compassionate circumstances; any representations received on the
           person's behalf.

 19. The passage relied on by Ms Webber in Bakhtaur Singh at  358,  is  Lord
     Bridge's observation that
           "In the argument before your Lordships, it was not disputed that
           the effect of deporting a particular individual on third parties
           other than his family and persons intimately connected with him,
           may well be a factor which  is  relevant  to  the  discretionary
           decision whether he should be  deported  or  not.  A  number  of
           examples will make this clear. 1. A person liable to deportation
           has been carrying on business in partnership.   His  deportation
           will ruin the  partnership  business.  2.  A  person  liable  to
           deportation is an  essential  and  irreplaceable  worker  for  a
           company  engaged  in  a   successful   export   business.    His
           deportation will seriously impair  the  business.  3.  A  person
           liable to deportation is a social worker upon whom a  particular
           local community  has  come  to  depend.   His  deportation  will
           deprive the local  community  of  his  services  which  will  be
           difficult to replace. 4. A person liable to  deportation  is  an
           indispensable member of the team engaged in scientific  research
           of public importance.  His deportation  will  put  at  risk  the
           benefit, which the  public  would  enjoy  if  the  research  was
           successful. I have  tried  to  choose  the  examples  so  as  to
           illustrate the  possibility  of  the  third  party  interest  in
           avoiding  deportation  extending  to  a  progressively  widening
           circle and ultimately to the public as  a  whole.   Third  party
           interests are of course much more likely to arise in relation to
           the deportation of convicted offenders than of overstayers.  But
           the ambit of what is relevant must be the same in paragraphs 156
           and 158 [of the Immigration Rules].

 20. Before turning to Kehinde, we would observe at this point that there is
     a considerable difference in degree between Lord  Bridge's  observation
     that the effect of deporting an individual on third parties  may  be  a
     relevant factor in making the discretionary decision to deport, and the
     proposition urged on us by Ms Webber's that third party rights have  to
     be taken into account in the decision making process.

 21. This distinction was considered by the Tribunal in Kehinde in  relation
     to Article 8 and the assessment of proportionality and it  was  decided
     in the following terms
           "The second question  relates  to  the  power  or  duty  of  the
           appellate authority to take into account human rights claimed or
           alleged to be possessed by individuals who  are  not  Appellants
           before the authorities.  Section 6 of  the  1998  Act  makes  it
           unlawful for any public authority (including of course the Court
           or the Tribunal or Adjudicator) to act  in  any  way,  which  is
           incompatible with a Convention Right.  That prohibition is quite
           general.  It appears to indicate that in making any judgment,  a
           Court or the Tribunal or the Adjudicator must have in  mind  not
           only those who are parties and whose cases have been argued, but
           also those who are not parties, and those whose cases  have  not
           been argued.  In  a  case  such  as  the  present  it  might  be
           suggested that in order to make a judgement  which  was  lawful,
           the Adjudicator  would  need  to  ensure  not  merely  that  the
           Appellant's human rights were not being infringed, but also that
           the human rights of members of his family (who are  not  parties
           to his appeal) were not infringed.  If  the  authority  did  not
           conduct a full inquiry into the human rights  of  everybody  who
           might conceivably be involved it could be argued that there  was
           a risk that the determination  itself  was  unlawful.   On  this
           point we had been persuaded by the submissions  of  Mr  Buckley.
           He points out that the appeal under section 65 is limited in its
           scope.  The right of appeal is given to  a  person  who  alleges
           that in a decision relating  to  that  person's  entitlement  to
           enter or  remain  was  in  breach  of  his  human  rights.   The
           Appellant under section 65 must be the subject of the  decision;
           and it is only his own human rights  that  he  may  plead  under
           section 65 against the decision in question.  In an appeal under
           section 65 therefore there is no obligation to take into account
           claims made about the human rights of individuals other than the
           Appellant, or individuals  who  have  not  themselves  been  the
           subject of a decision which is under appeal.  Such matters (save
           in so far as they relate to the human rights  of  the  Appellant
           himself) are irrelevant to the matter under consideration."

 22. These two decisions in Bakhtaur Singh and Kehinde are binding on us. In
     Met Sula, which is not binding on us, the  Tribunal  explored,  on  the
     facts before it, the scope offered by the observation in Kehinde,  that
     third party interests could be raised in so far as they relate  to  the
     human rights of a party to the proceedings i.e. the Appellant  himself.
     It did not attempt, as is sometimes suggested, to contradict or  extend
     the basic principle enunciated in Kehinde.

 23. Article 8 is wide-ranging. It offers a broad right to respect  for  the
     private and family life of the individual concerned.  Family  life  has
     not been expressed in restrictive or limited  terms.  Private  life  is
     also wide-ranging and has been linked in  European  jurisprudence  with
     personal  autonomy,  physical  and  psychological  integrity,  and  the
     development, without outside interference, of the personality  of  each
     individual in his or her relations with other human beings.

 24. Ms Webber has argued that the scope of Article  8  can  extend  to  the
     relationship between a natural father and his children and embraces not
     only their past relationship but also potential  developments  in  that
     relationship. We can see no reason to dispute this  submission  and  Mr
     Walker has not sought to do so. Indeed  the  European  Court  of  Human
     Rights in Keegan v Ireland expressly had regard to the need  to  enable
     family ties to be developed and this was quoted with approval in  Ciliz
     v The Netherlands. Clearly the effect of a natural father's deportation
     on his children can, if the facts so permit, relate to  their  father's
     Article 8 rights and can properly be taken into account in an Article 8
     assessment of his rights. However, there are  two  qualifications.  The
     first is that the focus of enquiry is on the rights of the  person  who
     is the party to the proceedings, ie the proposed  deportee,  and  other
     matters are relevant if they relate to his rights. Article 8  does  not
     offer an enquiry into the rights of those who are not  parties  to  the
     proceedings themselves. In this sense  a  deportation  case  is  rather
     different to a dispute over access to children as in  Sahin  v  Germany
     [2002] EHRLR 33 or over adoption as in Soderback  v  Sweden  (1998)  29
     EHRR 95 to which  Ms  Webber  has  referred  us.  In  those  cases  the
     children's interests and rights are directly involved, as they are  the
     focus of the proceedings. The second qualification is that rights under
     Article 8 are not absolute. They may legitimately be breached, provided
     that the breach accords with the conditions set out in Article 8(2) and
     such breach is subject ultimately to the test of proportionality.

 25. There is no reason why, in our overall assessment, the  effect  of  the
     Appellant's deportation on his children cannot be taken into account as
     it relates to the human rights of the Appellant himself. This  includes
     the potential impact of his deportation  on  the  way  in  which  their
     family life might develop. Insofar as there may be any  distinction  as
     to the relevant matters that can be taken into account between  Article
     8 and the decision to deport, it is, on the  facts  before  us  and  we
     suspect will be  in  most  other  similar  cases,  of  little  material
     significance.

 26. Ms Webber's  however  went  further  and  argued  before  us  that  the
     interests of the children are not just relevant, but that their  rights
     are paramount when considering the  question  of  proportionality.  She
     cited before us a variety of decisions of the European Court  of  Human
     Rights and others, all of which are listed and fully  set  out  in  her
     skeleton argument and which we have duly considered.

 27. However, she acknowledged fairly that none of these cases  had  similar
     facts to those we face in the appeal before us. We agree. Boughanemi  v
     France (1996) 22 EHRR 228, Bouchelkia v France (1997) 25 EHRR 686, C  v
     Belgium Appn 21794/93, and Boultif v Switzerland  (Appn  54273/00)  all
     relate to convicted criminals being  deported/  removed.  But  in  each
     case, the claimant had been legally resident  for  many  years  in  the
     country proposing to deport him. They all had established strong family
     and personal links in their host countries. None of them used deception
     to enter as did the Appellant in this appeal. There was  no  breach  of
     immigration law involved in these cases or in Ciliz v  The  Netherlands
     and Beharrab v The  Netherlands,  upon  which  Ms  Webber  placed  much
     reliance. Indeed, additionally in these  latter  two  cases,  the  past
     relationship between father and child was materially  more  substantial
     than that of our Appellant and his children.  She  argued  nevertheless
     that we could deduce from all these  cases  the  degree  of  importance
     given in European jurisprudence to the rights  of  children.  We  agree
     that the impact of the children is of  importance  when  considering  a
     deportation/removal appeal by their father. This is a matter  that  for
     most fathers will be of concern to them. But we cannot find anything in
     any of the European or other cases produced to us to indicate  that  in
     deportation/removal cases the children's interests are paramount, as Ms
     Webber asserts. This is principle  is  particularly  relevant  in  non-
     custodial cases where the father has never in the past lived  with  the
     children as part of a family on any long term basis. The situation  may
     well be different  in  adoption,  custody  and  access  cases  such  as
     Soderback and Sahin, referred to  above,  because  the  nature  of  the
     issues under consideration is different.

 28. Indeed Ms Webber herself in her skeleton argument rather undermined the
     absoluteness of this "paramountcy" proposition.  In  paragraph  8,  she
     acknowledged that even the total deprivation of a parent of family life
     with a child could be justified by exceptional circumstances.  Also  in
     paragraph  9  she  quoted  Majji  01/TH/1352,  as  authority  for   the
     proposition   that   the   extent   of   the   non-custodial   parent's
     responsibility for his or her failure to have contact with the children
     was a relevant factor in assessing the proportionality of  removal.  In
     paragraph 7 she quoted the  current  guidelines  of  the  Children  and
     Family Courts Advisory and Support Service which itself confirmed  that
     even established  loving  bonds  with  a  parent  or  carer  should  be
     protected "unless there are compelling grounds for doing otherwise."

 29. The Court of Appeal considered squarely the issue of the paramountcy of
     the interests of the child in 1997 in the well-known  leading  case  of
     Gangadeen [1998] Imm AR 106, which also involved deportation. This case
     was not cited specifically before us, no doubt inter  alia  because  it
     was decided before the Human Rights Act 1998 came into  force.  However
     the Court of Appeal did then consider the human rights implications  of
     the decision to deport, because the UK was  a  signatory  to  the  1950
     Convention and was bound  by  its  terms  even  if  the  terms  of  the
     Convention  had  not  then  been   incorporated   into   our   domestic
     legislation. The Court of Appeal addressed  inter  alia,  some  of  the
     European cases cited by Ms Webber before  us,  namely  Beharreb  v  The
     Netherlands and Keegan v Ireland, as well as  others,  which  have  not
     been so cited such as Poku v  The  UK.  It  held  in  relation  to  the
     European jurisprudence examined by it that
           "In their interpretation of Article 8 in  the  present  context,
           the Court of  Human  Rights  and  the  Commission  approach  the
           problem as a straightforward balancing  exercise  in  which  the
           scales start even and where  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
           considerations on each side of the balance  is  to  be  assessed
           according to the individual circumstances of the case; thus they
           do not support the notion that paramountcy is to be given to the
           interests of the child."

 30. Ms Webber did refer us to  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgement  in  Amjad
     Mahmood [2001] Imm AR 229. Most  of  the  cases  mentioned  above  were
     considered  when  Laws  LJ  assessed  the  approach  of  the   European
     jurisprudence to the potential conflict between the respect for  family
     life  and  the  enforcement  of  immigration  controls.   However   the
     conclusions drawn by him  related  expressly  to  the  situation  of  a
     married couple and their family. He was not concerned with the position
     of a natural father of illegitimate children, nor did he  consider  the
     implications of a "conducive" deportation after a  serious  crime.  The
     conclusions he drew in paragraph 55 of the  judgement  are  not  really
     therefore directly relevant to the  facts  of  this  appeal,  with  one
     exception. If the interests of the  children  of  a  family  should  be
     regarded as paramount, we would have expected to see some mention of it
     by him when assessing the position of a full "nuclear" family. There is
     none. Instead, Laws LJ stated in paragraph 55(6)(i) that regard  should
     be had "to the facts of the particular case."

 31. We have considered all the cases cited  by  Miss  Webber  but  can  see
     nothing, which could lead us to take a different view of  the  European
     jurisprudence or the position under UK law from that taken by the Court
     of Appeal in Gangadeen. The concept of the paramountcy of any  specific
     interest does not arise in any  of  the  deportation/removal  cases  to
     which we have been referred. The effects of deportation  on  the  child
     are  relevant  and  important,  but  so  are  other  factors  and   the
     appropriate weight to be given to them has to be balanced on the  basis
     of the relevant specific facts of each case.

 32. Having reached these general conclusions, we turn to our assessment  of
     this appeal, which has to  be  undertaken  on  the  basis  of  its  own
     particular facts.

 33. Some matters are undisputed. Mr Walker accepted that the Appellant  has
     established family life in the  UK  with  his  children  and  that  his
     removal from the UK would be an interference with that  right.  He  did
     not dispute that the potential development of that family  life  was  a
     relevant  consideration.  Ms  Webber  for  her   part   accepted   that
     deportation would be in accordance with the law having legitimate aims.
     The issues therefore  are  whether  the  discretion  exercised  by  the
     Secretary of State under the Immigration Rules under paragraph  364  of
     HC 395 (as set  out  above)  was  properly  exercised,  and  separately
     whether his decision was proportionate for the purposes of Article 8.

 34. The following  analysis  of  the  facts  provides  a  common  basis  of
     assessment of both issues.

 35. The Appellant is a single man and is aged 32. He came from Nigeria  and
     has Nigerian nationality. His education was  in  Nigeria.  His  family,
     such as it is, is there. He was an adult when he arrived in the UK. For
     the reasons already indicated  we  do  not  place  much  weight  on  Dr
     Oyatede's opinion that the Appellant would face  material  problems  on
     return to the airport in Nigeria on emergency  travel  documents.  Once
     having returned to Nigeria, there is no good reason why  he  could  not
     now re-settle and make his life there.

 36. He entered the UK in 1990 with a passport to which he was not  entitled
     and did not seek to regularise the basis of his  stay  here  until  six
     years later when he applied for asylum.  That  asylum  claim  has  been
     rejected and there is no subsisting appeal relating to  it.  Ms  Webber
     has not sought to rely on the claims advanced by the Appellant in  that
     claim. The Appellant has a  poor  immigration  history,  which  reveals
     scant regard for our  national  need  to  maintain  proper  immigration
     controls. The Respondent has never accepted that the Appellant had  any
     legal basis for coming here, and, with the rejection of his late asylum
     claim, any legal basis for staying here. This is in its  own  right  an
     important issue of principle  when  seeking  to  maintain  a  fair  and
     effective immigration policy.

 37. Apart from his illegitimate children, there is little else before us of
     material substance to the Appellant's private and family  life  in  the
     UK, even though he has been here for twelve years. There is no evidence
     of any attachment to any other woman. His job as a sous  chef  and  the
     accommodation that goes with  it  has  been  offered  as  part  of  his
     rehabilitation. He owns no property here. There is no evidence  of  any
     notable contribution to the community. He  has  undertaken  studies  in
     prison and plays  music.  This  may  offer  him  a  broader  scope  for
     employment in the future but still at a pretty basic  level.  There  is
     nothing remotely in his situation commensurate with the long  and  deep
     attachments formed with their host countries by  the  claimants  in  C,
     Boughanemi, Boultif and Bouchelkia.

 38. He has committed a very serious crime in the UK, which resulted in  the
     continuing  traumatisation  of  an  elderly  woman.   He   received   a
     substantial  prison  sentence  of  6  years,   which   underlines   the
     seriousness of the crime, as it was  a  first  offence  and  took  into
     account his guilty plea. His parole officer now considers that he is at
     low risk of re-offending and others concerned with  his  rehabilitation
     in prison consider that he is a reformed character.  That may  be  true
     abut but these are however only opinions, based  upon  his  conduct  in
     prison when he had the obvious  motives  first  of  wanting  to  obtain
     remission and later to avoid deportation. How he  will  behave  in  the
     future,  if  he  has  renewed  employment  problems,  is  a  matter  of
     speculation.

 39. His conduct in relation to Ms Niazi and his children by her has in  the
     past been very limited and utterly unimpressive.  He left her when  she
     was pregnant and wanted to marry him. He had the  opportunity  then  to
     establish a full family life but chose not to take it up. He walked out
     on his responsibilities. At the time  of  their  relationship  and  her
     pregnancy, the Appellant had no legal basis for remaining in the UK and
     both he and she must have been aware of this. So marriage, or at  least
     the maintenance of the relationship in some meaningful form, would  not
     have advanced materially his prospects of being allowed  to  remain  in
     the UK. His failure therefore to engage with Ms Niazi and the  children
     sheds light into his personal attitudes towards his children at a  time
     when he did not have any material self-interest in showing interest  in
     them. In the years that followed, until his imprisonment,  he  saw  the
     children only three times and did nothing of any significance to assist
     with their maintenance or care.  He has no rights  of  custody  of  the
     children. By the time he was arrested, he could hardly have shown  much
     less interest or concern about them. Such ties to his  children  as  he
     had arising from being their natural father,  by  his  choice  remained
     undeveloped. Only once he was in prison did the situation change to any
     degree. We accept that he kept in touch with them by telephone  and  by
     letter and that there were a handful of prison visits by the  children.
     We accept also that in the context of prison  life,  when  any  outside
     involvement can be of significance, his children became more  important
     to him than they had hitherto been. They offered an  alternative  focus
     to his restricted prison existence. Those who were  involved  with  his
     rehabilitation programme consider that this change in  him  is  genuine
     and likely to last. That may be true  but  again  it  is  a  matter  of
     opinion, which has yet to be tested to any meaningful degree.

 40. On his release from prison he went  to  live  with  Ms  Niazi  and  the
     children for a short time, when he had nowhere else to  go.  He  needed
     time to get a job and find somewhere to live by himself. There has been
     no question of any resumed personal relationship between  him  and  her
     and there has been no suggestion that this was anything  other  than  a
     very temporary and limited arrangement. Whilst living with her and  the
     children, the Appellant for a short time had more involvement with  the
     children's daily lives. However, within a few days after the hearing by
     the Tribunal, he will have left them, to live on his  own  in  premises
     connected with his work.   How  his  contact  with  his  children  will
     thereafter develop  is  essentially  speculation.   The  transformation
     noted in prison may be  genuine  and  long-lasting,  but  his  previous
     history suggests otherwise. Ms Niazi is now  married  to  someone  else
     (albeit a deportee) and, as Ms Webber indicated to us at  the  hearing,
     she still has some issues with the Appellant, though clearly she  would
     like some financial support  from  him  and  no  doubt  at  times  some
     assistance with the children.

 41. The children will not return with the Appellant to Nigeria, as Ms Niazi
     is the custodial parent. The children have lived all their lives in the
     UK and are now in effect part of another family. Whilst there would  be
     potential benefit to them in maintaining  contact  with  their  natural
     father and having a developing relationship with him, they have not had
     much benefit of this in the past.  With  the  exception  of  the  short
     period following his release from prison and prior to his  moving  into
     his own accommodation, the Appellant has  had  little  direct  personal
     contact with his children, and such real contact as there has been  was
     through letters and telephone calls. If the Appellant  is  returned  to
     Nigeria such postal and telephone contacts can continue in  the  future
     as in the past.

 42. Obviously the opportunity for  the  development  of  this  relationship
     through direct personal contact will be reduced.  Nevertheless there is
     no good reason why the children cannot visit him in Nigeria once he has
     established himself there. There is no insuperable  obstacle  to  their
     visiting their father there and this will become  progressively  easier
     as they get older. There is also a possibility  under  the  Immigration
     Rules that the Appellant may in the future be able to obtain  leave  to
     visit them in the UK, though this is unlikely for some years  to  come,
     if at all, in the light of his criminal conviction. Even so,  in  these
     circumstances family life with the children can  be  continued  in  the
     future in much the same way as it was conducted  in  prison,  and  much
     more so than in the years before the Appellant's detention. There  will
     be limited opportunity after deportation to  develop  the  relationship
     through regular personal contact. Whether the Appellant  himself  would
     continue to wish to do this  to  any  meaningful  extent,  if  he  were
     allowed to remain and once he had settled back into normal life outside
     prison and perhaps created new personal relationships, is a  matter  of
     speculation.

 43. This is our assessment of the material facts relevant to both issues in
     this appeal

 44.  There  are  two  powerful  and  distinct  reasons   underpinning   the
     Respondent's  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant,  namely  his   poor
     immigration record and his serious criminal offence.  This  duality  of
     purpose distinguishes this case from the others  cited  by  Ms  Webber.
     Thus even if he is at low risk of re-offending, we do not consider that
     Ms Webber's suggestion based on the observations of Dyson LJ in Samaroo
     [2002] INLR 55 and Andrews [2002] UKIAT 01452, that probationary  leave
     to remain to see whether he would re-offend is appropriate, as  on  the
     particular facts of this appeal it does not address the question of his
     previous, prolonged and blatant disregard for our immigration controls.
     Nor would he be entitled on the  facts  to  benefit  from  any  of  the
     published policy concessions by the Respondent. It is important in  the
     interests of overall fairness to maintain consistency.

 45. With regard to the section 63 (1) appeal against the decision to deport
     under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, we  have  considered
     all the relevant matters under paragraph 364 of HC 395, and  the  facts
     overall and in context. We have already described  our  assessment  our
     assessment in detail above, which includes having  due  regard  to  the
     effect, past and future, of deportation on the Appellant's children, as
     well as all the other relevant facts. We have  balanced  these  matters
     against the separate and distinct needs to maintain fair and  effective
     immigration control and to protect the public interest by  deporting  a
     person convicted of a serious crime.  In all the circumstances, we have
     concluded that the Respondent's  discretion  should  not  be  exercised
     differently. With regard to the section 65 (1) appeal on  human  rights
     grounds  under  Article  8,  we  consider  that  the  decision  by  the
     Respondent to deport  the  Appellant  is  not  disproportionate  having
     regard to the two legitimate and important objectives to be achieved by
     such deportation.

 46. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
