
 Appeal No: |cc |23208-2000 | |
|    |MH (Sufficiency of       |
|    |Protection -Roma -       |
|    |Svazas) Czech Republic CG|
|    |[2002] UKIAT 01845       |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:        |23 April 2002      |
|Date Determination      |7 June 2002        |
|notified:               |                   |


                                   Before:

                 The President, The Hon. Mr Justice Collins
                              Mr. P. R. Moulden
                              Mr. J. R. A. Fox


|Miroslav HRBAC                        |Appellant    |
|And                                   |             |
|Secretary of State for the Home       |Respondent   |
|Department                            |             |

|For the Appellant:|Mr. S. Symonds, R.L.C.           |
|For the           |Miss Lisa Govannetti, Counsel.   |
|Respondent:       |                                 |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of the Czech Republic.  He originally  claimed
   asylum when he came to the United  Kingdom  in  June  1999.   Before  any
   decision was made, he returned to Prague on 4 November 2000  because  his
   father had suffered a heart attack and  was  seriously  ill.   His  claim
   accordingly lapsed.  He returned to this country on 16 November 2000  and
   again claimed asylum.  Following interview, his claim was refused  on  22
   November 2000 on both asylum and human rights' grounds.   On  2  February
   2001, Miss. A. L.  Sawetz, an adjudicator, dismissed his appeal.

2. His appeal to the Tribunal has taken a  long  time  to  be  heard.   When
   leave was initially given,  two  important  points  appeared  to  require
   decision.  The first was whether the concept of sufficiency of protection
   applied to Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights as
   well as to asylum cases.  The second was whether a racial motive for ill-
   treatment could of itself mean that Article 3 was breached when otherwise
   it might not have been.   The  first  of  those  issues  was  effectively
   decided by the Tribunal in Kacaj.  The second remained  outstanding,  but
   it is far from clear what caused the subsequent delay.  It  was  intended
   that the decision be starred, but it is our view that, although the issue
   is important, it is unnecessary to  give  it  starred  status.   This  is
   partly because the  starred  decision  in  Devaseelan  has  set  out  the
   principles and partly because the issue may not  arise  directly  on  the
   facts so that any resolution could arguably be unnecessary.  However,  we
   do propose to deal with it and,  since  this  is  a  tribunal  comprising
   legally qualified members chaired by the President, would expect it to be
   given due weight.


3. The appellant is not himself a Rom but he has been living with a  partner
   who is.  She is described by him in interview as his  wife.   It  is  not
   clear whether there has been a formal  marriage,  but  that  matters  not
   since it  is  accepted  that  they  were  living  as  husband  and  wife.
   Unfortunately, since they have been in this country, the relationship has
   broken down and they are not at present living together.  She has made  a
   claim for asylum in her own right but we have no information from  either
   party what has happened to that claim.  There is a child who is now 6  or
   7 months old whose birth seems to have  triggered  the  separation  since
   that is the period during which they have been apart.  We were told  that
   the appellant had seen his son and spoken to his partner on the telephone
   from time to time.  He was hoping that there might be  a  reconciliation,
   she was apparently not particularly receptive to his overtures.

4. It was suggested that we should consider this appeal on  two  hypotheses,
   namely that there would be a reconciliation and that there would be none.
   We could then consider the position if return is of both to live together
   or of the appellant to live apart from his partner.   We  bear  in  mind,
   however, that if there is a reconciliation arguments may be raised if his
   partner's claim is allowed that  Article  8  might  prevent  his  return.
   Article 8 may also be raised if he wishes to maintain  contact  with  his
   son.  We are restricted by s.77(4) of the 1999 Act to considering Article
   8 in the light of the position which existed when the  appellant's  claim
   was refused in November 2000.  There was then  no  son  and  he  and  his
   partner were still living together.  Thus reconciliation or no could only
   effect the asylum or Article 3 claims, and to those it  would  have  less
   relevance.  In any event, as will become apparent,  the  result  of  this
   appeal will be the same whether or not there is a reconciliation  and  so
   it is convenient to consider both possibilities.

5. The appellant was accepted by the adjudicator as a credible  witness  and
   so his account of what had led him to leave the Czech Republic and  claim
   asylum was believed.  His difficulties started in February 1998, when  he
   started his relationship with his partner.  He suffered  harassment  from
   the police on a regular basis, being stopped and  searched  some  two  or
   three times a week.  It was the same police  officers  who  figured  most
   prominently in this harassment, both of whom made  a  point  of  removing
   their caps to disclose that their heads  were  shaven.   A  swastika  was
   scratched on his car.  In December 1998 he was attacked by a gang  of  10
   to 15 skinheads, and beaten with  baseball  bats;  his  front  tooth  was
   damaged when he was hit by a knuckleduster.   He  and  his  partner  were
   subjected to racial abuse and suffered discrimination.  On  one  occasion
   when he was stopped by the police, one of  the  police  officers  with  a
   shaven head had dealt with him very brutally, dragging him from  his  car
   while a pistol was held to  his  head.   He  had  been  accused  on  this
   occasion of driving a stolen car.  When he returned to the Czech Republic
   after his father's heart attack, he was again stopped and searched on one
   occasion.

6. The adjudicator decided that what the appellant  had  described  was  not
   serious enough to reach the threshold of persecution nor  did  it  breach
   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  Furthermore, there
   was in place a  system  which  would  provide  sufficient  protection  in
   accordance with the test laid down by the  House  of  Lords  in  Horvath.
   Insofar as the police officers were stopping and searching the  appellant
   for no good reason or were guilty of excessive brutality, they  were  not
   acting in accordance with their duties but were misusing their powers.

7. Subject to the argument that the racial motive can produce  a  breach  of
   Article 3, we are satisfied that the adjudicator was  correct  to  regard
   the actions of the police  as  not  amounting  to  persecution  or  being
   sufficiently serious to breach Article 3.  It  was  no  doubt  thoroughly
   irksome, but the appellant never suffered any physical violence at  their
   hands.  But even if it could be said to have crossed the  threshold,  the
   objective evidence of the measures  taken  by  the  state  to  deal  with
   violence towards and discrimination against Roma show that  there  is  in
   place a system which does provide in general a sufficiency of protection.
    The most recent US State Department Report comments:-

           "At times police failed to take sufficient action  in  cases  of
           threats or attacks against Roma; however, there was evidence  by
           year's [2001]  end  that  the  police  were  treating  cases  of
           violence against Roma more seriously than in the past".

8. It is noted that in practice, Roma face discrimination in such  areas  as
   education, employment and housing.  But positive steps are being taken to
   deal with the discrimination: see section 5 of the Report.   However,  we
   recognise that there is still  an  attitude  of  mind  which  results  in
   discrimination against and on occasions violence towards Roma  (or  those
   such as the appellant who are regarded as betraying  their  own  race  by
   living with a Rom) and that the government measures are not as  effective
   as they should be.  Nonetheless, the will is there and it  is  impossible
   ever to guarantee safety from attacks by individual elements.   The  same
   point may be made in respect of some parts of the  United  Kingdom  where
   racial violence  has  manifested  itself.   The  position  in  the  Czech
   Republic is such that it will in our view be  impossible  for  a  Rom  or
   anyone who has suffered as a result of  discrimination  against  Roma  to
   establish a well-founded fear of persecution.  We recognise,  of  course,
   that the situation may change for the worse; if it does, any such  change
   will be taken into account.

9. We recognise that the  appellant  fears  further  harassment  from  rogue
   police officers.  The Court of Appeal has recently considered the Horvath
   test in relation to such as police officers who  are  those  representing
   the States from which protection would normally be expected: see Svazas v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department C/2001/1964 31  January  2002.
   The majority of the Court (Simon Brown LJ and  Sir  Murray  Stuart-Smith)
   confirmed that the Horvath principle applied whether non-state agents  or
   State agents who were acting wrongly were involved.  However, the ability
   and willingness of the State to provide the necessary protection must  be
   more clearly demonstrated in the case of misconduct by officials  of  the
   State; a higher standard of protection is  required.   At  paragraph  54,
   Simon Brown LJ observed:-

           "... one  must  clearly  recognise  that  the  more  senior  the
           officers of State concerned and the more closely  involved  they
           are in the refugee's (sic)  ill-treatment,  the  more  necessary
           will it be to demonstrate clearly  the  home  State's  political
           will to stamp it out and the adequacy of their systems for doing
           so and for punishing those responsible, and the easier  will  it
           be for the asylum seeker to cast doubt upon their readiness,  or
           at least their ability, to do so".

10. The police officers concerned were ordinary officers  and  no  complaint
   was made by the appellant or his partner to senior officers.  There is no
   reason to believe that such harassment would have been condoned;  indeed,
   the contrary is the case if it was shown that it was  indeed  unwarranted
   and carried out only because of the appellant's connection with a Rom.

11. We have already expressed our agreement with the adjudicator  that  what
   the appellant has suffered is not sufficiently serious to breach  Article
   3.  Does the expressed racist  motive  behind  it  mean  that  it  should
   nonetheless be regarded as degrading treatment falling within Article  3?
   Mr. Symonds relied particularly on the decision of the Commission in  the
   East African Asians case (1973) 3  EHCR  76.   After  indicating  that  a
   'certain level of treatment which  was  degrading  in  that  it  'grossly
   humiliated' a person 'before others or drove him to act against his  will
   or conscience' (Paragraph 195), the Commission considered the  effect  of
   the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 which it found to  have  had  racial
   motives.  Its conclusions are  set  out  in  Paragraphs  207  to  209  as
   follows:-

      "207.  The Commission has stated above (Paragraphs 201 and  202)  that
      the legislation applied in the present cases discriminated against the
      applicants on the grounds of  their  colour  or  race.   It  has  also
      confirmed the view, which it expressed  at  the  admissibility  stage,
      that discrimination based on race could, in certain circumstances,  of
      itself amount to degrading treatment within the meaning of  Article  3
      of the Convention (See Paragraph 196, supra).


      The  Commission  recalls  in  this  connection  that,   as   generally
      recognised, a special importance should be attached to  discrimination
      based on race; that publicity to single out a  group  of  persons  for
      differential  treatment  on  the  basis  of  race  might,  in  certain
      circumstances, constitute a special form of affront to human  dignity;
      and that differential treatment of a group of persons on the basis  of
      race might therefore be capable of  constituting  degrading  treatment
      when differential treatment on some other ground would raise  no  such
      question. (See the Commission's decision on the admissibility  of  the
      applications in Group 1 - App II to this report).


      208. The Commission considers that the racial discrimination, to which
      the applicants have been publicly subjected by the application of  the
      above immigration legislation, constitutes an interference with  their
      human dignity which, in  the  special  circumstances  described  above
      (Paragraphs 203 - 206) amounted to 'degrading treatment' in the  sense
      of Article 3 of the Convention.


      209. It therefore concludes, by six (In addition, two other members of
      the Commission,  who  were  not  present  when  the  vote  was  taken,
      expressed their agreement with this conclusion)  votes  against  three
      (Vote taken on 11  October  1971)  votes,  that  Article  3  has  been
      violated in the present cases".

12. In Deevaseelan at Paragraphs 117 to  124  the  Tribunal  considered  the
   effect of the East African Asians case.  In short, it  decided  that  the
   treatment must be degrading for it to come  within  Article  3  and  that
   discrimination cannot render such treatment degrading  if  it  would  not
   otherwise be so.  The East African Asians  case was unusual in that there
   was a government policy  which  deliberately  treated  the  East  African
   Asians in a way which was different  and  less  advantageous  because  of
   their race.  Racist taunts and abuse will be part of  the  treatment  and
   will be taken into account in deciding whether the treatment  overall  is
   degrading.  But discrimination as such, in  that  the  treatment  may  be
   directed at one group of people rather than another, cannot in  our  view
   tip the balance.  Furthermore, racism displayed by individuals  which  is
   not condoned or accepted by the State will not,  however  unpleasant,  be
   within Article 3  unless  the  State  cannot  or  does  not  provide  the
   necessary protection.  So in this case  the  racist  motives  behind  the
   treatment do not create a breach of Article 3,  since  overall  what  was
   suffered did not cross the threshold.  In the end, we come  back  to  the
   underlying consideration that the tests under the Refugee Convention  and
   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights are the same in  all
   respects material to this case.

13. Accordingly, we are satisfied that the  appellant  has  not  established
   his case under either Convention.  It must be obvious that, if  there  is
   no reconciliation, any risk will be less since (although  we  presume  he
   will keep in touch if only to see his son)  he will not be living with  a
   Rom.  It follows that this appeal is dismissed.






Sir Andrew Collins
President
