
Heard at FIELD HOUSE                            MZ (PSG-Informers
-Political opinion) Colombia CG [2002] UKIAT 02465
On 7th May 2002

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date Determination notified

                  ...............10TH JULY 2002.............................

                                   Before:

                         Mr. D. J. Parkes (Chairman)
                               Mr. M. L. James
                             Mr. A. G. Jeevanjee

      BETWEEN

                      MISS MARIA DELFINA GARCIA ZUNIGA

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of  Colombia.    She  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr. S. L. Batiste, promulgated on 2nd
      November 2001, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
      Respondent on 25th April 2000 to grant her leave to enter  the  United
      Kingdom.   The Appellant had applied for  asylum  here  but  had  been
      refused and she appealed to the Adjudicator upon asylum  grounds  only
      because the Human Rights Act 1998 was not in  force  at  the  date  of
      decision.

2.    Before us the Appellant was  represented  by  Mr.  D.  H.  Southey  of
      Counsel instructed by Messrs. Glazer Delmar and the Secretary of State
      by Senior Presenting Officer Miss A. Green.

3.     The  Appellant  was  born  in  1968,  after  completing  her  general
      education she first studied accountancy  and  then  did  a  course  in
      social work and finally worked in the  factory  owned  by  her  family
      making gelatine until July or August of 1998 when she went to live  in
      Pereira in one of a block of four flats which  had  its  own  security
      officers and was situated in the middle class residential area  of  La
      Lorena.   Not all the flats were occupied and the Appellant  lived  in
      her flat alone, she had a  business  selling  high  quality  jeans  to
      people of her acquaintance.

4.    Soon after she moved  into  the  flat  the  Appellant  first  met  her
      neighbour from Flat 3, a Mr. Alcibiades who  happened  to  be  in  the
      entrance to the building and introduced himself and explained that  he
      was rarely at home  because  of  his  work.     He  passed  the  usual
      pleasantries that if there was anything that  the  Appellant  required
      she had only to ask and he would assist.    The Appellant herself  was
      frequently away because of her work and so she met Mr.  Alcibiades  by
      chance on rare occasions.

5.    One afternoon in August or September of 1998, said the Appellant,  she
      happened to meet Mr. Alcibiades once again  at  the  entrance  to  the
      building and there was a similar exchange of pleasantries and he asked
      if she could do something for him, that is  to  say  by  storing  some
      boxes for him because his flat was  already  full.      She  explained
      that she was rarely at home and that access might be a problem for him
      if he wanted the boxes but he was content and he left 10 medium  sized
      boxes with her.     They were sealed, she had no idea  what  were  the
      contents and she could not  tell  whether  or  not  they  were  heavy.
      After they had been left in her flat for  about  15  days  she  became
      concerned about how  long  they  would  remain  there  and  asked  Mr.
      Alcibiades whether he was soon going to take them away,  but  he  said
      "not yet" and indeed persuaded her to let  him  leave  yet  another  5
      boxes.

6.    Things went on like this for some  little  while  with  the  Appellant
      beginning to get anxious and when she asked what the  boxes  contained
      he simply laughed and said there was no problem and told her not to be
      afraid.    The use of that word made her suspicious and about  a  week
      later she opened one of the boxes  and  found  weapons  which  to  her
      looked like rifles and ammunition and stationery which bore  the  logo
      of FARC.    That is the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias  de  Colombia,
      the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,  a  peasant  self  defence
      group formed in the 1950's but which emerged in 1964 as the Pro Moscow
      armed wing of the Colombia Communist Party.   After various  ceasefire
      agreements  FARC  returned,  by  late  1987  to  a  policy  of  "total
      insurrection" but in 1997 set out conditions for entering  into  peace
      talks with the government.

7.    The Appellant had claimed that after her discovery of the contents  of
      the boxes she waited for her neighbour told him  that  she  knew  what
      they contained and that he had been lying to her and that  she  needed
      the boxes taken away because she was in great  danger.      He  became
      rude and threatening and told her that if the  police  came  he  would
      know that it was because she had  informed  them.     Nevertheless  he
      said he would take the boxes away but on the contrary two  days  later
      brought even another 4 boxes.

8.    On 25th January 1999 the Appellant says that she went  to  visit  some
      friends in another neighbourhood and when she returned found the block
      of flats surrounded by police and feeling  this  was  because  of  the
      weapon boxes in her own flat and that Mr. Alcibiades would think  that
      she had informed upon him and that the most powerful  guerrilla  group
      in Colombia would be after her she went to her friends to say that she
      needed money quickly and took a bus to Andalucia to her mother's home.
         That same week she claims to have received a telephone  call  there
      which was a mans voice who called her a Sapa which means  an  informer
      and he said that the matter would not end there.    There was a second
      call taken by  her  mother  who  started  crying  and  said  that  the
      Appellant had best leave.    All this happened in January 1999.    She
      had obtained a flight by the  3rd  March  1999  to  London  where  she
      arrived the following day and claimed asylum.

9.    We set out  that  brief  summary  of  the  Appellant's  account  taken
      largely from  her  own  statement  simply  in  order  to  render  this
      determination understandable.    We  do  not  pretend  that  it  is  a
      complete account, the Appellant mentioned other telephone calls and  a
      document left at her flat by the police for example but the  Appellant
      gave evidence orally before the Adjudicator and it is not necessary to
      this determination that we should go into every detail.

10.   There are two issues in this  appeal.     The  first  is  whether  the
      Adjudicator was right to make a finding that the  Appellant's  account
      was in many respects not credible.    The second is whether there is a
      Convention reason.

11.   The Adjudicator concluded at paragraph 36 of  his  determination  that
      taking the evidence as a whole and assuming the two letters from  FARC
      were genuine his finding was that the police raided the block of flats
      where the Appellant lived to arrest a known  FARC  activist  but  they
      missed him.    They left a search warrant in each of  the  four  flats
      and would have searched all the flats if they could not  find  him  in
      his own.     They did not find boxes of guns  and  ammunition  in  the
      Appellant's flat because none were ever stored there.

12.   So far as political opinion is concerned as a  Convention  reason  Mr.
      Southey started with the  proposition  which  we  accept  to  be  well
      established that it  is  sufficient  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the
      Appellant was and would be in danger of persecution  from  FARC  as  a
      result of what that organization or those involved in the  persecution
      perceived to be her  political  opinion.     He  referred  us  to  the
      starred Tribunal decision in the case of  Gomez  promulgated  on  20th
      November 2000.   The Appellant in that case had investigated a  victim
      of extortion from armed men as a result of which she claimed that  she
      was in danger of being murdered or abducted  by  guerrillas  whom  she
      believed were members of FARC.    Her appeal was dismissed  but  these
      cases depend upon their own facts and that is of  no  significance  so
      far as this present appeal is concerned.

13.   The Tribunal at paragraph 73 gave a summary of  the  main  conclusions
      and we have been particularly  referred  to  sub-paragraph  vii  which
      reads:

           To qualify as political the opinion in question must  relate  to
           the major power transactions taking  place  in  that  particular
           society.   It is difficult to see how a political opinion can be
           imputed by a non-State actor who (or  which)  is  not  itself  a
           political entity

14.   Sub-paragraph ix reads:

           It is an error to try to rely on a fixed category of persons  on
           the side of law order and justice.   Reference, star wars style,
           to "dark horses" does  not  serve  the  interests  of  objective
           decision making.   To the extent  that  Acero-Garces  relies  on
           such an approach it is not to be followed.

15.   We were referred to paragraph 50 in  which  it  is  pointed  out  that
      Adjudicators should recognize that mixed  motives,  non-political  and
      political may be involved.

16.   We remind ourselves of paragraph 53 that it is also  commonsense  that
      although one may hold a political opinion, not everything one does  is
      motivated by that political opinion.

17.   We accept that the aims of FARC might be regarded, however  unlawfully
      pursued, as political  for  we  bear  in  mind,  as  is  mentioned  in
      paragraph 63 of Gomez, that for example in  July  1998  the  President
      elect of Colombia met with members of the FARC National Secretariat to
      explore ways of carrying on a fruitful dialogue.

18.   Pertinent, in our view, is the view expressed at paragraph 73  xii  of
      Gomez that even in  cases  involving  criminal  gangs  or  guerrillas,
      however, evidence of imputed political opinion cannot  consist  solely
      of the general political purposes of the persecutor.    We  appreciate
      that sub-paragraph xi points out that certain features of the  current
      Colombian context make it more possible than otherwise  that  criminal
      elements or guerrilla organizations will view the words or actions  of
      those they persecute as representing a political opinion.   Even in  a
      case, as is pointed out in sub-paragraph x where an Appellant can make
      out a Convention ground of political opinion he or she must still also
      establish that  the  persecution  is  on  account  of  that  political
      opinion.

19.   There had been presented for the purpose of this appeal  the  judgment
      of the Court of Appeal in the case of Storozhenko in which a  man  who
      witnessed  a  motor  accident  in  which  a  young  girl  was  injured
      remonstrated  with  two  drunken  police  officers  and  was   injured
      sufficiently to need hospital attention for his trouble later received
      threats to withdraw his statement which threats persisted in the  most
      sinister fashion was claimed to have been persecuted for his political
      opinion, that is to say that he was on the  side  of  law  and  order.
      That submission was rejected with some force by the Court of Appeal.

20.   Mr. Southey referred us to paragraph  8.3.  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in the case of Noune, C 2000/2669  to  the  effect  that  the
      motives of the persecutor may be  mixed  and  they  can  include  non-
      Convention reasons, it is not necessary to show that they  are  purely
      political.

21.   It is relevant in this case to remember that the Appellant had  spoken
      to her neighbour to the effect that she had discovered what was in the
      boxes and that she was afraid about them being left at her flat.    It
      had nothing whatever to do with politics or any kind of opinion it was
      sheer fear of the nature of  the  items  left  in  the  boxes.     The
      threats which were later received, if they were received, seem  to  us
      to be arguably at least  simply  that,  "Do  not  interfere  with  our
      purposes or we can be very nasty to those who get in our way"  we  say
      using our own words to illustrate what was the nature of  the  threat.
       Put alternatively it was a threat of vengence that others might  know
      not to cross this guerrilla group which admittedly has political aims.



22.   We consider that the Adjudicator was entitled to the view, it was  one
      which it was legitimate for him  to  reach  that  the  threat  to  the
      Appellant was not by reason of any political opinion which she held or
      which she was believed to hold but against her as  a  person  who  was
      seen to have behaved in a way harmful to the terrorist  activities  of
      those involved.

23.         Mr. Southey argues that the Appellant is a member  of  a  social
      group of informers or witnesses.     He  refers  us  to  the  Tribunal
      determination in Montoya 00TH00161 which concerned whether  a  private
      landowner in Colombia facing threats at the hands of non-State  agents
      was a member of a particular social group and in which  the  House  of
      Lords judgment in Shah and Islam was considered.   There  is  a  basic
      human right he claims to act  as  an  informer,  it  is  part  of  the
      inherent obligation to bear witness and  the  status  of  informer  is
      basic to the question of the protection of human rights.    He  points
      us to paragraph A 97  of  the  C.I.P.U.  report  to  the  effect  that
      witnesses are not protected in  Colombia.     He  reminds  us  of  the
      principle in Shah and Islam that a social group is a group of  persons
      all  of  whom  share  a  common  immutable   characteristic.      That
      characteristic must be either beyond the power  of  an  individual  to
      change, or so fundamental to individual identity or conscience that it
      ought not to be required to be changed.    He refers us to a phrase in
      the Tribunal decision in Montoya to the effect that  once  one  is  an
      informer always an informer there is nothing  you  can  do  about  it.
      That, of course, is no  more  than  persuasive  in  the  interests  of
      consistency and it does not seem to us, in  any  event,  that  it  was
      essential to the determination concerned.

24.   We can understand that there are characteristics that cannot  normally
      be changed.   For example a woman in Pakistan will forever be a  woman
      in  Pakistan  even  if  the  laws  for  the  protection  of  women  or
      discriminatory against them are changed and even  if  the  customs  of
      that society radically change.   The giving of  information,  however,
      may be a single act, it may never be repeated, someone who was willing
      at one time to inform or to become a  witness  may  become  unwilling.
      It cannot be realistically argued, in  our  view,  in  regard  to  the
      actions of human beings that once they have acted in  a  certain  way,
      still less that once they are believed to have acted in a certain way,
      they will forever be characterized as one of a group of those who have
      so acted. Whilst there are some events, such for example as becoming a
      Nobel Prize Winner, which might be viewed as  if  permanently  in  the
      present tense,  - although the prize was won some  years  ago  such  a
      person might be referred to as a Nobel Prize Winner, -  that cannot be
      applied in commonsense in our view to all the activities of  life,  to
      each event in the existence of each of us which makes  us  part  of  a
      social group with those to whom some similar event has occurred or who
      have been similarly involved.   The world would be made up  of  social
      groups large and small by the thousands to many of which we would  all
      belong or many of us would belong in varying  numbers.     We  do  not
      consider that the Adjudicator was disentitled to take  the  view  that
      there was no social group such as that which was being urged upon him.



25.   Finally there is the question of credibility.   It is pointed  out  to
      us that the Appellant had been consistent in what she had alleged  and
      that it was possible in the light of the country information and  that
      the Adjudicator accepted those facts.   The Adjudicator had made  some
      positive findings of fact which was inconsistent, he suggests, with an
      unfavourable credibility finding in regard to those matters  essential
      to the asylum claim.

26.   We are mindful of the fact that the Adjudicator  approached  his  task
      with reason.    The fact that he made  those  acceptances  illustrates
      that as did also the fact that at paragraph 33 of his determination he
      rejected the significance of two minor differences  between  what  the
      Appellant said at interview and her written statement.       They  had
      been explained satisfactorily he concluded.

27.   At paragraph 35  of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  set  out  8
      reasons why he considered  that  there  were  central  issues  in  the
      Appellant's core account  which  undermined  her  credibility.     Mr.
      Southey  referred  us  to  some  of  them  and  suggested   that   the
      Adjudicator's conclusions should not be supported.    In  making  that
      submission, however, it seems to us that he  said  nothing  more  than
      what amounted to an expression of disagreement with what was  entirely
      a matter of personal opinion with conclusions which upon the  evidence
      in our view, at least, the Adjudicator was entirely entitled to reach.



28.   Whether or not we are right upon the issue of  Convention  reason  the
      Appellant  fails  in  our  view  upon  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings.

29.   Miss Green for her part addressed us upon the basis of  the  cases  to
      which we have referred and the Adjudicator's findings and that is  why
      we have not set out her submission at greater length.

30.   We consider that Miss Green is in fact correct,  this  was  a  careful
      determination by the Adjudicator who in  respect  of  the  matters  in
      issue before us and indeed in regard to the appeal as a whole came  to
      conclusions which upon the evidence he was entitled to reach.   Having
      listened to Mr. Southey at his persuasive best he has in  fact  failed
      to persuade us that there is anything in the issues which  he  pursues
      sufficiently supportable to warrant interference with a  determination
      properly considered and made upon the basis of  the  evidence.     The
      conclusions of the Adjudicator are in our view sound and  this  appeal
      is consequently dismissed.










                                                                D. J. Parkes
                                                       Acting Vice-President

