
H-THN11-PP-V2
                                                 Appeal Number :CC51726-1997
                                                                  BK (Risk -
                 Adultery -PSG) India CG [2002] UKIAT 03387

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  15th May 2002                           |                             |
|Dictated : 16th May 2002                      |..........2-8-2002...........|
|                                              |.............                |


                                  Before:-


                         Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)
                                Mr P D Burns
                                 Mr A Smith


between
                                 Balvir KAUR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representatives:

For the Appellant:           Ms A Weston of Counsel, instructed by Atteys,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer.


1.    This is an appeal by Balvir Kaur, a  citizen  of  India,  against  the
    Determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  Mark  Davies)  who  dismissed  her
    appeal against the Respondent's decision  made  on  27th  January  1997
    giving directions for her removal following the refusal  of  her  claim
    for asylum.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as long ago as 20th  April
    1991 with entry clearance as a visitor.  She was  granted  six  months'
    leave to enter.  On 8th August  1991,  she  applied  for  asylum.   She
    submitted her Self-Completion Asylum Questionnaire dated 18th  November
    1991 but was not interviewed until 12th  December  1996.   The  initial
    basis of her claim was that her husband was a member of Babbar  Khalsa.
    The police came looking for her husband.  The Appellant  did  not  know
    where he was and the police took  her  to  the  police  station.   They
    harassed her and wanted to know where her husband was.  They threatened
    that, if she did not present her husband in front of them, she would be
    arrested in his place.  She spoke about this with  her  sister  in  the
    United Kingdom who suggested that she came to visit her.   She  applied
    for entry clearance.  When interviewed, she said that the  purpose  was
    to visit her sister.  She was leaving her daughter in India.   She  had
    no problems in her home area.

3.    The Secretary of State clearly did not believe the  account  given  by
    the Appellant.  He refused her claim for the reasons  set  out  in  his
    letter dated 27 January 1997.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision and her appeal was heard by the  Adjudicator  on  27th  August
    1997.  By this  stage,  another  factor  fell  to  be  considered.   In
    December 1994, the Appellant had met a man called  Pyara  Singh  and  a
    friendship developed leading to a short affair.  The  Appellant  become
    pregnant and gave birth to her son, Karan Vir Singh  Rai.   Two  months
    after his birth, Pyara Singh terminated the relationship because he did
    not wish to divorce his wife but he has continued to have contact  with
    Karan and pays maintenance.  The Appellant says that she cannot  return
    to India because she is in fear of the authorities as the  police  will
    continue to harass her as she is the wife of someone they believe to be
    a terrorist (A12).  She is also in fear of her husband, saying that she
    is certain that he will kill her and her son if they  are  returned  to
    India.  Her daughter, Amandip Kaur, who still lives in India, has  been
    in contact with her father and she says that  he  has  threatened  her,
    saying that she must  not  have  any  contact  with  her  mother.   The
    Appellant also asserts that, if she  returns  to  India,  she  will  be
    ostracised and persecuted by her community because she is the mother of
    an illegitimate child.  The domestic situation is made more complicated
    by the fact that Mr Pyara Singh has said that he will take  proceedings
    to attempt to obtain a residence order if  there  is  any  prospect  of
    Karan being removed to India with his mother.

 4. Having heard the evidence, the Adjudicator did  not  believe  that  the
    Appellant's husband had been politically involved as alleged, nor  that
    the Appellant had had any political involvement.  He commented that  at
    the very best, even if he were prepared to accept that her husband  was
    involved in some political activity, he had been involved in  terrorism
    and acts of violence which it would be legitimate for  the  authorities
    in India to investigate.  However, he accepted that the  Appellant  had
    had an adulterous affair in the United Kingdom with a married man which
    had resulted in the birth of a child.  There was  no  prospect  of  the
    Appellant, her son and his father forming a family group in the  United
    Kingdom.  He accepted that if  she  returned  to  India  she  may  face
    discrimination but, even were it to amount to persecution, it would not
    arise on account of her membership of a particular  social  group.   He
    accepted that the Appellant's husband in India may  well  be  extremely
    unhappy about the situation but he did not accept that there would be a
    course of persecution by the authorities.  He also commented  that  the
    Appellant's credibility had been reduced by the timing of her political
    asylum application which was nearly four months after  her  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom as a visitor.  In these circumstances, he  dismissed
    the appeal.


5.    Leave to appeal was granted,  and  the  appeal  was  duly  listed  for
    hearing before the Tribunal.  The hearing  was  adjourned  pending  the
    decision of the House of Lords in Shah and Islam  (1999)  Imm  AR  283.
    There then followed a number of delays which  were  not  the  fault  of
    either party, but due to administrative errors by the Tribunal and  the
    appeal was finally listed for hearing before this Tribunal  on  15  May
    2002.  This appeal  is  being  heard  almost  eleven  years  after  the
    Appellant first applied for asylum.   This  kind  of  delay  is  wholly
    unacceptable.  It is not in the Appellant's interest insofar as she has
    a genuine claim to pursue, and it most certainly is not in  the  public
    interest.   The  introduction  of  new  procedures  and,  perhaps  more
    importantly, more resources at least means  that  this  kind  of  delay
    normally  no  longer  occurs,  not  that  this  is   necessarily   much
    consolation for the Appellant, save to the extent that  the  change  in
    circumstances and the passage of time (and perhaps the  development  of
    the law) puts a very different complexion  on  her  claim.   A  further
    consequence of the fact that the decision  was  made  in  January  1997
    means that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider any claim under
    the Human Rights Act.  Karan was born in May 1996.  He will be six this
    year.  He has now started school.  Assuming that the witness statements
    are correct and he has  regular  contact  with  his  father,  there  is
    clearly a strong argument  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim under Article 8(2) for this child to be removed to India
    but, as the Tribunal has said, that matter is not before us.

6.    The Tribunal must now turn to the issue of whether the  Appellant  has
    a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  under  the
    Refugee Convention.  The case  put  by  Ms  Weston  can  be  summarised
    succinctly: the Appellant has committed adultery.  The very fact of the
    birth of Karan proves this.  The  Appellant  is  from  a  simple  rural
    background.  If she returns to her home area, she will be ostracised by
    the community but, more to the point, will be at risk of violence  from
    her father and family members.  She will not be able  to  look  to  the
    Indian authorities for protection as they rarely involve themselves  in
    domestic matters and, in any event, her position will be aggravated  by
    the fact that the police will be even  less  inclined  to  protect  her
    because her husband is a suspected terrorist.  Although India is a very
    large country, it would not be reasonable to  expect  her  to  relocate
    because she  will  be  returned  to  a  situation  where  she  will  be
    destitute.  Both she and her son would  suffer  unduly.   Mr  Buckley's
    response to this is that the criteria for a social group,  set  out  by
    the House of Lords in Shah and Islam, is not fulfilled.  The  Appellant
    would be able to look to the authorities for protection as the criminal
    justice system is available to all in India.  She would be able  to  go
    to a different area where there will be no real  risk  of  any  contact
    with her husband.

7.    The Tribunal has been referred to reports prepared by  Dr.  Purna  Sen
    from the London School of  Economics  and  an  opinion  from  Professor
    Patricia Jeffrey from the Department of Sociology at the University  of
    Edinburgh, both dealing specifically with the situation  in  which  the
    Appellant finds herself.  There is also a letter from Hannana  Siddiqui
    from the Southall Black Sisters.  Dr. Sen in her report summarises  the
    background to the Appellant's claim, and summarises her fears as  being
    from a hostile husband who she fears would kill  her,  a  police  force
    which she feels  will  continue  to  harass  her  about  her  husband's
    activities and a community which she considers will be hostile  to  her
    condition of having an illegitimate child.  The report deals  with  the
    situation facing single adult women in  India  and  in  particular  the
    problems arising from divorce and  separation.   The  general  cultural
    attitude is that a women belongs to her husband once married  and  this
    proprietorial relationship is offended by a man other than the  husband
    having sexual relations with a married woman.  If the Appellant is  not
    supported by her family, she will need to provide for herself  and  her
    son.  There is no certainty of employment and there is the  possibility
    that she would be  cajoled  or  forced  into  dangerous  work  such  as
    prostitution.  She says that it is safe to conclude that a single adult
    female in India would  have  great  difficulty  in  supporting  herself
    financially and in absence of  familial  support  may  be  destined  to
    destitution or prostitution.  So far as the willingness or  ability  of
    the police to protect women against violence, it is her view  that  the
    Indian State appears to succumb to communal pressures and to privileged
    religious interests.  It is her view that Mrs Kaur  will  not  only  be
    subjected to allegations of adultery but there will be a factual  basis
    to those claims.  There will be significant social  opprobrium  if  not
    absolute  ostracism.   She  will  be  the  subject  of  hostility  even
    persecution and may  well  be  socially  outcast  by  her  peers.   The
    situation in which she would find herself  would  pose  a  threat  from
    which the State authorities may not be  quick  or  complete  enough  in
    their actions to protect her.  The likelihood is that she would not  be
    accepted back into her community and would probably be rejected by  her
    family.  Were she and her son to be forcibly returned  to  India,  they
    would be at risk of violence from her  husband  or  his  family.   This
    would be due to their interpretation of her behaviour as bringing shame
    and dishonour on the family.  It is her  view  that  the  Indian  State
    manifestly fails to protect women in such circumstances.

8.    In the opinion from Professor Jeffrey, she  expresses  the  view  that
    there is a very serious risk that the Appellant will be  in  danger  of
    losing her life were she required to return either to her husband's  or
    mother's village in Punjab.  She would be likely to become a victim  of
    her  husband's  persecution  in  a  context  in  which  she  could  not
    realistically expect protection from the State.  She  has  neither  the
    resources nor qualifications  to  enable  her  to  live  safely  as  an
    independent woman.  Throughout south Asia, the honour of  a  family  is
    said to reside in the behaviour of its women and those who fail to meet
    these standards run the risk of some form of punishment such as marital
    violence.  Women who commit adultery are extremely vulnerable to  being
    murdered by their husbands who feel that they have been dishonoured  by
    their wives' behaviour.  In her view, it is highly improbable that  the
    Appellant would be able to obtain protection to guard her life.  Police
    resources will be quite inadequate to do this in any event but, more to
    the point, the will to protect her would probably not be there.  Police
    in north India have a very poor record in dealing with  what  would  be
    called  "a  domestic"  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  would  be  quite
    unrealistic to expect her to call on the local police  to  protect  her
    from her husband.  Professor Jeffrey has provided a short update to her
    report dated 30th April 2002.  She says that, having recently  returned
    from eighteen months' field work in north India,  she  can  vouch  that
    honour killings are still common for women in the Appellant's situation
    and there are no grounds for supposing that the police would be able or
    willing  to  protect  her  adequately.   She  reiterates  her  original
    conclusion that there is a very serious risk that the  Appellant  would
    be in danger of losing her life if compelled to return to Punjab.

9.    The letter from Hannana  Siddiqui  from  the  Southall  Black  Sisters
    makes the further point that many "disgraced" and  rejected  women  and
    their children are forced to live in total destitution,  vulnerable  to
    economic and sexual exploitation.  Women in both rural and urban  areas
    have little or no access to any support services and women's groups and
    others complain about the State's failure to provide resources.

10.   In Shah and Islam the House of Lords considered the  definition  of  a
    social group.  On the facts  of  that  case,  they  accepted  that  the
    appropriate social group was women in Pakistan.  In  his  speech,  Lord
    Hoffman emphasised that each case must depend upon the evidence.   This
    point is made in his comments at page 304 where he says:

      "I am conscious, as the example which I have just given will  suggest,
        that there are much more difficult cases in which the  officers  of
        the State neither act as the agents of  discriminatory  persecution
        nor, on the basis of a discriminatory policy, allow individuals  to
        inflict persecution with impunity.  In countries where the power of
        the State is weak, there may be intermediate cases in which  groups
        of people have power in particular areas to persecute others  on  a
        discriminatory basis and the State, on account of lack of resources
        or  political  will   and   without   its   agents   applying   any
        discriminatory policy of their  own,  is  unable  or  unwilling  to
        protect them.  I do not intend to lay down any rule for such cases.
         They have to be considered by adjudicators on a case-by-case basis
        as they arise.  The distinguishing feature of the present  case  is
        the evidence of institutionalised discrimination against  women  by
        the police, the courts and the legal system, the central organs  of
        the State."

11.   The Tribunal will deal first with the assertion that the Appellant  is
    at risk because of the political activities of her husband.  Ms  Weston
    did not pursue this contention at the hearing and  rightly  so  in  the
    light of the change of circumstances in India.  However, she  did  make
    the point that the Appellant's background was such  that  it  was  even
    more likely that the Indian  authorities  would  fail  to  protect  the
    Appellant.  The Tribunal is not persuaded by this.  We see no reason to
    differ from the Adjudicator's findings.  It seems to the Tribunal  that
    the political background or otherwise of the Appellant's husband is not
    a relevant factor to be taken into account.

12.   That said, the Tribunal accepts that there are considerable risks  for
    the Appellant were she to return to India with her son.   She  is  ill-
    educated and from a rural background where traditional  values  are  at
    their strongest.  The Tribunal has very  little  doubt  that  not  only
    would the Appellant be ostracised by her husband's family  but  in  all
    likelihood by her own family as well.  In the  light  of  the  evidence
    about the perceived role of  women  and  their  relationship  to  their
    husbands, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a real risk that  she
    could face reprisals from her husband.  However the degree of  risk  is
    assessed, it is certainly more than a speculative risk which  could  be
    discounted.  In our view,  the  combination  of  the  factors  we  have
    referred to means that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  of  treatment
    which could properly be described as persecution.

13.   The next issue is whether it would be by reason of her  membership  of
    a particular social group.  The Adjudicator identified the social group
    as  "fallen  women".   The  Tribunal  can  well  understand   why   the
    Adjudicator put speech marks around  this  phrase  which  has  an  old-
    fashioned  ring  to  it  now  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  the
    expression has more  potency  when  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence as to how the Appellant would be treated in  India.
    The issue is whether the Appellant as a wife who has committed adultery
    could form part of a social group.  As Lord Hoffman said  in  Shah  and
    Islam, to identify a social group one must first identify  the  society
    of which it forms a part.  Although the Tribunal  has  had  its  doubts
    about this, on balance we have come to the view that,  looking  at  the
    Appellant's background in rural India  in  the  light  of  the  social,
    cultural and religious mores, women in  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    are identifiable as a particular social group.

14.   The final issue is whether the  Appellant  is  able  to  look  to  the
    authorities in India for  protection.   Mr  Buckley  submits  that  the
    Indian criminal courts are  open  to  all  and  the  authorities  would
    provide protection.  In general terms,  the  Tribunal  is  inclined  to
    agree with this but we must look at the specific situation faced by the
    Appellant were she to return to her home area, a rural area in  Punjab.
    There are laws in place in India to protect the rights  of  women:  see
    the CIPU report April 2001 and in particular paragraph 5.3.11.  But  at
    paragraph  5.3.9  it  is  reported  that  violence  against  women  has
    increased in recent years.  Wife-beating is a  problem  cutting  across
    all castes, classes, religions and education levels.  There is domestic
    violence in the context of dowry disputes.  At paragraph 5.3.16  it  is
    confirmed that police are reluctant to intervene in family disputes and
    that crime may be ignored if the  perpetrators  are  influential.   The
    situation may well be improving and there are thousands of  grass-roots
    organisations working for social justice and the  economic  advancement
    of women:  paragraph  5.3.20.   Nonetheless,  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning to an exceptionally vulnerable situation  in  a  rural  area.
    The Tribunal has considerable doubts whether the authorities  would  be
    either willing or able to protect her and these doubts must be resolved
    in the Appellant's favour.

15.   It has been submitted that the Appellant could live  in  another  part
    of India.  In theory, doubtless this is so.  However,  the  reality  is
    that she would be destitute, without accommodation, without housing and
    with no one to turn to.  The Tribunal has little doubt that it would be
    unduly harsh to expect her to relocate in India.

16.   Accordingly, in the circumstances of  this  case,  which  perhaps  are
    exceptional, this appeal is allowed.





                                                                H J E LATTER


                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


