
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX51798-2000      |
|On 4 September 2002        |        |14 (Kabul -                 |
|                           |        |Pashtun)Afghanistan cg      |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 05345          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|...........21/11/2002................                             |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr M Shrimpton                                                    |
|Mr J B Wilson                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|No 14                                                             |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant has been granted leave  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
        against  the  determination  of  a  Tribunal   of   three   Special
        Adjudicators who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
        decision refusing asylum.

     2. The hearing before us  took  place  on  4  September  2002.   Mr  S
        Revindran from the Refugee Legal Centre appeared on behalf  of  the
        appellant, and Mr C Buckley of the Home Office Presenting Officers'
        Unit appeared on behalf of the respondent.

     3. Mr Buckley had put in  place  enquiries  concerning  the  newspaper
        article concerning the appellant.  He had enquired with the Foreign
        and Commonwealth Office  via  the  Information  Policy  Unit.   The
        document emanated from Pakistan and there was a skeleton  staff  in
        post there and the view of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office  was
        that it would be difficult to form a view  on  the  reliability  of
        newspaper articles in that part of Pakistan, so it  was  not  worth
        trying to verify it.  It was not suggested that the newspaper was a
        forgery or other than genuine.  In summary there had been little if
        any progress.

     4. Mr Revindran  called  the  appellant  to  give  evidence.   He  was
        referred to his statement and  said  that  the  contents  had  been
        translated to him and he understood  the  translation  and  it  was
        true.  He had two shops, one in Mazar-i-Sharif, and one  in  Kabul.
        He had been born in Kabul.  Before he came to the United Kingdom he
        was living in Mazar, having started to do so in 1993.  He  was  the
        sole owner of each shop.  His brother Karim looked after  the  shop
        in Kabul.  His wife lived in Mazar and had lived there between 1993
        and when he left Afghanistan.  He owned a house in Mazar.

     5. With reference to his first statement which was referred to at page
        6 of the Adjudicator's determination, he had said that he  had  two
        houses and sometimes lived in  Kabul.   His  parents  and  brothers
        lived in the house in Kabul.   That house was in his father's name.
         His father had lived there for some 20-25 years.  He used to  stay
        at his father's house when he went to Kabul to see  the  shop.   To
        the best of his knowledge he had no family  in  Afghanistan.   They
        were in Pakistan.  He had last spoken to his family about 1� months
        ago and he had enquired about his brother and he was told they  had
        no information about him.  This was Qayum, who had  been  kidnapped
        by Commander Amanaullah.

     6. His father's profession was a shopkeeper who sold cosmetics and had
        two shops, one in Mazar and one in Kabul and the shop in Mazar  was
        the same as the witness's shop.  His father was a wealthy  man  and
        he also had a company dealing with the same stuff he  was  selling.
        He did not know what had happened to his father's house in Kabul.

     7. In cross-examination Mr Buckley asked the appellant what proportion
        of his time he spent in Kabul between 1993 and  the  time  that  he
        came to the United Kingdom.  He said he spent 15  years  in  Kabul.
        He would come from Mazar, not for a long time and would  bring  the
        stuff from there nearly for a week.  He could not specifically  say
        what proportion of his time he spent living in  Kabul  but  he  was
        sometimes in Mazar and sometimes in Kabul.  He  had  lived  in  his
        father's house when he was in Kabul.

     8. He was referred to the newspaper article.  His brother was reported
        as saying that his brother (the witness) used to work with  him  in
        the shop before he went to London.  He agreed  that  that  was  the
        case.  He said his brother was talking about  the  joint  work  and
        they used to work jointly and travelled to together to Mazar and it
        was shared work.  The brother had been kidnapped  from  Kabul.   He
        was asked what he would fear  on  return  to  Mazar  and  said  his
        brother had been kidnapped because of him because he was in  London
        and if he went back his life would be in danger as  well.   It  was
        put to him that the kidnap took place in Kabul and he was asked why
        he would be at danger in Mazar.  He  said  that  in  the  whole  of
        Afghanistan there was one government and all the  people  were  the
        same people.  He was asked whether it was not the case that he  did
        not fear the government and he said these people  were  the  people
        from the government.  He was  asked  whether  he  was  saying  that
        Commander Amanaullah was acting on behalf of the government and  he
        said yes he was the Commander of Shaurai Nizar which was the  party
        of the Defence Ministry and he was their man.  Commander Amanaullah
        was a member of the government  and  a  commander  of  the  Defence
        Ministry.  He was asked whether the same fear would have applied if
        it was said to him that he could go to a predominantly Pashtun area
        in Afghanistan and he said yes, definitely.

     9. On re-examination the witness was asked whether he  spent  most  of
        his time in Kabul or in Mazar and he said it was in Kabul.  He  was
        asked whether on his trips he travelled  alone  between  Mazar  and
        Kabul or with his family and he said he used to travel alone.

    10. We asked the appellant a few questions.  The port sheet said he was
        single but he said that  he  had  not  said  that.   He  had  flown
        regularly by air from Kabul to Mazar.  He was asked why  there  was
        no independent evidence other than a newspaper  about  the  alleged
        kidnap and he asked what evidence that might be.  It was put to him
        that one would think it would be fairly prominent, as it  concerned
        allegedly the kidnap of a relation of a person who had been on  the
        hijacked plane.  He said that Commander Amanaullah had spent 13  to
        14 years in the same way kidnapping and  killing.   The  government
        which had power now were all thieves  and  they  were  all  killing
        people and all murderers.  The government here had  more  knowledge
        than he did about Afghanistan.

    11. The next witness was Mr Peter  Marsden.   He  had  provided  expert
        witness testimony  in  the  form  of  a  statement  concerning  the
        appellant.  He said that in Mazar at the moment there  was  a  very
        significant level of tension between Dostum, who was of the Junbish
        Group, Atta who was the leader of the Jamiat Group  which  was  the
        dominant party in Kabul, and to which the  Defence  Minister  Fahim
        was  affiliated,  and  also  the  Shia  Party  which  was  of  less
        significance than when the Taliban were in power.  The UN sought  a
        joint defence force but there were clashes.  The  UN  continued  to
        try to stabilise the situation in the north and sought an extension
        of its mandate and there was as yet no  positive  response.   There
        was serious concern about security in the north.  There had been  a
        lot of targeting of Pashtuns in the north since the  Taliban  fell.
        A century or so ago Pashtun colonies had  ben  established  in  the
        north alongside Tajiks and Uzbeks.  There  were  historic  tensions
        and when the Taliban were overthrown the Pashtuns found  themselves
        targeted by the Tajiks and the Uzbeks.  Tens of thousands had  been
        forced to flee, many to Pakistan, who now sought to relocate  them.
        So the security situation and the targeting of the  Pashtuns  meant
        that the area was dangerous.

    12. Kabul used to  be  multi-ethnic  before  the  Soviet  invasion  and
        Pashtuns were relatively prominent then in government and commerce.
         Many had fled in the late 1970s.  There  had  also  been  internal
        purges within the socialists and it was a war  zone.   Others  left
        when the Taliban came.  It was a traditionally Pashtun area to  the
        south of Kabul.  Tajiks had fled to Kabul, and mainly now Kabul was
        inhabited by Tajiks.  Around half of Kabul was  in  ruins  but  the
        north of the centre was still intact and the centre was  relatively
        affluent and had been lived in by the Pashtuns when they were still
        there.  Kabul had ethnically based neighbourhoods.   The  appellant
        could choose to go and see if his family home was still  there  and
        the neighbours would ask questions about who he was and they  could
        be different people from those who lived there before.  People were
        very suspicious in Afghanistan and it could be that they  would  be
        aware that he was on the plane and it would get back to  the  Tajik
        forces who wielded power.  There  had  always  been  a  climate  of
        suspicion in Afghanistan and also one of fear.  An incomer could be
        seen as threatening.  It would be most unusual to see a  young  man
        moving into a house on his own as people usually  operated  on  the
        basis of families.

    13. A further problem was the  influx  of  international  organisations
        which led to very high rents being charged on available  properties
        and this was beyond the means of people making a living  in  Kabul.
        The appellant's family was relatively wealthy so he would be  in  a
        good position to pay rent but even so  it  could  be  difficult  as
        prices were comparable to London prices.  There were  some  400,000
        refugees in Kabul and it could be more  and  this  led  to  further
        pressure on rents even in the suburbs.  This  also  led  to  health
        problems.  If he could not rent then he would join  the  influx  of
        refugees from Pakistan with no accommodation  who  were  living  in
        destitution in the ruins of Kabul.  Again questions would be asked.
         It would be fairly obvious that  he  had  not  been  living  in  a
        refugee camp  in  Pakistan.   Tajik  forces  were  behaving  in  an
        intimidatory manner  to  returning  refugees  and  there  could  be
        problems if they questioned him and there  would  be  a  record  in
        intelligence files that he  was  on  the  plane  and  he  could  be
        targeted  as  having  abandoned  Islam  and  also  as  a   Pashtun.
        Pashtuns had not been driven out of Kabul as they had in the north,
        but they had fear.  The humanitarian agencies were focused on their
        task and bodies such as the United Nations and Human  Rights  Watch
        were monitoring human rights issues and tended  to  focus  on  more
        high profile abuse.  They would not hear of examples of  individual
        harassment, beatings, disappearance.

    14. Mr Marsden was asked whether the appellant could in the alternative
        travel to the southern region which was predominantly  Pashtun  and
        whether there would be any risks in travel for him going south.  Mr
        Marsden said that all the roads were  manned  by  people  demanding
        bribes and there were a lot of checkpoints  and  this   applied  to
        everybody.  He would be at  risk  of  criminal  activity.   It  was
        unclear whether his family originated from a particular village and
        so it would be  difficult  and  if  he  could  not  go  back  to  a
        particular village it would be hard to settle in the south.

    15. We asked Mr Marsden if the people on the hijacked plane were  still
        highlighted.  He said that they were perceived as abandoning  Islam
        and the Jamiat Party were in control in Kabul in parts of the north
        and they had their origins as a radical Islamic Party and were  not
        much less radical than the Taliban.  If the appellant moved to  the
        south it would be hard to find somewhere to settle.   Each  village
        had its own kinship patterns.  There would be a greater  risk  from
        Taliban elements in the  south  as  in  the  Taliban  period.   The
        Taliban were upset by the hijack and the families of the people  on
        the hijacked plane were targeted by the Taliban and many had had to
        flee to Pakistan.  Some elements of the former Taliban  were  still
        powerful and there was evidence of Al-Qaeda activity  in  Pakistan.
        The power was highly fragmented and highly fluid in the  south  and
        when he tried to settle questions would be asked.

    16.  We put to Mr Marsden that there were millions of  people  in  this
        situation and he said yes that questions would be asked about  each
        and there was no effective police force.  On return he  would  fear
        for the appellant being targeted by the Taliban as a  Pashtun  seen
        as abandoning Islam as a person on the hijacked plane or  he  would
        be targeted by former Taliban members in the south.

    17.  He was asked whether  the  claim  concerning  the  hijack  of  the
        brother surprised him and he said no the family  were  seen  to  be
        wealthy and it was not surprising that the opportunity arose as  he
        was on the plane.

    18.      In cross-examination Mr Buckley asked Mr Marsden when  he  was
        last in Afghanistan and he said that it was in December  1997.   He
        was funded by the Department of International Development  and  the
        Department had banned travel there since 1998.  He had not  thought
        it safe enough to  return  there  last  autumn  and  did  not  feel
        particularly safe with regard to his impending visit to Afghanistan
        under the auspices of  the  UNHCR  but  the  United  Nations  would
        protect  him.   People  were  feeling  very  nervous  there.   ISAF
        protection was less certain.

    19.  He was asked whether he was familiar with the Danish Fact  Finding
        Report referred to in the CIPU No 3 Bulletin of 2002 dated 11  July
        2002.  It was put to him that that was more optimistic than he was.
         He was referred to the comment of the Fact  Finding  Mission  that
        several thousand Pashtuns were living in Mazar-i-Sharif without any
        problems.  It was also said by the Director  for  the  Co-operation
        Centre for Afghanistan in May 2002 that Pashtuns still occupied the
        trade and transport sector in the northern area.  Mr  Marsden  said
        that people were driven from their homes and it  was  hard  to  say
        what risks faced those who returned.   He  would  be  surprised  if
        people felt no risk and there  would  be  an  extra  risk  for  the
        appellant as he was on the hijacked plane.  He was asked  what  was
        the risk from being on the plane and he said that feelings ran high
        if he was seen as abandoning Islamic values.  It  was  put  to  him
        that this appeared to be no more than  an  extrapolation  from  the
        case of people seen to be associated with the Soviet regime, and as
        essentially speculative.  He said that there was evidence of a lack
        of sympathy to the west.  He was asked whether the risk  arose  not
        from being on the plane but having been in  a  western  non-Islamic
        country and he said no the hijack had brought shame to  Afghanistan
        and there was a climate of erosion of moderate Islam now.   He  was
        asked why people who had been opposed to  the  Taliban  would  feel
        this about a man who had stayed in the United Kingdom to avoid  the
        Taliban.  He said that they had the  same  value  systems  and  the
        Tajiks opposed the Taliban  as  they  were  seen  as  Pashtuns  and
        radical Islamic views remained and this was  a  dominant  force  in
        Afghanistan.  There would  be  significant  risks  for  any  asylum
        seeker who went to the west on return to  Afghanistan.   The  risks
        would be greater for the appellant.

    20. We asked Mr Marsden who would know that the appellant  was  on  the
        plane  and  he  said  the  intelligence  services  which  had  been
        effective throughout and records had remained throughout.  All  the
        indications were that this was so.  From talking to individuals  in
        Afghanistan they referred to the intelligence service and this  was
        in his verbal contacts with people that the service existed and was
        effective and was feared.   This was an assumption based on hearsay
        and accounts given by people to him but it was  no  different  from
        the ignorance one had about the operations of MI5 and MI6.  He  was
        aware of the fear of these people.  He made what he regarded  as  a
        reasonable assumption and it would be  on  official  records  which
        were available to the present regime.  There had been no  reference
        to the Taliban destroying records and they had left in a hurry.

    21. It was put to him that he said it was highly unusual to live  alone
        in Kabul and he was asked whether that was so  after  23  years  of
        combat and occupation and mass movements  of  the  population.   He
        said that it would be highly unusual because of the climate of fear
        and he would feel fear living in alone in a house.   He  was  asked
        where individuals who had split from their  families  went  and  he
        said they would find refuge very difficult and  there  was  nowhere
        else you could go and feel  protected.   He  was  asked  about  the
        situation where there was no choice due to a family being split  up
        and he said you would send them to relatives to  look  after  them.
        It was put to him that there  must  be  a  lot  of  people  in  the
        position and they were not the only person left from  their  family
        and  he  said  that  the  extended  family  system   prevailed   in
        Afghanistan and it would be unusual to live alone in Kabul.

    22. He was referred to paragraph 21 in the CIPU  Report.   He  did  not
        consider that this was inconsistent with what he had  said.   There
        could still be violence under the surface and there had been recent
        bomb attacks and there were high levels of fear.  The role of  ISAF
        was to provide security to the government and not to the public  at
        large.  Even so there had been two assassinations of ministers.

    23. He was referred to paragraph 13 of that report  which  among  other
        things referred to a report by ISAF that crime rates had  decreased
        across the city by as much as 70%.  He was not sure how they worked
        this out and even so it was  70%  of  whatever  the  situation  was
        before they came to the city.   ISAF  could  not  promote  security
        throughout the city and there had been a  deterioration  since  the
        United Kingdom forces left and it was pretty bad before anyway.

    24. He was referred to the reference to the Danish Report in  paragraph
        14 and it was put to him  that  that  taken  with  what  ISAF  said
        contrasted with his evidence.  He said  that  the  head  of  police
        referred to would say what he said as he  was  in  control  of  the
        Tajik  forces.   The  Danish  organisation   was   reputable,   but
        international groups were heavily constrained in their movements in
        Kabul.  Before the fall of the Taliban you could walk around  Kabul
        freely but international staff could not do now  and  it  was  very
        hard for diplomats to find out was going  on  and  it  would  be  a
        problem for any international organisation to do any investigation.
         The Loya Jurga had been seen as disappointing and there  were  the
        same old people still around.

    25. He was asked how reliable his information could be and he said that
        he was in a relatively good position to find out as he had contacts
        with British NGOs working in Afghanistan and had  constant  contact
        with the  people  with  information  about  the  situation  in  the
        country.  The Danish team would be involved with  the  day  to  day
        operations.  He could provide the big picture to  all  humanitarian
        agencies he worked for and he drew on a lot of sources.

    26. He was referred to paragraph 38 of the CIPU Report  which,  it  was
        put to him contrasted with what he said about the  difficulties  of
        movement in Afghanistan and  in  particular  the  difficulties  the
        Danish team would have in getting information.  He  said  that  the
        situation changed rapidly, and  reference  was  made  to  a  recent
        article he had written which had been put in by Mr  Revindran.   It
        was risky to say what had been said, although it could be reporting
        on a brief period when it was all right.  He saw  many  reports  of
        traders complaining about large numbers of roadblocks.

    27. As regards the situation in Kabul it was a question of  supply  and
        demand  concerning  rents.   Landlords  sought   to   exploit   the
        international organisations also.  He was referred to paragraph  23
        of the CIPU report and was asked whether there was accommodation in
        Kabul and said no.  Housing was being built and some was being done
        by aid agencies and some by returning refugees.   Shelter  projects
        did not mean that new housing was being  produced  fast  enough  to
        meet all the needs and there was an economic bubble and  boom  from
        the international community.

    28. He did not know how  many  Pashtuns  had  returned  to  Kabul.   He
        guessed that most returnees  to  Kabul  were  not  Pashtuns,  Kabul
        having a mainly Tajik population.  He would  say  that  there  were
        thousands of Pashtuns  in  Kabul,  however  mainly  living  in  the
        southern suburbs, in the  relevant  areas.   There  was  a  lot  of
        harassment from Tajik forces and it would be ethnically based.

    29. As regards any exclusively or mainly Pashtun  areas  outside  Mazar
        and Kabul, he said that all southern Afghanistan  was  Pashtun  and
        most had gone back there.  The appellant could  not  go  to  a  new
        village but people went back to where they originated from.

    30. He was asked who had accommodation in the UN camps and he said they
        were Pashtuns who were living in the north and had been driven  out
        by the Tajiks and Uzbeks as  potential  Taliban  sympathisers,  and
        also nomads who were affected by the drought.  He agreed  that  the
        appellant would fit the first profile.  He was asked why  he  could
        not then go and live in one of the camps and he said he  could  and
        he would be living in an area where he would be at  risk  of  mines
        and it was unclear  whether  he  would  be  at  risk  of  arbitrary
        violence from Tajik sympathisers and it would be hard to  hide  his
        identity.  This was relevant to the United  Nations  camps  in  the
        south where refugees from Pakistan were  accommodated,  people  who
        had come from the north and tried to get into Pakistan.  There were
        up 80,000 people in these camps.  The UNHCR had felt  they  had  to
        set something up meeting  international  standards  but  there  was
        still concerns in the sites from  mines  etc.   There  was  also  a
        theoretical risk that former Taliban members or sympathisers  could
        attack the appellant.

    31. Mr Revindran had no questions on re-examination.

    32. In his submissions his Mr Buckley said the first issue was what the
        appellant's home area was.  It seemed that it could be said  to  be
        Mazar or Kabul.  If that was the case then proposed return to Kabul
        would not be a question of internal flight.  That would equally  be
        so if he went to Mazar.  The CIPU Report referred to  thousands  of
        Pashtuns remaining in Mazar these being mainly business  people  as
        was the appellant.  He referred us to  paragraph  35  of  the  CIPU
        Report.  The problems with Commander Amanaullah had arisen in Kabul
        and not in Mazar.  The appellant could return to  Mazar  and  there
        was no risk of persecution there.  If he went to Kabul,  how  could
        Commander Amanaullah become aware that he was  there.   There  were
        some problems in any event with the credibility  of  this  account.
        Mr Marsden had no information on Commander Amanaullah.   One  would
        expect, given that Mr Marsden said the people on the hijacked plane
        had a high profile, that the kidnap of a brother of such  a  person
        would be publicised but there was no evidence except in a Pakistani
        newspaper quoting the appellant's family.  If it was credible there
        would be further evidence of it given his supposed profile.

    33. If contrary to Mr Buckley's submission there were fear in either or
        both then he could  be  expected  to  relocate  in  an  exclusively
        Pashtun area  in  the  south.   The  Tribunal  was  invited  to  be
        circumspect concerning Mr Marden's evidence about  the  appellant's
        inability to integrate in the south.  It might be that there was an
        atmosphere of suspicion in Afghanistan, but given the large  number
        of internally displaced people in Afghanistan it could  not  be  as
        unusual as Mr Marsden suggested for people  to  be  in  areas  with
        which  their  families  had  no   connection.    Mr   Marsden   had
        prevaricated and had been equivocal on this point.  There had  been
        a period of 23 years of upheaval and there were bound to be  family
        splits.  On the question of undue harshness, the UNHCR backed  such
        relocations by the provision of  refugee  camps  and  it  would  be
        difficult to say that it was unduly harsh to use UNHCR  protection.
        It would be hard to invite people to use the camps if they were not
        basically humanitarian.

    34. In his  submissions  Mr  Revindran  agreed  that  the  first  issue
        concerned  what was the appellant's home area.   His  home  was  in
        Mazar where his wife and children had  lived.   He  stayed  at  his
        father's house in Kabul.  It was accepted you could have  two  home
        areas but he did not own two houses nor had  he  travelled  between
        the two with his family.  He had resided in Mazar between 1993  and
        the time when he came to the United Kingdom and travelled to  Kabul
        quite often.

    35. The Tribunal was referred to the schedule of evidence.  He would be
        at risk according  to  the  UNHCR  preliminary  position  paper  as
        returning to an area  where  he  constituted  an  ethnic  minority.
        Reference was also made to the CIPU Report  and  the  Human  Rights
        Watch Report and the Amnesty International  Report.   The  Tribunal
        was also referred to the extracts from the Guardian.  It  showed  a
        history of the kind of mistreatment referred to.  He also  referred
        us to paragraph 35 of the CIPU Report.  Pashtuns leaving  the  area
        were linked to increased attacks and it was likely  to  be  as  the
        Taliban were Pashtun dominated.  The question was whether there was
        a real risk for the appellant as a Pashtun.  No  copy  of  the  CCA
        Report had been provided.   That seemed to conflict with  what  was
        said by other agencies and more weight should be attached to  other
        reports.  He faced a well-founded fear of persecution in  Mazar  on
        grounds of race.

    36. If it were the case that it was found that he had his home area  in
        Kabul then there were fears from Commander Amanaullah.   Often  the
        agencies in Kabul were dealing with the humanitarian situation  and
        not with individuals so it was not unusual that they did  not  know
        of him.  As far as one was aware this was  a  one-off  event.    An
        analogy could be drawn with the  fact  that  it  had  not  appeared
        anywhere in the media that two of the air  crew  after  return  had
        been mistreated and fled to Pakistan and approached the  UNCHR  and
        the British High Commission and claimed  mistreatment.   One  would
        have thought that the Pakistani newspapers would be aware of  this.
         There had been a lot happening in Afghanistan and there the kidnap
        of a member of one of the family of  the  hijacked  passengers  was
        relatively minor news.

    37. We put to Mr Revindran that there was no mention of the  kidnap  in
        the newspaper article and also, that it referred to several arrests
        of the appellant's father, and he  did  not  mention  that  in  his
        statement.  Mr Revindran said that  it  was  only  the  appellant's
        evidence about the kidnapping and it was what the  newspapers  said
        and it was not a discrepancy as such it was just a small  paragraph
        in the newspaper and the  appellant  had  gone  into  more  detail,
        having spoken to his brother.   It could be that it  was  explained
        by the timing since the newspaper article was 2  months  before  he
        signed the statement although he might have been told  subsequently
        about the kidnap.  Mr Marsden had said that the description of  the
        kidnap and the demand for money was in line with  the  material  he
        had read from Afghanistan.   The Convention  reason  was  political
        opinion or religion.  He would be seen as turning his back on Islam
        in remaining in the United Kingdom.

    38. If the Tribunal did not believe him about the kidnap but found that
        Mazar was his home area then to return him to Kabul would be unduly
        harsh.  The Tribunal was  referred  to  the  schedule  of  evidence
        concerning the situation in Kabul, including high crime  rates  and
        the lack of any real police force.  What was described as a  police
        force was in fact a body acting as police force which was under the
        control of the Defence Minister who was a member of  Jamiat.    For
        that reason the appellant  as an ethnic Pashtun seen to be  turning
        his back on Islam was at  risk.   Mr  Marsden  had  said  that  the
        Taliban left Kabul quickly and there  was  no  evidence  that  they
        destroyed their records.  The appellant was in a unique  situation.
        The new regime had a similar approach to Islam as the Taliban  did.
        It was true that there were some differences  with  regard  to  the
        treatment of women but fundamentally they were the same.  There had
        been no forced returns at present  and  so  it  was  hard  to  know
        exactly what the position on the ground was.     Clearly  going  to
        Pakistan would not be seen as problem as it was not a rejection  of
        Islam.  No doubt there had been an improvement in Kabul in the last
        6 months, but it could hardly have got much worse,  and  to  return
        him there would be unduly harsh.  Reference was made to  paragraphs
        22-28 of the CIPU Report.   The  Tribunal  had  to  deal  with  the
        situation as of now.  Mr Marsden had said that it would be  unusual
        for a single person to relocate and to live alone in  Kabul.   Over
        recent years, certainly between 1997 to 2001 there had not  been  a
        question  of  large  numbers  of  people  being  caught  in  a  war
        situation. It must be quite rare to be in  his  situation.   If  he
        could return to Mazar he would be likely to come across  family  or
        people he knew.  Questions would be asked as  to  why  he  was  not
        living with his family  and  why  he  had  come  to  Kabul.   These
        questions created risk.

    39. The south was the Taliban's heartland and it was  hard  to  believe
        that all of the Taliban's huge  forces  had  been  killed  or  fled
        Afghanistan and it was  far  more  likely  that  they  had  changed
        allegiance and again questions would be asked.  He  would  be  much
        more likely to come across Taliban sympathisers if not  high  level
        members.  There would be problems of travelling to the south  also.
        There was a reference in the schedule to Achter  Mohammed  who  had
        experienced problems on return.

    40. It was accepted that Kabul was the central issue on whether he  was
        at risk of persecution or whether it would be unduly harsh for  him
        to  relocate  there.   As  regards  the  implied  criticism  of  Mr
        Marsden's evidence, the CIPU Report was a series  of  extracts  and
        they were not seen in context and a number of points could be  made
        in different ways and the most favourable reading to the  appellant
        should be taken.  In particular paragraphs 13 and 14 were  relevant
        on  this.   Mr  Marsden  did  not  dispute  that  there  had   been
        improvements in Kabul but in many areas there  were  still  serious
        problems concerning crime and general living  conditions.   It  was
        hard but not impossible to obtain accommodation.  Fewer  roadblocks
        did not mean none  so  again  there  was  not  a  discrepancy.   Mr
        Marsden's job was to collate large amounts of information in  order
        to create a monthly bulletin and was funded by the United  Kingdom,
        by the Department  for  International  Development  and  the  UNHCR
        sought his opinion  which  should  be  given  considerable  weight.
        Pages 5-7 of his report  concerning  returnees  to  Kabul  and  the
        security situation should also be borne in mind.

    41. We thanked the representatives for their  helpful  submissions  and
        reserved our determination.

    42. The appellant was intending to go to Mazar-i-Sharif and  the  plane
        he was on was hijacked and he ended up in the United Kingdom.   The
        panel of Adjudicators found that he  had  been  arrested  on  three
        occasions as a consequence of breach of Taliban regulations and not
        as a  consequence  of  persecution.   The  Adjudicators  noted  his
        statement in evidence that he was  an  economic  refugee.   He  has
        businesses in both Mazar and Kabul and his wife and children  lived
        at his house in Mazar and when he was doing business  in  Kabul  he
        stayed at his father's house there.   We  consider  that  in  those
        circumstances it is appropriate to regard Mazar-i-Sharif  as  being
        his home area and therefore any questions of his situation in Kabul
        would be issues involving internal flight  and  consequently  undue
        harshness, should we consider that to be an appropriate issue to be
        explored.

    43. We consider first therefore any real risk of persecution in Mazar-i-
        Sharif.  In this regard we have paid particular  attention  to  the
        schedule of evidence put in by Mr Revindran, referring to the  more
        detailed reports also, and also to the CIPU Reports put in by in Mr
        Buckley.  We bear in mind as we  must  the  need  to  consider  the
        evidence as of today.  Against the point made for  example  in  the
        UNCHR preliminary position paper that is dated 30 February 2002, it
        said  that  people  may  be  at  risk  of  violence  harassment  or
        discrimination if they originate and return  to  areas  where  they
        constitute an  ethnic  minority.   We  remind  ourselves  that  the
        appellant is a Pashtun.  There is a reference in the CIPU Report of
        April 2002, referring to the March 2002 Human Rights  Watch  Report
        concerning the situation of Pashtuns in northern  Afghanistan.   It
        is said that they were subjected to such abuses   as  killings  and
        beatings on account of their ethnic group being closely  associated
        with the Taliban.  It is said in the Human Rights Watch Report that
        the wave of violence against Pashtuns has somewhat diminished since
        the first month following the falling of the  Taliban  but  Pashtun
        communities continue to face serious and regular abuses.  Paragraph
        35 of the CIPU Report No 3 for July 2002  deals  specifically  with
        the position for Pashtuns.  It refers also to the UNHCR Report  and
        the Human Rights Watch Report.  It notes the fact that in May  2002
        UNHCR  Afghanistan  stated  the  number  of  attacks  in   northern
        Afghanistan against Pashtuns had reduced, but it  notes  also  that
        Pashtuns were leaving the area to  move  to  eastern  and  southern
        parts of Afghanistan, and there may well be a  correlation  between
        the two  in  our  view.   There  was  reference  to  the  Norwegian
        Ambassador in Afghanistan  stating  that  the  attacks  which  were
        suppressed in April  2002  had  grown  worse  again  leading  to  a
        movement of refugees to the south.  As against that the director of
        the  Co-operation Centre for Afghanistan stated in  May  2002  that
        Pashtuns still  occupy  the  trade  and  transport  sector  in  the
        northern area.  We note also from the Danish Fact  Finding  Mission
        of 5-19 May 2002 that it is said that several thousands of Pashtuns
        are living in Mazar-i-Sharif without any problems.

    44. In our view there is evidence of an improvement  in  the  situation
        for Pashtuns in Mazar-i-Sharif.  We  bear  in  mind  also  in  this
        context Mr Marsden's evidence that in his view  there  are  serious
        concerns about security in the north, although the  United  Nations
        are seeking to persuade the various contenders for  power  to  work
        together and are seeking the creation of a joint defence force.  We
        note also in  this  context,  and  it  is  relevant  elsewhere,  Mr
        Marsden's  view  about  the  extra  risk  to  the  appellant  as  a
        consequence of having been on the hijacked plane and having  chosen
        to remain in the United Kingdom rather than return  earlier  as  he
        had the opportunity to do.  He said that the risk is from the  fact
        that in this regard he was referring  we  think  in  particular  to
        Jamiat in Kabul having essentially the same radical  Islamic  views
        as the Taliban had, and that they would be just as  likely  as  the
        Taliban to see him as having betrayed Islam  in  remaining  in  the
        United Kingdom.  We shall come back to the issue of Kabul  shortly,
        but we note that Mr Marsden made this comment in the context of the
        risk in Mazar also.

    45. One issue that immediately arises in this regard  is  the  question
        whether anybody would know that the appellant was on the plane.  Mr
        Marsden said that they would,  because  the  intelligence  services
        have been effective throughout and records have remained throughout
        and all the indications are he said that this is so and this  is  a
        consequence  of  his  talking  to  individuals  who  refer  to  the
        intelligence service and retain a fear of  it.   He  accepted  that
        this was based on an assumption based on hearsay  evidence  but  he
        was aware of these people's fear and considered  he  was  making  a
        reasonable assumption.  He pointed out that there was no  reference
        to the Taliban destroying records.

    46. We have to say that we find Mr Marsden's evidence in this regard to
        be excessively speculative.   He  has  produced  no  hard  evidence
        (perhaps it is not possible to do so we accept)  that  intelligence
        records have been retained, that  there  would  continue  to  be  a
        record of the appellant having been a  passenger  on  the  hijacked
        plane in those records, and that either  in  a  factionalised  area
        such as Mazar-i-Sharif or in Kabul itself would  there  be  anybody
        with access to those records who  would  be  likely  to  use  them.
        References  to  a  generalised  fear  of  the  secret  intelligence
        services from contacts of Mr Marsden do not in our view come  close
        to indicating a real  risk  that  such  records  exist  and/or  are
        accessible  to  anybody  likely  to  come  into  contact  with  the
        appellant.  We regard the evidence in this  regard  as  essentially
        fanciful.

    47. In any event, even if one accepts Mr Marden's evidence that  groups
        such as Jamiat are of the same radical nature as  the  Taliban,  we
        bear in mind the absence of any evidence concerning anyone who  has
        been shown to have suffered because  of  any  presumed  association
        with the west as a consequence of seeking  asylum.   There  is  the
        case of Achtar Mohammed to which we have  referred  above,  but  it
        seems to have been of particular significance  in  that  case  that
        money was a significant motive for the beating and  robbing  of  Mr
        Mohammed.  In effect Mr Marsden asks us to  draw  conclusions  from
        the radical Islamic nature of the various groups and to derive from
        that the existence of a real risk to the  appellant.   We  consider
        that the evidence in this  regard  is  no  more  than  supposition.
        Failure to take the opportunity to return after the  hijacking  and
        to go back into the custody of and potential ill-treatment  by  the
        Taliban, against whom the various groups in Mazar-i-Sharif and also
        the Tajiks in Kabul are strongly opposed, does not seem  to  us  to
        give rise to a real risk that they would regard him with  disfavour
        as a consequence of him having sought to keep himself away from the
        risk of mistreatment from people  who  are  indeed  themselves  the
        enemies of the  groups  into  whose  custody  he  might  now  come.
        Accordingly we do not consider  there  is  any  real  risk  to  the
        appellant as a consequence, if it did ever come out, that he was  a
        person on the hijacked plane, that anybody would  regard  him  with
        disfavour and as such place him at any real risk.

    48. Taken as a whole our view concerning the  risk  on  return  to  the
        appellant, bearing in mind on the one hand  our  rejection  of  the
        claim that he would be at any risk on account of having been on the
        hijacked plane and as a consequence be regarded as somebody who  in
        effect expressed an anti-Islamic view, and also bearing in mind the
        increasingly positive signs that we detect, and  in  particular  of
        the report of the Danish Fact Finding Mission, we consider that  he
        does not face a real risk on return to Mazar-i-Sharif.

    49. If we are wrong in this regard however, it is  clearly  appropriate
        for us to consider  the situation in Kabul which is  the  place  to
        which  he  would  be  returned  initially,and   then  consider  the
        question of whether, if he were at  real  risk  of  persecution  in
        Mazar-i-Sharif, he would be able to relocate in  Kabul  without  it
        being unduly  harsh.   An  alternative  issue  concerns  relocation
        elsewhere  in  Afghanistan,  and  here  we  need  to  consider  the
        situation in the south which is largely if not exclusively  Pashtun
        occupied.

    50. It is we think accepted on all sides that the  situation  in  Kabul
        has improved.  Mr Revindran argues that an improvement from such  a
        low base is not  an  improvement  which  is  such  as  to  make  it
        practicable for the appellant to relocate to Kabul.  In this regard
        we incorporate our above comments about any potential risk  to  the
        appellant with regard to the fact  that  he  was  on  the  hijacked
        plane.  We reiterate our view that he would not face any real  risk
        either on the basis that no one would become aware of the fact that
        he was on the plane, or if they did so, they would not  be  a  real
        risk that they  would  take  an  adverse  view  of  him  as  having
        abandoned Islam by  remaining in the United Kingdom for a period.

    51. In this regard an issue that must be considered first of all is any
        potential risk from Commander Amanaullah which the appellant claims
        would exist  bearing  in  mind  the  claim  that  his  brother  was
        kidnapped and held in exchange for him on $20,000.  The evidence in
        this regard  consists  of  a  newspaper  cutting  from  a  Peshawar
        newspaper concerning a  report  given  to  that  newspaper  by  the
        appellant's brother Karim and also what the appellant says  in  his
        statement and said in his evidence before us.   As was pointed  out
        at the hearing before us, there is no reference  in  the  newspaper
        cutting to the appellant's brother  Qayum  having  been  kidnapped.
        His brother is quoted as saying to  the  newspaper  that  Commander
        Amanaullah has threatened us several times and he  demands  $20,000
        or our brother from us.  We  find  it  inconceivable  that  if  the
        brother Qayum had been kidnapped as is claimed by the appellant  in
        his statement that this  would  not  have  been  mentioned  by  his
        brother Karim when interviewed by the newspaper.  We also note  the
        fact that in that interview Karim referred to  his  father  in  the
        past 15  days  having  been  arrested  several  times  by  the  new
        government, whereas at paragraph 3 of his statement  the  appellant
        said that Commander Amanaullah had threatened his  father  who  had
        left Kabul and travelled to Pakistan.  Again we find a  significant
        discrepancy between the two pieces of evidence.  We do not consider
        that there is particular significance to be attached to the absence
        of any corroboration of  this  story  from  any  other  documentary
        source.  There is force in Mr Revindran's argument there  has  been
        so much happening in that part of the world that a  story  of  this
        kind even bearing in mind that it is said to  have  happened  to  a
        relative of one of the people on the hijacked plane, might  not  be
        regarded as of particular significance and indeed  might  not  have
        been reported to the  press.   However  we  do  consider  there  is
        significance  in  the  absence  of  any  reference   to   Commander
        Amanaullah in any of the evidence.  He is said by the appellant  in
        evidence before us to be a member of the government  and  to  be  a
        Commander of the Defence Ministry.  As such one would  expect  that
        it would have been possible to find some reference to him somewhere
        if he does in fact exist.  Taken as a whole these matters are  such
        as to lead us to the view that we do not  accept  the  evidence  on
        this point and do not accept that the appellant's brother has  been
        kidnapped by a Tajik warlord called Commander Amanaullah or  indeed
        by anyone else, nor  that a demand of $20,000 or  handing  over  of
        nor the appellant has been made.  We therefore do not  accept  that
        there is any risk in Kabul to the appellant by  or  on  account  of
        Commander Amanaullah or anybody associated with him.  There  is  no
        credible evidence that he exists.

    52. Otherwise the evidence with regard to Kabul  concerns  the  general
        security situation and how life can be lived there with  regard  to
        the  question of whether or not it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
        appellant to relocate there.   We  have  already  referred  to  the
        incident of Achtar Mohammed which was set out in the  Human  Rights
        Watch Report of March 2002.  One issue of some  relevance  here  is
        the question of the nature  of  the  police  force  in  Kabul.   Mr
        Marsden was insistent that what is referred to as a police force is
        no more than Tajik militia.  There is reference at paragraph 14  of
        the CIPU Report to the Afghan police in Kabul.  It said  that  ISAF
        are not responsible for the protection of individuals  or  minority
        groups and have no official authority to investigate complaints  or
        take action.  It is said that complaints  could  be  taken  to  the
        police but they have a limited capacity to react in the face  of  a
        high level of crime and  the  domination  of  warlords.   There  is
        reference to the Deputy Chief of police  in  Kabul  who  said  that
        there were no security problems there and he attributed the limited
        crime rate to economic problems.  We also note  the  Institute  for
        War and Peace Reporting document in the appellant's bundle at  page
        C23.  It is said by the Deputy Defence Minister that like the  army
        the police force was destroyed when the Mujahedin took  control  of
        Kabul in 1992 and so until a new police force was formed they  must
        rely on what he referred to as "these men" for security.  There  is
        reference also to the authorities succeeding in forcing hundreds of
        armed men to withdraw beyond the  city  limits  that  the  few  who
        remain are being drafted in the local police  force.   It  is  said
        that the police  do  not  have  enough  armed  resources  to  mount
        operations against robbers who target the city and then retreat  to
        hiding places, and some police officers are quoted as  saying  that
        the reason for lack of pursuit  is  that  certain  members  of  the
        Interior Ministry are themselves involved in criminal networks.  It
        is said that many policemen have not received  their  salaries  for
        months.  The local police officers acknowledge that the  ISAF  with
        whom they conduct joint patrols have helped them  to  restore  some
        degree of law and order to the city.  The Ministry of Interior  has
        promised an extra 29,000 officers for this and other tasks such  as
        patrolling badly damaged parts of the capital to which people  will
        not return because they feel unsafe.

    53. We take from this that there is some entity representing  a  police
        force which is carrying  out  some  policing  functions  in  Kabul.
        There is no suggestion in the evidence which  we have set out above
        that they are politically or ethnically motivated in their actions.
         We note also the comment of the Director of the  Danish  Committee
        for Aid to Refugees that he did not consider  that  there  was  any
        ethnically motivated violence in Kabul.  It was also  said  by  the
        Danish Fact Finding Mission to Kabul in May 2002 that the  security
        situation  there  is  generally  good  although  in  certain  areas
        civilian safety is poor and crime in those areas is mainly directed
        against the wealthy.  Such politically motivated crime as had  been
        reported was thought to be in connection with the selection process
        for the Loya Jurga which was still under  way  at  that  time.   We
        attach significant weight to the Danish Reports.  We bear  in  mind
        that these reports were made by people  on  the  ground  and  as  a
        consequence of  their  direct  observation  of  what  was  actually
        happening.  We note Mr Marsden's comment that it would be a problem
        for any international organisation to carry out  any  investigation
        since it could not go around Kabul freely.  It is true that  we  do
        not have any indication of the sources of information relied on  by
        the Fact Finding Mission and by the Danish  Committee  for  Aid  to
        Refugees, but just as Mr Marsden has his sources,  we  can  see  no
        reason to suppose that  they  do  not  have  theirs  also,  and  we
        consider that as we have noted above there is extra  weight  to  be
        attached to their reports by  dint  of  the  fact  that  they  have
        actually been in Kabul recently and have made  their  reports  from
        there.

    54. That is but one aspect of the situation in Kabul however,  although
        clearly the issue of security is an important one.  As regards  the
        humanitarian situation, the CIPU  Report  indicates  a  significant
        improvement in the situation in Kabul and there  is  reconstruction
        under  way  in  many  districts  and  new  businesses  opening  and
        journalists report on the general return to normal life within  the
        city.  There are however problems with water since many  wells  are
        running dry and the water table is  still  low  after  4  years  of
        drought  and  there  is  no  urban  sanitation  system,  no  sewage
        treatment and pit latrines are the norm.  It is said that  work  is
        being undertaken to improve water and sanitation in Kabul and  work
        is being done to improve the  situation  including  restoration  of
        family wells, the construction and cleaning of drainage piping  and
        the installation of latrines and waste tanks.  Some work  has  been
        carried out by the Red Cross on work on water  supply  systems  and
        sewage systems.  In Kabul they also maintain over  300  hand  pumps
        for water.  Accommodation is available in Kabul although housing is
        increasingly limited as more families arrive, Mr Marsden  tells  us
        that rents are significantly high.  It is said that  reconstruction
        is under way in Kabul and  over  38  agencies  in  Afghanistan  are
        working  on  shelter  and  housing  projects.   Skilled  labour  is
        currently in demand  in  Kabul  and  the  Recovery  and  Employment
        Afghanistan  Programme  working  on  projects  in  the  employment,
        infrastructure and environment sectors has employed  12,000  people
        in Kabul since February  of  this  year.   On  7  June  2002  UNHCR
        reported that  the  numbers  returning  had  exceeded  expectations
        straining aid agency resources and the absorption capacity  of  the
        country.

    55. It is unclear whether the appellant's house in Kabul still remains.
         If it does then clearly he can be accommodated, and  alternatively
        if he were able to he would have  to  rent  or  alternatively  face
        greater difficulties of accommodation in  a  shelter.   Mr  Marsden
        claimed that the appellant would experience difficulties as being a
        single person on his own in a situation where people  are  expected
        to live with their immediate or  extended  families  and  he  would
        stand out in that regard.  Although we bear in mind the  fact  that
        there was less movement than previously during the period  1997  to
        2001, we cannot ignore the 23 years of turmoil that have existed in
        Afghanistan.  We do not consider it to be a matter  of  more  minor
        significance the appellant would be returning on his own.  We  hear
        what Mr Marsden says about the rumour mill that is Afghanistan, and
        also we bear in mind that fact there will be  likely  to  be  other
        returnees who have been refused asylum in the west as well  as  the
        many people returning having sought refuge in Pakistan or Iran.  As
        we have noted above, we do not consider that there is a  real  risk
        that the fact that the appellant was on the  hijacked  plane  would
        come to anybody's attention, but even if we are wrong in  that,  we
        do not consider there is a real risk that he would  experience  any
        hardship on that account as being regarded as having  expressed  an
        anti-Islamist view by remaining outside Afghanistan.  That must  be
        seen in the context of the fear of the Taliban and  the  opposition
        to the Taliban which would be likely to be found in the people with
        whom he came into contact.  No doubt the  situation  on  return  to
        Kabul would have its difficulties.   The  appellant  is  however  a
        young man who claims that he  had  a  home  and  a  shop  in  Kabul
        previously.  It may well be that the people who were neighbours  of
        his father's house previously would still be there and clearly they
        would recognise him and remember him and it is not unreasonable  to
        expect that he might find some support from them if they are there.
         Even if they are not, we consider that he would be but  one  of  a
        very large number of other people returning to Kabul who would take
        their part in the redevelopment and re-growth of that city, and  we
        do not consider the objective evidence shows that  there  would  be
        problems for him such as to make it unduly harsh for him to  return
        to Kabul.

    56. In the alternative we consider the situation in the south.  We note
        from the CIPU Report at paragraph 38, that it was reported  in  May
        2002 by the Danish Fact Finding Mission that there is free movement
        both in and out of Kabul.  In the remainder of  the  country  there
        are no official restrictions on movement although there may be some
        local road blocks due to local acts  of  war.   Banditry  persists.
        The Director of the Danish Committee for  Aid  to  Refugees  stated
        that people now travel freely including on country roads  and  that
        there are fewer road blocks  than  previously  and  the  main  road
        running through Kabul, Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat,  Kandahar,  Jalalabad
        and back to Kabul is fully open.  Clearly in terms of how he  would
        be regarded ethnically,  we  would  not  expect  the  appellant  to
        experience problems in the south given that it is predominantly  if
        not almost entirely Pashtun.   Clearly  he  might  experience  some
        minor difficulties from the fact that as far as we know his  family
        does not originate from  that  area,  and  therefore  he  would  be
        returning to a part of the country where he was not known.  We  can
        see  no  reason  why  that  fact  should   cause   him   particular
        difficulties.  In any event the alternative exists of living  in  a
        UNHCR camp, and as was cogently pointed out by Mr Buckley, it would
        be difficult to regard being under UNHCR protection in a UNHCR camp
        as being unduly harsh.  It is  difficult  to  believe  that  people
        would be invited to make use  of  those  camps  if  they  were  not
        basically humanitarian.  That exists as a further  alternative  for
        the appellant.

    57. In conclusion therefore we do not consider the appellant is at real
        risk of persecution in Mazar which we consider to be his home area.
         If we are wrong in that regard, we do not consider that  it  would
        be unduly harsh for him to relocate in Kabul.  If we are  wrong  as
        regards Kabul, we consider that he  could  relocate  in  the  south
        bearing in mind the situation as  set  out  in  particular  in  the
        DACAAR Director's view concerning freedom of travel, either  living
        in a village in the south or if he thought that was likely to  pose
        difficulties, than living in a UNHCR camp.

    58. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.






                                                   D K Allen
                                                   Chairman


















