


Appeal No. HX22363-2002
      LS (Risk-Return-General ) Sierra Leone CG [2003] UKIAT 06390

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date heard:  2 December  2002
                                            Date notified:...04.02.2003.....

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                               MRS  S I HEWITT
                                MR C THURSBY




                                                       Between

                         MR   LAMIN MUSTAPHA SHERIFF

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Sierra Leone, has  appealed  with  leave  of
the  Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  R  F  Sanderson,
dismissing the appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
refusing to grant leave to enter on asylum  grounds.   Mr  M  Symes  of  RLC
(London)  appeared  for  the  appellant.  Mr  D  Ekagha  appeared  for   the
respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The basis of the appellant`s claim was that he had fallen  foul  of  both
the RUC rebels (from whom he had escaped after a  lengthy  abduction  during
which he was cut with a machete having refused to mutilate a  prisoner)  and
the armed forces on account of having been (correctly) named in a  newspaper
as  the  source  of  information  disclosing  illegal  activities  by   Navy
Officers.

4. The adjudicator disbelieved the appellant`s account.

5. The  grounds  take  issue  with  the  adjudicator`s  adverse  credibility
findings. They contend that he placed  unsustainable  weight  upon  a  minor
discrepancy concerning whether  the  appellant`s  friend  was  with  him  in
Guinea when he ran into naval officers buying  ammunition  improperly.  They
contend he was wrong to place adverse weight on the difference of a  day  in
the appellant`s account as to the timing of subsequent visits  by  soldiers.
They  complain  that  the  adjudicator  gave  no  reasons  for  finding  the
appellant`s account of how he departed from Sierra Leone incredible.   Given
that there was no Home Office Presenting Officer  present,  the  adjudicator
should have taken cognisance of the Surendran Guidelines and  requested  the
representative to deal with these matters. In relation to Art 3 and  Art  8,
the grounds argued that the adjudicator failed to  take  proper  account  of
the medical report of Dr Shehadeh which  assessed  that  to  return  him  to
Sierra Leone would deprive him of the chance to overcome his depression.  In
relation to Art 8, the grounds took further issue with the  failure  of  the
adjudicator to recognise that the appellant did have a  family  relationship
in the UK amounting to family life within the meaning of Art 8

6. We find ourselves unable to accept any of the contentions raised  in  the
grounds.

7.  As  regards  the  Surendran  point,  the  main  difficulties  with   the
appellant's account identified by the adjudicator had  already  been  raised
in the Secretary of State's refusal letter. In  such  circumstances,  it  is
not  incumbent  upon  an  adjudicator  to  remind  the  appellant   or   his
representative that the evidence  and  submissions  need  to  address  these
difficulties.

8. As regards the appellant`s evidence concerning  whether  his  friend  was
with him in Guinea, it is true that the appellant was only 18 at  the  time,
that he corrected  his  account  during  his  asylum  interview,  that  this
interview took place shortly after his arrival in the UK and that there  was
no read-over of his interview. It would also seem that at this time  he  was
suffering from anxiety and depression. However, the issue of  who  was  with
him when he was in Guinea was absolutely central to his claim to be in  fear
of the armed forces.  The appellant was very clear when first asked that  he
had his friend with him at the shop in Guinea when he  ran  into  the  Naval
Officers. He was asked  what  his  friend  was  doing  there.  He  gave  his
friend's name and said he was there as a  business  partner.  He  then  said
that the two of them went from shop to shop. When asked  why  shortly  after
he changed his evidence to say he was on his own,  the  appellant  explained
that he had simply meant  to  clarify  that  his  friend  was  his  business
partner. The adjudicator did not accept this explanation.  Bearing  in  mind
that the appellant had described his friend going round the shops in  Guinea
with him, we think the adjudicator was fully justified  in  concluding  that
the appellant was not giving  credible  evidence  regarding  a  point  quite
material to his claim.

9. As for the adjudicator's treatment of the discrepancy in the  appellant`s
evidence regarding the dates when the soldiers came  to  his  house,  it  is
true the difference only amounted to one day.  However,  the  appellant  did
clearly say at the beginning of his interview that there  was  a  gap  of  a
"few days" between the two visits of the soldiers.  Later  his  account  was
that the soldiers came on successive days, viz. Saturday and Sunday, and  he
was particularly adamant that the soldiers had  come  on  a  Sunday  because
"officially everything is closed, and it  was  surprising  they  came  on  a
Sunday".  He gave that as the reason why he had not gone  to  the  soldier's
boss the first time. On the dates  he  gave  elsewhere,  however,  the  last
visit would have been on a  Monday.  Hence,  although  at  first  sight  the
difference of one day  was  not  great,  there  were  discrepancies  in  his
account that had not been satisfactorily explained.

10. In assessing these discrepancies the  adjudicator  made  clear  that  he
bore in mind that the appellant had also failed  to  satisfactorily  explain
why he had not left Sierra Leone  until  some  7  years  after  his  alleged
abduction by the rebels. He also made plain that he attached no credence  to
the appellant`s account of being assisted to leave  by  a  stranger  without
payment.

11. We would agree with Mr Symes that the adjudicator's  reliance  on  these
two further factors was inadequately  explained.  However,  considering  the
evidence for ourselves, we also find these  factors  to  count  against  the
appellant. On his account he had been  abducted  by  the  RUC  in  1994  and
forced to work for them for  several  years  until  his  escape.  Given  his
insistence that if returned he would still face a real risk  of  persecution
from the rebels, it was difficult to understand why his  fear  of  them  had
not led him to seek to leave Sierra Leone much earlier than he did.

12. As regards the appellant`s account of how he got out of the country,  we
see nothing unsustainable about the adjudicator's finding that  it  was  not
reasonably likely that a  stranger  would  in  reality  not  only  help  the
appellant get out of the country but pay for him.  Certainly  the  appellant
failed to demonstrate any particular reason why  the  stranger  should  have
acted so altruistically.

13. In considering this appeal it is impossible for us not to  notice  other
unsatisfactory features of the appellant`s  evidence.  Although  not  relied
upon by the  adjudicator,  we  see  them  as  further  reinforcing  our  own
conclusion that the  adjudicator`s  rejection  of  the  credibility  of  the
appellant`s account was entirely proper. Like the Secretary of State, we  do
not consider it plausible that the appellant would  have  put  his  life  in
danger by allowing a journalist to  publish  his  name  and  address  in  an
article about the Navy Officers. The appellant  has  nowhere  satisfactorily
explained why he would have done this. Like the Secretary of State  we  also
consider that his ability to leave Sierra Leone using his own ID card was  a
further indication that he did not in  reality  have  a  real  fear  of  the
authorities identifying him.

14. Mr Symes urged us to  approach  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant`s
account in the light of the medical evidence  showing  him  to  suffer  from
depression  and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  However,  Dr  Shehadeh`s
report does not state that the appellant`s psychological  difficulties  were
such as would make it likely  he  would  be  unable  to  give  a  reasonably
accurate account of his experiences in Sierra  Leone.  We  do  not  consider
that the appellant's psychological difficulties  establish  that  to  remove
him would breach either his Article 3 or Article 8 rights.

15. Insofar as Dr Shehadeh`s report casts light  on  the  situation  of  the
appellant upon return, we accept that it  establishes  he  would  return  as
someone with psychological difficulties, but this report falls far short  of
establishing  that  these  would  cause  him  serious  harm  or  significant
detriment.

16. In relation to his Article 8 rights, we would agree with Mr  Symes  that
the adjudicator was wrong to find that no aspect of the  appellant's  family
life was located in the UK. The adjudicator had accepted that  he  had  been
"adopted by a family of a distant  relative  and  has  become  part  of  the
family." In factual  terms,  therefore,  he  had  family  ties  in  the  UK.
However, the adjudicator went on to assume that the appellant had a  private
and family life which had been the subject of interference, but  found  this
interference proportionate. Given the fact that the appellant  still  had  a
father and brother back in Sierra Leone, had  only  been  in  the  UK  since
October 2001, had known from the outset that his immigration status  in  the
UK  was  precarious  and  that  he  was  now  an  adult,  we  consider   the
adjudicator's conclusion in this regard was entirely sustainable.

17. There is one further matter that requires  specific  comment.  Mr  Symes
very properly drew  our  attention  to  the  difficulties  currently  facing
Sierra Leone returnees, many of whom face the prospect of life in IDP  camps
in sub-standard conditions. He cited the case  of  Owen  which,  although  a
case dealing with  internal  relocation,  highlighted  the  UNHCR  -endorsed
evidence showing that IDP  camps  are  over-stretched  and  conditions  sub-
standard. Mr Symes also highlighted evidence relating to  the  fragility  of
the current peace process.

18. Having considered the objective country  materials,  we  have  concluded
that it is not necessary for us to consider the issue of whether  return  to
live in IDP camps gives rise to a real risk of serious harm, although  in  a
recent case  Sumah [2202] UKIAT the Tribunal did accept  that  there  was  a
real risk of a violation of Art 8 in the case of a woman who because of  her
previous experiences would be vulnerable to rape and prostitution.

19. It is not necessary  in  this  case  because,  on  the  appellant's  own
evidence, he  had  a  father  and  brother  who  still  lived  in  Freetown.
Accordingly, upon return it was  reasonably  likely  he  would  be  able  to
secure accommodation and family support without the need to go into the  IDP
camp process.

20.  Even  though  we  would  accept  the  peace  process  remains  somewhat
volatile, the objective country  materials  demonstrate  that  there  is  in
general no longer a significant risk upon return of persons  being  targeted
for persecution or treatment contrary to their human rights  by  either  the
government forces or the RUF rebels.

21. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




