
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX39650-2001      |
|On 5 July 2002             |        |JM (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection - Ethnic Russian)|
|                           |        |Latvia CG [2002] UKIAT 03133|
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....29.7.2002                                                     |
|......................................                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|JELENA MARACKOVSKA                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Latvia, appeals the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mrs E B Grant) dismissing her appeal from the decision of
      the Secretary of State to refuse her application for asylum.


   2. Mr A Alabi of Douglas Peters, Solicitors, appeared for the  appellant.
      Mr M Blundell represented the Secretary of State.

   3. The appellant was born on 13 June 1974 in Latvia. She  claims  she  is
      ethnic Russian. She claimed she was arrested and interrogated  by  the
      police on  various  occasions  and  beaten  up.  She  had  threatening
      telephone calls and letters from the local police and at  the  end  of
      1998 she was sacked from her job. Both the appellant and  her  brother
      were fighting for  the  rights  of  ethnic  Russians  in  Latvia.  The
      appellant's brother fled the country whereupon the police turned their
      attention to her.

   4. In the Home Office refusal letter of 23 May  2001  part  of  what  the
      appellant had to say is accepted.  In  some  respects  the  letter  is
      rather unusual because it goes into the claim in more  depth  than  is
      sometimes the case. The Secretary of State  explicitly  accepted  that
      the  appellant  was  an  ethnic  Russian  and  had   participated   in
      demonstrations. Her claim  that  her  brother  was  involved  with  an
      organisation concerned with the rights of Russians in Latvia  was  not
      disputed. However, the Secretary of State took issue  with  the  claim
      that the appellant's brother was sought by  the  authorities  for  the
      reasons  claimed  or  that  the  appellant  was  of  interest  to  the
      authorities because of her ethnicity or her activities,  or  those  of
      her brother.

   5. The Secretary of State went  into  the  background  material  and  the
      constitutional position in Latvia. He noted that there had  been  fair
      and free parliamentary elections in Latvia on 3 October 1998. He noted
      that numerous public meetings and political demonstrations  had  taken
      place recently without government interference. The Secretary of State
      concluded that the appellant would not suffer  persecution  in  Latvia
      solely on account of her  Russian  ethnicity  for  reasons  which  are
      detailed in paragraph 11 of the refusal letter. The Secretary of State
      was not satisfied that the medical report relied upon was evidence  of
      the appellant's claim to have been detained and  ill  treated  by  the
      police.

   6. The Secretary of State also considered the  position  on  the  footing
      that what the appellant had said about her ill treatment was  in  fact
      true. However, he came to the conclusion that  even  in  the  unlikely
      event that these claims were genuine,  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      establish a well founded fear of persecution. He considered  that  the
      activities of the police resulted  from  failures  of  discipline  and
      supervision rather than from any concerted policy on the part  of  the
      Latvian authorities. There have been no recent  reports  of  arbitrary
      arrest. There were also judicial remedies. The Latvian government  had
      a commitment to improvement of rights in this area and  the  appellant
      should have had recourse to remedies in her own country before seeking
      international protection. Irrespective of any problems claimed to have
      been suffered in the past, the appellant had  failed  to  establish  a
      reasonable likelihood that she would be of interest to the authorities
      in Latvia on her return - see paragraph 17 of the  letter.  There  was
      the possibility of internal relocation. The Secretary  of  State  also
      suggested that if she were in genuine fear, she would have left Latvia
      earlier.


   7. When the matter came before the Adjudicator on 18 February 2002  there
      was no appearance by the appellant. Neither did her solicitor  appear.
      There was no representative from the Home Office either. An hour after
      the hearing was scheduled to being, the  appellant's  brother  arrived
      and sought an adjournment. He claimed that the appellant was ill  with
      a fever but adduced no evidence for this. The appellant had previously
      had her case adjourned in order that  it  might  be  joined  with  her
      brother's appeal.

   8. The Adjudicator refused the application to adjourn the hearing.  There
      was  no  prejudice  to  the  appellant  in  having  her  appeal  heard
      separately from her brother. There was no medical evidence adduced  to
      support the claim that the appellant was ill. The Adjudicator was  not
      satisfied that the appellant was unable to  attend  the  hearing.  She
      proceeded with the hearing.

   9. In granting leave to the Tribunal, the Chairman expressly stated  that
      the refusal to grant the adjournment was correct  and  reasonable.  We
      agree. No evidence was adduced before the Adjudicator or before us  to
      support the claimed indisposition of  the  appellant  on  the  day  of
      hearing.

  10. The Chairman who granted leave was concerned about the lack of reasons
      in the determination and that was why he granted leave.

  11. Mr Alabi submitted that the case should be remitted for rehearing.  An
      asylum case was a very serious matter and the issues should  be  taken
      seriously. There was an insufficiency  of  protection  in  Latvia.  He
      acknowledged that he had lodged no material whatsoever in  support  of
      his case. The only material before the Tribunal had been lodged by the
      Home Office. Accordingly,  the  only  objective  material  before  the
      Tribunal was the Home Office Country Assessment in respect  of  Latvia
      dated March 2002.

  12. Mr Blundell relied on the reasons given in the  refusal  letter  which
      the Adjudicator had adopted in her determination.

  13. No steps whatsoever had  been  taken  to  prosecute  this  appeal.  No
      evidence has been lodged,  objective  or  otherwise.  There  are  some
      manuscript grounds of appeal.

  14. We see nothing wrong with the way in which the Adjudicator  approached
      the matter. The refusal letter in this case was a  long  and  detailed
      one and appears to have been the product of rather  more  thought  and
      care than one sometimes sees. There is not a blanket rejection of  the
      applicant's credibility and, indeed, part of her story  is  explicitly
      accepted. On the other  hand,  where  the  account  is  rejected,  the
      Secretary of State considers in the alternative the  position  on  the
      footing that the appellant's account was true.

  15. We really do not see in such a case where  the  Adjudicator  considers
      that the refusal letter provides proper reasons, he or she should  not
      rely  upon  it.  An   Adjudicator   must   always   give   independent
      consideration to an appeal and we are satisfied that  the  Adjudicator
      did in this case. The appellant's claim is briefly summarised on  page
      4 of the determination and the Adjudicator notes that the  grounds  do
      not address any of the matters raised in the letter and she refers  to
      the bundle lodged by the appellant at the hearing.

  16. Although it was not lodged before us, we  have  also  looked  at  this
      bundle and the submissions on human rights points.

  17. Also before us is the Home Office Country Assessment and we note  that
      the government in Latvia is willing to engage in  dialogue  with  non-
      governmental organisations working  on  human  rights  issues  and  is
      generally responsive to their views. It has fully cooperated with  the
      recommendations of  the  OSCE  in  addressing  citizenship  and  other
      issues. Paragraph 6.16 of the Assessment  makes  the  point  that  the
      Constitution provides that all citizens are equal under  the  law.  Of
      Latvia's 2.35 million inhabitants there are over  980,000  persons  in
      ethnic minority groups comprising 42% of  the  total  population.  The
      majority ethnic group are ethnic Russians. We note that there  are  no
      ethnic restrictions on political  participation  and  that  non-ethnic
      Latvians, including ethnic Russians serve in various elected bodies  -
      see paragraph 6.20 of the Report. The Cabinet adopted a broad national
      programme at the beginning of 2001 entitled The Integration of Society
      in Latvia. The Social Integration Foundation has been  established  to
      attract funds to assist in the implementation of projects  within  the
      broad national program of integration.


  18. On the material before us, we are not satisfied that  it  is  arguably
      established that there is an insufficiency of protection available for
      the appellant in  Latvia.  We  do  not  find  that  the  Adjudicator's
      approach was wrong in the premises. No material  whatsoever  has  been
      lodged  before  us  to  demonstrate  that  her  conclusions,  or   the
      conclusions of the Secretary of State were in any way flawed.

  19. This appeal is dismissed.





                                                                      G Warr


                                                              Vice President

