



                        APPEAL NO:  CC 38892/2001



                        AS (Sufficiency of Protection) Lithuania CG [2002]
UKIAT 02843



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                   Date of  Hearing:  30
May 2002
                                                   Date Determination
notified:


                                 19.7.2002

                                   Before:


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                             Ms S S Ramsumair JP





                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                    APPELLANT
                                     and


                                           ASTA SIRVIENE


                                  RESPONDENT



Represented by:   Ms M Banwait, Home Office Presenting Officer, for the
Appellant


                Ms C Stulin of Counsel, instructed by Purcell Brown & Co,
           for the Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  an  Adjudicator,
      Mr J L Guest, which was given on 12 March 2002.  In it he dismissed an
      asylum claim by the Respondent who is a  citizen  of  Lithuania,   but
      allowed her claim under  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
      finding that there was a real risk that to send her back to  Lithuania
      would expose her to inhuman treatment which breached  Article  3.   He
      also decided that there was a real risk that she  would  suffer  death
      and so there would be a breach of Article 2.   That  finding  has  not
      been supported by Ms Stulin who has said all that  could  possibly  be
      said on behalf of this Respondent.   This  is  a  case  in  which  she
      submits that Article 3 was properly regarded as being material in  the
      circumstances of this case.

   2. The Respondent and her husband ran a transport business in  Lithuania.
      They unfortunately attracted  the  attention  of  the  local  criminal
      organisation known as the Mafia and in the 1990s they began to have to
      pay substantial sums by way of protection money.  She says  that  they
      did approach the police when the demands became more extortionate  but
      were told that there were no such gangs  in  Lithuania  and  that  the
      threat should not  be  taken  seriously.   The  Respondent  said  that
      shortly  after  she  received  a  threatening  telephone  conversation
      indicating that they should not go to the police again otherwise there
      would be dire consequences for her as well as for her family.  Demands
      were made in 1997 that as well as paying protection money they  should
      transport unspecified goods between Russia and Lithuania.  Those goods
      were clearly forbidden goods of one sort or another.  Again they  were
      more than concerned about this and they  refused  to  accede  to  this
      demand.  This led to her husband being abducted on the way  home  from
      the garage, taken to some local woods and  beaten,  causing  him  some
      really serious injuries.  As a result he went to see a doctor and took
      the doctor's report to the police but the police said  they  could  do
      nothing because there were no witnesses.  The threats continued.


   3. They were concerned about their family and their  daughter  was  taken
      out of school but in February 1998 came the incident which really  led
      to the respondent leaving Lithuania.  She was stopped by what appeared
      to be a police car, she was accused of being drunk  and  told  to  get
      into a police minibus to be  breathalysed.   Once  she  got  into  the
      minibus she was attacked by three men in  plain  clothes.   They  then
      drove her to a building site where she was handcuffed and then  raped.
      Although she did not say this in her statement, or in  the  course  of
      any interview, when she gave evidence before the Adjudicator  she said
      that in the course of the rape the men had referred to the non-payment
      of the protection money and the refusal to carry the goods to and from
      Russia.  Accordingly there was on the face of it a connection  between
      the two and the rape was as a result of her failure to cooperate  with
      the demands of the Mafia.   She immediately left Lithuania  and  tried
      to enter the United Kingdom.  She was refused leave to enter, although
      she did not then claim asylum.  Having been so refused she returned to
      France, contacted her husband, and went back to Lithuania and  on  the
      Monday they flew to the United Kingdom.  On their arrival her  husband
      claimed asylum with her and the children as dependants.  His claim has
      subsequently been rejected and his appeal against that  rejection  has
      been dismissed.  It was  said  before  the  Adjudicator  that  he  was
      thoroughly badly advised.  He did not give evidence in his appeal  and
      it would seem he never sought to appeal against the dismissal  of  his
      appeal.  The Adjudicator stated that in those circumstances,  although
      he had  heard  no  evidence  from  the  husband,  he  was  relying  on
      observations of the Respondent and a statement from  the  Respondent's
      present representatives that these  particular  individuals  who  were
      advising him took large sums of money off the husband and did  nothing
      positive for him.  The Adjudicator concluded that he  felt  forced  to
      regard the fact that the husband had lost his appeal  as  unsurprising
      and was no guide to him in determining his wife's appeal.

   4. It is our view that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  make  a  positive
      finding from the material that was before him. There  was  simply  not
      enough information about the nature of the husband's  appeal  and  the
      circumstances in which it was heard.  On the other hand it is fair  to
      say that the Adjudicator could not  be  faulted  for  treating  it  as
      something that was neutral in all the circumstances.  He  did  express
      some surprise that the husband had not given  evidence.   That  was  a
      surprise which we share.  Nonetheless he took the view that there  was
      an explanation for it and he did not use it  against  the  Respondent.
      Overall the Adjudicator believed what the Respondent had told him.

   5. The grounds of appeal which have been  relied  on  by  the  Presenting
      Officer include a suggestion that the Adjudicator was wrong to  regard
      the appellant as being in a traumatised state and that that  explained
      why she tried to  come  here  immediately  after  the  rape  and  then
      returned to collect her husband and family.  It is said that that  was
      contrary to the evidence in the report of the Consultant  Psychiatrist
      (Dr Steadman), who had found, when he examined  the  Respondent,  that
      she  demonstrated  some  loss  of  concentration  but  was   otherwise
      relatively cognitively intact.   That  is  a  bad  point  because  the
      Adjudicator was considering her state at the time  that  she  left  to
      come to this  country  and  he  accepted  her  account  that  she  was
      traumatised  by  what  had  happened  to  her.   Indeed  it  would  be
      altogether surprising if a victim of an unpleasant  rape  such  as  is
      described was not traumatised by what had happened to her and what the
      Consultant Psychiatrist may have found later is nothing to the  point.
      A further ground relied on was that the Adjudicator erred  in  finding
      that involvement in the transport industry in Lithuania was liable  to
      lead to adverse attention from criminals.  That  was  based  upon  the
      Adjudicator's assertion that it would help  that  the  Respondent  was
      involved  in  the  transport  business  because  the  Mafia  would  be
      interested in having someone who was able to make journeys to and from
      Russia.  Whether that is a good point or not so good we do not need to
      determine, but we take the view that the Adjudicator was  entitled  to
      reach that conclusion as a matter of common sense.  Overall we do  not
      think that it would be right for us to  go  behind  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions of fact.  As is well  known,  the  Tribunal,  although  of
      course it is able to review facts, will not usually overturn or reject
      an Adjudicator's findings of  fact  unless  persuaded  that  they  are
      clearly wrong or that there was no evidence or  insufficient  evidence
      to justify them.  That we might not ourselves have  reached  the  same
      conclusions on the evidence that  we  have  seen  is  not  the  point.
      Accordingly we approach this case on the basis  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings.

   6. The objective evidence about the situation in Lithuania makes it clear
      that there is still, and has since Lithuania achieved its independence
      from the Soviet Union, been a real problem in  relation  to  organised
      crime.  It is something that has been referred to in the succession of
      United  States  reports  as  the  Adjudicator  points  out.   But  the
      Government is well aware of the difficulties and is  taking  steps  to
      try to do  something  about  it.   Those  steps  are  not  yet  always
      successful.  We have before us, produced on behalf of the  Respondent,
      a report from Dr  Popovski.   Dr  Popovski,  as  we  know,  has  given
      evidence in a case involving the Baltic States and has a  considerable
      expertise in that area.   Dr Popovski  refers  to  the  United  States
      Reports indicating  that  district  police  inspectors  are  the  most
      negligent and that the local Mafia would indeed use all means to reach
      the end that they desire.  Furthermore there has  been  a  connection,
      certainly a suspicion of a connection, between the  police  and  Mafia
      criminal elements and undoubtedly police corruption has  been  and  to
      some extent still is, a problem.  But her conclusion is this:

           "What is clear from this summary is  that,  firstly,  there  has
           been a serious problem with organised crime and  that  it  still
           exists despite all the efforts to control it.  Secondly,  it  is
           also clear that the Lithuanian Government realised that its  own
           effort in fighting crime and corruption in different sectors  of
           economy has not been  enough  and  acknowledged  that  it  needs
           support from other countries in fighting  them.   Thirdly,  that
           there have also been problems with enforcing laws in relation to
           police corruption.  This is  also  confirmed  by  the  US  State
           Department Reports for 1997 through to 2000 that 'the Government
           is making some progress  in  bringing  police  corruption  under
           control'.  In the same report for 1996 it was argued  that  'the
           police  corruption  is  on  the  rise'.   In  January  1999  the
           Lithuanian Prime Minister, declared a 'war on  organised  crime'
           (after the Chief-Prosecutor in the northern  town  of  Panavezys
           was murdered).  He also added that the Government would make  an
           effort to pass laws making  it  easier  to  arrest  and  convict
           organised  crime  bosses.   He  promised  that  the   Government
           spending on law enforcement would be increased.  The  Parliament
           of the  Republic  of  Lithuania  issued  on  10  June  2000  the
           Resolution concerning the programme of the Government under  the
           heading Domestic Policy:  1. Reform of Legal System and Law  and
           Order special emphasis is  given  to  'measures  and  means  for
           fighting organised crime and corruption: a) improvement of legal
           basis...b)    reorganisation    of    the    law     enforcement
           institutions...and c)improvements of the courts' work."


   7. We do not doubt that these efforts have not yet proved  always  to  be
      successful.  Criminals and particularly well organised criminals, will
      continue to function even in a country which has a well organised  and
      effective police force.  Protection rackets exist in this country  and
      it is often difficult to persuade witnesses to come  forward  to  give
      evidence in order to convict those who are responsible.  Of course  if
      the police themselves are corrupt and are involved it will make it the
      more difficult to ensure that such offences are not only detected  but
      are dealt with.  The Adjudicator was most impressed with the fact that
      on economic grounds in 1999 more than  twelve  hundred  policemen  had
      been made redundant and  he  observed  that  with  crime  soaring  the
      decision to reduce police numbers indicated to  him  the  opposite  of
      sufficiency of protection.  That is hardly a balanced conclusion.   It
      is not even  necessarily  a  pointer  in  the  direction  of  lack  of
      sufficiency.  The reality is that we have to approach this case on the
      basis of the House of Lords' decision in Horvath.  There is on all the
      evidence  before  us  quite  clearly  an  effort  being  made  by  the
      authorities in Lithuania to deal with the problem of organised  crime.
      There is therefore a willingness to provide the necessary  protection.
      It may be said that that willingness does  not  always  exist  at  the
      lower level with local police.  It is not entirely clear at what level
      the respondent and her husband made their complaints, but if they were
      getting nowhere in their local police station or with the lower  ranks
      then surely they should have gone higher.


   8. So far as ability is concerned, as Horvath  makes  plain,  it  is  not
      possible to guarantee protection.  What has to exist is a system which
      is in place and which is able generally to  deal  with  crime  and  to
      investigate and to try to bring to justice those  who  have  committed
      the crimes.  Police are always going to be  hampered  in  relation  to
      organised crime by the difficulty in obtaining witnesses  but  in  our
      judgment on the material before us it is quite impossible to say  that
      in Lithuania as a  whole  there  is  such  a  breakdown  of  effective
      protection against organised crime that anyone who is affected  by  it
      cannot be returned to Lithuania.  Of course we appreciate that we have
      to look at the facts of the individual case and there  may  always  be
      cases whose circumstances show that it is indeed unsafe  to  return  a
      particular individual.  The respondent has undoubtedly  suffered  much
      as a result of what happened to her and even if  one  accepts  as  the
      Adjudicator did that  the  rape  was  connected  with  the  protection
      racket, still in our judgment we cannot say and it is not established,
      that there is a failure of  the  degree  of  protection  that  Horvath
      requires to be in place.  The  principles  of  Horvath  are  now  well
      established and in our judgment this case falls  clearly  within  that
      guidance.  In all those circumstances this appeal must be allowed.









MR JUSTICE COLLINS
