
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC36979-2001      |
|On 14 March 2002           |        |BL (Ogboni Cult - Protection|
|                           |        |- Relocation) Nigeria CG    |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 01708          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28.05.2002                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr T B Davey                                                      |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|BABATUNDE LEBOHANG                                                |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Decision:        Appeal allowed

Appearances:
For the appellant:     Mr C Buckley, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr N Moloney of Counsel instructed by IAS Liverpool.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  C  P
        Rushton) who allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Lebohang  a  citizen  of
        Nigeria, against a decision of the appellant on 14  July  2001  who
        issued removal directions to Nigeria and refused asylum.


     2. Leave to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on 4  January  2002  on
        the basis that "the determination is somewhat brief, fails to  deal
        with the human rights appeal and to refer to the appropriate burden
        and standard of proof. The respondent may,  however,  persuade  the
        Tribunal that it remains salvageable in spite of the various points
        made by the applicant. However, it is appropriate to grant leave. "

     3. The respondent's claim was that, through his  mother's  family,  by
        culture and tradition, due to inherit the title of  Aro.  Being  an
        Aro would involve the appellant being initiated into a cult  called
        Osugbo: a demonic cult which uses ritual sacrifice, cannibalism and
        other rituals.

     4. The respondent is a practising Christian, as is his mother, who did
        not wish to become an Aro. His refusal to become an Aro led to  the
        death of his mother at the hands of cult members and for five  days
        he was held by the cult. During this time he claims  to  have  been
        tortured by way of having two bags of sand put on his back and then
        required to do some form of pressups.

     5. The respondent was released through the acts of an  unknown  person
        in the cult who, with at least one  other,  took  him  out  of  the
        compound where he was being held and a car was  thereafter  waiting
        to take him away. The respondent left Nigeria on or  about  3  June
        2001 flying to South Africa where he remained for  some  ten  days.
        Thereafter he flew into the United Kingdom and  obtained  entry  by
        deception and without making any claim for asylum.

     6. The respondent holds a  valid  South  African  passport  and  is  a
        national of South Africa. He was  stopped  attempting  to  board  a
        flight to Canada using a forged British passport on 28 June 2001.

     7. The respondent says there is nowhere in Nigeria he could go without
        the cults being able to find him and they would have found  him  if
        he had stayed in South Africa.

     8. In paragraph 12 of the determination and  reasons  the  Adjudicator
        said this:

           "it is submitted in the refusal letter that the appellant  could
           have sought safety elsewhere in Nigeria and that the police have
           such activities under control. The population of Nigeria  enjoys
           rights of freedom of movement and just as he could easily travel
           to other areas of Nigeria so could  members  of  the  cult.  The
           activities have been deeply entrenched in rural  communities  in
           Nigeria for generations  and  it  is  therefore  unrealistic  to
           suggest that in such circumstances in a third world country  the
           police would be in a position to intervene.

           13.The Secretary of State also submitted that the cults were not
           agents of persecution. The cults are  widespread  and  organised
           groups over  which  the  police  will  not  or  cannot  exercise
           control. The attacks on the appellant  and  his  mother  were  a
           precisely  targeted  instant.  Those  concerned  are  agents  of
           persecution."

     9. The Adjudicator  had  found  that  the  respondent's  evidence  was
        credible and accepted him  as  a  credible  witness.  Further,  the
        Adjudicator stated that "there is much in the objective documentary
        evidence which echos the appellant's account  of  events."  However
        having examined, as we did, all the background  material  that  had
        been put before the Adjudicator we could not  find  either  in  the
        CIPU Country Assessment 2001, or the US Department of State Country
        Report for 2000 (dated February 2001), or the 2000 Annual Report on
        International Religious Freedom for  Nigeria  produced  by  the  US
        Department of State, the US Library of Congress Report  on  Nigeria
        (which contains some information relating to indigenous beliefs  or
        any of the other documentation) anything which indicated that there
        was any basis for the Adjudicator's assertions about the level  and
        depth of cult activities being such that the police would not be in
        a position to intervene.


    10. The background material, on the contrary, shows that  the  Nigerian
        authorities have been acting against a particularly powerful secret
        society known as the Ogboni and the general tenor of the background
        information  does  not  suggest  that  the  government  is   either
        unwilling or unable to provide protection, nor that it is unwilling
        or unable to take steps against cult activities. We cannot find any
        objective material which supports the proposition that  the  police
        will  not  or  can  not  exercise  control.  We   find   that   the
        Adjudicator's conclusion  that  this  cult  constituted  agents  of
        persecution is simply unsustainable.


    11. Further,  we  note  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  identify  any
        Convention reason for the conclusion that the respondent faced risk
        at the hands of the cult. The respondent's case is clearly that  he
        was  being  pursued  because  he  refused  to  follow  custom   and
        tradition. Mr  Moloney  was  unable  to  identify  any  independent
        objective evidence which supports the respondent's  claim  that  he
        could not obtain protection from the authorities in Nigeria.

    12. The claim therefore of persecution  comes  from  his  rejection  of
        joining the cult. The cult is not seeking to persecute him  because
        of his religious convictions or opinions. Albeit  his  motives  for
        refusal, which were accepted by the  Adjudicator,  arise  from  his
        Christian faith. The respondent's motive has nothing to do with the
        cult seeking to recruit. We find the conclusions of the Tribunal in
        the case of Eze (00/TH/01308)  of  assistance  in  that  there  are
        considerable similarities  in  the  facts  of  the  case  albeit  a
        different cult was involved. That Tribunal, as  we  were,  was  not
        presented with evidence from any independent source which supported
        the respondent's  claim.  In  Eze  the  appellant  had  not  sought
        protection claiming that the authorities would not be  prepared  to
        protect him and effectively supported the existence of such cults.

    13. The Tribunal in Eze found there  was  an  absence  of  evidence  to
        support the claim that the authorities in Nigeria would not provide
        assistance and protection. In this  case,  as  in  Eze,  the  point
        remains that an asylum seeker should exhaust all reasonable avenues
        within his own country  for  protection  before  seeking  surrogate
        international protection. This the respondent did not do,  wherever
        it is he may have been in Nigeria when these events  were  said  to
        have occurred.

    14. Nigeria, with a population of in excess of 100 million, is  a  very
        large country indeed. Internal flight is  identified  in  the  CIPU
        assessment as being a real possibility (see paragraph 9.10) and  it
        seemed to us that there was no evidence before the  Adjudicator  to
        show that the size of the particular cult was such that it  was  to
        be found  throughout  Nigeria.  The  CIPU  Report  identifies  that
        traditional religious beliefs are widespread in Nigeria,  but  that
        where these practises may have resulted in criminal  activity,  the
        Nigerian police have investigated them. It  identifies  that  there
        are on occasion isolated reports of ritualistic killings  which  do
        not appear linked to organised traditional religious practises, but
        that such rare events are investigated as crimes and  action  taken
        against  the  perpetrators.  There  does  not  appear  to  be   any
        widespread support for the practices or their perpetrators and they
        are viewed by society as criminal, investigated and dealt  with  in
        an appropriate manner. (see paragraph 7.33)

    15. It was said that it would be unduly harsh having to relocate,  that
        is because he is a Christian, secondly his subjective fear  of  the
        cult, and thirdly, adverse employment prospects.

    16. As to the first of these points, nearly 40% of  the  population  is
        Christian and about half the population is Muslim mostly living  in
        the north of the country. Whilst a few northern states have adopted
        Sharia law, there is nothing in general to show that even in states
        where  there  is  a  majority  of  Muslims  over  Christians,  that
        Christians cannot live and go about a  normal  way  of  life.  Thus
        there is nothing in this point.

    17. As to the respondent's subjective fears  if  genuinely  held,  that
        would not be sufficient to constitute matters  being  unduly  harsh
        for the facts of this case.

    18. The respondent's representative did not know  what  employment  the
        respondent had ever maintained in his twenty-nine or  so  years  in
        Nigeria. Thus, without knowing what job or skills he may  have,  it
        is hard to see how it can seriously be  said  that  his  employment
        prospects are poor particularly when no  one  apparently  knows  or
        could tell us the home area from which he came, and  even  the  job
        prospects there. There can thus be no assessment of the  extent  to
        which situation is materially  different  such  that  it  would  be
        regarded as unduly harsh to relocate. On the  material  put  before
        us, it cannot be said that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  relocate
        elsewhere in Nigeria.

    19. The Adjudicator did not address the respondent's claim that  return
        would be a breach of his human rights under Article 3 of  the  ECHR
        which were contained within the statement  of  additional  grounds.
        The claim is essentially the same as that made  under  the  Refugee
        Convention. Accordingly we take the view that there is nothing that
        would otherwise be said in relation  to  Article  3  that  makes  a
        material difference to the outcome  of  this  appeal.  The  matters
        relied upon being the same, no submissions were made to  us  as  to
        any material difference to the point,  therefore  assuming  in  the
        appellant's favour as we have done in all  respects,  that  he  was
        mistreated and that such mistreatment crossed the minimum level  of
        severity to engage Article 3, nevertheless we do not  find  looking
        at the objective material and taking into account the  respondent's
        claim into his personal circumstances that they reveal  that  there
        is a real risk of Article 3 mistreatment  on  return.  Accordingly,
        although the Adjudicator failed to address  that  matter,  we  find
        that it makes no material difference to the outcome of the appeal.


    20. We therefore conclude  as  follows:  First,  the  respondent  faces
        removal to Nigeria not to South  Africa  of  which  he  is  also  a
        national and passport holder.  Secondly,  the  respondent  has  not
        disclosed any Convention  reason  for  the  persecution  which  the
        Adjudicator found had taken place.  Thirdly,  published  background
        objective material does not support the conclusion that the  police
        or  authorities  in  Nigeria  failed  to  act  against  traditional
        religious cults. Fourthly, the background material does not support
        the proposition that cults are non-state agents of  persecution  in
        that the police or authorities will not or cannot exercise  control
        and/or refuse  to  investigate  or  deal  with  satanic/ritualistic
        ceremonies which include  cannibalism.  Fifthly,  an  Adjudicator's
        determination should identify  the  home  area  so  that  a  proper
        assessment of the issue of internal flight can be considered if  it
        is established that an appellant has been  persecuted  or  for  the
        purposes for considering under Article 3 ECHR whether  there  is  a
        real risk of such mistreatment arising either  there  in  the  home
        area or elsewhere within the country.  Sixthly,  an  asylum  seeker
        should exhaust all reasonable avenues within his  own  country  for
        protection  before  seeking  surrogate  international   protection.
        Seventh, an Adjudicator should address the issue of the ECHR claim,
        even if only to reject the same if that be the case, for whilst  as
        Kacaj (2001) indicates the vast majority of  cases  will  have  the
        same outcome and are both a basis for seeking protection, there  is
        a material difference given the absence of the  requirement  for  a
        Convention reasons for such mistreatment. Eighth, in this case  not
        withstanding the Adjudicator's findings in favour of the respondent
        and his finding that the respondent has been persecuted  by  agents
        of persecution, we have not found on the basis of  the  submissions
        and  representations  made  to  us,  as  well  as  the   background
        information, that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  such  mistreatment
        recurring were the respondent to return to Nigeria where  he  could
        safely remain.


    21. The appeal is allowed.






                                                                   T B Davey

                                                                    Chairman
