
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX10822-2002      |
|On 28 August 2002          |        |LG (Maoist-Ex-Military)     |
|                           |        |Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 04334 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|23-9-2002                                                         |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|A R Mackey (Chairman)                                             |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|LAL BAHADUR GHALE                                                 |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT (CLAIMANT)       |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Wilkie, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent (Claimant): Mr P Anim-Addo, of Counsel, representing
Kothala & Co. Solicitors.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals, with leave, against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator Mr Jonathan M Lewis, promulgated  29  May  2002.  In
      that determination the Adjudicator allowed an appeal both  on  refugee
      and human rights grounds against a decision of the Secretary of  State
      who had refused leave to enter and an asylum claim.


      The Adjudicator's determination:
   2. After hearing evidence from the appellant and  cross-examination,  the
      Adjudicator found the appellant had given a truthful account. He noted
      that the appellant had been born in 1957 and had served in the  Indian
      Army from 1974 to 1992, retiring with the rank of  Sergeant.  He  then
      returned to his home and wife and two children  in  Nepal,  and  began
      drawing a pension from the Indian Army and worked on  his  land  as  a
      farmer. He had never been involved in politics.


   3. In May 2001, the appellant received the first of four visits from nine
      or ten members of the Maoist insurgence, known as the "Maobadi".  They
      had found out the appellant was an ex-soldier and pressured  him  into
      joining the Maobadi, so that  he  could  train  them  in  the  use  of
      firearms, military tactics and intelligence.  The  appellant  was  not
      prepared to join, both on moral grounds, but  also  did  not  want  to
      contribute to the bloodshed of innocent  people.  He  did  not  refuse
      outright, because he knew this would put him in danger.  He  therefore
      prevaricated. He was threatened that if he did not join, he  would  be
      killed. The appellant however, did not attempt to seek protection from
      the police, considering that they, themselves, were infiltrated by the
      Maobadi, and that given that the Royal  Family  had  been  killed  and
      there was a national state of  emergency,  with  everyone  wishing  to
      protect their own lives, he did not consider  that  the  police  would
      listen to them. He was also aware of a number  of  other  former  army
      personnel who had been targeted in a similar fashion, and  had  either
      fled or been killed.  After  the  fourth  visit  by  the  Maobadi,  he
      concluded it was only a matter of time before he would be killed,  and
      so he decided to flee Nepal. He left on 2 November 2001 for India, and
      then made his way to this country. He considered that the Maobadi were
      operating all over Nepal, and thus, there was nowhere that was safe to
      him.




   4. The Adjudicator's determination is a short one. However, he does refer
      to background evidence on the situation in Nepal, including  the  CIPU
      Report of April 2002, and the US Department of State Report.  He  goes
      on to conclude that the appellant faced a real risk of being  murdered
      by the Maoists, as an  "enemy  of  the  revolution",  because  of  his
      refusal  to  place  his  military  experience  at  the  disposal.   He
      considered  that  fear  was  a  well  founded  one.  The  Maobadi,  he
      considered,  were  non-state  actors,  and  against   the   background
      information, the authorities in Nepal he  considered  were  unable  to
      afford the appellant "any, let alone sufficient, protection." He  also
      considered there would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.


      The appellant's submissions:
   5. Mr Wilkie relied on the grounds of appeal submitted, which were,  that
      there was  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant  from  the
      Nepalese Government as the risk to this appellant had been  identified
      as being from non-state actors. The other ground of appeal is that the
      Adjudicator had failed to consider that an internal flight alternative
      was available to this appellant.

   6. On the first ground, he claimed that from an assessment of the country
      of origin information that was placed before us, there was evidence of
      a determination by the Nepalese authorities to meet the Maoist threats
      and that the army and the police in Nepal were determined to stamp out
      the Maoist rebel activities.

   7. The objective information placed before us consisted of:

         . The United States Department of State Country  Report  on  Human
           Rights Practices 2000.
         . A report dated March 2002 from the Office  of  the  Commissioner
           General for Refugees and Stateless Persons -  Belgium:  "Mission
           to Nepal - 21 January to 9 February 2002".
         . The CIPU Report - Nepal - Extended Bulletin 4 (July 2002).
         . News releases from Amnesty International, May and June 2002.

   8. Mr Wilkie referred us to the  extended  Bulletin  4,  paragraphs  3.8,
      3.14, and 3.15. These state that the government  has  claimed  results
      from military offensives since November [2001] with some 6,000 Maoists
      surrendering at the end of December 2001. It  also  reports  the  army
      moving against the Maoist guerrillas in February 2002 after almost 400
      people were murdered in the week before that.  Also  reported  is  the
      Nepalese Parliament's agreement to extend the state of  emergency  for
      three months from 22 February 2002.


   9. We were also referred to paragraph 4.20 which reports the police force
      being  supplemented  in  August  2001  and  joint  operations  between
      Paramilitary Police Force and the Royal Nepal Army.

  10. He submitted that had this appellant reported the incidents, where  he
      had been targeted by the Maoists and pressured to join them because of
      his military background, to the authorities in Nepal  then,  logically
      it was nonsense to suggest that the authorities would not take action.
      He submitted the objective information  indicated  that  the  Nepalese
      authorities would deal with such threats effectively. The  conclusions
      of the Adjudicator in this regard therefore he submitted were wrong.

  11. In relation to the Internal Flight Alternative (IFA) he submitted that
      it was unlikely that this appellant would be pursued by the Maoists if
      he moved to another part of Nepal. This had  been  given  insufficient
      consideration by the Adjudicator. The appellant  was  in  a  situation
      where, despite various threats had been made to him over a  period  of
      several months, there was no evidence of any actions taken  to  pursue
      him further. In this situation, the appellant had  available  to  him,
      the option of moving to a safe area. Mr Wilkie acknowledged that there
      were parts of Nepal (in the mid-west) where  the  Maoists  had  strong
      elements of control, but, there were other parts of the  country  that
      could be used as a place of relocation by the appellant. It would  not
      be unduly harsh for him to go there. In this regard, he referred us to
      the Belgium Report, at page 13, where it states:

           "Since getting a clear view of  the  present  situation  in  the
           country turned out to be  very  difficult,  the  office  of  the
           Commissioner General, during its mission, mainly focused on  the
           political situation and the situation  on  the  level  of  human
           rights before the state of emergency had  been  proclaimed,  all
           the more so because  most  of  the  Nepalese  asylum  cases  are
           situated in this period.


           This Report does not examine the violations of human  rights  by
           the Maoist Rebels thoroughly.


           The office of the Commissioner General  hereby  wants  to  state
           that it is very conscious of the  violations  committed  by  the
           Maoists, that have been  denounced  and  condemned  by  all  the
           contacts during the mission.

           Since this problem is only a marginal  aspect  in  the  Nepalese
           asylum cases (given that most asylum seekers claim that they are
           only persecuted by the Nepalese Government),  this  Report  will
           not deal with this problem.


           We can however state that Nepalese people who declare that  they
           are afraid of being  persecuted  by  the  Maoists  do  have  the
           possibility of internal flight.


           Within this group, defected Maoists, who previously occupied  an
           important post within the Party or within one of its satellites,
           do run a higher risk of being persecuted by Maoists, even in the
           big cities."

  12. He stressed the last two sentences of the above quote as being  highly
      relevant. Also in a footnote to the Report he  noted  it  states  that
      during the mission "we could also see that Kathmandu is still  a  safe
      city".


  13. Mr Wilkie further submitted that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  or
      unreasonable for this appellant to relocate to other  parts  of  Nepal
      away from  his  home  district,  as  he  was  clearly  from  his  army
      background, a person who had moved around in the past and been able to
      equip himself satisfactorily in different areas.

  14. In summary therefore, he submitted we should allow the appeal.


      The claimant's submissions:
  15. Mr Amin-Addo submitted that  the  acceptance  of  credibility  by  the
      Adjudicator, was strongly in favour of his claim, and that the  appeal
      appeared to be a second attempt to review the situation. He  submitted
      that the Adjudicator has referred to the objective country information
      and concluded that this appellant  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  a
      sufficiency of protection against the Maobadi on return to  Nepal.  He
      referred us to an Amnesty International Report of April  2002  "Nepal:
      Lives must be protected  during  coming  strike",  this  news  service
      report concludes with the following statement:


           "Since the start of the "Peoples War" there has been  increasing
           concern that  the  authorities  have  failed  to  impose  strict
           limitations on the use of force and  firearms  by  the  security
           forces or to  take  appropriate  actions  against  abuses.  This
           concern has heightened after the army was  called  out  and  the
           state of emergency imposed in late November 2001. Since then the
           number of alleged unlawful killings have increased dramatically.
           The reported incidents have included killings  of  civilians  in
           reprisal for the killing of police and army personnel by members
           of the CPN (Maoist):  killings  of  armed  members  of  the  CPN
           (Maoist) in circumstances where they could have been taken  into
           custody or where they  already  had  been  taken  prisoner,  and
           avoidable use of lethal force."


  16. Specifically, he submitted that this appellant would be targeted as an
      ex-soldier, the Maobadi were in need of his military skills and  thus,
      highly desirous of his  services.  He  submitted  that  the  objective
      information indicated there were a number of abuses  still  continuing
      and that he would not be able to access sufficiency of protection from
      the state.


  17. On the issue of relocation, he submitted that there were problems  for
      persons, such as the appellant, all over Nepal,  and  that  the  state
      authorities were too busy protecting themselves  to  take  actions  to
      protect a person such as this appellant.  He  submitted  that  if  the
      Maoists were so  rampant,  and  that  the  police  could  not  protect
      themselves, it was incorrect to assume that the appellant himself,  as
      a mere individual could obtain protection. He noted  the  comments  in
      the Belgian Report as to the IFA possibility, but submitted that  each
      case must turn on its own facts, and that given  that  this  appellant
      was an ex-soldier, the Maoists would still continue to target him  for
      his services. Thus, the real risk to him remained and he would not  be
      able to access meaningful protection from that risk.

  18. In reply, Mr Wilkie acknowledged that credibility was not at issue and
      that there was still violence being carried out in  Nepal,  but,  that
      the threats from the Maoists were reducing and must  be  seen  against
      the  commitment  by  the  authorities  to  stamp  out  the   terrorist
      activities. The appellant was thus  in  a  situation  where  he  could
      either access meaningful protection from the state and/or an  internal
      flight alternative was available to him.

      The issues:
  19. We found the issues before us to be:


          a) Either from the determination  of  the  Adjudicator,  or  from
             other objective information before us, is there a  sufficiency
             of protection available to this  appellant  against  potential
             risks  to  him  on  return  to   Nepal   from   the   Maobadi?
             Alternatively,
          b) If this appellant has a well founded fear  of  persecution  in
             his home district  in  Nepal,  is  there  an  internal  flight
             alternative available to him, and if so, would  it  be  unduly
             harsh or unreasonable for him to relocate elsewhere  in  Nepal
             and avoid the risks of persecution or maltreatment within  the
             provisions of Article 3 of the ECHR?


      Assessment:
  20. The Adjudicator in this matter found the appellant credible  and  that
      credibility assessment is not challenged by the Secretary of State  in
      this appeal. Given that  acceptance  of  credibility,  we  find  that,
      consequently, it is accepted that there is a real risk of serious harm
      to this appellant should he be returned to his home district in  Nepal
      which  he  described  as  Makonpur,  Chepakot  District,  Kaski.   The
      Adjudicator found that the appellant was thus at a real risk from  the
      Maobadi in that area.  He  went  to  find  that  the  Maobadi  operate
      throughout  Nepal,  and  that  from  his  assessment  of  the  country
      information, the appellant would be at a real risk of  being  murdered
      by the Maoists as an enemy of the revolution. In relation to the first
      issue, as to whether the appellant, being a person in fear of  a  non-
      state actor (Maobadi) could  access  sufficiency  of  protection,  the
      Adjudicator merely stated that "... from the background evidence,  the
      authorities  are  unable  to  afford  the  appellant  any,  let  alone
      sufficient, protection." Unfortunately, he does not go into any detail
      as to the reasons why  he  concludes  there  is  an  insufficiency  of
      protection.


  21. At this point, we remind ourselves of the accepted law in relation  to
      persecution from non-state actors,  and  that  in  such  a  situation,
      persecution can only be made out if the facts established both serious
      harm, and an absence of state protection. This is of course  noted  in
      Professor Hathaway's book, The Law of  Refugee  Status  (Butterworths,
      1991) at 125 where he states:

           "... in addition to identifying the human rights potentially  at
           risk in the country of origin, a decision on whether or  not  an
           individual faces a risk of "persecution"  must  also  comprehend
           security of the state's ability and willingness  effectively  to
           respond to that risk."

  22. This test was applied succinctly in the  decisions  of  the  House  of
      Lords in Shah [1999] 2AC 629 (HL) and in Horvath [2000] 3WLR 379 (HL).
      The formula in those decisions has been expressed  as:  Persecution  =
      Serious Harm + The Failure of  State  Protection.  We  have  carefully
      considered the submissions on state protection offered in  Nepal  that
      were presented by Mr Wilkie, and indeed, gone on to  consider  all  of
      the objective country information that was before us.  We  agree  that
      the objective country information does indicate that  the  government,
      army and police force in Nepal, are  applying  significant  effort  to
      confront the Maoist "Peoples War", or  interaction.  Balanced  against
      those activities we were directed to by Mr Wilkie, we must  also  note
      that the violence and  conflict  that  has  been  perpetrated  by  the
      Maoists, is of such a severe nature that, a state of emergency,  which
      was declared in November 2001, has been continued and  we  understand,
      is still  operative.  The  mere  fact  that  the  state  of  emergency
      continues, indicates the commitment to confront the problem, but  also
      implies that the Maoist threats are certainly not under control of the
      authorities to the extent, that there is a sufficiency of  protection,
      as envisaged in the decision in Horvath. Indeed, the CIPU  Report  for
      July 2002, indicates that the six-year war with the Maoists  has  seen
      the killing of some  2,000  people,  the  massacre  of  policemen  and
      soldiers, and only  a  small  number  of  some  200  Maoists  actually
      captured during this period. The same Report  indicates  army  actions
      being taken against Maoists to the extent that there is now  a  policy
      of shooting on sight. At paragraph 3.16 of the CIPU Report, it  states
      the political violence continued as at the end of March  2002  with  a
      bombing in Kathmandu in March 2002, where 25 people were injured.


  23. In addition, while it states that additional paramilitary armed police
      have been created to supplement the police force in 2001,  the  police
      themselves, have been targeted by Maoist armed groups, with  over  100
      policemen killed in the "People War" by May 2001. It also  reports  at
      paragraph 4.21, that: "Between November and  December  2001  over  100
      security personnel, mainly policemen were killed."

  24. The Belgian Report also is of assistance and, while we note,  that  it
      is written from the viewpoint of assessing  asylum  claims  by  Maoist
      sympathisers (rather than the opposite, which  is  the  situation  for
      this appellant), it does also indicate that the strength of the Maoist
      groups are very real. At page 17 of the Report it notes that of the 75
      districts in Nepal, some districts are struck harder  than  others  by
      the battle between the rebel army of  the  Maobadi  and  the  Nepalese
      police and army. A number of  districts  are  then  listed,  including
      several districts where the Maoists are stated  to  be  completely  in
      control, (with the  exception  of  district  headquarters,  where  the
      police and army are still stationed). It also states:

           "The local Nepalese police are the first  target  of  the  armed
           attacks by the Maoist rebels.


           Due to a shortage of men, and of modern weaponry  and  means  of
           communication, and  also  because  of  the  very  difficult  war
           against a guerrilla army - which carries  out  targeted  attacks
           very unexpectedly, and then  disappears  without  trace  -,  the
           police  are  said  to  be  contending   with   frustration   and
           demotivation.


           Reportedly, this frustration has driven the police to  punish  a
           lot  of  local  citizens  -  who  did  not  engage  in  military
           activities, but who have lent support to the Maoists (forced  or
           not) these "supporters" of the Maoists risk being persecuted  in
           these districts just because the police is apparently  not  able
           to deal with the real - militant - Maoists."

  25. We do note that the appellant's home district of Kaski is  not  listed
      as one of the districts where the Maoists are in control. However,  we
      are satisfied from the objective information that there is strength in
      the submission put forward by the claimant's  Counsel,  Mr  Anim-Addo,
      that the police  and  army  authorities  in  Nepal  are  significantly
      occupied in their own protection  to  the  extent  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable to expect them to provide protection  for  an  individual
      such as this appellant. There is also realism in the argument that  he
      would be reluctant to approach the police for fear of being  suspected
      as a Maoist himself.


  26. We are satisfied that in the current  situation,  given  the  relative
      profile of this appellant, which would not be seen as  significant  by
      the authorities, that there simply is not a sufficiency of  protection
      available to him by the authorities in Nepal. The  commitment  by  the
      Nepalese authorities to confront the Maoists threats appears, at  this
      time, to be very much at the level  of  the  state  of  emergency  and
      "civil war", rather than in the protection of a deserving individual.

  27. The submission, that there is a sufficiency  of  protection  for  this
      appellant, is therefore rejected. We find, that as  there  is  both  a
      real risk of serious harm on return to his  home  district,  and  that
      sufficiency of protection is not  available,  that  there  is  a  well
      founded fear of persecution on his return to that district.

  28. That risk is for a Convention reason,  namely  his  imputed  political
      opinion that he is against the Maoists.  This  is  clearly  a  Refugee
      Convention reason.

  29. We now turn to the second submission as to whether an Internal  Flight
      Alternative is available to this appellant. Mr Wilkie was not specific
      in this regard as to which alternative site in  Nepal,  the  appellant
      could safely relocate to, apart from a generalised reference to cities
      such as Kathmandu.

  30. From an assessment of the objective country information,  we  must  of
      course note at the outset, that several districts  within  Nepal  that
      are  actually  controlled  by  the  Maoists  themselves.  Clearly  the
      appellant would not be expected to relocate to those areas. The  issue
      before us, is therefore if this appellant were to relocate to a  place
      such as Kathmandu, whether he  would  be  able  to  access  meaningful
      protection in that site, and whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh,  or
      unreasonable to expect him to  relocate.  While  we  agree  that  this
      appellant is a mature man, who has been in the Indian  army  for  many
      years  and  thus,  the  prospect  of  relocation  is  not   one   that
      subjectively would by unduly harsh to him, we must also  look  at  the
      reality of his own predicament.  He  is  a  person  who  has  spent  a
      considerable career (1974 - 1992) in the army,  he  retired  with  the
      rank of sergeant. He is 45 years of age. It is accepted  that  he  has
      been targeted for his  usefulness  to  the  Maobadi  in  training  the
      Maobadi forces in firearms, military tactics and  intelligence.  Given
      this situation, and the fact that he  was  singled  out  in  his  home
      district as an ex-soldier, and  pressured  to  join  the  Maobadi,  we
      consider that there is still a real risk to this appellant, should  he
      relocate to other parts of Nepal, including Kathmandu. He is a  person
      who is of value to the  Maobadi  if  he  can  be  recruited.  In  this
      situation, we do not consider that his  risk  of  persecution  can  be
      alleviated by  relocation  to  another  part  of  Nepal,  and  IFA  is
      therefore unreasonable and unrealistic in his situation.


  31. We therefore also reject the submissions that an IFA is  available  to
      this appellant.

      Decision:
  32. We consider that the decision of the Adjudicator, whilst unfortunately
      too brief in its conclusions, is a correct  and  sustainable  one.  We
      find  that  the  Adjudicator  was  correct  in  concluding  that  this
      appellant is a refugee within the meaning  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the
      Refugee Convention 1951 and in addition to that, there is a real  risk
      of harm to him that would constitute a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR
      if he were returned to Nepal.


  33. The appeal is therefore dismissed.






                                                                  A R Mackey

                                                              Vice President
