
Hamza (Disputed Nationality - Removal Directions - Section 66(2) 1999 Act)
Kenya * [2002] UKIAT 05185


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 8th October 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                        ....11/11/02........................

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Collins (President)
                                Mr D K Allen
                            Professor D B Casson

Between:




                              JAMILA OMAR HAMZA


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant, Ms Jamila Hamza,  claimed  to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom by air from Kenya on 5th September 2000.  She  attended  at  the
    Home Office on 26th September and claimed asylum.  Her claim  was  based
    on her assertion that she was a citizen of Somalia, born on 2nd February
    1976.  She then gave an account  of  her  tribulations  upon  which  she
    relied to establish her asylum claim.  She had, in fact, she said, moved
    from Somalia to Kenya, but that was because of her fears of persecution,
    or so she alleged.

 2. The Secretary of State did not believe that she was  from  Somalia,  and
    indeed did not believe her account.  She admitted in interview that  she
    had entered the country using a false passport provided  to  her  by  an
    agent, that being a Dutch  passport  which  might  explain,  if  it  was
    accepted at face value by the Immigration Officer, how she  came  to  be
    admitted because she would have been regarded as a national of a country
    of the European Union.

 3. As we say, the Secretary of State did not believe her account  and  when
    it was pursued before the Adjudicator, he equally did not  believe  her.
    He decided she was not a national of Somalia.  Indeed, he  went  further
    and decided on the evidence  before  him,  that  she  positively  was  a
    citizen of Kenya.  That he decided, as he put  it,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  That is not directly material so far as this  appeal  is
    concerned, because all that is material is that it has been decided that
    she was not a national of Somalia.   What  she  was  doing  was  putting
    forward a lying and dishonest claim to try to enable her  to  remain  in
    this country.

 4. When the matter  came  before  the  Adjudicator,  the  question  of  the
    possibility of an appeal being made simultaneously under s 66(2) of  the
    1999 Act was raised.  That was based upon the decision of  the  Tribunal
    in Zeqaj [2002] UKIAT 00232, which was a case where the Home Office,  in
    error, had issued removal directions  to  a  Kosovar  to  Albania.   For
    reasons which need not concern us, that mistake was persisted in  before
    the Adjudicator and was still in existence  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant had, at all times, in that  case  asserted  that  he  was,  as
    indeed was the truth, a citizen of  Kosovo  and  when  the  matter  came
    before the Tribunal it was  decided  that  his  asylum  appeal  did  not
    succeed.  That was not altogether surprising.  When he had  left  Kosovo
    it may well be that an asylum  claim  might  have  had  merit,  but  the
    situation in Kosovo had changed  radically  since  then.   So  the  only
    question was whether the removal directions should stand.  The  Tribunal
    recognised that there was, if the appeal  were  dismissed,  at  least  a
    theoretical possibility that removal could take place to Albania because
    the appeal was, of course, against the removal directions on  the  basis
    of the asylum claim.  That seemed  to  the  Tribunal  to  be  wrong  and
    capable of working an injustice and, in the circumstances, on the  facts
    of that case, it was decided that leave  to  pursue  a  s  66(2)  appeal
    should be granted.  Mr Deller, who then  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State, as he has in this appeal before us, did not seek to argue against
    the decision of the Tribunal to permit the s  66(2)  appeal  to  proceed
    because, in that way, the  removal  directions  were  disposed  of.   Of
    course it would have been open to the Secretary of State to issue  fresh
    removal directions thereafter to Kosovo, which is what should have  been
    done in the first place.

 5. We have referred to Zeqaj because it is essential, in our view, to  bear
    in mind that it was a very  different  case  from  this  case.   We  are
    concerned with the circumstances of this case because it is by no  means
    unique.  There seems to be something of a culture of  people  coming  to
    this country claiming they are citizens of a country in which  there  is
    trouble and in which it  may  be  feasible  to  suggest  that  there  is
    persecution.  They spin a tale which fits in with the  circumstances  in
    that country and based on that they claim asylum.   This  case  involves
    Somalia.  The same assertions have been made, in the experience  of  the
    Tribunal, in connection with Afghanistan, Burundi and sometimes even Sri
    Lanka and parts of Eastern Europe, and we do not doubt  that  there  are
    other countries in respect of which similar allegations can be made.  It
    is therefore something of a growing problem.

 6. That being so, the Tribunal in a recent determination which  is  starred
    Asif  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  [2002]  UKIAT   004412   issued   a
    determination which, to a large extent, was intended to deal  with  this
    particular sort of situation.  In paragraph 14  of  that  determination,
    the Tribunal said this:


           "We firmly take the view that an Appellant cannot  be  heard  to
           claim, for the purposes of his asylum appeal, that he comes from
           a particular country and,  in  the  same  proceedings,  for  the
           purposes of s 66, that he does not come from that country.  That
           should be sufficient to deal with any case in which, in the same
           appeal, an Appellant claims that he is from a particular country
           but, if the Adjudicator does not believe that,  then  he  claims
           for the purposes of an appeal under s 66 that  he  is  not  from
           that country.  To do so is simply  an  abuse  and  we  will  not
           tolerate it.  It follows that an appeal under s 66, based on the
           falseness of the information given for the purposes of any other
           grounds of appeal in the same appeal, will not succeed."

      That approach we regard as a very proper one, but we have to  consider
      whether it fits in with the language of the Act because  we  recognise
      that as a Tribunal set up under statute, there may be  argument  about
      the extent of any inherent jurisdiction that we may have.


 7. We turn to the conclusions of the Adjudicator, Mr Varcoe, in the instant
    case.  In paragraph 37, he says this:

           "Now clearly at the time that the  directions  were  set,  there
           were indeed grounds  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State  could
           reasonably have set removal  directions  for  Somalia.   Had  he
           chosen instead to set directions to, say, Kenya, I suspect  that
           a representative for the Appellant would have argued  that  this
           was unreasonable since, on the face of  the  Appellant's  claim,
           this would have been the wrong country.  Accordingly, I conclude
           that since I deliberately did not deal with the nationality as a
           separate and preliminary issue, it is now open to me  to  regard
           an appeal under s 66(2), albeit it relates to an appeal under  s
           69(5) of the same Act, as being one which I need  not  consider.
           In any  case,  at  the  hearing  Mr  Masters,  representing  the
           Respondent, did not  specifically  either  consent  to  such  an
           extension of the grounds of appeal nor did he demur.  However, I
           cannot believe that the intention of Parliament was to allow  an
           Appellant first to put forward a claim for  asylum  based  on  a
           particular country and then, when it is shown that there was  no
           connection between the Appellant and that country, to argue that
           he should be able to alter the grounds of  appeal  so  that  the
           removal directions should be held to be invalid.  It seems to me
           that s 66 should not be interpreted in that manner.   Nor  do  I
           believe that the decision in Zeqaj requires me to do so."


 8. With those observations, we  entirely  agree.   We  should  go  back  to
    consider the precise wording  of  s  66  to  see  whether  the  approach
    suggested by Mr Varcoe conforms  to  the  proper  construction  of  that
    section.  S 66(2) reads:

           "(2)  That person [that is to say a person in  respect  of  whom
                 directions for his removal have been given  on  the  ground
                 that he is an illegal entrant which is the one that matters
                 in the  circumstances  of  this  case]  may  appeal  to  an
                 Adjudicator against the directions on the  ground  that  on
                 the facts of his case there was, in law, no power  to  give
                 them on the ground on which they were given.


           (3)   This section does not entitle a person to appeal while  he
                 is in the United Kingdom unless he is appealing under s  65
                 or s 69(5)."


      Now that enables a person,  in  respect  of  whom  appealable  removal
      directions have been given, to say not only that he is a  refugee  but
      also that there was no power to give the directions on  the  facts  of
      his case.  What he is not entitled to do is to blow hot and  cold  and
      say "On the facts of my case, I am a  national  of  country  A  and  I
      cannot be returned to country A because it would be contrary either to
      the Refugee Convention (s 69(5)) or the  Human  Rights  Convention  (s
      65).  But,  if you, the Adjudicator, decide that I am not  a  national
      of country A, then the removal directions cannot stand because, on the
      facts that you have then found, there would be in law no power to give
      them on the ground on which they were given".


 9. In our view, because, like Mr Varcoe, we do not believe that  Parliament
    could have intended an individual to rely on his own fraud to obtain  an
    advantage, s 66(2) must be construed to mean that the facts of his  case
    mean the facts asserted by the Appellant in support of his appeal.  That
    is to say that the Appellant is entitled to appeal under s 66(2) if, and
    only if, he asserts facts which mean that there was in law no  power  to
    give the directions on the ground on which they were given.  If he fails
    to establish those facts, his claim will fail.

10. Thus, to take the Zeqaj case, it was perfectly proper for the  Appellant
    in that case to say "You cannot direct my removal to Albania, because  I
    am, and it is my case that I am,  a  national  of  Kosovo,  and  not  of
    Albania".  No question of any deception, no  question  of  any  reliance
    upon his own fraud arose.  That being so, we are  satisfied  that  in  a
    case such as the one before us, if the Appellant were to try to  run  an
    appeal under s 69(5) or s 65 and an appeal under s  66(2)  on  different
    bases, the Adjudicator should require him to state what  his  case  was.
    If he was not prepared to assert other than he was  a  national  of  the
    country to which removal directions had  been  set,  then  the  s  66(2)
    appeal could not succeed.  Whatever may in due course  be  the  findings
    made by the Adjudicator, it would not in those circumstances get off the
    ground.  If that construction of s 66(2) is  correct,  then  it  is  not
    proper for a subsequent s 66(2) appeal to be made  opportunistically  or
    leave sought to advance such an appeal.  It would not only be  an  abuse
    of process, but also it would be contrary to the proper construction  of
    s 66(2), because it would not be an assertion that on the facts  of  the
    Appellant's case there was in law no power to  give  the  directions  in
    question.

11. We appreciate that this is perhaps to be regarded as a  somewhat  narrow
    construction of the wording of s 66(2), but we  believe  that  it  is  a
    construction which is necessary and which is clearly in accordance  with
    the intention of Parliament because, as we repeat, like  Mr  Varcoe,  we
    cannot conceive that Parliament would have permitted a person to come to
    this country, to put forward a fraudulent claim to be able to stay  here
    and then if that fraud was detected,  to  rely  upon  it  to  obtain  an
    advantage  to  enable  the  removal  directions   to   be   set   aside.
    Accordingly, we go further than the Tribunal in Asif Khan not because we
    do not agree with them, but because we take the view that not only would
    it be an abuse of the process (and the Tribunal may well have, albeit it
    is a creature of statute, an inherent power  to  prevent  its  processes
    being abused) but also because it is contrary to what we regard  as  the
    correct construction of s 66(2).

12. In this case, as we have indicated, Mr Varcoe not only did  not  believe
    that the Appellant came from Somalia, but found as a fact that she  came
    from Kenya.  Often, the Appellant in these cases does not  assert  other
    than that he or she comes from a particular country, and  when  that  is
    rejected it is not always easy to determine which country he or  she  in
    fact is from.  It would no doubt be of assistance to  the  Secretary  of
    State, and generally for the determination  of  the  correct  course  of
    action in relation to an individual, if  an  Adjudicator  were  able  to
    decide the issue of nationality.  Of course, we recognise  that  it  may
    well be in many cases that there is insufficient information  to  enable
    him to do so and we do not for a moment suggest that he should go off at
    a tangent and try to deal with matters which have not been  the  subject
    of any proper evidence.  But sometimes, and this case is a good example,
    it is  possible  because  there  are,  in  reality,  only  two  possible
    contenders - either the country from which the Appellant alleges  he  or
    she came, or some other country which is the obvious candidate.   As  we
    say, if an Adjudicator feels able to do that then it would be helpful if
    he did so, but he must bear in mind that  if  he  is  going  to  make  a
    positive finding against the Appellant, then he must do so  not  on  the
    asylum standard, but on a higher standard which would be the balance  of
    probabilities.  That indeed is the basis  upon  which  this  Adjudicator
    approached his task in that respect.

13. All in all, we regard this as an admirable  determination  and  for  the
    reasons given by the Adjudicator and developed by us, we  are  satisfied
    that the appeal was  correctly  dismissed.   Accordingly,  we  ourselves
    dismiss this appeal.









                                                                        MR
JUSTICE COLLINS



     PRESIDENT

