
ar                                                           Appeal No.
HX53224-01
              MH (Article 3 - Blind Person - KAA) Iraq CG [2002]  UKIAT
07196

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 16 January 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                         ...13 March 2003...

                                   Before:


                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                               Mr M E A Innes
                                Mr M G Taylor



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                            MAHMUD  ABDALLA  HAMA

                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
      I.J. French) who  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Mahmood  Abdalla  Hama
      (hereinafter for convenience referred to as the appellant) against the
      decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for
      asylum. The Adjudicator dismissed the asylum appeal  and  allowed  the
      appeal on human rights grounds only.

2.    Mr J. Jones appeared for the Secretary of State while Mr R. Frank,  of
      counsel, instructed by James Pearce & Co.,  solicitors,  appeared  for
      the appellant.  Counsel had been instructed late in the  day  but  was
      able to present the appellant's case with his usual skill and  ability
      and we are fully confident that the  appellant  has  in  no  way  been
      disadvantaged by the clerical oversight  that  led  to  counsel  being
      instructed late.

3.    The issue in this case is in fact a very narrow  one.   The  appellant
      has been a longstanding member of the  Patriotic  Union  of  Kurdistan
      (PUK) in the Kurdish Autonomous Area of Iraq (the KAA).  Unfortunately
      in April 1988 he was captured by the Iraqi forces and  ill-treated  to
      the extent that he has lost 60% of his vision in his left eye and  80%
      of his vision in his right eye and he  has  registered  blind  in  the
      United Kingdom.  Following  his release from detention  he  had  three
      operations on his eyes which  were  apparently  of  little  help.  The
      Adjudicator rejected the  appellant's  account  of  spying  activities
      between 1991 and 1999.  There has been no appeal from that  aspect  of
      the Adjudicator's decision. The Adjudicator  considered  and  rejected
      the appellant's case as a former active PUK member in the light of the
      ceasefire between the KDP and the PUK. He would not  face  persecution
      for a Convention reason because of that.  Again, there  is  no  appeal
      outstanding from that aspect of the Adjudicator's decision.

4.    The Adjudicator allowed the appeal for the reasons given in  paragraph
      27 of his determination which reads as follows:

             'This appellant is blind. There can be no doubt abut that. Not
             only are there medical certificates produced from  a  hospital
             in Iraq where he had three operations on his eyes, but  he  is
             registered blind with the UK  authorities. He appeared  to  me
             to handle his disability with dignity but  it  does  make  his
             position radically different from that of  a  fit  and  active
             young man if returned to the KAA.  Short  of  begging  on  the
             streets or the good fortune of meeting a benefactor  the  only
             way that this man would be able to survive in the KAA would be
             if he were returned to his family in Derbendikhan. I  have  no
             undertaking or other assurance from the respondent that  there
             would be any intention to  return  him  to  that  location  if
             indeed it were practical to do so. The only undertaking I have
             is that the appellant would be returned to the KAA and not  by
             way of the area under the   control  of  the  Baghdad  regime.
             Given this man's disability if he was  simply  deposited  over
             the border from Turkey, Syria or Iran into  the  KAA  area  he
             would to my mind be at  real  risk  of  suffering  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment.  In considering whether the minimum level
             of severity  is  reached  I  have  to  consider  the  physical
             situation of the appellant. This man faces enormous burdens in
             making his way in the KAA, other than in his hometown or  with
             the support of his family.  Although there is some  system  of
             civil administration in the KAA there is no system  of  social
             security as such and the  appellant  would  be  likely  to  be
             reduced to penury or to begging, possibly to both.  There is a
             real risk of him  facing  conditions  which  would  amount  to
             inhuman or degrading treatment.'

5.    The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal claim that the  Adjudicator  had
      erred in holding that  the  appellant's  Article  3  rights  would  be
      breached by his  return.  He  had  said  at  the  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator that prior to leaving Iraq he had been supported   by  his
      father and no doubt that support would continue  on  his  return.  The
      Adjudicator's approach was speculative and failed to take into account
      the fact that the appellant had  travelled  through  the  KAA  to  the
      United Kingdom and there was no reason why he could not make  his  way
      to his home area upon return.  The Adjudicator had not  taken  account
      of the fact that the appellant had  family  in  the  KAA  including  a
      father, wife and  six  children  who  might  be  able  to  assist  him
      returning.

6.    Mr  Jones  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  were  indeed
      speculative.   It  was  speculative  to  assume  he  would  simply  be
      deposited  near  the  border.  The  Adjudicator  had  focused  on  the
      logistics of him getting to his home area and there was no  real  risk
      of inhuman or degrading treatment. The threshold had not been reached.

7.    Mr Frank submitted that the appellant would  not  necessarily  receive
      the support of his family. The Adjudicator was not fanciful to suggest
      that the appellant would not get any help  and  would  be  reduced  to
      begging. There was no evidence as to  whether  the  family  was  still
      alive or still  in  the  area.  The  Adjudicator  had  considered  the
      physical  situation  of  the  appellant  in  paragraph   27   of   his
      determination.  The appellant's  rights  would  be  infringed  if  his
      family was not there to support him.

8.    Mr Jones pointed out that in paragraph 11  of  the  determination  the
      Adjudicator  had  stated  in  terms  that  the  appellant  came   from
      Derbendikhan where his father had 'and still has  a  vegetable  shop'.
      There was no evidence that the appellant's family  would  not  support
      him.

9.    We reserved our  determination.   We  have  carefully  considered  the
      issues in this case which, as we have observed, fall within  a  fairly
      narrow compass. It does appear to us implicit in paragraph 27  of  the
      determination that the Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant  would
      be looked after by his family in Derbendikhan.   The  Adjudicator  was
      concerned with the prospect of  the  appellant  being  dumped  at  the
      border.  We do not consider that approach to be correct, indeed it  is
      purely speculative.  It would be wrong to assume that the Secretary of
      State would remove someone and dump them  in  such  circumstances.  In
      cases involving the return of children, for example, arrangements  are
      made with the receiving country.  In this case, the  appellant  has  a
      family in the KAA and it appears from the Adjudicator's  determination
      that the father  has a shop in the home area.   The  appellant  has  a
      wife and six children and, as we have observed,  it  appears  implicit
      that the Adjudicator accepts that the appellant would be looked  after
      by his family.  It defies commonsense to suggest  that  the  appellant
      would not receive some assistance from  a  member  of  his  family  in
      getting home. As the grounds of appeal point out,  the  appellant  was
      able to leave Iraq and, on his account, went to Turkey  and  found  an
      agent in Istanbul to make the  arrangements  to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  He had lived for very many years  in  the  KAA  as  a  blind
      person. There is  no  basis  in  our  view  for  the  assumption  that
      returning him to the KAA  would  breach  his  Article  3  rights.  The
      Adjudicator's findings on the issue are wholly unsustainable.

10.   The appellant has not made out  his  case  to  the  required  standard
      under Article 3.

11.   For the reasons we have given, the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  is
      reversed and the appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                   G. WARR

                               VICE PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      1


