
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX/03995/2002     |
|On 2 September 2002        |        |IM (Article 3-Orthodox      |
|                           |        |Jew-Military Service) Russia|
|                           |        |CG [2002] UKIAT 05952       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|08/01/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Chairman)                                           |
|Mrs E Hurst, JP                                                   |
|Mr D R Bremmer                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ivan Malyutin                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:


For the appellant:           Mr C Yeo

                       Refugee Legal Centre (London)
For the respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Russia, appeals with leave of the Tribunal
      against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Miss  J   Grimmett)
      dismissing his appeal against the refusal  of  the  respondent  on  15
      November 2001 to refuse to vary his leave to enter or  remain  and  to
      refuse him asylum.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14  November  1998  and
      was granted leave to enter as a student.  He applied for asylum on  23
      June 1999 while he still had leave.

   3. The appellant's claim to asylum is that he is a member of the  Naturey
      Karta denomination of Orthodox Judaism.  He was called up for military
      service in 1993  but  as  he  was  in  hospital  following  a  nervous
      breakdown, he  was  told  that  he  would  not  be  called  up  during
      peacetime.  However, in 1999  while  he  was  in  the  UK  his  mother
      received a letter requiring him to go for  a  medical  assessment  for
      military service.  When told that  he  was  out  of  the  country  the
      authorities said he should contact them on return.

   4. He said that he has  a  moral  and  religious  objection  to  military
      service as he is a pacifist.  There  is  no  alternative  to  military
      service in Russia at present and even if  there  were,  he  could  not
      undertake it as he would not be allowed  to  follow  his  religion  in
      particular and would interfere with holy  days,  fasting  and  dietary
      requirements.   He  would  be  imprisoned  for  failing  to  undertake
      military service.  The condition and treatment of prisoners in Russian
      prisons is inhuman and degrading.  He would also be at risk because of
      his religion.

   5. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant  belongs  to  the  Naturey
      Karta.  She also found  that  he  has  a  conscientious  objection  to
      military service in view of his religion.  However, in light of  Sepet
      and Bubul that  is  not  sufficient  to  bring  him  within  the  1951
      Convention.

   6. The Adjudicator found that all of those called up have an  80  percent
      chance of  avoiding  military  service  according  to  the  background
      evidence.  This appellant would appear statistically to have a smaller
      risk than that as he only has to avoid it for a further 14 months when
      he will be 27 rather than for the full nine years.  It also  seems  up
      to him to contact the authorities as that is what they  have  said  to
      his mother.  This suggests that they are unlikely to come looking  for
      him.

   7. As to the Adjudicator's  findings  that  the  appellant  would  appear
      statistically to have a smaller risk because he can  avoid  it  for  a
      further 14 months when he will be 27, we agree with  Mr  Yeo  that  we
      have to decide the appeal as if  the  appellant  were  to  be  removed
      today, when he is 26 years old rather than look to the future, in fact
      next year when he will reach the age of 27.

   8. The Adjudicator found that in addition the appellant has in  the  past
      obtained exemption because of his ill  health  as  he  had  a  nervous
      breakdown when originally called up.  Therefore there is a  reasonable
      chance that that will provide him with further exemption on return  as
      the authorities will be aware of his medical history.   She  therefore
      thought that his chances of being forced to undertake military service
      are small  and  therefore  his  chances  of  facing  imprisonment  for
      refusing to undertake it are equally small.  Those working abroad  can
      seek exemption as can some who are continuing with their studies.   It
      may be that the appellant can apply now for exemption as  his  studies
      will not end until next year when he will be 27.  The  Tribunal  found
      in relation to these findings that they  were  not  supported  by  any
      independent background material and are therefore not sustainable.

   9. The issues in this case are whether as a result of  his  conscientious
      objection to military service, the appellant can bring himself  within
      the 1951 UN Convention and/or whether there  are  substantial  grounds
      for believing that there is a real risk of a breach of  Article  3  of
      the ECHR on his removal from the United Kingdom.  Furthermore, whether
      there is an alternative to military service for this appellant.

  10. Mr McGirr submitted BBC News report dated 28 July 2002 which  reported
      that the Russian President had signed a  bill  into  law  creating  an
      alternative to military  service  for  conscientious  objectors.   The
      alternative service is expected to involve largely menial jobs,  often
      for the armed forces.

  11. Mr Yeo however submitted that it is not clear from this evidence  that
      there is an alternative to military service and that the  report  does
      not say what the alternative is.  If it does involve menial  work  for
      the military, it would offend against the appellant who does not  wish
      to have any involvement with the military  or  military  warfare.   He
      submitted that it is possible to get around military  service  if  one
      paid a bribe or through  illegal  means  but  this  appellant  is  not
      willing to engage in any such means because of his conscience.  If  he
      refuses to serve he faces the risk of imprisonment for  one  to  three
      years, according to paragraphs 4.10 and 4.11 of the April CIPU report.
       According to an Amnesty International  report  covering  events  from
      January to December 2001, that although  the  right  to  conscientious
      objection  is  enshrined  in  the  constitution,  in  practice  courts
      continued to imprison objectors.  In light of this  Mr  Yeo  submitted
      that even though there is  now  passed  into  law  an  alternative  to
      military service, he would argue that the government has  not  changed
      its culture and therefore the situation still remains uncertain.

  12. Mr Yeo submitted that during his period of imprisonment, the appellant
      is likely to suffer ill treatment.  According to Amnesty International
      the police continue  to  torture  and  ill-treat  detainees  in  their
      custody.  Up to a million people are held  in  overcrowded  conditions
      that often constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.   Medical
      care is generally inadequate.  Therefore for an orthodox Jew  such  as
      the appellant, the conditions would  render  him  vulnerable  and,  on
      account of his appearance he would  be  treated  far  worse  than  the
      general inmates.  Mr Yeo however accepted that there is  no  objective
      evidence as to how Jews are treated in prison.  According to paragraph
      4.25 of the CIPU report, correctional labour colonies (ITKs) hold  the
      bulk of convicts.  There are educational labour colonies for juveniles
      (VTKs) but their conditions are significantly  better  than  in  ITKs,
      where torture, beatings and rape still occur.  In the  light  of  this
      evidence Mr Yeo submitted that as  an  orthodox  Jew  in  prison,  the
      appellant will be in a difficult position and  will  not  be  able  to
      observe religious practice.   The  prison  conditions  for  him  would
      amount to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

  13. Mr Yeo submitted that there is a Convention reason in this  case;   it
      is the ill treatment the appellant will suffer, more  because  of  his
      religion than his ethnicity.  Although he would accept that because of
      Sepet and Bubul the Convention reason just has to be partial and  does
      not have to be the sole reason for his objection to military  service.



  14. Mr McGirr submitted that there was no evidence before the  Adjudicator
      nor before the Tribunal that the appellant is likely to be called  up.
      What we do know is that as of 28 August 2002 there has been  a  change
      in legislation.  The BBC News site gives details  of  the  alternative
      service.  The suggestion is put that the appellant would not serve  in
      any capacity in the military.  That being the case he will have a non-
      military option because the BBC News site says  that  the  service  is
      likely to involve doing menial jobs for the  military  or  working  as
      hospital orderlies or carers in orphanages.  Furthermore the appellant
      is going to be exempt on age grounds in the near future.  If,  indeed,
      the appellant has a sufficiently  strong  conscientious  objection  to
      military  service,  he  would  have  contacted  the  authorities   and
      explained the situation.  There is no evidence that the appellant  has
      made such efforts.  The objective evidence shows that  80  percent  of
      those who do fall within the  required  age  band  do  not  serve  for
      whatever reason.  There is no  suggestion  that  the  80  percent  are
      imprisoned.  The appellant is not likely to be called up and  even  if
      he is, he has an alternative and does not have  to  face  imprisonment
      and therefore not face poor prison conditions.

  15. As regards Article 3,  he  would  refer  us  to  paragraph  9  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination where she said that Moscow is a relatively
      liberal city for Jewish people according to the Union of  Councils for
      Soviet Jews.  President Putin is committed to fighting  anti-Semitism.
      According to paragraph 5.21 of the CIPU report the 1990s saw a  Jewish
      revival in  Russia,  as  Jewish  communities  worked  to  re-establish
      religious, social and cultural life and to provide for  the  education
      and  welfare  of  their  people.   The  focal  point  of  the   Jewish
      renaissance has been Moscow, where  almost  all  international  Jewish
      organisations, numbering over a hundred, are  represented,  and  where
      numerous religious, academic and social  events  and  programmes  have
      been organised.  The Jewish cultural, religious and social revival has
      been accompanied by a political renaissance.  Paragraph  5.22  reports
      that in  July  2000  Russia's  Chief  Rabbi  stated  that  the  Jewish
      community experienced no more anti-Semitism there than  in  any  other
      eastern European nation and much less  than  in  some  countries.   Mr
      McGirr therefore  submitted  that  this  evidence  combined  with  the
      alternative service suggests that in the Putin era, Russia has changed
      significantly and it is reforming.   The  Tribunal  decisions  in  the
      appellant's objective bundle are concerned with circumstances from  an
      earlier period.   Therefore  the  appellant  will  not  face  military
      service or ill treatment in breach of Article 3.

  16. In reply Mr Yeo submitted that the 80 percent who fail to  respond  to
      the call up may not be in prison because there are  different  reasons
      for avoiding a call up either through legitimate  ways  or  illegally.
      Neither option would be available to the appellant as he is not in the
      position of the vast majority of those called up.  The  treatment  the
      appellant will receive will be  far  worse  because  of  his  Orthodox
      Judaism.

  17. The objective evidence before the Tribunal says that military  service
      is compulsory for those between 18 and 27  but  80  percent  of  those
      called up evade conscription.  Although the appellant will be 27 years
      old in July of next year, we take cognisance of the fact that  we  are
      only required to consider the consequences of removal of the appellant
      as at today.  Therefore he is 26 years  old  and  still  eligible  for
      military  service.   The  Adjudicator  has  found  that   he   has   a
      conscientious objection to military service as a pacifist.  However as
      recognised by Mr Yeo, conscientious objection has to be motivated by a
      Convention reason. In the light of Sepet and  Bubul,  the  Adjudicator
      rightly found that his conscientious objection was not  sufficient  to
      bring him within the Convention.

  18. The next argument put forward by Mr Yeo  was  that  the  appellant  is
      likely to be imprisoned for a period one to three years if he fails to
      serve in the military.  Given that the  appellant  does  not  want  to
      serve in any capacity in the military, the question  that  has  to  be
      asked is whether he is likely to suffer a period of imprisonment.  The
      objective evidence shows that 80 percent  of  those  called  up  avoid
      military service.   The fact that the appellant  is  an  Orthodox  Jew
      does not, of itself, mean that he will be unable  to  avoid  call  up.
      Furthermore, we have no evidence as to what proportion of this  number
      is  actually  imprisoned.   According  to  the  report  from   Amnesty
      International,  although  the  right  to  conscientious  objection  is
      enshrined  in  the  constitution,  in  practice  courts  continued  to
      imprison objectors.  However it was recognised that this was at a time
      when there was no law authorising  alternative  civilian  service  and
      courts were often inconsistent in their support for applications  from
      men seeking a civilian alternative  to  compulsory  military  service.
      Such evidence does not lend support to Mr Yeo's argument.

  19. Furthermore there is now an alternative to military service  that  has
      now passed into law.  Therefore the chances  of  the  appellant  being
      imprisoned for failing to undertake military service are remote.

  20. According to the BBC News site the service is likely to involve  doing
      menial jobs for the military  or  working  as  hospital  orderlies  or
      carers in orphanages, though this has not been made  explicit  by  the
      law.  Whilst we accept that this appellant does not want to  have  any
      involvement with the military in  any  capacity,  the  alternative  to
      military service does indicate that there is an alternative for  doing
      menial jobs outside of the military, such as  working  as  a  hospital
      orderly or a carer in an orphanage.

  21. Accordingly, were the appellant removed to Russia today, there  is  no
      reasonable likelihood that he would suffer imprisonment as a result of
      his conscientious objection and therefore not face  imprisonment;  nor
      are there substantial grounds for believing that he would  suffer  ill
      treatment of any kind on account of his religion  or  ethnicity  as  a
      result of his refusal to serve in the army.

  22. Accordingly, his appeal is dismissed.




                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President








