
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX44402-2001      |
|On 21 May 2002             |        |DK (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection-KAA-Blood Feud)  |
|                           |        |Iraq CG [2002] UKIAT 03608  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......9TH august 2002 ...................................        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Chairman)                                           |
|Lady Bonham-Carter                                                |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|DANA LATEEF KAREZA                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:


For the appellant:           Ms F Webber, of Counsel, instructed by

                       Winstanley-Burgess, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Iraq,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
        Tribunal against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  T  R
        Cockrill)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
        respondent made on 4 June 2001 to give directions for  his  removal
        from the United Kingdom following refusal to grant him asylum.

     2. In this case the appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  21
        April 1999.  He was picked up by Dover Enforcement Unit and claimed
        asylum the same day.   He submitted a Statement of Evidence Form on
        20 May 1999.  He was interviewed by the Home Office on 22 May 2001.
         The reasons for the refusal of his asylum application are set  out
        in a letter dated 23 May 2001.

     3. The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum is  his  fear  of  the
        Rash family.  The Rash family had acted  on  behalf  of  the  Iraqi
        authorities to remove Kurds from their villages and place them in a
        camp.  Despite the protestations of the appellant's  father  to  Mr
        Gathora Rash, the project went ahead and was eventually  completed.
        The appellant's family moved under sufferance  to  the  camp.   The
        appellant's father had the support of Peshmergas against Rash.   In
        1981/1982 Mr Rash was killed alongside his  cousins  apparently  by
        Peshmergas.  It was considered that the appellant's father  was  in
        some way responsible for the killing.  The appellant asserted  that
        his father was not behind the killing and nor indeed did he ask the
        Peshmergas' to kill Rash.   In  1990  the  appellant's  father  was
        killed by the Iraqi security forces.   It  was  believed  that  the
        reason behind the killing of the appellant's father was that he had
        been in some way responsible for Mr Rash's death.  Mr Rash had been
        an agent of the Iraqi government, in the view of the appellant.  In
        1991 Mr Rash's family attempted to avenge his death  and  attempted
        to kill both the appellant and his paternal uncle.  The uncle ran a
        grocery shop but they did  not  pursue  their  plans  to  kill  the
        appellant because the appellant believed that they were aware  that
        he and indeed his uncle gained support  from  the  KDP.   The  Rash
        family were supported by the PUK.  Although the  appellant  himself
        was not a member of the  KDP,  his  maternal  uncle  was  a  senior
        member.  In about 1993 or 1994 the  family  were  forced  to  close
        their shop and relocate to Shaqwala.  This was because  Suleimaniya
        was to be under the control of the KDP.   Shaqwala  remained  under
        KDP control and so the appellant felt relatively safe there.

     4. The appellant's paternal uncle  was  killed  in  1994  in  a  fight
        between the KDP and PUK.  The KDP took control of  Erbil  in  1994.
        Although the appellant  continued  to  feel  relatively  safe  from
        attack because he remained in a KDP dominated area,  there  was  an
        occasion on 5 December 1998 when he was shot at from  a  taxi.   He
        considered that this was an attempt either to kill him or to kidnap
        him.  The person who had fired at him belongs to the  Rash  family.
        This  incident  was  reported  straight  away  to  the  police.   A
        description was given of the attacker and the car in which  he  had
        been travelling.  Although the police notified the  checkpoints  on
        the way to Suleimaniya the car was  not  spotted.   No  arrest  was
        made.  The police could not provide  the  appellant  with  24  hour
        protection.  The appellant considered that he was not safe and went
        to Shaqwala and into hiding.  Arrangements were then made  for  him
        to leave the country.

     5. The appellant felt that a truce could not  be  organised  with  the
        Rash family because he could not see them in order to negotiate it.
         If there was a means of  effecting  that  reconciliation  then  he
        would take advantage of it.  He did not know where the Rash  family
        were currently living and thought it was Suleimaniya.   Suleimaniya
        was under PUK control and Erbil was under KDP control at  the  time
        that he was last in Iraq.

     6. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had got a fear  of  the
        Rash family but  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Rash  family  were
        indirectly responsible for the death of his father at the hands  of
        the Iraqi authorities.  He was not satisfied that any positive link
        has been made by the appellant.  What emerged from the evidence and
        seemed to be in no way an  issue  was  that  the  Rash  family  are
        supported by the PUK.  This is to be contrasted with the  situation
        of the appellant.  He has gained and so has his family support from
        the KDP.  The Adjudicator found that the appellant made  deliberate
        efforts to remain within the KDP dominated areas such as Erbil  and
        Shaqwala.  On the totality  of  the  evidence  he  found  that  the
        appellant can  be  safe  within  KDP  dominated  areas.   What  the
        appellant has described is clearly personal animosity from  certain
        members of the Rash family towards his own.  That is not  a  matter
        which engages the Convention.  The Adjudicator considered that  the
        appellant readily turned to his local police after the incident  of
        shooting and efforts were made  apparently  to  try  to  catch  the
        perpetrator.  Therefore should there be any repetition of  criminal
        acts on the part of the Rash family against the  appellant  in  the
        future, then he ought to turn immediately to  the  authorities  for
        appropriate protection.  The KDP dominated areas are quite distinct
        from those run by the PUK.   In the judgement  of  the  Adjudicator
        the Rash family are not agents  of  persecution.   The  Adjudicator
        rejected the argument that the appellant is a member  of  a  social
        group.

     7. The grounds of appeal form part of the bundle of papers before  the
        Tribunal.  The arguable issue was whether the KDP  are  capable  of
        providing the appellant with adequate and effective protection from
        the Rash family, who the Adjudicator considered were not agents  of
        persecution.

     8. At the hearing Counsel submitted a supplementary skeleton  argument
        on behalf of the appellant.  She also submitted various  precedents
        she intended to rely on.

     9. Counsel accepted that the recent Court of Appeal case of  Skenderaj
        (25 April 2002) is  binding  on  the  Tribunal.   Counsel  however,
        submitted that Skenderaj is distinguishable.  In Skenderaj the root
        cause of the issue between the families was a land  dispute,  which
        is clearly outside the bounds of the Convention; and is similar  to
        Quijano  where  the  root  cause  of  the  issue  was  criminality.
        However, she would  submit  that  this  appellant's  appeal  has  a
        political background.   The  family  in  this  case  constitutes  a
        particular social group because of their political background which
        gives it its root cause, namely, imputed  political  opinion.   The
        political nature of the feud is emphasised by the support  for  the
        families by the PUK and KDP respectively.  Therefore the protection
        issue is the same whether it is an asylum Convention  claim  or  an
        Article 3 claim.

    10. Counsel then called Dr Maria O'Shea to give evidence.  Dr O'Shea is
        a  Research  Associate  of  the   Geopolitics   and   International
        Boundaries Research Centre and  Honorary  Research  Fellow  of  the
        Centre and Near and Middle East Studies, at the School of  Oriental
        and African Studies, University  of  London.   She  has  particular
        research interest in the  countries  of  the  northern  middle-east
        Iran,  Turkey  and  Iraq  and  the  regions  stateless  minorities,
        particularly the Kurds.

    11. A witness statement from Dr O'Shea had been submitted in advance of
        the hearing.

    12. Dr O'Shea was asked for her opinion as to whether  there  could  be
        protection in cases of blood feuds and revenge attacks in the light
        of paragraph 9 of her report  which  talked  about  the  disordered
        nature of the administrative control of the KAA.   Dr  O'Shea  said
        that as recently as 6 May 2002 a car was routinely stopped  at  the
        Kurdistan regional control point.  It was found  to  contain  three
        armed men who opened fire and killed one of the army officers.  The
        car was pursued but no action was taken because the armed men  fled
        into an area under the control of IMIK who are in  turn  controlled
        by the Iraqi government.  Dr O'Shea  said  that  segmentary  tribal
        politics apply in the KAA.  The PUK are reluctant  to  take  action
        against their own if the  problems  involves  tribal  families  and
        clans.  It was put to her that this appellant was attacked  by  the
        PUK in a KDP controlled area and asked how common or uncommon  such
        an event was.  Dr O'Shea said that she had heard  several  accounts
        of such events.  There is a distinct breakdown of law and order  in
        the KAA and the borders between the  regions  are  permeable.   Two
        weeks ago the PUK and KDP  met  in  Germany  to  discuss  a  merger
        because of the artificial distinction between them.  Dr O'Shea said
        that police officers will not pursue  suspects  into  each  other's
        area.  There is a policy of  not  officially  deporting  people  to
        either region and there is no formal extradition treaty between the
        KDP and PUK.

    13. Dr O'Shea said that it is  not  possible  to  separate  family  and
        politics in Kurdistan or Iraq.  There can be few Kurds who  do  not
        have tribal affiliations.  There is a segmentary structure in place
        which says that the enemy of my brother is my enemy.  A family  can
        be a small unit but it can unite together at increasing high  level
        if one of  their own is insulted.  Tribal revenge  can  go  on  for
        years and years.  Individuals can choose to support a party outside
        of their tribe.   The  feud  might  end  by  mediation.   The  main
        mediator will be a religious person called a sheif.  At the  moment
        there is a shortage of sheifs because there is a decline  in  young
        people's respect for mediators.  If the KDP  and  PUK  merge  their
        areas, there will be an increase in the freedom of  the  tribes  to
        move around.

    14.  Under  cross-examination  Dr  O'Shea  said   that   she   obtained
        information about the 6 May 2000 incident from the Habbjah web site
        which is owned by Kurdish people.  The incident was  also  reported
        on one of the Kurdish TV stations.

    15. Dr O'Shea accepted that there were organised municipal elections in
        the KAA which international observers considered to  be  fair.   Dr
        O'Shea was asked why she thought the authorities would not be  able
        to provide the appellant with protection considering  that  he  had
        visited the police after he was shot at and they had taken  action.
        Dr O'Shea replied that as the appellant  said,  the  police  cannot
        provide  him  with  24  hour  protection.   There  is   a   general
        lawlessness which makes it difficult for the authorities to protect
        anyone.  If it was difficult to protect  Mr  Bhazani,  then  it  is
        unlikely  that  the  authorities  would  put  much  effort  in   to
        protecting the appellant.

    16. Dr O'Shea agreed that in the absence  of  the  appellant  from  the
        area, it is possible that other members  of  the  family  could  be
        attacked, but added that it is unlikely to be female members.   She
        said that the absence of a member can break the feud.  She was then
        asked why it is that Mr Siwaily, the appellant's  uncle,  has  been
        able to return to the KAA three times since he  left  the  country.
        Dr O'Shea replied that Mr Siwaily is a senior  figure  in  KDP  and
        moreover he would return for short trips to fortified KDP borders.

    17. We then heard submissions from Counsel.  On the issue of protection
        Counsel submitted that the fact that the appellant  readily  turned
        to the local police and efforts were made is not conclusive on  any
        issue of protection.  In Souad Noune  [2001]  INLR,  the  Court  of
        Appeal said at page 540, paragraph 28, that an authority doing  its
        best is not enough to disqualify a potential victim  from  being  a
        refugee.  In Kacaj the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  held  that  the
        obligations under the 1950 Convention can extend  to  the  need  to
        protect an individual against relevant ill-treatment  by  non-state
        actors provided the receiving  state  is  unable  or  unwilling  to
        provide such protection as is necessary.  However,  that  does  not
        mean that there will always be a sufficiency of protection whenever
        the authorities in  the  receiving  state  are  doing  their  best.
        Counsel submitted that Kacaj makes it clear that  Horvath  was  not
        talking about deemed protection by way of a justified legal  system
        but a practical standard of protection.  The  case  of  Hari  Dhima
        also decides that the test for the sufficiency of protection is the
        same test as in Kacaj and Horvath.  Counsel also cited the case  of
        Widgery Soldiers and Others (C/2001/2538) which is about  the  test
        of real risk of harm for the purposes of Article 3.  It was decided
        in Widgery that it is the same test as in the  Refugee  Convention.
        In Widgery the issue was whether British soldiers involved  in  the
        Londonderry incident will have to go there  to  give  evidence  and
        whether there would be a risk of terrorist attacks  on  them.   The
        Court of Appeal accepted that there would be no terrorists  attacks
        on a Guildhall in Londonderry and that security forces in  Northern
        Ireland were extremely competent  and  would  use  all  their  best
        efforts to ensure that no such attacks took place.   The  Court  of
        Appeal however decided that the soldiers  would  be  vulnerable  to
        attacks and because such  a  risk  could  not  be  ruled  out,  the
        soldiers  would  have  cause  to  have  fears  for  their   safety.
        Therefore considerations of the Convention meant  that  they  would
        not have to do so as there was a  real  possibility  of  prohibited
        harm.  Counsel therefore argued that if in the context of  Northern
        Ireland where the security forces  are  amongst  the  best  in  the
        world, the soldiers were considered to be vulnerable, then how much
        more of a real risk there would be for this appellant when  clearly
        the authorities in the KDP areas are unable to provide  appropriate
        protection for him.

    18. The appellant's uncle,  Hoshyar  Siwaily  was  a  KDP  official  in
        Europe.  He says in his statement at paragraph 4 that in March 2001
        a very prominent KDP member, Francois Hariri was assassinated.   He
        was the governor of Erbil.  In paragraph  5  of  his  statement  he
        talks about the killing of his cousin in 1987 and the flight of his
        cousin's family  to  the  United  Kingdom  because  of  a  lack  of
        protection.  According to Dr O'Shea in paragraph  8  of  the  first
        section of  her  report,  the  Kurdish  parties  are  not  able  to
        administer the regions  under  their  control.   According  to  the
        evidence of the UNHCR of November  2000  there  is  fragmented  and
        localised control by IMIK.  Counsel therefore submitted that  there
        is very clear and strong evidence that the authorities in that part
        of Iraq are unable, with the best will in the world, to provide the
        appellant with protection.   Therefore  the  appellant  cannot  not
        avail himself of the protection of the authorities in that region.

    19.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator   erred   in   equating
        willingness with ability.  Given  the  facts  that  he  found,  the
        Tribunal can accept and find that an inference can be drawn on  the
        facts and in the light of the background evidence that there is  an
        inability of the authorities in the KAA to offer protection to  the
        appellant and therefore his claim is made out.  As to  whether  the
        appellant's claim has a Convention reason or not, Counsel submitted
        that the case is about a blood  feud.   The  appellant  by  logical
        position as a son makes him a target.   The  Adjudicator's  finding
        that he was not satisfied that  the  Rash  family  were  indirectly
        responsible for the death of the appellant's father at the hands of
        the Iraqi authorities is not against the weight  of  the  evidence.
        It does not affect the  Adjudicator's  decision.   The  Adjudicator
        accepted that the appellant has a fear of the Rash family.  One has
        to look at the root cause of the issue and she  would  submit  that
        this family constitutes a social group by reason of  its  political
        opinion.  The Rash family  believed  that  the  appellant's  father
        killed their father for a political reason because of  the  removal
        of Kurds from their village in which Rash elder  had  participated.
        It is that  political  opinion  which  turns  this  family  into  a
        particular social group.   A family which is distinguished  by  its
        political opinion and can be expected to be persecuted by reason of
        its political opinion.

    20. Counsel submitted that to return the appellant  to  the  KAA  would
        give rise to a breach of Article 3.  Counsel relied on the decision
        in Soering in support of her argument.  She said that the  decision
        in McQuillan [1995] 4ALL ER 400 is more apposite.  At 423 Sedley  J
        said   that   in   his   judgement   the   applicant's   testimony,
        uncontroverted as it was before him, is  evidence  of  a  real  and
        continuing threat to his life, with a further consequence that  the
        effect of the exclusion order is to  subject  him  to  the  inhuman
        treatment of being for all practical purposes confined to one  part
        of the United Kingdom where his life and his  family's  safety  are
        most at risk.  Counsel therefore submitted that there is acceptance
        in the domestic context that putting somebody  at  risk  on  return
        constitutes inhuman treatment where they  are  in  fear  for  their
        life.  She would  therefore  ask  us  to  find  in  favour  of  the
        appellant.

    21. Mr Ekagah submitted that Counsel has not been able  to  distinguish
        this case from Skenderaj.  There is no link in  this  case  of  the
        cause of the blood feud to a political opinion.   The  evidence  of
        the appellant is that his father protested against the movement  of
        the family to a camp as far back as 1981/82 when Rash  was  working
        as an agent of the Iraqi government.  Today  the  Rash  family  now
        support the PUK and the appellant's family support the  KDP.   Both
        these parties are against the Iraqi government.  So  it  cannot  be
        argued that the Rash family  is  against  the  appellant's  family.
        According to Dr O'Shea the two parties met and were  considering  a
        merger.  So the issue here has nothing to do  with  differences  in
        their political opinion.

    22. Mr Ekagha submitted that the  Adjudicator  did  not  make  a  clear
        finding that the appellant was shot at by the  Rash  family.   That
        incident happened over 10 years after the head of the  Rash  family
        had been killed.  The authorities  within  the  KDP  were  able  to
        provide protection to the appellant.  As soon as  he  reported  the
        incident, a road block was informed but the car  was  not  spotted.
        It is  therefore  not  right  to  say  that  the  authorities  were
        ineffective.

    23. Mr Ekagha asked the Tribunal  not  to  give  the  evidence  of  the
        appellant's uncle Siwaily  much  weight.  In  paragraph  5  of  his
        uncle's statement he said he was a KDP  commander.   We  know  that
        Siwaily is in the UK and has exceptional leave to remain.

    24. Mr Ekagha also asked us not to accept  Dr  O'Shea's  evidence  that
        blood feuds can continue for years and  affect  the  whole  family.
        The appellant has a brother  and  sister  in  the  KDP  area.   His
        brother was born in 1990 and his sister in 1988.

    25. It was his submission that the  appellant  does  not  belong  to  a
        particular social group.  The basis of his fear is of a family  who
        claimed that his father  was  responsible  for  killing  their  own
        father.  According to the  extract  from  a  Higher  Administrative
        Court (9th Senate), Luneburg, Lower Saxony, in a case decided on  6
        March 2000, at B133 of the appellant's bundle, the criteria is that
        in  the  event  of  a  family  member  being  killed  by  an  adult
        perpetrator, then the killing of another  family  member  of  equal
        value is incurred.

        The appellant's father himself was  killed  by  the  Iraqi  forces.
        Therefore the criteria is satisfied.   A  family  member  of  equal
        value  has  been  killed  in  satisfaction.   The  CIPU  report  at
        paragraphs 3.7 and 3.21 confirm that each KAA region has  it's  own
        administration and system of justice with a police force to enforce
        public order.  The police did that for this appellant.  The parties
        were able to engage in elections.  Even if the story  is  accepted,
        the appellant is not a member of a particular social group and does
        not come within the Convention.


    26. With regard to Article 3, Mr Ekagha submitted that the  authorities
        were able to offer him effective protection from the  Rash  family.
        The appellant's uncle frequents  Iraq  and  goes  there  as  a  top
        official of  the  party.   There  is  therefore  a  sufficiency  of
        protection for the appellant in the KAA.


    27. In response to Mr Ekagha's submission that the Adjudicator made  no
        finding that the appellant was shot at by the Rash family,  Counsel
        submitted that the Adjudicator accepted the factual  basis  of  the
        appellant's claim.   Counsel  also  said  that  it  was  never  the
        appellant's evidence that the road blocks were set up to  apprehend
        his assailants.  In paragraph 8 of his statement he said  that  the
        police notified the checkpoints.  Although the appellant's evidence
        indicates a willingness on the part  of  the  KDP  to  assist  him,
        according to the evidence of Dr O'Shea and the  UNHCR,  willingness
        is not accompanied by a sufficiency of protection in  reality.   As
        to the killing of someone of equal value  in  satisfaction  of  the
        blood feud, Counsel  submitted  that  according  to  the  objective
        evidence, the blood feud keeps on going and is ended by  agreement.
        The report also makes it clear that  a  particular  member  who  is
        sought out for retribution is sought out beforehand.  The fact that
        the appellant's uncle is able to come and  go  does  not  give  the
        appellant confidence in his own case.  His uncle is not  a  target.
        Dr O'Shea says the absence of the person is enough to  satisfy  the
        feud and his uncle's privilege in the KDP means that the places  he
        visits are going to be better protected.  The fact that  the  uncle
        is willing to return does not mean that there is  no  risk  to  the
        uncle and cannot possibly  affect  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
        safety given that he is the target.

    28. The issues before the Tribunal are twofold:

        1) Whether the blood feud between the appellant's  family  and  the
           Rash family has an underlying Convention reason and


        2) Whether the authorities in the KAA region are able  and  willing
           to offer him a sufficiency of protection.

    29. Counsel submitted that the appellant's family constitutes a  social
        group by  reason  of  its  political  opinion.   By  so  doing  she
        distinguished this case from  Skenderaj.   In  Skenderaj  the  root
        cause of the issue between the families was a  land  dispute  which
        the Court of Appeal found was clearly outside  the  bounds  of  the
        Convention.  In Quijano the root cause of the issue was criminality
        by drug cartels which was also found to be outside  the  bounds  of
        the Convention.

    30. It is apparent from Skenderaj and Quijano, that we have to identify
        the root cause of  the  issue  between  the  Rash  family  and  the
        appellant's family.  According to  the  appellant's  statement  and
        evidence, the problem goes as far  back  as  1979  when  the  Iraqi
        government wanted to build a camp to accommodate Kurdish villagers.
         Mr Rash was appointed by the Iraqi government to head the project.
         Despite protestations from his father, the project  was  completed
        and the Kurdish families, including his own, moved into  the  camp.
        Mr Rash was killed in 1981/82 by  the  Peshmergas  because  he  was
        responsible for destroying many Kurdish  villages  which  they  had
        used  as  bases.   The  Rash  family  however  believed  that   the
        appellant's father was responsible for the killing.  This  has  now
        given rise to a blood feud.

    31. It is our considered opinion that the blood feud does not  have  as
        its root cause a political  opinion.   It  may  be  said  that  the
        Peshmergas had a political motive for killing Mr Rash  but  in  our
        opinion this cannot be extended to the appellant's father.   We  do
        not find that the appellant's father's protest was  rooted  in  any
        political opinion.  Furthermore, we agree with the Adjudicator that
        there is no causative link between the Rash family and the  killing
        of the appellant's father in February 1990.   Without  a  political
        motive and without a causative link, the appellant's  fear  of  the
        Rash family remains simply a fear that is grounded on  a  suspicion
        that has no Convention basis.  Indeed according to the  appellant's
        own evidence at paragraph 5 of his  statement,  it  was  after  the
        Kurdish parties took over Kurdistan in 1991, that the  Rash  family
        joined the PUK.  We are  therefore  of  the  view  that  the  PUK's
        support for the Rash family at this stage did not have  the  effect
        of transforming the blood feud into a political cause.   Therefore,
        following  Skenderaj  and  Quijano,  we  do  not  find   that   the
        appellant's family constitutes a social group that  is  within  the
        bounds of the Convention.

    32. We now turn to the issue of whether  the  authorities  in  the  KAA
        region are able and willing to offer the appellant a sufficiency of
        protection.

    33. We do not find that the evidence of Dr O'Shea greatly assisted  the
        appellant.  Although the appellant claimed at paragraph  5  of  his
        statement that Rash family attempted to kill him and  his  paternal
        uncle in1991, when one reads that paragraph there  is  no  evidence
        that any such attempt ever took place.  The appellant  only  talked
        about threats and  stated  that  "I  believe  they  never  actually
        carried out their plans to kill either my uncle or  myself  because
        they knew that we were supported by the KDP".  At  this  time  they
        resided in Suleimania which was under the control of the  KDP.   It
        was not until 1993 or 1994 that  he  and  his  uncle  relocated  to
        Shaqwala because Suleimania was no longer under the control of  the
        KDP and they feared being killed by the Rash family.  This evidence
        shows that the Rash family did not  feel  able  to  carry  out  the
        threat to kill  the  appellant  while  he  was  in  KDP  territory.
        Indeed, according to his own evidence he  felt  safe  in  Shaqwala,
        which was yet another KDP controlled territory.

    34. However, according to the  appellant's evidence he was shot at on 5
        December 1998, while he  was in a taxi by one  of  the  people  who
        threatened him and his uncle in Suleimania. The  person  who  fired
        the shot was from the Rash family. This Adjudicator  did  not  make
        any finding on this evidence.  Looking at the  evidence  ourselves,
        we doubt that it ever happened.  By  his  own  evidence,  the  Rash
        family had not carried out their plan to kill him knowing  that  he
        was supported by the KDP and this  was  when  he  was  residing  in
        Suleimania.  In December 1998, he was residing  in   Shaqwala,  yet
        another area controlled by the KDP.  We  would  therefore  question
        why the Rash family would now attempt  to  kill  him  when  he  was
        residing in yet another area controlled by the KDP.   The  evidence
        does not add up.  Nevertheless, even if  the  incident  did  occur,
        according to his evidence, the taxi driver drove him to the  police
        station where the incident was reported.  He  told  the  police  he
        could identify at least one of the attackers, gave details  of  the
        car they had been driving and  said  he  expected  the  car  to  be
        returning to Suleimania.  The police notified  the  checkpoints  on
        the way to Suleimania but the car was not spotted.  No-one was ever
        arrested.  Because the police told him they  could  not  offer  him
        with 24 hour protection and the KDP also told him that it  was  not
        practical for them to provide him with protection in  his  kind  of
        situation, the appellant decided to leave Iraq.

    35. Counsel relied on a raft of cases to support an  argument  that  an
        authority doing its best is not enough to  disqualify  a  potential
        victim from being  a  refugee;  that  there  must  be  a  practical
        standard of protection; that  a  willingness  to  assist  does  not
        amount to a sufficiency of protection.  In this instant appeal,  we
        find that the police took the most practical  action  available  to
        them by  immediately  notifying  the  checkpoints  on  the  way  to
        Suleimania.  That was where the appellant believed  his  assailants
        were heading. Given the circumstances,  we  find  that  the  police
        provided  him  with  a  sufficiency  of  protection  within   their
        capability.  We do not believe that  a  comparison  of  the  police
        force in the KDP area with the security forces in Northern  Ireland
        is a fair comparison.  It is not comparing like with like.  As  the
        House of Lords said in Horvath no one can  be  guaranteed  absolute
        protection and this we believe is what the appellant was expecting.



    36.   According  to  the  extract  from  the  case   decided   by   the
        Administrative Court in Lower Saxony, the  criteria  in  any  blood
        feud is the killing of another member of equal value.  If there was
        indeed a blood feud, we find that the killing  of  the  appellant's
        father brought that blood feud to an end.

    37. We also note in that same extract,  that victims  and  perpetrators
        are mostly  sought  out  beforehand,  with  the  result  that  word
        generally gets out around in families about who is next in turn and
        who must do it.   As  there  is  no  evidence  before  us  of  this
        happening in this case, we can only  conclude  that  there  was  no
        blood feud, but if there was one, it no longer  exists.   According
        to Dr. O'Shea, the absence of the appellant  from  the  area  means
        that it is possible that other  members  of  the  family  could  be
        attacked; though not female members.  The appellant has  a  younger
        brother and there  is  no  evidence  that  this  brother  has  been
        targeted in any way by the Rash family.  This must surely  indicate
        that there is no blood feud.

    38. We  are  unable  to  place  any  weight  on  the  evidence  of  the
        appellant's uncle Hoshyar Siwaily.  He has lived in  the  UK  since
        1984 and we can only assume that any information he has  about  the
        appellant has come from the appellant himself and/or other sources.
         He is a high  profile  KDP  official  and  his  circumstances  are
        completely different from the appellant's own circumstances.

    39. Therefore, in all the circumstances of this case, we find that  the
        appellant's appeal must fail.




                                                   Miss K Eshun
                                                   Vice President











