
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX23788-2002
On 16 December 2002        TT (Risk - UDPS) Democratic Republic of Congo  CG
[2002] UKIAT 06471



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified



12/02/2003

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                               Mr F T Jamieson
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE


                             TSHIBANGU TSHIMANGA

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo,  appeals,
     with leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Miss M E Lewis
     dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  on  25
     April 2001 to issue removal and refuse asylum

  2. Ms G Brown   represented the Appellant. Mr M Pichamuthu, a Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims that his problems arose on 7 July 1998.   At  that
     time he was a practicing lawyer in Kinshasa, and was one of a number of
     lawyers who  gave  their  time  voluntarily  to  advise  the  UDPS,  an
     opposition party in the Democratic Republic of Congo. On 7 July he  was
     attending an illegal public meeting outside the home of the  leader  of
     the party with some hundreds of others.  The police raided the  meeting
     and arrested a number of the attendees. The Appellant was  among  those
     arrested, but there is no evidence that he was  specifically  targeted.
     He claims that he was held in prison and ill treated  for  twenty  days
     following which the door of his cell was opened and a man  who  he  did
     not know took him out of prison and handed him over  to  someone  else,
     who took him to Congo Brazzaville  and  from  there  to  the  UK.   The
     Appellant assumes that it was someone from UDP  his  who  arranged  his
     escape but does not know.  Once here he joined the  UK  branch  of  the
     UDPS and was appointed to the role of secretary liaison. However he was
     replaced in this job in July 2001, and has held no post  in  the  party
     since.

  4. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was a  lawyer  in  Kinshasa
     and that he worked for the UDPS voluntarily between 1996 and 1998.  She
     did not accept that he was a prominent member and concluded  that  such
     low-level activities as he  undertook  would  not  have  attracted  any
     adverse attention by the authorities.  She appears to  accept  that  he
     was detained as one of a number of people attending an illegal  meeting
     in July 1998, but concluded, as he was not charged and there was little
     evidence of any  continuing  adverse  interest  in  him  after  leaving
     prison, that his account of torture during  detention  and  his  escape
     lacked plausibility and were embellishments. She did  not  accept  that
     the authorities in DRC would be aware of the Appellant's activities  in
     the UK on behalf of the UDPS. She made an assessment of  the  objective
     material and came to the conclusion that he would not be  at  any  real
     risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return

  5. There were four grounds of  appeal  upon  which  leave  to  appeal  was
     granted. For convenience we have first addressed Ms Brown's  complaints
     about the Adjudicator's findings of fact.

  6. She argued that the Adjudicator had failed  to  set  out  clearly  what
     evidence was accepted and what was not accepted.  It is true  that  the
     Adjudicator did not state  in  terms  whether  she  accepted  that  the
     Appellant had been detained at  all.  However  it  is  clear  from  the
     context of her conclusions in paragraph 10.4 of the determination, that
     she proceeded on the basis that he had been  detained  at  the  illegal
     meeting and Mr Pichamuthu accepted this. The Adjudicator did not  state
     in terms either how the Appellant was released from detention or how he
     was treated in prison.  However, again in the context of  the  findings
     by the Adjudicator in paragraph 10.4, it is  plain  that  she  did  not
     accept the account of escape as plausible, and the Tribunal agrees that
     the evidence fully supports this conclusion. Indeed  this  finding  has
     not been challenged. That is not surprising because the account  is  in
     itself inherently plausible and if the Appellant had been  released  on
     the intervention of the UDPS it is also implausible that he  would  not
     then or since have obtained confirmation that the party  was  involved.
     The only viable alternative to this implausible account  of  escape  is
     that he was released  from  prison  by  the  authorities,  and  as  the
     Adjudicator said, without charge. As to how long he  was  detained  for
     and precisely what happened to him during detention  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusion that there is embellishment is justified  on  the  evidence.
     The medical evidence about the Appellant's scars is  ambivalent  as  to
     whether they can  realistically  be  ascribed  to  torture.  The  death
     threat, about which much was made at the hearing before us, was by  way
     of general intimidation in detention and not targeted  specifically  at
     the Appellant,  at  least  according  to  his  account  in  his  asylum
     interview.  He said he was held in a room with  others  and  they  were
     beaten and they were told they were going to die. This account  reveals
     no more than general intimidation and is a long way from  comprising  a
     specific death threat targeted at the Appellant because of his  claimed
     role with UDPS. We can see  nothing  of  material  substance  in  these
     criticisms of the Adjudicator's determination by Ms Brown on the  basis
     of lack of clarity or incompleteness.

  7. The second ground of attack by Ms Brown was also on  the  Adjudicator's
     findings of fact and was that  she  did  not  address  the  Appellant's
     supporting evidence. However  this  attack  evaporated  when  Ms  Brown
     acknowledged that  the  supporting  evidence  in  question  related  to
     matters, which the Adjudicator had found to be credible. That being so,
     there was no need to deal with the items specifically.

  8. The third ground of appeal is that the Adjudicator placed over reliance
     on perceived improvements in the situation in DRC.   The  determination
     shows that the Adjudicator had proper regard  to  the  material  placed
     before her. She concluded in paragraph 10.5 that "I find no  indication
     of a pattern of sustained harassment or persecution  of  UDPS  members,
     but  rather  random  events  that  might  pose  problems  for   certain
     individuals.  None of the reports I have read  indicate  that  activity
     abroad is likely to found a reasonable likelihood of  being  persecuted
     on return."

  9. It is this conclusion that Ms Brown attacked. She placed reliance  upon
     the US State Department report for the year  2000  which  included  the
     following observations.
           "On January 13, security forces arrested, detained and  tortured
           for  five  days  UDPS  activist  Crispin  Banda,  reputedly  for
           distributing brochures on the Lusaka Accord. He was  accused  of
           committing offences against President  Kabila  but  all  charges
           subsequently were dropped and he was freed on 2 February. On  29
           February, rapid intervention police arrested  seven  members  of
           the UDPS in Kinshasa near the home of  the  UDPS  President  and
           detained them out in jail  in  Kinshasa  where  security  agents
           reportedly lashed  them  with  whips  until  their  release  the
           following morning."

 10. She also relied on the US State Department  report  for  the  following
     year, 2001, which stated the police used excessive  force  to  disperse
     demonstrations and there was no known action against the members of the
     security forces responsible for torturing, beating or otherwise abusing
     people in cases arising the  previous  year.  The  incidents  described
     related to a much broader spectrum than the UDPS, including  the  death
     of Iyela Mokolo, a suspected poacher in illegal possession of  weapons,
     which Ms Brown incorrectly  ascribed  to  association  with  the  UDPS.
     However  there  was  evidence  in  the  reports  that  security  forces
     arbitrarily arrested  several  members  of  the  political  opposition,
     although the number of such cases decreased from the previous year.  On
     27 March two UDPS members were detained briefly  but  released  without
     charge.  On 20 July several other UDPS members were arrested  but  were
     released the following day.  On  5  December  five  UDPS  members  were
     arrested for submitting a request to hold public rally, without  having
     first submitted party registration  papers.   They  were  charged  with
     assault, incitement to riot, and sedition and remained in detention  at
     the year end. Ms Brown separately referred us to a  report  by  Amnesty
     International about this same incident. There was also evidence in  the
     US State Department report that the security forces prevented political
     party press conferences and rallies on several occasions by various  of
     the opposition parties.

 11. This was the extent  of  the  objective  material  to  which  Ms  Brown
     referred us on this subject.  Mr Pichamuthu referred us to passages  in
     the CIPU report, itself a compendium of opinions expressed by  a  range
     of sources.
           "4.3  Political parties are  allowed  to  exist  and  registered
           political parties can engage in  political  activities  although
           some  political  activists  have  been  subject  to  arrest  and
           detention.  Political parties have to  be  registered  with  the
           government to be officially recognised
           5.20   On  17  May  2001  President  Kabila  issued   a   decree
           liberalising political activities.  Under the decree,  political
           parties can function legally upon  simple  notification  to  the
           Ministry of the Interior and on condition that founding  members
           have national representation.  The new law imposes some  onerous
           conditions on political parties.
           5.22  Political party offices by and  large  remained  open  and
           members  of   political   parties   can   carry   out   internal
           administrative functions.  In 2001, opposition parties were able
           to hold private meetings without  government  harassment,  which
           had not been  the  case  in  previous  years.   The  government,
           however, prevented most public political  gatherings  and  press
           conferences.  Government harassment of various political parties
           decreased in 2001 as compared with previous years. ......  also,
           in  2001,  there  were  no  reports  the  government   prevented
           opposition party members from travelling.
           5.33 Information obtained from the British Embassy  in  Kinshasa
           in 2001 indicates that Embassy officials there are not aware  of
           any reports that indicate failed asylum seekers returned to  the
           DRC via Kinshasa are  subject  to  detention  or  persecution  -
           either on arrival at the city's airport or subsequently."

 12. We conclude from this evidence that there is no material error  in  the
     Adjudicator's assessment that it  reveals  random  events  affecting  a
     limited number of individuals, but no pattern of  sustained  harassment
     or persecution. The number of cases where  individual  members  of  the
     UDPS, at any level, have faced ill-treatment, which  could  be  of  the
     severity required to constitute persecution or breach of Article 3,  is
     tiny. The Adjudicator found that the  Appellant  was  not  a  prominent
     member of party and that his low level activities for  the  UDPS  would
     not have attracted any  adverse  attention  by  the  authorities.  This
     assessment is reinforced by the fact that  the  Appellant  on  his  own
     evidence was only one of a number of lawyers who advised UDPS, and when
     asked about the nature of his advice  was  only  able  to  offer  broad
     generalisations. In asylum interview he did not know the  name  of  the
     current secretary-general of the party. Even in the UK, the  relatively
     low level post held by him soon after arrival was  lost  some  eighteen
     months ago and there is real evidence of any continuing activity by him
     since then of any material significance. This is not indicative that he
     was a prominent member of party prior to  his  leaving  the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo, but fits well with the Adjudicator's assessment that
     he was only engaged in low level activities.  Moreover such activity as
     he did undertake for party whilst in the DRC took place some years ago.
     His only arrest was whilst taking part in  an  illegal  public  meeting
     (illegal because his party refused to register). He was arrested  along
     with a number of other people and the death threat to which he referred
     at his asylum interview was again, even if true, expressed  as  general
     intimidation to all the detainees and he was released  without  charge.
     We also have regard to the fact that there are  no  known  examples  of
     failed asylum seekers facing persecution or ill-treatment on return. We
     conclude from all this that there is  no  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusion that there is no reasonable likelihood that  the  Appellant,
     given his profile, will be at real risk of persecution on return.

 13. The final ground of appeal raised by Ms Brown is that  the  Adjudicator
     gave inadequate attention to the human rights appeal under  Article  3.
     However as Ms Brown acknowledged that the Article  3  appeal  stood  or
     fell into line with the asylum appeal, there  is  nothing  of  material
     substance in this submission.


 14. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
