



                                                           Appeal
            No.HX87092-1997 MI (Fair Trial-Pre-Trial Conditions)
                       Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT 02239


                     IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL






                               Dates heard: 9 January 2001, 24 April
                                    2002
                                                                Date
                             notified: 28 06 02


                                             Before: -


                            DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                   MR R HAMILTON




                                            Between


                                      MUZAFAR IQBAL



                                      Appellant


                                               and


            THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME  DEPARTMENT



                             Respondent




                 DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.This  case  raises  the  issue  of  prosecution  versus  persecution.  The
particular  context  concerns  an  appellant  facing  prosecution  on  false
charges in Pakistan.

2.The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  adjudicator,  Mr  L   V   Waumsley,
dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  giving
directions for his removal having refused to grant him asylum. The  Tribunal
had originally refused leave to appeal, but that refusal  had  been  quashed
by Order of the High Court. Ms J Farbey of  Counsel  instructed  by  Darby`s
Solicitors appeared for the appellant and  Mr  P  Deller  appeared  for  the
respondent. There was also a hearing resulting in an  adjournment  at  which
Mr J Gulvin appeared for the respondent.

3. Proceedings in this case have been protracted. That is  never  desirable.
At the close of the first hearing  the  Tribunal  felt  handicapped  by  not
having objective country materials dealing with the workings of the  justice
system  in  Pakistan  since  the  military  take-over  by   General   Pervez
Musharraf. In the event more recent materials were  produced,  although  not
comprehensive.

4. At the original hearing, the Tribunal consisted  of  three  members,  the
present two plus  Mr  R  Baines.  For  administrative  reasons  it  was  not
possible for  Mr  Baines  to  sit  at  the  resumed  hearing.  Both  parties
indicated they  had  no  objection  to  the  Tribunal  continuing  with  two
members.

5. It must be borne in mind that the subject of this appeal  is  a  decision
dated 23 December 1996. Being a date well before the Human Rights  Act  1998
came into force on 2 October 2000, the fair trial  issues  examined  in  the
context of a human rights claim in the  starred  Tribunal  determination  of
Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 are not as such  relevant,  although  we  will
have occasion to refer to that decision together with another  case  dealing
with a human rights claim  raising  issues  of  detention  as  a  result  of
prosecution, that of Fazilat [2002] UKIAT 00973.

6. The appellant`s claim was in essence that he was a member of  the  Muslim
League who had fled Pakistan  after  members  of  the  local  PPP  (Pakistan
People's Party) in Tehsil and District  Jhelum  had  brought  serious  false
charges against him. The adjudicator had accepted the  appellant`s  evidence
that a riot took place on 12 August 1995 at which a member of  the  PPP  was
killed and in consequence the appellant had been issued  with  two  warrants
for his arrest. He further accepted that if the appellant were  to  come  to
the attention of the Pakistani authorities following his  return,  he  would
be likely to be arrested and brought to trial. He found further that:

      " he might also be at risk of a possible revenge attack  from  members
      of the deceased man`s family who believe, rightly or wrongly, that the
      appellant was responsible for his death".

7. Relying mainly on the submissions made to the High Court  in  the  course
of an application for judicial review, Ms Farbey said the  appellant`s  case
was  one  of  persecution  rather  than  prosecution.  The  adjudicator  had
accepted that, as a result of an incident in August  1995,  the  appellant`s
political opponents had brought serious charges against him and that he  was
a "wanted man". The appellant`s case  was  that  those  charges  were  false
charges. The adjudicator, she submitted, had  erred  in  two  key  respects.
First he had erred in holding that whether or not these  charges  were  true
or false and whether or not the appellant  would  get  a  fair  trial  as  a
result of these charges were not at all matters for him,  but  only  matters
for the Pakistan courts. The adjudicator  ought,  contended  Ms  Farbey,  to
have considered whether the accusations  were  true  or  false  as  well  as
whether or  not  he  would  get  a  fair  trial.  Second  he  had  erred  in
overlooking that, even if the appellant  would  receive  a  fair  trial,  he
would face serious harm at the pre-trial detention stage. The outcome  would
be that, as a result of serious harm instigated by  non-state  agents  -  in
this case PPP  members  bringing  false  charges   -   the  appellant  would
receive ineffective  protection  from  the  state.  The  likelihood  of  ill
treatment at the pre-trial stage was borne  out  by  the  objective  country
materials including the UNHCR report of May 1998,  the  Human  Rights  Watch
report of 2001 and the US State Department  report  of  February  2001.  The
latter indicated that torture in detention still occurred "regularly",  that
police corruption was widespread, that prison conditions were bad  and  that
there was significant delay in the prosecution  process.  The  appellant  in
this case was able to show, not only that he would face persecution  against
which the state could not protect him,  but  also  a  Convention  reason  of
political opinion which in this case was the  opinion  which  his  political
opponents (the PPP) would either ascribe or impute to him.

8. Ms Farbey asked the Tribunal to attach particular weight  to  the  expert
report from Dr Martin Lau dated 11 April 2001.  His  report  confirmed  that
despite the arrest warrant being nearly 7 years old, it would  remain  valid
and in any event fresh charges and warrants could still be issued  regarding
the 1995 offence. He concluded  that  PPP  supporters  would  recognise  the
appellant as one accused of killing a  PPP  supporter  and  would  still  be
likely to press charges, as would the family of the victim. There was  still
strong local support for the PPP in some areas  and  prominent  PPP  members
remained able to exert influence over police officers and judicial  officers
in  their  localities.   Should  the  authorities  seek  the  appellant   in
connection with an alleged murder, continued Mr Lau,  they  could  find  him
irrespective of the locality or region in which Mr Iqbal  happened  to  live
or hide.

9. For the respondent Mr Deller argued that it was not the job of a  refugee
decision maker or of an  adjudicator  to  analyse  whether  charges  brought
against a claimant were true or false or whether he was innocent  or  guilty
of those charges. It would impose an  impossible  burden  on  the  decision-
maker if he had to make such evaluations, since in most cases, as here,  the
best available evidence would be limited to the oral evidence of the  person
who claimed to be the victim of false accusations. The fair trial system  in
the country of origin must take precedence. Mr Deller asked the Tribunal  to
hold that there was insufficient evidence to establish that  a  person  held
in detention at the pre-trial stage would face  serious  ill  treatment.  If
the risks of ill treatment during pre-trial detention  were  as  serious  as
claimed, there would be virtually no one involved in  Pakistan  politics  at
liberty. As regards the claim to a Convention ground of  political  opinion,
Mr Deller said that the appellant`s argument amounted to a claim to  "remote
control" persecution in which the criminal justice authorities were said  to
act as the "blunt instruments"  of  the  real  perpetrators,  in  this  case
certain members of the PPP. At the relevant time in 1995 the  Muslim  League
was the party of government, so the state authorities  at  that  time  would
not have had any sectarian motive hostile to the appellant. The  appellant`s
argument also left unclear what was the persecutory act. If it was  the  act
of the state authorities in ill-treating him in detention,  then  the  issue
was whether the state would be likely to  persecute  him;  non-state  agents
would only be involved in a limited way. If it was the act of his  political
opponents in bringing false  charges,  then  how  in  itself,  without  some
follow-up action by the state authorities,  could  that  amount  to  serious
harm? There was also real doubt in  this  case  in  any  event  whether  his
political opponents were targeting him for political reasons or  for  purely
personal reasons. The acts they complained of concerned the use of  violence
at a political meeting. On his own  account  he  had  gone  there  with  the
intent of disrupting that meeting. Someone had been killed. They thought  it
was him. There was no direct linkage between the Convention ground  and  the
claimed persecution. Even if the PPP had political motives for harming  him,
it was unwarranted to say that the authorities would do  their  bidding  and
fail to rectify any unfairness.  The  risk  of  revenge  attacks  must  have
considerably diminished and, even if the family were thought to  still  have
a vendetta, there would in that respect be no effective  Refugee  Convention
ground either.

10. As  regards  the  background  country  evidence,  Mr  Deller  urged  the
Tribunal to bear in mind that whilst Pakistan  remain  under  military  rule
there were concrete indications of steps being taken towards restoration  of
democracy with a much greater political consensus.  It  was  not  reasonably
likely that the local PPP  members  would,  in  the  changed  conditions  of
current-day Pakistan, still wish to continue with a  malicious  prosecution.
Although the background reports continued to  detail  a  significant  number
and variety of human rights  abuses,  the  reports  of  incidents  of  human
rights abuses in prison had diminished.  There was also  a  possibility  the
appellant could obtain pre-arrest bail as well.

11. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.


The issue of the Convention ground of political opinion

12. For reasons which will become apparent, the Tribunal has  not  found  it
necessary to consider whether there was a  Convention  ground  of  political
opinion in this case.

The issues of  the  charges  against  the  appellant  and  the  fairness  or
otherwise of any consequent trial
 13. The Tribunal would accept  that  the  adjudicator  was  mistaken  to  a
limited extent in his stated approach to the interrelated issues of  whether
the charges against the appellant were true or false  or  whether  he  would
face a fair trial. What he said was:

      "The Appellant states that the charge against him is false,  and  that
      it has been filed on the basis of false accusations made  against  him
      by local members of a rival political  party.  Possibly  that  is  so.
      However, that is a matter for the Pakistani Criminal Courts,  not  for
      me. I have  not  heard  evidence  from  those  who  have  accused  the
      Appellant, and am therefore in no position  to  assess  his  guilt  or
      innocence. That must remain a matter for the Pakistan Courts alone.

      The Appellant states that he would not receive a fair trial on  return
      from the Pakistani Courts. In considering that assertion, I have given
      careful consideration to the background material and other documentary
      evidence which has been placed before me. However I see no evidence to
      support that assertion. The Appellant  also  claims  that  the  police
      would cause  false  evidence  against  him  in  order  to  secure  his
      conviction rather than lose face by admitting that  they  had  made  a
      mistake. Once  again,  I  have  given  careful  consideration  to  the
      background material  before  me,  but  as  before  there  is  not  the
      slightest support for the Appellant`s  assertion  that  the  Pakistani
      police would be prepared to swear away the life  of  an  innocent  man
      rather than admit that they had made a mistake. There  is  nothing  in
      the evidence before me to indicate that the  Appellant  would  not  in
      fact receive a fair  trial  if  he  were  to  be  brought  to  justice
      following his return on the charges files (sic) against him  following
      the incident of 12 August 1995."


14. If all the adjudicator had meant here was that it is not the purpose  of
refugee law to pronounce on whether accusations made  against  an  appellant
are true or false or whether an appellant is guilty or innocent  of  charges
levelled against him, we would wholeheartedly  agree.  Indeed  it  would  be
entirely wrong to use the Refugee Convention, an international treaty  based
on comity between states, as an instrument to pronounce definitively  on  an
appellant`s guilt or innocence under the laws  of  his  or  her  country  of
origin. A refugee decision maker should not seek in this  way  to  stand  in
place of the domestic authorities in  the  country  of  origin  tasked  with
deciding such matters. In this regard the refugee  decision-maker  is  in  a
similar position to a magistrate or judge hearing  an  extradition  request.
It is not the role of either to decide whether there is a real risk  that  a
claimant is innocent.

15. However it does not follow that refugee  decision  makers  can  entirely
exclude evaluation of such matters in the  course  of  their  assessment  of
whether a claimant is at risk of persecution as opposed to  prosecution.  As
is stated at para 56 of the 1979 UNHCR Handbook:

      "Persecution must be distinguished from punishment for  a  common  law
      offence. Persons fleeing from prosecution or punishment  for  such  an
      offence are not normally  refugees.  It  should  be  recalled  that  a
      refugee is a victim - or  potential  victim  -  of  injustice,  not  a
      fugitive from justice".

16. It follows that a refugee decision-maker will always need  to  be  alive
to issues  of  justice  or  injustice  in  the  case  of  persons  who  fear
persecution as a result of criminal charges  brought  against  them.  If  in
fact all a claimant faces is proper prosecution  for  an  ordinary  criminal
offence, the Convention is not engaged at all. But if the legal  process  he
will go through is one that would subject him  to  injustice,  the  harm  he
faces may well amount to persecution. That approach  has  been  endorsed  by
the Tribunal in such cases as Ozov (12233), Woldemichael and by  the  courts
in such cases as Ameyaw [1992] Imm AR 206, Sivakumar [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1196
judgment of 24 July 2001, R (Tientchu) v IAT C-2000-6288(CA) judgment of  18
October 2000 and Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100 a judgment of  the  Court  of
Appeal dated 18 December 2001.

17. In assessing such issues the refugee  decision  maker  will  more  often
than not have very little to go on. But  incomplete  or  one-sided  evidence
about specific charges facing a  claimant  cannot  be  a  valid  reason  for
declining to assess in a relevant case what evidence  there  is  as  to  the
source and nature of those  charges.  As  paragraphs  195-197  of  the  1979
Handbook underscore, incomplete evidence  is  a  difficulty  which  faces  a
refugee decision-maker at every turn. If this factor were to be relied  upon
in the way canvassed by the adjudicator in this case, relatively few  claims
raising the prosecution  versus  persecution  issue  would  ever  receive  a
proper assessment.

18. That the drafters of the  Convention  intended  issues  of  justice  and
injustice to be evaluated at least to some degree is also evident  from  the
fact that its text includes Exclusion clauses as well as Inclusion  clauses.
The focus of the Exclusion  clauses  at  Article  IF  are  persons  seen  as
undeserving of international  protection  because  of  their  commission  of
serious human rights crimes. These clauses are not intended to  be  operated
in isolation from each other. As UNHCR has stated, "Inclusion and  exclusion
are integral aspects of the status determination  process.  Both  should  be
regarded as part of  a  comprehensive  examination  of  all  relevant  facts
underlying a refugee claim..." (Report  on  Article  1F  Exclusion  Clauses,
Standing Committee of the UNHCR Executive  Committee  C,  para  15(I)(1998).
Thus Art 1F(b) mandates that:


      "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person  with
      respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
      ...
      (b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country
      of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee.
      ...". (emphasis added)

19. The adjudicator should, therefore, have decided whether  he  thought  it
reasonably likely the appellant had been a victim of injustice. (Indeed,  as
we will go on to note, there did come a point  where  he  himself  found  it
necessary to abandon his position of neutrality and  take  a  view  on  this
issue).

Relevant  principles  in  assessing  the   issue   of   prosecution   versus
persecution.
20.  Before  proceeding  further,  we  think  it  may  assist  to  summarise
important principles decision makers should bear in mind  when  assessing  a
case concerned with the prosecution versus  persecution  issue.  We  believe
these principles can be extracted from leading cases here and abroad.

21. One such principle is that just  identified.  Although  it  is  not  the
purpose  of  refugee  law  to  adjudge  guilt  or  innocence,  the  type  of
examination which the refugee decision-maker must conduct  when  considering
the issue of prosecution versus persecution is no less  evaluative  than  it
is in respect of any other issue.

22. Another cardinal principle is that highlighted by Lady Justice Arden  in
the case of R (Tientchu) in the following passage:

      "Whether  a  prosecution  amounts  to   persecution   depends   on   a
      consideration of all the factors. It is,  in  effect,  a  question  of
      fact. It is not the case that every political activity is  necessarily
      legal, but the adjudicator has to determine on the facts presented  to
      him  whether  the  prosecution  in  fact   is   really   a   disguised
      persecution".

23. To similar effect are cases requiring  all  the  relevant  circumstances
relating to prosecution versus persecution to be considered  on  a  case-by-
case basis, such as the Tribunal cases of  Munir  Ahmed  (00TH00024),  Koffi
Nestor Brou (19259), Balendran (16864) and Belhadi (12157);  and  the  Court
of Appeal judgment of 6 November 1997, Mirza Mahmum Hussain v The  Secretary
of State for the Home Department LTA 97/6637

24.  Another  key  principle  is  that  the  decision-maker   consider   the
prosecution process as a whole.

25. Where evaluation of issues of prosecution  versus  persecution  must  be
made, it is vital decision-makers avoid a  fragmented  approach.  Particular
care must be taken to focus on the criminal justice process  involved  as  a
whole.  Which ever parts of the criminal law process are  being  examined  -
be it the initial laying  of  information,  the  bringing  of  charges,  the
arrest, the detention, the consideration of  bail,  the  trial  itself,  the
subsequent punishment - the refugee decision-maker  must  be  alert  to  how
these stages  interact  and  what  safeguards  apply  at  each  stage.  Also
relevant will be  the  nature  of  the  law  in  question  and  whether  its
provisions adequately ensure justice.  Only  a  holistic  approach  to  this
issue can ensure the decision-maker weighs any harms involved  cumulatively,
not just separately. Thus in Ozer (12233) the Tribunal noted  that  relevant
questions in assessing whether treatment in that  case  was  prosecution  or
persecution included proportionality of  punishment  to  the  offence,  pre-
trial detention conditions and the manner in which a trial is conducted.

26. A fourth principle is  that  set  out  at  paragraph  59  of  the  UNHCR
Handbook. It consists  in  the  importance  of  evaluating  the  prosecution
versus persecution issue  by  reference  to  objective  international  human
rights standards. Noting the difficulties involved in  evaluating  the  laws
of another country, para 59 concludes by exhorting that:

      "...recourse may usefully be had to the  principles  set  out  in  the
      various  international  instruments  relating  to  human  rights,   in
      particular the International Covenants on Human Rights..."


27. The House of Lords judgment in the case of Horvath [2000] 3 All  ER  577
confirmed the central importance of defining  persecution  (and  protection)
by reference to human rights norms. Explaining why  matters  to  do  with  a
state's operation of a system of  criminal  law  can  sometimes  engage  the
Convention, Professor James Hathaway in his  book,  Law  of  Refugee  Status
(Toronto, Butterworths 1991) Professor Hathaway observed at page 179:

      "While it is true that genuine criminality is not a form of  civil  or
      political status which attracts protection, the criminal  law  is  not
      infrequently manipulated as a tool of persecution".

28. There is a particular utility behind the  application  of  international
human rights norms to the analysis of  the  prosecution  versus  persecution
issue. Not only do major  international  human  rights  instruments  contain
specific guarantees relating to the criminal justice process (see under  the
UN International Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights,  articles  26,
14(2), 9(1), 9(2), 9(3), 9(4) 10(1), 10(2), 14(1),  14(3),  14(4)  and  17),
but  increasingly  the  major  general  country  reports  contain   specific
assessment of the performance  of  a  State`s  criminal  justice  system  by
reference to these same guarantees.

29. The overall question the adjudicator must ask, therefore, is whether  or
not the criminal justice process considered as a whole  is  compatible  with
core human rights entitlements relating to a  person`s  physical  integrity,
his right to liberty and security of person and his right to  a  fair  trial
and a proportionate punishment. If the process as a whole as it affects  the
claimant is incompatible with such entitlements, then there is serious  harm
amounting to persecution.

30. However, basing evaluation on human rights  norms  carries  with  it  an
important limitation of scope. In line with the  human  rights  approach  to
the definition of persecution and its basis in a notion of  a  hierarchy  of
human rights, account must be taken of the fact that the  right  to  a  fair
trial is not an absolute, non-derogable right. Although international  human
rights law casts the right in less qualified terms than  rights  to  freedom
of assembly, association  and  expression,  the  fact  that  it  is  not  an
absolute  right  justifies  limiting  its  application  in  the  context  of
international protection  against  refoulement  to  interferences  with  the
right that are sufficiently severe. Here, there is a useful  insight  to  be
drawn  from  what  international  human  rights  law  has  said  about   the
extraterritorial application of the right to a fair trial. In Soering  v  UK
(1989) 11 EHRR 439, the European Court  of  Human  Rights  accepted  that  a
person`s removal could violate Article  6  of  the  ECHR  (guaranteeing  the
right to a fair hearing) but only when the risk was of a flagrant denial  of
that guarantee. The Court stated at paragraph 113:

      "The right to a fair trial in criminal  proceedings,  as  embodied  in
      Article 6, holds a prominent place in a democratic society. The  Court
      does not exclude that an issue might  exceptionally  be  raised  under
      Article 6 by  an  extradition  decision  in  circumstances  where  the
      fugitive has suffered or risk suffering a flagrant denial  of  a  fair
      trial in the request country".

31. In Drozd and Janousek v France and Spain (1992) 14  EHRR  745  the  [now
defunct] Commission had written in similar terms that contracting states  to
the  ECHR  were  obliged  to  refuse  international  co-operation   in   the
administration of justice "if it emerges that the conviction is  the  result
of a flagrant denial of justice".

32. This Tribunal in cases dealing with human rights grounds such as  Nhundu
v Chiwera (01/TH/0613), Kacaj [2001] INLR 354 Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702
and Fazilat [2002] UKIAT 00973  has  further  developed  this  approach.  In
Fazilat, which dealt  with  a  claimant  facing  prosecution  in  Iran,  the
President wrote:

    "So far as the question of fair trial is concerned,  Article  6  can  be
    engaged if an individual is to be removed from  this  country.  That  is
    made clear by the decision of the Tribunal in Kacaj following the  Court
    of Human Rights decision in Soering v United Kingdom. But, it is only if
    the breach of Article 6 would be flagrant, that is  to  say  that  there
    would clearly be a thoroughly unfair trial,  that  Article  6  could  be
    engaged. Again, it is not for  the  signatories  to  the  Convention  to
    impose their system on the entire world. One  has  to  consider  whether
    looking at again in the round, it can be said that the  Respondent  will
    be able to receive what amounts to a reasonably fair trial.  So  far  as
    criminal charges are concerned, and the alcohol  offences  are  criminal
    charges, as would be any charges relating from unauthorised  leaving  of
    the country or indeed from unauthorised escape from custody, if anything
    were done in relation to these student offences, there is no  reason  to
    believe that there would be any flagrant breach of  Article  6  whatever
    may be the shortcomings, and there are shortcomings, of the Iran  system
    of trial"".

33. These cases were of course concerned with human rights issues  directly.
However, as the  Tribunal  has  demonstrated  in  Kacaj,  the  criteria  for
assessing serious harm in the context of the Refugee  Convention  are  built
out of the same public international law  principles.  Thus  when  assessing
under the Refugee  Convention  whether  prosecution  is  persecutory  it  is
equally necessary for a claimant to demonstrate not simply that  the  system
of trial in question has shortcomings.  More  must  be  demonstrated.  Those
shortcomings must be serious enough to threaten the very  existence  of  the
right to a fair trial.

Application of these principles to the facts of this case
34. Bearing these main principles in mind, we would assess  the  appellant`s
claim in the light of the adjudicator's principal findings as follows:

The evidence in this case concerning the falsity or not of charges
35. The appellant claimed he was innocent of any crime and that the  charges
brought against him were false. The adjudicator took no  clear  position  on
this issue, stating merely  that  it  was  possible.  However,  he  made  no
specifically adverse finding of credibility and  in  a  number  of  passages
proceeded on the basis that this claim was true. Having ourselves looked  at
all the available evidence, including the documentary evidence, we  consider
the appellant had established that, albeit he had gone to  the  PPP  meeting
with the intention of disrupting it, he had not  in  fact  been  responsible
for killing anyone there. Whether or not the PPP  members  who  subsequently
filed a First Information Report were falsely or in  good  faith  describing
him as the killer is less clear, but again there is no specific  finding  by
the adjudicator that the appellant is not to be believed in relation to  his
statement at interview that: "I am framed in  a  fake  murder  case..."  Put
another way, the evidence such as it is does not show there was any  genuine
substance to the charges brought against this appellant.

36. One obvious  consequence  of  this  conclusion  is  that  there  was  no
question in this case of the appellant falling to be  considered  under  the
Convention`s Exclusion Clauses: he had not in fact committed any crime.

37.  What  else  flows  from  this?  In  many  countries,   democracies   in
particular, the fact that a person is the  subject  of  false  or  malicious
accusations does not give rise to persecution because sufficient  safeguards
exist in the subsequent stages of the criminal justice  process  to  rectify
matters. What was and is the position in this case,  bearing  in  mind  that
Pakistan under President Musharraf cannot be classified as a democracy?

38. In this case it would appear that the Pakistan police did  not  exercise
any check on whether the accusations were false  at  the  initial  stage  of
deciding to press charges in the light  of  the  First  Information  Report.
However, for reasons given below, we are not  satisfied  there  would  be  a
failure of safeguards later on in  the  criminal  justice  process,  As  the
adjudicator appeared to find in at least one passage of  his  determination,
we have concluded that it would come to light that the charges laid  against
this appellant were false or at least baseless.

39. Bearing in mind our earlier point that assessment  of  this  issue  must
take into account the entire criminal law process, there are  three  further
stages that require particular examination and comment  in  this  case,  the
pre-trial detention stage, the trial stage and the punishment stage.


The issue of ill-treatment by the police during pre-trial detention

40. The alleged failure of the adjudicator to  consider  this  issue  formed
the principal ground on which the appellant sought judicial  review  and  on
which this appeal is argued before us.

41. If in a particular case  the  evidence  establishes  that  an  appellant
would face a real risk of ill-treatment at the hands of the police prior  to
trial, then that would amount to persecution, since  it  would  violate  the
appellant`s basic human right not to be subjected to  serious  harm  in  the
form of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Furthermore, as  Pill,
LJ observed in Kinuthia, the availability of effective ex post  facto  legal
remedies does not  make  the  risk  of  maltreatment  during  the  pre-trial
process any the less persecutory.

42. Even if  the  ill  treatment  was  from  police  officers  misconducting
themselves, it would not be easy to show that the authorities would be  able
to effectively protect its citizens against such treatment. As the Court  of
Appeal held  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
C/2001/1964 31 January 2002, the ability and willingness  of  the  State  to
provide the necessary protection must be  more  clearly  demonstrated  to  a
higher standard in the case of misconduct by officials of the State.

43. The Tribunal would accept that  the  adjudicator  erred  in  failing  to
address directly the issue  of  serious  harm  at  the  pre-trial  detention
stage. However,  we  consider  we  are  in  a  position  to  assess  it  for
ourselves, building on the adjudicator's findings of fact otherwise.

44. The  closest  the  adjudicator  got  to  addressing  the  issue  of  the
appellant`s ill treatment in detention was when he was  considering  whether
the police were likely to harass the appellant further. He stated:

      "It is also clear from the background material before me that there is
      widespread corruption amongst the Pakistani police who are  frequently
      suborned from their duty to the public  and  allow  themselves  to  be
      influenced by those local politicians who happen for the time being to
      be in the ascendancy into taking improper action  against  members  of
      rival parties. However there is no evidence before me one way  or  the
      other as to whether this situation  has  changed  to  any  significant
      degree  since  the  recent  overthrow  of  the  former  Muslim  League
      Government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif by the military  government,
      which is currently in control in Pakistan.

      I am therefore prepared to accept if the Appellant were to  return  to
      some part of Pakistan where the local police are under  the  influence
      of members of the rival PPP, and if he were to be seen  to  be  active
      locally on behalf of the Muslim League, he might then run the risk  of
      further harassment, either from the PPP members themselves or possibly
      from  corrupt  elements  in  the  local  police  acting  under   their
      influence."

45. However, here the adjudicator went on to conclude  the  appellant  would
be able to relocate "with  complete  safety"  to  some  other  part  of  the
country where the roles were reversed and  the  Muslim  League  was  in  the
dominant position. The flaw with this application of  the  "internal  flight
alternative" principle was that he had  elsewhere  proceeded  on  the  basis
that, if the appellant went to Pakistan, the authorities would come to  know
"wherever  he  went"  that  there  were  outstanding  charges  against  him.
Furthermore, both  of  the  arrest  warrants  accepted  as  genuine  by  the
adjudicator  required  the  appellant's  surrender  to  his  home  district.
Additionally the expert evidence of  Dr  Martin  Lau  indicated  that  these
arrest warrants would remain valid, notwithstanding the passage of time.

46. Plainly, therefore,  the  adjudicator  should  have  accepted  that  the
outstanding charges against this appellant would at least bring him  to  the
attention of the authorities wherever he went in Pakistan and to  his  being
handed over to the police in his home area.

47. As to whether the appellant  would  thereafter  face  detention  pending
trial, the evidence is less clear-cut. As Mr Deller pointed  out,  there  is
some suggestion in the objective country  materials  that  even  persons  on
serious charges are able to secure bail. However, given that the charges  he
might face in this case were serious - possibly  murder  charges  -  we  are
prepared to approach the case on the basis that he would indeed face a  real
risk of pre-trial detention.

48. The question was, therefore, would  the  appellant  face  ill  treatment
whilst in pre-trial detention? The appellant based his claim that  he  would
on two grounds. The first was that the police, having specifically  targeted
him for political reasons in the past, would have a motive for harming  him.
The second ground was that he  would  face  such  ill  treatment  simply  by
falling into the category of pre-trial detainees or detainees.

49. As regards the appellant`s claim that  the  police  would  (still)  have
(politically motivated) reasons  for  maltreating  him,  we  find  ourselves
unable to accept it. The adjudicator effectively declined to  take  a  view,
stating that there was "no evidence before me one way or the  other"  as  to
whether Pakistani police were less likely than  previously  to  be  suborned
from their duty to the public and allow themselves to take  improper  action
against members of rival parties. However, we cannot agree  that  there  was
no evidence either way as to what  the  situation  would  be  now  for  this
appellant. Even assuming  the  local  police  in  1995  might  have  had  an
interest in maltreating him, we do  not  think  it  reasonably  likely  they
would now. Our reasons have to do with the elapse of time  and  the  changed
context of Pakistan politics since then.

50. The actions taken against the appellant occurred five years ago  and  at
a time when he was actively involved in local politics. On his own  account,
the past adverse interest of the police in him  had  arisen  during  a  time
when Pakistan politics at both the national and local  level  was  dominated
by conflicts between rival political parties. The basis  of  his  claim  was
that the police in his area had acted under the influence of members of  the
PPP intent on asserting their power vis a vis their  political  adversaries.
Thus, when describing three arrests he had experienced prior to  the  August
1995 incident, he said the police put pressure on him to  leave  the  Muslim
League and to cease trying to hold meetings in support of that party.

51. However we agree with Mr Deller  that  the  context  in  which  conflict
between these  two  political  parties,  the  PPP  and  the  Muslim  League,
continues has changed considerably since 1995. Neither party is  any  longer
in control at  the  national  level.  Whilst  military  rule  under  General
Musharaff  has  not  seen  the   elimination   of   police   corruption   or
susceptibility to political  influence  either  at  the  national  or  local
level, the police are clearly aware that political  parties  are  no  longer
the principal political masters. Mr Martin Lau  has  stated  in  his  report
that the PPP are still a force on the local level in many areas of  Pakistan
and could influence police conduct. We are prepared to accept that  that  is
the case. But we are not satisfied  there  would  any  longer  be  any  real
interest by the police in the appellant`s home area in going so  far  as  to
maltreat the appellant whilst in  detention.   And  we  think  it  would  be
fanciful to suggest, given the  curtailment  of  party  politics,  that  the
police would have a continuing interest in forcing him to switch  his  party
allegiance.

52. Hence we consider that if the appellant might face any real risk of  ill
treatment, it would be no more than the level of risk facing the  generality
of detainees held in Pakistan presently.

53. As to the risk to detainees in general, the Tribunal would  accept  that
the objective country materials show that there would be  a  possibility  of
ill treatment at the hands of the police.  But we do  not  think  they  show
there would be a real possibility of such ill treatment.

54. At this point we must confront a common problem  confronting  assessment
of claims based on the treatment of some  category  of  citizens  generally.
The  background  evidence  relating  to  Pakistan  does   bear   out   that,
notwithstanding some steps taken by the government  during  2000  to  reduce
police corruption, such as transferring several senior  police  officers  to
other provinces  to  circumvent  their  local  ties,  police  corruption  is
widespread. The April 2001 CIPU report reported that:

      "Police and prison officials frequently use the  threat  of  abuse  to
      extort money from prisoners and their  families.  Certain  individuals
      pay police to humiliate their opponents and to  avenge  their  persona
      grievances."

55. At paragraph 5.2.8 dealing with torture it noted:

      "The suspended  Constitution  and  the  Penal  Code  expressly  forbid
      torture and  other  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  Police
      however regularly torture and abuse people. Police routinely use force
      to elicit confessions, although there were fewer reports  and  greater
      police co-operation in investigating such incidents during 2000. Human
      rights observers suggest that because  of  torture,  suspects  usually
      confess to crimes regardless of their actual culpability".

56. The US State Department report  of  February  2001  noted  that  "Prison
conditions remained extremely poor,  and  police  arbitrarily  arrested  and
detained citizen... Case backlogs led to long delays in trials, and  lengthy
pre-trial detention is common: later on it specifies that: "in  many  cases,
trials do not start until 6 months after the filing  of  charges".  .  "  It
further notes that according to Amnesty International at least  100  persons
die from police torture  each  year.   It  notes  also  that  prisoners  are
routinely shackled and that the class "C" cells which generally hold  common
criminals  and  those  in  pre-trial  detention   have   dirt   floors,   no
furnishings, and poor food. "Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer  the
most abuse, including beatings and  forced  kneeling  for  long  periods  of
time".

57. However damning of pre-trial detention standards such materials are,  it
is important to  note  what  they  do  not  assert.  Whilst  they  speak  of
corruption or abuse being "widespread" or "routine" or "frequent",  they  do
not state that the pattern  of  abuse  is  gross  and  systematic.  That  is
important because in cases which rest not on a personal risk of  harm  (e.g.
where the police or prison staff would have cause to target a claimant)  but
on a risk of serious harm said to face people generally, e.g. in  this  case
all persons detained pending trial, it cannot be said that they  would  face
a real risk of serious harm unless in that country  there  is  a  consistent
pattern of gross and systematic violations of their human rights  whilst  in
detention.

58. The  "gross and systematic" standard is not chosen arbitrarily.  It  has
been in use as a minimum international standard by the  UN  ever  since  the
introduction in 1967 of Resolution 1235 authorising the Commission on  Human
Rights to  "examine  information  relevant  to  gross  violations  of  human
rights" and  to  "make  a  thorough  study  of  situations  which  reveal  a
consistent pattern of violations of human rights". Article 3 of the 1984  UN
Convention Against Torture, which prohibits return of a  person  to  another
State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be  in
danger of being subjected to torture enjoins at paragraph 2:

      "For the purpose of determining whether there are  such  grounds,  the
      competent  authorities  shall   take   into   account   all   relevant
      considerations including, where applicable, the existence in the State
      concerned  of  a  consistent  pattern  of  gross,  flagrant  or   mass
      violations of human rights".

59. Whilst not even under Article 3  of  the  Torture  Convention  has  this
standard been used on its own to establish risk of torture  in  the  context
of refoulement, the case law of the Committee Against Torture on  Article  3
does confirm that, in the absence of personal risk, it is  difficult  for  a
person to show a breach of Article 3 unless the  level  of  abuse  of  human
rights in the country of return is  at  least  as  serious  as  that  of  "a
consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of  human  rights";
indeed even the existence of such a pattern may not be enough: see Kisoki  v
Sweden,  Comm.No.41/1996,  reported  in  Report  of  the  Committee  against
Torture, U.N. GAOR 51st Sess., Supp. No. 44 9.2, U.N.  Doc  A/51/44.  Where,
however, one has a situation in which it is accepted that a  claimant  would
face prosecution and pre-trial detention, it would seem sufficient  for  him
to establish a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass occurrences  of
ill-treatment in detention.

60. The objective country materials  dealing  with  pre-trial  detention  in
Pakistan fall short of describing the existence of such a pattern.  They  do
show that ill treatment of those in detention is widespread,  but  not  that
there is a consistent pattern of gross or systematic abuse of the right  not
to be exposed to ill treatment. In the absence  of  evidence  to  show  that
such practices are gross or systematic it cannot  be  concluded,  therefore,
that there is a real risk to pre-trial  detainees  in  general  or  to  this
appellant in particular.

61. It is true that delay in the trial being brought on, said  often  to  be
in the region of six months, would cause  hardship,  as  would  poor  prison
conditions and shackling. But in the context of assessing risk  upon  return
to a person under his country's criminal justice process, we  do  not  think
this would amount to serious harm.


The issue of the fairness or otherwise of the trial itself

62. As already noted,  we  consider  that  in  approaching  this  issue  the
relevant criterion is not whether the appellant would receive a  trial  that
was  fair  in  every  respect.  Serious  harm  will  not  arise  unless  the
shortcomings in the trial process are thoroughgoing or extensive  and  would
add up to flagrant denial of a fair trial.

63. As already noted, the adjudicator expressly stated at one point that  it
was not for him to evaluate this issue, describing it as entirely  a  matter
for the Pakistani courts. However, he did eventually go on  to  evaluate  it
to some extent at least. His conclusion was that there was "no evidence"  to
support the assertion that the appellant would not receive a fair trial.

64. Insofar as he did address the issue, the Tribunal would  agree  with  Ms
Farbey that the adjudicator was wrong to state that there was "no  evidence"
that the appellant would face an unfair trial. From the  background  country
materials it was plain there  was  some  evidence  that  defendants  do  not
always receive a fair trial.

65. The US State Department report chronicles  that  the  judiciary  remains
subjected to executive branch influence and notes  that  "[l]  ow  salaries,
inadequate  resources,  heavy  workloads,  and  corruption  contributed   to
judicial inefficiency, particularly in the lower courts". However, the  same
report  also  records  that  the  "higher  level  judiciary  is   considered
competent and  generally  honest".  It  notes  that  because  of  widespread
torture by police leading to suspects confessing  to  crimes  regardless  of
their actual  culpability,  the  court  subsequently  throw  out  many  such
confessions. It notes that in the face  of  police  impunity  the  judiciary
faults the police for presenting weak cases that do not stand up  in  court.
The CIPU report notes that although the Musharraf regime has  encroached  on
the  independence  of  the  judiciary  in  specific  respects,  its  general
independence is claimed to remain intact. The government  insists  that  all
legal proceedings since the  coup  have  remained  open  to  the  media  and
totally transparent. International observers have been invited to visit  and
observe court proceedings. At paragraph 4.2.4. it is  noted  that  in  April
2001 the judiciary demonstrated its capacity to act  independently  when  it
acquitted on charges  of  murder  and  arson,  including  the  murder  of  a
policeman, 10 activists of the MQM.

66. Considering these  reports  in  the  round,  we  do  not  consider  they
establish that an appellant facing serious charges in  current-day  Pakistan
arising out of a 1995 incident at a demonstration would face a real risk  of
a flagrant denial of a fair trial. We bear in mind here that  the  appellant
would be the subject of pre-trial detention, even though not in fact  guilty
of the charges laid against him. But, given  existing  safeguards  in  later
stages of the trial process, we do not think it reasonably  likely  that  he
would not be exonerated during those later stages.

67. What this means in our view is that the evidence  certainly  establishes
that it is possible he would face a trial process with shortcomings. But  it
falls short of establishing  a  real  possibility  of  a  thoroughly  unfair
trial.

68. We note that Ms Farbey herself conceded that the evidence overall  falls
considerably short of establishing that  defendants  in  Pakistan  routinely
fail to receive a fair trial.


The issue of any likely punishment

69. In view of our findings on the likely nature of the trial the  appellant
would receive, we do not consider the issue of any likely punishment  to  be
relevant.

70. However, for the sake of completeness we would  observe  that  we  found
the adjudicator's treatment of this issue open to question. At  the  hearing
the appellant's representative submitted that if the appellant  were  to  be
convicted of murder, he would then  face  the  possibility  of  receiving  a
death sentence and that  this  would  amount  to  "persecution"  within  the
meaning  of  the  1951  Convention  because  it   would   be   contrary   to
international  human  rights  standards.  The  adjudicator  did  not  agree,
pointing to the fact that Article 2 of the ECHR did not prohibit  the  death
penalty. However, if the ECHR was to be used as a benchmark, then it  should
have to be referred to in full. In this regard  the  adjudicator  overlooked
that the Sixth Protocol prohibits the death penalty except in time  of  war.
Be that as it may, it must be said  that,  outside  the  ECHR  context,  the
basis in public international law for treating  the  death  penalty  in  the
context of refoulement as illegitimate per  se  is  less  well  established.
Therefore, to the extent that international human  rights  law  furnishes  a
relevant point of reference for defining  persecution,  it  cannot  be  said
definitively that return to a  country  to  face  the  death  penalty  would
always constitute persecution. Fortunately we do not  need  to  decide  this
question in this case.


The issue of risk to the appellant of revenge attacks

71. The grounds of appeal also allege that the  Pakistan  authorities  would
be unable to protect this appellant against "revenge attacks"  from  friends
or relatives of the person who had died at the demonstration.

72. We find it difficult to follow the argument raised  in  the  grounds  on
this point. The adjudicator is said to have  erred  in  not  realising  that
those seeking to revenge this death would get to  know  of  the  appellant`s
whereabouts through the fact that he would come up in court. We agree  that,
since the appellant might have to go to court to face  charges  arising  out
of the August 1995 incident, his presence back in  Pakistan  would  come  to
the knowledge of the dead man's relatives. However, even if the  adjudicator
failed to make that point  sufficiently  clear,  we  are  satisfied  he  was
entirely correct to conclude that the evidence did not demonstrate that  the
authorities in Pakistan would be unable or unwilling to protect him  against
any such attacks. Even  assuming  at  the  end  of  the  trial  process  the
appellant would be unsafe remaining in the same  area,  there  would  be  no
difficulties in him relocating elsewhere in Pakistan.

73. The appeal is dismissed.

74. Summary of conclusions

1. Although it is not the  purpose  of  refugee  law  to  adjudge  guilt  or
   innocence under the national law of the country of origin,  the  type  of
   examination a refugee decision-maker must conduct  when  considering  the
   issue of prosecution versus persecution is no less evaluative than it  is
   in respect of any other issue. Incomplete or sketchy evidence  is  not  a
   valid reason for failing to decide whether a claimant  faces  justice  or
   injustice.

2. Whether a prosecution amounts to persecution is a question of  fact.  All
   the relevant circumstances have to be considered on a case-by-case basis.

3. Particular care must be taken to focus on the  criminal  justice  process
   as a whole. Only a  holistic  approach  to  this  issue  can  ensure  the
   decision-maker weighs any harms cumulatively and not just separately.

4. Whether prosecution amounts to persecution must be analysed by  reference
   to international human rights norms. The utility behind doing so is  that
   international  human  rights  instruments  contain  specific   guarantees
   relating to the criminal justice process and that these are  increasingly
   used in major general country reports to  assess  the  performance  of  a
   State`s criminal justice system.

5. In line with the human rights approach to the definition  of  persecution
   (and protection) approved in Horvath and its  basis  in  a  notion  of  a
   hierarchy of human rights, account must be taken of  the  fact  that  the
   right to a fair trial is not an absolute, non-derogable  right.  Just  as
   under international human rights law examining the issue of fair trial in
   the context of return or refoulement there is  no  violation  unless  the
   risk faced is that of a flagrant denial of a fair trial, so too under the
   Refugee Convention prosecution does  not  amount  to  persecution  unless
   likely failures in the fair trial process go beyond shortcomings and pose
   a threat to the very existence of the right to a fair trial.

6. When considering whether the generality of citizens face a real  risk  of
   persecution under the criminal justice system of their country of origin,
   it is important to establish the scale  of  any  violations  of  relevant
   human rights such as the right not to be exposed to ill treatment  during
   detention or the right to a fair trial. A useful benchmark  is  that  set
   out in Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture,  namely  whether  the
   level of abuse of human rights  rises  to  the  level  of  a  "consistent
   pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights".

7. Applying these principles to this case, the  adjudicator  had  sufficient
   evidence before him to establish: (i) that the  police  would  no  longer
   have any reason to target the appellant; (ii) however, the charges facing
   the appellant might proceed, even though false; (iii) but  the  Pakistani
   courts would recognise they were false and would exonerate him  at  least
   by the time of the trial; (iv) that he might nevertheless first undergo a
   period  of  pre-trial  detention;  (v)  although  this  would   mean   he
   experienced hardships, these would not rise to the level of serious  harm
   so as to make his a case of persecution  rather  than  prosecution;  (vi)
   even on the assumption that he might still face a real  risk  of  serious
   harm from the relatives of the man killed at the  demonstration  (against
   which the authorities could not protect him), he would be able  to  avail
   himself of an internal flight (protection) alternative.





               DR H H STOREY

               VICE PRESIDENT
