
KH

|Heard at Field House       |        |AL (Documentary Evidence -  |
|                           |        |UNHCR - Peaceholding) Angola|
|                           |        |CG [2002] UKIAT 06429       |
|On  6 December 2002        |        |HX50946-2001                |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|7 February 2003                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr  G  Warr (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|Aguinaldo  Simao  Tomas  Lunguieki                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Angola, appeals the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr  C  P  Rushton)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for
      asylum.

2.    Mr R O'Ryan, of Counsel, instructed by Rochdale  Law  Centre  appeared
      for the appellant while Mr M Davidson  represented  the  Secretary  of
      State.

3.    The appellant arrived in this country on 29 September 2000.   He  made
      his application for asylum on arrival.  He and  his  family  had  been
      directly involved in the civil war in Angola and both his parents  had
      been killed by government agents in 1993.  Prior  to  his  death,  the
      appellant's father had been detained and  tortured.   In  consequence,
      the appellant had become involved with the  UNITA  opposition  and  in
      1997 he had secretly joined the party.  He had obtained employment  in
      the Ministry of Agriculture despite his sympathies and had represented
      his  department   in   various   international   organisations.    The
      appellant's father had worked as a journalist  and  the  ruling  party
      considered that he had assisted the UNITA leader to  escape  from  the
      country.  In spite of the appellant's  employment  with  a  government
      department, the security forces began to  show  an  interest  in  him,
      suspecting him of sharing his father's  views.   He  had  always  kept
      secret his own membership of UNITA.  From  1998  until  his  departure
      from Angola in September  2000  the  appellant  had  been  subject  to
      harassment by the security forces and had been  interrogated  on  many
      occasions as the government believed that he had  sensitive  documents
      passed on to him by his father.   He  had  been  severely  ill-treated
      while in detention and  was  placed  on  trial  and  detained  pending
      sentence.  In August 2000 his brother had been murdered because of the
      family connection.

4.    While awaiting sentence,   the  appellant  escaped  from  custody  and
      contacted a UNITA agent who arranged his departure.

5.    The appellant accepted in his evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  that
      there had  been  a  significant  change  in  the  position  in  Angola
      following the assassination of the UNITA leader on 22  February  2002.
      The Adjudicator noted that  some  six  weeks  had  elapsed  since  the
      signing of the peace accord between the government and  the  remaining
      UNITA command structure.  There had been no reports of  the  agreement
      breaking down.  While the appellant was emphatic in his oral  evidence
      that there was no certainty that the peace agreement would  not,  like
      the ones which had preceded it, break down the Adjudicator  could  not
      accept that the agreement was likely to fail.   The  Adjudicator  did,
      however, accept the appellant's oral evidence that in  consequence  of
      both his family history and his own covert support for  UNITA  he  was
      regarded by the Angola  regime  as  an  opponent.   Absent  the  peace
      agreement, the  appellant  would  have  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution.  The Adjudicator considered that the peace  accord  would
      now prevail and consequently dismissed the appeal.

6.    The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 18 April  2002  and  on  26  April
      2002 the UNHCR issued a statement as follows:-

           "Whilst we consider this  (the  ceasefire  agreement)  to  be  a
           welcome and potentially far reaching development,  our  view  at
           this stage is that it should not warrant an immediate or radical
           change to UNHCR's existing position regarding the assessment  of
           refugee claims...  UNHCR believes that a  cautious  approach  is
           justified because it will take some time for the new development
           to filter down to the rank and file of the protagonists  to  the
           conflict... UNHCR believes that the situation in Angola has  not
           sufficiently consolidated to justify the return  of  individuals
           whose claims for asylum have been unsuccessful..."


7.    It was this statement by the UNHCR which caused the Chairman to  grant
      leave in this matter.  Counsel submitted that it was illogical for the
      Chairman to grant leave on this issue and  artificial.   He  drew  our
      attention to the operational guidance note issued by the  Home  Office
      and reminded us that the appellant had been in custody and had escaped
      and had a  history  of  detention  and  mistreatment.   While  it  was
      accepted that the UNITA fighters had been demobilised and that several
      hundred thousand were dispersed in camps  there  was  no  evidence  of
      large scale releases where individuals had  been  detained  after  the
      ceasefire.  Counsel drew our attention to Amnesty International and US
      State Department Reports in the bundle about the position prior to the
      ceasefire.  The Human Rights Watch Report indicated that  the  Angolan
      Police Force might have strong internal  disciplinary  structures  but
      violation of the rights of citizens are  not  targeted  systematically
      from the top down.  Counsel acknowledged  that  the  report  mentioned
      that human rights awareness  had  been  developed  to  a  considerable
      degree in Luanda (where the appellant comes from) although  there  had
      been very little impact in the provinces.  Counsel accepted  that  the
      passage in the Human Rights Watch Report to which he referred  us  was
      somewhat obscure.

8.    The Home Office operational guidance note in respect of  Angola  dated
      October 2002 emphasised that fighting had not  completely  ceased  and
      that there was still fighting between the Front for the Liberation  of
      the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC) and the government. While  the  guidance
      note stated that the majority of UNITA  cases  were  not  well-founded
      there might be exceptions.  While it was not suggested there  was  any
      reverse burden on the  Secretary  of  State,  the  case  of  Arif  was
      analogous to that of the appellant.

9.    Mr Davidson submitted that the UNHCR  had  been  contacted  to  update
      their position in the light  of  the  statement  referred  to  in  the
      grounds of appeal which had caused  the  Tribunal  Chairman  to  grant
      leave.  In October 2002  the  UNHCR  had  stated  that  their  current
      position on returns to Angola was as follows:

           "As far as individuals originating from Luanda are concerned, we
           believe that they should only be returned if, firstly, this will
           not  result  in  them  living  in  a   situation   of   internal
           displacement, and, secondly, any family members  residing  there
           have been identified and so notified.   As  regards  individuals
           from the provinces or those who do not have relatives in Luanda,
           we believe that their return to Angola  should  be  avoided,  if
           they increase the already  large  number  of  internally  placed
           persons."


10.   Also, the UNHCR  had  written  specifically  about  the  appellant  on
      15 July 2002 noting that following the ceasefire "no serious security
      incidents have been  reported"  although  the  humanitarian  situation
      continued to be  alarming.   It  was  premature  to  assume  that  the
      security of returned asylum seekers could be guaranteed.

11.   The  ceasefire  and  other  developments  had  demonstrated  that  the
      Angolan authorities did not pursue former UNITA  fighters  and  indeed
      many former rebels have been recruited to join  the  military.   There
      would be no interest in prosecuting the  appellant  and  it  would  be
      speculative to assume that he would be  of  interest  because  of  his
      escape.

12.   We reserved our determination at the conclusion  of  the  submissions.
      We do not consider that it was artificial for the  Chairman  to  grant
      leave on the point identified  by  him.   The  peace  deal  was  still
      comparatively young and the UNHCR statement was issued  within  a  few
      days of the Adjudicator's determination.  We now have the  benefit  of
      up-to-date information from the UNHCR together with a  letter  written
      specifically concerning the appellant.  The  October  2002  gives  the
      following summary concerning the ceasefire agreement which it  may  be
      helpful to reproduce here:


        . "Following the death of Jonas Savimbi in February 2002, UNITA and
          the FAA agreed to a ceasefire. The  subsequent  peace  agreement,
          signed on 4 April 2002, established the organisational  framework
          for the full demobilisation of UNITA forces, and arrangements for
          their reintegration into civilian life. The accord was  based  on
          the principles of the Lusaka Protocol of 1994.

        .  The  Joint  Military  Commission  (JMC)   formally   began   the
          demobilisation process in June 2002.  In  order  to  support  the
          JMC's work, the Government established  the  National  Commission
          for the Productive Social Reintegration of  Demobilised  Soldiers
          and  Displaced  People  (NCPSRDSDP)  to  provide   administrative
          assistance in the reintegration process.

        . At the end of June 2002 over  85,000  (and  over  300,000  family
          members) UNITA rebels had been  registered  in  quartering  camps
          across the country, and nearly 31,000 weapons had been handed in.
          On 15 July 2002 the FAA began recruiting 5,000 former  rebels  to
          join  the  military  and  police  in  the  final  stage  of   the
          demobilisation process. Though reports from various provinces  on
          22 July 2002 indicated that the ex-rebels were still  armed,  the
          completion of the demobilisation process at the end of July  2002
          symbolised the formal end of the civil war.

        . In April 2002 UNITA began the process of redefining  its  mandate
          by establishing a Reconciliation and Reunification Commission  to
          support and monitor the peace process and encourage a move toward
          unifying the movement.  On 17 May 2002, the UN  Security  Council
          decided to suspend the  travel  restrictions  imposed  on  senior
          UNITA officials for a period of 90 days.  On 16  June  2002,  the
          UNITA leadership announced that a new party leader and  political
          framework would be agreed at a Party Congress in 2003.

        . UNITA's military wing was disbanded following the  completion  of
          the demobilisation process. The organisation's  various  factions
          were formally unified on 10 October 2002 when 18  working  groups
          were established in order  to  shadow  the  Government.   UNITA-R
          ceases to exist.  The UN Security Council has decided to lift the
          travel ban (temporarily suspended since 17 May  2002)  on  senior
          UNITA officials as of 14 November 2002."

13.   The Home Office concluded that following the ending of the  civil  war
      and  the  subsequent  peace  process  in  most  cases  applicants  who
      expressed a fear on the basis of membership or association with  UNITA
      were unlikely to have a well-founded fear of persecution although  the
      threshold may be passed in individual cases.

14.   The United Nations  Report  dated  26  July  2002  reproduced  in  the
      appellant's bundle notes that the chances for a sustainable peace  are
      higher than at any time since Angola became independent but that there
      was nevertheless a humanitarian crisis.  While  it  appears  from  the
      material in the appellant's bundle which is up to date, that some four
      million Angolans, a third of the population, have been displaced,  the
      general picture is one of difficulties relating to malnutrition,  lack
      of food and health issues.  Counsel drew our attention to  a  part  of
      the Human Rights Watch Report which he accepted was not entirely clear
      but none of the material before us appears to indicate that the  peace
      process has broken down or threatens to  break  down.   The  appellant
      comes from Luanda and  in  Luanda  it  is  stated  that  human  rights
      awareness has been developed to a considerable degree.

15.   The UNHCR on 15 July 2002 responded to a request  to  comment  on  the
      appellant's individual circumstances.   The  UNHCR  stated  that  they
      could not produce a statement  of  fact  on  an  individual  case  and
      whether or not the Angolan Government would persecute the appellant as
      an individual due to his  connections  with  UNITA.   The  UNHCR  gave
      general  guidance  and  referred  to  the  signing  of  the  ceasefire
      agreement and referred to the fact that no serious security  incidents
      had been reported.

16.   The emphasis of the UNHCR in that letter appears to us to  be  on  the
      humanitarian concerns and the need to  avoid  unplanned  or  premature
      returns which would put additional strain on the infrastructure.   The
      situation had not sufficiently consolidated to justify the  return  of
      unsuccessful asylum seekers.

17.   We can quite understand why the UNHCR  would  wish  not  to  encourage
      returns to a country which is facing problems of health and  nutrition
      and recovering from years of war.

18.   Of course no guarantee of safety  can  be  given  to  any  individual.
      However, it is necessary for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  to  the
      required standard that returning him to Angola will expose  him  to  a
      real risk of harm  or  ill-treatment  or  persecution.   The  evidence
      before us does not show that.  It  shows  that  the  peace  accord  is
      holding although there are serious problems of a  humanitarian  nature
      to overcome.  Counsel acknowledges that there is no reverse burden  of
      proof in this case, the burden remains on the appellant, light  though
      it is.  On the material before us, he has not discharged that  burden.
      The UNHCR has clarified the position which moved the Chairman to grant
      leave.  The Adjudicator was right to dismiss this appeal.

19.   We dismiss the appeal and affirm the Adjudicator's determination.





                                                                     G  Warr
                                                              Vice President




