
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |MT (Risk-Return-GIA) Algeria|
|                           |        |CG [2002] UKIAT 01166       |
|On 11 March 2002           |        |CC34833-2001                |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|18.04.2002                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mrs M L Roe                                                       |
|Mrs E Hurst JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MUSTAPHA TAALAH                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who has been  granted  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
      Malcolm Rothwell, who dismissed his appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision refusing to grant leave to enter and refusing asylum.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 11 March  2002.  Mr  L  Alara  for
      Dozie & Co. Solicitors appeared on behalf of the appellant, and  Mr  N
      Banks of the Home Office Presenting Officer's Unit appeared on  behalf
      of the respondent.

   3. Mr Alara relied upon his skeleton argument. He said that he would make
      no further submissions otherwise except in response to the points made
      by Mr Banks.

   4. Mr Banks put in the decisions in Saidi and  Bensaid.  Relying  on  the
      former, the Tribunal should find there was a sufficiency of protection
      in Algeria, and reference was made in particular  to  paragraphs  129,
      130 and 133. The influence of the GIA was significantly diminished and
      there had been an amnesty.  There  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      within the major urban centres. Reference was also made  to  the  CIPU
      Report at paragraph 3.53 and at A5, A6 and  B13.  Such  extremists  as
      were left had been forced into the rural areas. It would therefore not
      be  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  exercise  an  internal  flight
      alternative, but it would be available and in fact  he  had  exercised
      it. Reference was made to question 6 at A4  and  question  14  B5  and
      question 21 at B6 and the  answers.  They  all  went  to  support  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions at paragraphs 4.11 and 4.12. The appellant's
      fear such as it was, was linked to a particular employment which he no
      longer held. It was most unlikely that the GIA would have a continuing
      interest in him and they would not impute a political opinion to  him.
      He had simply not done what they wanted and there  was  no  Convention
      reason, as the Adjudicator had found.


   5. As regards the recommendation made by the Adjudicator, it  was  argued
      that the medical report was somewhat inconclusive. The  appellant  was
      not receiving prescribed medicine but taking a product  passed  on  to
      him by a friend and it was unclear  that  he  had  on-going  treatment
      needs. Hence the  relevance  of  Bensaid,  and  the  Tribunal  was  in
      particular referred to paragraph 36. That was the  same  drug  as  had
      been prescribed in this case, and the appellant in Bensaid was  taking
      that course of medicine which the appellant was not. In any event  the
      European Court of Human Rights had said there would not be a breach of
      Article 3 or Article 8 to return that appellant to Algeria.  Treatment
      would be available  there.  It  was  speculation  as  to  whether  his
      condition might  worsen,  and  the  Tribunal  was  again  referred  to
      Bensaid, at paragraph 39. There was no evidence sufficient for a grant
      of leave to remain on that basis.

   6. In his submissions Mr Alara took us to pages 13 - 15  of  the  bundle,
      the medical report, and also made the point that the appellant had  an
      appointment to see a consultant, and a letter concerning this was  put
      in.

   7. He also made the point that the date of Saidi was 24 January 2001  and
      that today's case had been heard  by  the  Adjudicator  subsequent  to
      that. In the light of the medical report and the recommendation by the
      Adjudicator one would expect  the  Adjudicator  to  have  allowed  the
      appeal under paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 of the 1999 Act.

   8. The Tribunal was  referred  to  paragraph  5.3  of  the  determination
      concerning the Ireland case, and it was not  the  case  that  a  value
      judgement as to the circumstances of the case and the  effect  on  the
      particular victim had been considered in  this  particular  case.  The
      Adjudicator had accepted that the appellant was  wholly  credible  and
      that he had been  persecuted.  At  paragraph  4.11  he  accepted  that
      although the issue of terrorism was largely outside  the  cities,  the
      group the appellant feared had caused problems in that part of Algiers
      and in the cities. The fear was accordingly well founded.

   9. It was the case that the appellant had an imputed  political  opinion.
      The Tribunal was referred to the discussion of Noune and Adan  in  the
      grounds of appeal. Although there had been a number of people who  had
      surrendered themselves as part of the amnesty, at the same time the so
      called GIA had never accepted the ceasefire or dialogue. The  splinter
      group was the GSPC who maintained a power base in the cities.

  10. The Tribunal was referred again to the medical report on  the  history
      of the appellant and he had had this illness for  some  time  and  his
      fear was very real. No one knew how long it  would  take  for  him  to
      heal. Proper account had not been taken of the medical evidence by the
      Adjudicator. Even the consultant could not say how  long  his  illness
      would last. Faced with the same situation from which he had run  away,
      he was likely to be worse. The appeal should be allowed.

  11. We stated that we would reserve our determination.

  12.  The  Adjudicator  made  a  favourable  credibility  finding  in   the
      appellant's favour, finding his evidence to  be  generally  consistent
      with the background evidence in material respects.  More  specifically
      at paragraph 4.5 of his determination, he  found  that  the  appellant
      became a security guard at Kouba Hospital in Algiers and  subsequently
      became the head of security in 1998. Subsequent to that appointment he
      was targeted by the GIA terrorist group for medical supplies and later
      for weapons. He did this for some time, however at some time  in  1999
      he first refused  to  give  them  access  to  hospital  equipment.  He
      continued to provide supplies  but  stopped  short  of  providing  the
      weapons they demanded. At a  time  around  the  end  of  1999  or  the
      beginning of 2000, someone came to the hospital and demanded access to
      the pharmacy, and at that point he  decided  to  report  this  to  his
      director who contacted the police. He claims that they said that  they
      could not protect him because they were  in  fear  of  the  terrorists
      themselves.

  13. The Adjudicator also found, at paragraph  4.6  of  his  determination,
      that the appellant had spent  at  least  four  months  living  outside
      Algiers after he decided to flee from the pressure of the  terrorists.
      It seems that this was from March or April 2000. He  spent  some  four
      months in Bechar, at which time he was treated at a military  hospital
      for depression, and  thereafter  returned  to  Algiers  for  some  two
      months, to a hotel room from which he left Algeria  and  came  to  the
      United Kingdom via France. He left  Algeria  on  5  January  2001  and
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 January 2001.

  14. The Adjudicator also considered a psychiatric report provided by a  Dr
      Pierides, and  concluded  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the
      appellant was suffering  from  mental  illness  and  continued  so  to
      suffer, largely from depression and anxiety. He accepted the  doctor's
      view that the appellant was a suicide risk and would  have  little  to
      live for if his application for asylum was refused, but did not accept
      the medical opinion that he was suffering from PTSD.

  15. As a consequence the Adjudicator found that the appellant  did  suffer
      very strong pressure  from  terrorists  who  he  said  were  the  GIA,
      directly because of his position of responsibility  at  the  hospital.
      This caused him to flee  Algiers  and  receive  medical  treatment  on
      account of the stress resulting from this pressure. He found that this
      was a sufficient degree of pressure to amount to persecution  by  non-
      state agents, but concluded that there was  no  Convention  reason  in
      this case since he found that the appellant was targeted  by  the  GIA
      because of work and not because of any imputed political opinion,  and
      that the objective was criminal and  not  political.  The  Adjudicator
      also noted that there was no evidence that there  was  any  effort  to
      carry out alleged threats made by  the  GIA  against  the  appellant's
      family during the period of several months between the making of those
      threats and his leaving Algeria. The Adjudicator regarded this failure
      to act as inconsistent with  the  objective  evidence  concerning  the
      harsh and pitiless nature of the GIA and its offshoot  the  GSPC.  The
      Adjudicator also  found  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  objective
      evidence to support the appellant's claim that he was at risk from the
      security forces themselves, noting that the authorities did  not  take
      action against him for suspected complicity when he reported to  them,
      and that there was no objective evidence that the authorities did take
      any such action against terrorist targets.


  16. On his  consideration  of  the  objective  evidence,  the  Adjudicator
      concluded that there was a reasonable likelihood that  the  GIA  would
      not be in a position to carry out its threats against  the  appellant,
      but noted that some networks still exist in  Algiers  and  Constantine
      and the splinter group of the GIA, the  GSPC,  is  largely  active  in
      western Algeria  and  that  there  was  some  support  for  continuing
      terrorist activity which could have targeted the appellant, even if to
      a limited extent, in Algiers.

  17. The point concerning fear from the authorities was not pursued  before
      us, and we see no merit to it. We consider that  the  Adjudicator  was
      right to conclude as he did that the appellant did  not  have  a  well
      founded  fear  of  persecution  or  indeed  of  any  harm   from   the
      authorities. There is no evidence to sustain that contention.

  18. On the question of a Convention reason, we think there  is  sufficient
      force in the matters set out in the grounds of appeal in  this  regard
      as to make it arguable that an imputed political opinion  could  exist
      in this case in the refusal of the appellant to  provide  material  as
      demanded by the GIA to them.

  19. However we do not agree with the arguments put before us by  Mr  Alara
      concerning the risk on return, even if it is  accepted  the  appellant
      has in the past been persecuted for a Convention reason by the GIA. We
      note from the CIPU Report for October  2001  at  paragraph  3.53  that
      though the killings by armed groups continued  in  rural  areas,  main
      cities were generally secure,  though  there  is  mention  of  a  bomb
      exploding in Algiers wounding 34 people. At A5 there is mention of the
      amnesty, which led some 4,500 persons, mainly from  the  GIA  and  the
      GSPC, to surrender under the terms of the Civil Harmony Law. There  is
      mention of random targeting of civilians by terrorists  and  the  fact
      that the violence takes place primarily in the countryside and smaller
      towns as the security forces have largely forced the insurgents out of
      the cities. This part is reinforced at B13 where it is also said  that
      it is essentially rural terrorism that is taking place except  in  the
      strong-holds of the armed groups. It is said  that  the  situation  in
      Algiers and Constantine is very calm,  although  some  networks  still
      exist. We agree with Mr Banks, who made the point that the  appellant,
      who is no longer in a position to assist  the  GIA,  having  left  his
      employment, would not be a person  who  would  be  at  risk  of  being
      targeted. It is not without relevance that the claimed threats to  his
      family were never carried out, and we note also that the appellant was
      able to return to Algiers for a period. It is worth  nothing  that  in
      reply to question 21 he said that  when  he  returned  to  Algiers  he
      stayed in the centre of the capital which is a safe area and far  from
      his neighbourhood. When it was put to him that if it was a  safe  area
      he could have stayed there, he said that he could not afford  to  live
      there financially.  In  our  view,  on  a  proper  assessment  of  the
      objective evidence, the  appellant  does  not  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution on return to Algeria. Even if he did, on his past  history
      he was able to relocate without problems to Bechar,  but  we  consider
      that in any event he could return to Algiers or live  in  any  of  the
      other cities without any real risk of persecution. The level  of  risk
      that exists in our view, on  a  proper  assessment  of  the  objective
      evidence, is so slight as not to amount to a real risk of  persecution
      for this appellant with his particular history.


  20. The Adjudicator considered the medical evidence in assessing the human
      rights issues in this case. He made a recommendation in the  light  of
      the psychiatric evidence that the appellant be not removed  until  the
      Secretary of State was satisfied that he had recovered from his mental
      condition sufficiently to allow his safe  return  to  Algeria.  As  Mr
      Alara  pointed  out,  even  specialists  were  unable  to  given   any
      indication as to when that might be. Mr Banks made the point that  the
      appellant did not appear to have any  on  going  treatment  needs,  in
      light of the fact that he had found it difficult  to  take  Olanzapine
      and had been using medication taken  on  the  advice  of  friends.  Dr
      Pierides said as a consequence  he  had  not  prescribed  any  further
      medication for him and told him to see his new GP as soon as possible.
      The only other medical evidence is that he has an appointment  in  May
      to see a consultant psychiatrist.

  21. In Bensaid the court examined carefully the  evidence  concerning  the
      applicant in that case who was suffering from  schizophrenia  and  who
      was in fact receiving Olanzapine as part  of  his  medication.  If  he
      returned to Algeria this drug would no longer be available to him  for
      he is an outpatient and he was not enrolled in  any  social  insurance
      fund and  could  not  claim  any  reimbursement.  The  drug  would  be
      available to him if admitted as an inpatient and would be  potentially
      available  on  payment  as  an  outpatient.  The  court  accepted  the
      seriousness of his medical condition, but at paragraph 40, having  due
      regard to the high threshold set by Article 3, particularly where  the
      case does not concern the direct  responsibility  of  the  Contracting
      State for the infliction of harm, the court did not  find  that  there
      was a sufficiently real risk that the  appellant's  removal  in  those
      circumstances would be contrary to the standards of Article 3.

  22. The Tribunal considers that reasoning can be equally  applied  to  the
      situation of the appellant before us. Clearly  he  has  mental  health
      problems, but the Tribunal considers that the  reasoning  set  out  in
      Bensaid is equally applicable to his case, and that as  a  consequence
      there would be no real risk of a breach of his  Article  3  rights  on
      return to Algeria.

  23. This appeal is dismissed.





                                                                   D K Allen

                                                                    Chairman
