
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

 Decision no. PI (Relocation - Osu-Igbo - Christian) Nigeria CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       04720
                                                    Appeal no. HX 41745-2001
Heard:      23.09.02
Typed:      26.09.02
Sent out:  08.10.02


                     IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-99



Before:
                       John Freeman (chairman)
                             and
                       Mr MG Taylor CBE

Between:
                         Prince Nwachukwu IHEJIRIKA,
                                  appellant

and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent



                             DECISION ON APPEAL

Mr S Winter (solicitor, HBM Sayers, Glasgow) for the appellant
Mr A Mullin for the respondent

   This is an appeal from a decision of an adjudicator (Mr F Pieri), sitting
   at Glasgow on 18 December 2001, dismissing an  asylum  and  human  rights
   appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, from directions for removal as an illegal
   entrant on  10  July  2001.  Leave  was  given  on  the  basis  that  the
   adjudicator might  not  have  considered  the  human  rights  claim  with
   sufficient care: it is not clear what that added to the asylum claim. The
   adjudicator's findings on internal flight would have  been  an  effective
   answer to both claims, if upheld,  which  the  chairman  who  gave  leave
   specifically did. However, having got leave, the appellant is entitled to
   a hearing on the merits of his case; so we asked Mr Winter to begin  with
   the internal flight point.


2. The appellant's case on this  is  that  he  could  not  move  to  western
   Nigeria as he would face discrimination everywhere in that  country.  Far
   from his first name being a title of  honour,  he  is  a  member  of  the
   outcaste Osu group of the Igbo tribe in the south-east. Like many  Igbos,
   he is a Christian. He and his first wife had had numerous problems in the
   south-east from higher-caste elements, till 1982, when  their  house  was
   burnt down, and she and their four children fled. The  appellant  himself
   moved to Togo (adjacent to western Nigeria) in 1982. There he  lived  for
   18 years, going through a ceremony of marriage with another woman  (oddly
   enough with the same Christian name) during that time. With  her  too  he
   had four children.

3. In November 2000 the appellant returned to Nigeria to see what was  going
   on. He got no further than Badagry, on the Togo border in the west, where
   he spent a week without problems. However he  said  he  would  have  been
   unable to stay there, because he would have been recognized as  an  Igbo,
   and there were too many differences in culture and language; so  he  came
   on here in February 2001. While the vernaculars of western Nigeria are of
   course completely different from the Igbo language, the same is true  for
   Togo;  and  there  is  the  added  complication  that  the  official  and
   commercial language there is French. Given the appellant's  18  years  in
   Togo, we do not see any problem for him in adjusting to life  in  western
   Nigeria from that point of view.

4. The way Mr Winter put the appellant's case was that he  would  have  been
   subject to discrimination as an  Osu,  even  in  the  west.  This  rather
   surprized us, as we had always understood the Osu/non-Osu divide as being
   an internal Igbo distinction; so we  asked  Mr  Winter  to  refer  us  to
   anything in the background evidence which could support its universality.
   This point had not occurred to him before, so we gave him  some  time  to
   consider it: he had already referred us to a report by  Victor  Dike,  on
   the 'caste system' in Nigeria, from Africa Economic Analysis of  13  June
   1999. Nothing is known about the author (Mr Winter had  got  the  article
   through the bibliography in a Human Rights Watch report); but he seems to
   know a good deal about his subject. From the  way  he  addresses  it,  he
   seems to be a Nigerian  himself,  writing  with  the  worthy  purpose  of
   persuading the current government to do something to  end  discrimination
   against the Osus.

5. When we resumed, Mr Winter conceded that there was nothing in  Mr  Dike's
   article to show that there was any discrimination  or  animosity  on  the
   part of, for example, the Yoruba (the largest tribe in  western  Nigeria)
   against Igbo Osus. What Mr Winter referred us to was what he said was the
   suggestion at p 6 of the article that  discrimination  against  Osus  was
   widespread. Mr Dike in fact says that "Everybody in  the  designated  Osu
   area is automatically pariah ...". As we pointed out to Mr  Winter,  that
   refers back to, for example, the instance of segregation given by Mr Dike
   at p 4, where one whole village in a particular community in  the  south-
   east was categorized by its neighbours as Osu.  As  Mr  Dike  points  out
   immediately before that, 'Communities in the six geo-political  zones  in
   Nigeria have one variety of caste system or the other' [no dichotomy  had
   been mentioned, so the idiomatic English of a native speaker  would  have
   been 'one ...or another'. Mr Winter was unable to refer us to anything to
   show that the Igbo caste system would have meant anything at all  to  the
   Yoruba or other inhabitants of western Nigeria (including  the  vast  and
   cosmopolitan city of Lagos).

6. The only additional point made  by  Mr  Mullin  was  as  to  whether  the
   appellant could be identified as an Osu anywhere outside his  own  tribal
   area, even supposing anyone were interested in doing so. We  can  readily
   accept that

   a) other tribes could identify him as an Igbo; and
   b) Igbos could identify him as an Osu;

   but Mr Winter rightly conceded that there  was  no  way  in  which  other
   tribes could identify the appellant as an Osu. Mr Winter did seek to rely
   on the appellant's  being  a  Christian;  but,  though  there  have  been
   religious riots [probably as much by way of  labels  adopted  by  hostile
   tribes as in the north of Ireland] in Lagos, there  is  nothing  to  show
   that Christians in general are not usually able to live in peace there or
   elsewhere in the south-west. The result  is  that,  even  supposing  this
   appellant still faced, after twenty years, any repetition of what he  had
   suffered in his home area up to 1982, there is nothing to make it  unduly
   harsh to expect him to take refuge elsewhere in Nigeria.

Appeal



                                                     John Freeman (chairman)
