
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX02089-2002      |
|On 1 August 2002           |        |YD (Risk-Fazilet) Turkey CG |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 04154          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..........04/09/2002..................                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)                                         |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|YUSUF DONDU                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr E Raw, Counsel, instructed by Chamberlain.
For the respondent:    Mr A Sheikh.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, who appeals,  by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal, against a determination of an Adjudicator (Mr Keith W Brown)
      dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
      asylum and to give removal directions to Turkey as an illegal entrant.


   2. The appellant arrived in this country clandestinely in June last  year
      and claimed asylum when he was arrested as  an  illegal  entrant.  The
      basis of his claim, is that he was a  member  of  the  Fazilet  Party,
      which was a legal Party at the time that he was a member, but, in June
      2001, was declared by the Constitutional Court of Turkey, to be banned
      for undermining Turkey's secular order.

   3. The appellant was a farmer, though  employed  as  an  energy  salesman
      selling wood and coal, and was Director of the Farmer  Association  in
      Nurdagi Town, from where his family comes. He  was  a  member  of  the
      management committee of the Fazilet Party in that town. That committee
      used to meet at regular intervals of between two and three weeks  with
      the aim of increasing membership of the committee and  the  number  of
      persons in the Party entitled to vote.

   4. On 1 May 2001, when one such meeting  was  taking  place,  the  police
      raided the meeting and the appellant and four other people were  taken
      into custody. They were detained for five days and maltreated. He  was
      taken before the prosecutor who, after taking statements, released him
      on the condition that he signed on every  week  at  the  local  police
      station. His home was raided on two further occasions, on 9 May and 15
      May 2001 and on both occasions he was taken to the police station  and
      detained for about five hours and he alleged that he  was  maltreated.
      He then decided to come to this country.

   5. The Adjudicator has found the appellant  to  be  credible,  though  he
      considers that he  has  exaggerated  the  degree  of  maltreatment  he
      endured. He found that the appellant  was  released  after  the  first
      arrest, because the authorities had no further  interest  in  him,  he
      having been questioned by the prosecutor and released,  presumably  on
      the orders of the prosecutor. He does not find that the three  arrests
      and periods of detention give rise to a Convention ground.

   6.  He  accepts  that  the  Fazilet  Party  is  now  a  banned  political
      organisation and that on return, the appellant could be  arrested  and
      detained,  because  he  has  failed  to  carry   out   the   reporting
      restrictions. He finds that the appellant would probably be  released.
      In the alternative, he finds also that internal flight is available to
      the appellant, if he fears for his safety in Nurdagi.

   7. Mr Raw put before  us  a  helpful  skeleton  argument  upon  which  he
      enlarged. He emphasised the fact that the  appellant  had  been  taken
      into custody on three occasions in a period of two weeks, and that  he
      had been maltreated on each occasion. He emphasised the fact that  the
      Fazilet Party was a legal party at this time. The appellant  had  only
      reported to the police on one occasion.  He  submitted  that  internal
      flight was not a viable proposition, because the appellant belongs  to
      a prescribed party. He considered  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings,
      that the appellant  would  be  arrested,  but  would  subsequently  be
      released  erroneous.  The  appellant's  previous   arrest   would   be
      discovered, as would the fact that he has failed to report.

   8. Mr Sheikh, in his submissions, pointed out that the appellant had been
      on the management committee of a small party in a provincial town.  No
      evidence had been adduced against him and so he had been released.  He
      referred us to annex E of the CIPU  Report,  which  sets  out  various
      criminal offences arising out of anti-state activities, and points out
      that the appellant comes within none of the categories which carry any
      weighty sentence. There was nothing in the  evidence  to  suggest  the
      appellant would come to the attention of the authorities, were  he  to
      return, other  than  the  question  of  his  failure  to  report.  The
      appellant has not committed a criminal offence, there is  no  evidence
      that he is wanted by the authorities. He drew  our  attention  to  the
      fact that Fazilet members of Parliament continue to operate as members
      of Parliament in Turkey, but are now treated  as  independents,  their
      party being banned. No action has been taken against them by reason of
      their activities. He has not been active on behalf  of  any  political
      party whilst in this country. The Fazilet Party  have  now  splintered
      into a number of groups, which support the existing government, it  is
      not a consequential party, save in provincial terms.


   9. Mr Raw, in his final submission, reiterated the points he had made  in
      his earlier submission.

  10. The appellant's activities were perfectly legal at the  time  that  he
      was detained. The Fazilet Party is not dedicated to the  overthrow  of
      the government. It is a party which is opposed to the secular order in
      Turkey. It would not appear that its aims are pursued  by  violent  or
      illegal means, and it is successful in  having  a  number  of  members
      elected to the Turkish Parliament.  The  appellant  himself,  was  not
      involved in any material political  activity.  His  functions  on  the
      management committee appeared to be limited  to  discussing  with  his
      colleagues on a regular basis, the means  by  which  the  party  could
      expand, its membership and secure more votes at  elections.  It  would
      not appear that he attended demonstrations or embarked upon any  anti-
      government activities. It is hardly  surprising  therefore,  that  the
      prosecutor directed that the appellant should be  released  after  his
      first arrest. Had any case been brought against  him,  it  would  have
      seemed more likely than not, that charges would have  been  dismissed.
      The appellant was doing nothing illegal. It is accepted  that  he  was
      required to report to the police on a regular basis and he did  so  on
      only one occasion. It was accepted  that  the  police  took  him  into
      detention on two further occasions within a very short space of  time,
      and on each occasion, he was detained for a matter  of  hours.  It  is
      apparent that the appellant was no  more  than  a  minor  cog  in  the
      Fazilet Party Organisation. On the two occasions  that  the  appellant
      was taken into custody following his release at the directions of  the
      prosecutor, the police were no doubt acting over zealously and for  no
      apparent, or legal, reason.


  11. The report on the position of the party, as disclosed in  CIPU  (3.32)
      is interesting. It reads:


           "In June 2001 the Constitutional Court reached a decision  in  a
           case launched in May 1999, and banned the Virtue Party (Fazilet)
           for undermining Turkey's secular order. The decision fell  short
           of the expected mass-expulsion of party members from Parliament.
           The Judges voted to expel only two Virtue Deputies, and most  of
           the hundred remaining Deputies joined two new Successor  Parties
           - the Felicity  Party  (Saadet  Partisi)  and  the  Justice  and
           Development Party (Adalet Ve Kalkinma Partisi). The  banning  of
           Virtue was opposed by most legislators, including Prime Minister
           Ecevit, who contended  that  this  exclusion  of  Virtue,  would
           contribute  to  greater  political  instability  at  a  time  of
           financial crises. Recia Kutan said that the Felicity Party would
           seek to protect religious rights, but would  not  challenge  the
           secular basis of the Turkish state."


  12. It is not insignificant that the Constitutional Court's decision,  was
      opposed by  the  majority  of  the  legislature  including  the  Prime
      Minsiter; it is not insignificant that a substantial number of members
      of Parliament continue in that capacity, without any problems with the
      authorities. It is apparent to us, that there  is  no  policy  by  the
      authorities, and certainly the government, to pursue  this  Party  and
      its membership. The Legislature and the Constitutional Court appear to
      be at odds, as to the value of this party within the Turkish political
      spectrum.  Within  the  context  of  a  small  provincial  town,  when
      proceedings were already pending before the Constitutional Court as to
      the legitimacy of the Fazilet Party, it is not surprising that, on the
      basis of a tip off, police acted  as  they  did.  It  is  equally  not
      surprising that the prosecutor took no action  against  the  appellant
      and his colleagues. He gave, no doubt as a gesture towards the police,
      or the complainers, directions for a regular reporting to  the  police
      station.


  13. It is important to place the position of  this  appellant  within  the
      context of the political spectrum of which he claims to be a part.

  14. What would be the risks to the appellant upon return now?  No  warrant
      for his arrest has been issued, no charges were brought against him at
      the time that he was arrested. On the contrary, he was  released  with
      reporting restrictions. If he were to be  returned,  there  would,  no
      doubt, be a record of the detention on 1 May 2001. There would also be
      a record of the fact that he  was  brought  before  a  prosecutor  who
      directed that he be released and that no charges  be  brought  against
      him. There would be a record of the reporting  restrictions.  We  have
      considerable doubt as to whether or not there would be any  record  as
      to the subsequent two detentions. They  were  of  short  duration  and
      probably improper, bearing in mind the  prosecutors  original  release
      directions. He was not taken into custody for failing to report.  Upon
      return, therefore, he could be questioned as the CIPU Report indicates
      a number of returned asylum seekers are. Disclosure  would  emerge  of
      his previous detention, release,  lack  of  charge  and  lack  of  any
      further action against him by the authorities. The  offence  which  he
      has committed, namely that of  failing  to  report,  is  comparatively
      minor and, bearing in mind the quotation from the  CIPU  Report  given
      above,  as  to  the  view  of  the  legislature  with  regard  to  the
      Constitutional Court's ruling on the state of  this  Party,  we  would
      have thought there was less than  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
      appellant would be taken into custody by  reason  of  his  failure  to
      report.


  15. Mr Raw has argued that the appellant would not be able to continue his
      activities on behalf of the Fazilet Party. As we  read  the  objective
      evidence before us, the philosophy of one of  the  two  other  parties
      that have now been formed, i.e. the  Felicity  Party,  is  to  protect
      religious rights, but not challenge the secular basis of  the  Turkish
      state. This would appear to  be  very  much  in  line  with  what  the
      appellant was doing at the time he left the country. The Fazilet Party
      was based on a  religious  philosophy,  namely  it  disapproved  of  a
      secular state. The Felicity Party is devoted to  protecting  religious
      rights, but not challenging the secular basis of the Turkish state. We
      would have thought that within the new  political  spectrum  that  has
      been formed following the Constitutional Court ruling,  the  appellant
      would find an  organisation  embracing  the  principles  in  which  he
      believes which are  perfectly  legitimate,  and  he  can  continue  to
      express any political or religious beliefs which  he  may  retain.  He
      certainly has not been active on behalf of the Fazilet Party,  or  any
      other political organisation whilst in this country; it  would  appear
      that there are alternative organisations sharing his philosophy  which
      he can join when he returns. He is not wanted by the authorities,  and
      was not politically active in any real sense of  that  phrase  at  the
      time he left. We cannot see therefore, that there  is  any  reasonable
      likelihood of the appellant being persecuted upon his return.

  16. The appeal is dismissed.





                                                                 M W Rapinet

                                                              Vice President
