
H-THN11-PP-V1
                                                 Appeal Number :CC53309-2001
                    FJ (Proportionality - Kosovo) Kosovo
                            CG [2002] UKIAT 03516

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  17th May 2002                           |                             |
|Dictated : 23rd May 2002                      |                  6.8.2002.  |


                                  Before:-


                         Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP
                               Mrs E Hurst, JP


between


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                Ferit JASHARI
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Appearances:

For the Appellant:           Mr R Homes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Jones of Counsel,  instructed  by  Wesley  Gryk,
    Solicitors.


1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  Determination
    of an Adjudicator (Mr D  A  Radcliffe)  who  allowed  the  Respondent's
    appeal on human rights'  grounds  against  the  decision  made  on  3rd
    September 2001 giving directions for his removal following the  refusal
    of his claim for asylum.


2.    In this Determination, the Tribunal will refer to  the  Respondent  as
    the Applicant.

3.    The Applicant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  16th  July  1998
    clandestinely by lorry.  He says that he got off the lorry some 50 kms.
    outside London.  He approached a police officer  immediately  who  told
    him to go to the Home Office.  The following day the Applicant  claimed
    asylum.

4.    The basis of his claim is set out in his written statement  which  was
    submitted to the Home Office and supplemented by an  undated  statement
    which was in front of the Adjudicator.  The Applicant was born in  Peje
    where he lived with his family.   His  father  ran  a  small  newsagent
    business.  A large proportion of the profits was extorted by  the  Serb
    authorities and part of the remainder given to political  organisations
    such as the KLA and LDK.  As a result of these  donations,  his  father
    came to the attention of the authorities and his  shop  was  raided  in
    January 1998.  In February 1998, there was a further detailed search in
    which the shop was ransacked.  His father was  attacked  and  when  his
    mother intervened she was brutally beaten.  In July 1998,  his  parents
    were arrested when in the process of taking food supplies by car to the
    KLA in a different town.  He later learnt that they had  been  sent  to
    prison.  A friend of the Applicant's father advised him that  it  would
    be unsafe for him to remain in Kosovo and arrangements  were  made  for
    him to leave.  He  crossed  the  border  by  foot  into  Macedonia  and
    travelled across Europe to the United Kingdom.

5.    The Secretary of State refused his claim for asylum  for  the  reasons
    which are set out in the reasons for refusal letter dated  21st  August
    2001.  He also certified the claim on the basis that the  circumstances
    which gave rise to his fear no longer existed.  The Appellant  appealed
    against this decision on both asylum and human  rights'  grounds.   His
    appeal was heard by the Adjudicator sitting at  Taylor  House  on  11th
    January 2002.  The Adjudicator dismissed the asylum appeal  and  upheld
    the certificate.  He found on the evidence that  UNMIK  and  KFOR  were
    capable both in law and fact of providing a sufficiency  of  protection
    for Kosovan Albanians including the Applicant.  The  circumstances  had
    changed since the Applicant's departure and he would no  longer  be  at
    risk of persecution.

6.    He went on to consider the Applicant's claim under Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  He  was  satisfied  that  the  Applicant  had
    acquired a family life in the United Kingdom with his three cousins and
    that there would be an interference with  this  right  were  he  to  be
    removed to  Kosovo.   The  Adjudicator  had  heard  evidence  from  the
    Applicant and from a cousin, Bleda Jashari.  His cousin  Bleda  is  his
    paternal uncle's son and his  cousins,  Valjon  and  Hekuran,  are  his
    maternal aunt's  sons.   He  made  contact  with  these  cousins  after
    arriving in London.  He does not live with them but he sees them almost
    every day.  It is evidence that these cousins were now his family.

7.    There is further detail about his  cousins  in  paragraph  12  of  the
    witness statement before the Adjudicator.  Valjon was recognised  as  a
    refugee on 12th June 1999  and  granted  indefinite  leave.   Hekuran's
    appeal against the refusal of asylum was allowed by an  Adjudicator  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The other cousin is still awaiting the  outcome  of
    his claim.  In the statement, the Applicant says that he has  now  been
    living in the United Kingdom for more than three years.  When he  first
    came, he could not speak English but his English was  now  of  quite  a
    high standard.  He was working as a receptionist at a hotel in Holborn.
     He had been trying to pursue his studies and develop closer ties  with
    this country.  He had attended various courses.  He was only in contact
    with his three cousins in this country.  He had  not  been  in  contact
    with his parents.  He did not have any definite word about their  fate.
    He had heard news in  May  1999  that  his  mother  was  a  refugee  in
    Macedonia but it seems that since then he has heard no further news.

8.    The Adjudicator went on to consider whether  the  Applicant's  removal
    would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.  He commented in  paragraph
    9.3 of his Determination that there was no evidence that the  Applicant
    posed a threat to law and order.  He was settling in well,  was  paying
    his rent, attending college and had good character references.  He  had
    met a young Spanish woman who worked at the same hotel and had formed a
    relationship with her.  Taking all  these  factors  into  account,  the
    Adjudicator came to the view, as he put it, that a  removal  to  Kosovo
    now would be disproportionate enough  to  put  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of Article 8.

9.    The Secretary of State has been granted leave to appeal  against  this
    Determination.   The  grounds   assert   that   the   Adjudicator   was
    unreasonable to allow the appeal under Article 8 and had misinterpreted
    "legitimate aims" by understating the importance of immigration control
    when  assessing  whether  or  not  the  Applicant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.   When  assessing  the  breach  of  Article  8,   the
    Adjudicator had not taken into account the  Tribunal  Determination  in
    Kacaj  (01/TH/0634)*  where  it  stated  that  it  would  be  virtually
    impossible for an applicant to establish that  control  on  immigration
    was disproportionate to any breach.

10.   Mr  Holmes  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  adopted  a  flawed
    approach to his assessment of the appeal under Article 8.  He was wrong
    to have decided that there was  family  or  private  life  between  the
    Applicant and his three cousins.  He had not  adequately  examined  the
    basis of the cousins' stay in the United Kingdom.  It was one thing for
    an Article 8 claim to be allowed  on  the  basis  of  the  relationship
    between brothers but another where it was between cousins.  So  far  as
    proportionality was concerned, the Adjudicator had not properly weighed
    all the relevant factors.  He had failed to give  adequate  weight  for
    the need for effective immigration control by the removal of those  who
    fail to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

11.   Mr Jones submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  appreciated  all  the
    relevant  factors.   It  was  for  him  to  balance   the   conflicting
    considerations.  The issue of proportionality was  essentially  one  of
    fact and the Tribunal should exercise caution before  interfering  with
    an Adjudicator's Determination.  He referred to Borissov v Secretary of
    State [1996] Imm AR 245.  He submitted that the Adjudicator's  findings
    were sustainable and should be upheld.  It could not be argued that  he
    had reached a decision not properly open to him on the facts.   It  was
    for  him  to  take  into  account  the  Applicant's  age   and   family
    circumstances, and to balance these  against  the  need  for  effective
    immigration control.  His decision was within the range  of  reasonable
    decisions open to an Adjudicator.

12.   The grounds of appeal are limited to the issue of proportionality,  as
    indeed Mr Holmes accepted.  There is no appeal against the finding that
    there would be an interference with the Applicant's family  or  private
    life were he to be  removed.   The  sole  issue  for  the  Tribunal  to
    consider is the issue of proportionality arising  under  Article  8(2).
    This provides  that  there  should  be  no  interference  by  a  public
    authority with the  exercise  of  this  right  except  such  as  is  in
    accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
    interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic  well-
    being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for  the
    protection of health or morals or for the protection of the rights  and
    freedoms of others.  There is no doubt that the interference  would  be
    in accordance with the law.  The issue is whether it is necessary in  a
    democratic society for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime.   The
    Adjudicator commented that there was no  evidence  that  the  Applicant
    posed a threat to law and order.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  never
    suggested that he does, in the sense of being someone who is likely  to
    go out  and  commit  criminal  offences;  however,  the  prevention  of
    disorder imports the idea  of  preventing  disorder  in  society  by  a
    failure to maintain effective immigration control.  Mr  Holmes  directs
    the Tribunal to Kacaj where the Tribunal expressed  the  view  that  it
    would be virtually  impossible  for  an  applicant  to  establish  that
    control on  immigration  was  disproportionate  to  any  breach.   That
    comment must be read in the context and, of course, the Tribunal  could
    never have intended that Article 8 should be construed so strictly that
    the importance of immigration control imported  an  almost  insuperable
    obstacle to a claim succeeding.

13.   Each claim must be looked at  on  its  own  facts  and  circumstances.
    Proportionality is essentially a question of fact involving a balancing
    of the conflicting requirements of the appropriate legitimate aim  with
    the personal compassionate circumstances of each applicant.

14.   The Tribunal has taken into account the fact that  the  Applicant  was
    16 when he arrived in the United Kingdom.  He claimed  asylum  in  July
    1998 but did not receive a decision until August 2001.  He is  now  20.
    The Adjudicator clearly believed the account he gave of his experiences
    in Kosovo.  He does not know the whereabouts  of  his  parents  or  his
    sister.  His family ties  are  now  with  his  cousins  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  We have been referred to the Determination of Mr C  J  Deaven
    who allowed Hekuran's appeal on the basis of his relationship with  his
    brother, Valjon.  Taking these factors into account and bearing in mind
    that  the  onus  lies  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  justify   the
    interference with family life, the Tribunal has come to the  view  that
    the Adjudicator reached a decision which was properly open  to  him  on
    the evidence.  The Tribunal  accepts  Mr  Jones'  submission  that  the
    Tribunal should not  interfere  with  an  Adjudicator's  assessment  of
    proportionality unless it can be shown there is an error of law or  his
    assessment is wrong or unsustainable  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him.  It is not enough to show  that  the  Tribunal  might  have
    reached a different result on the same evidence from the result in fact
    reached by the Adjudicator.  It must  be  shown  that  the  Adjudicator
    reached a result which was not properly open to him on the evidence.

15.   In our view, the Adjudicator did take account  of  the  importance  of
    immigration control.  He was referred to Kacaj which he  has  cited  in
    paragraph 6.3 of his Determination together  with  Nhundu  and  Chiwera
    (01/TH/00613), Marckz v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330 and Boyle  [1994]  19
    EHRR 179.  In our view, it cannot be shown  that  the  Adjudicator  has
    left any material  consideration  out  of  account  when  reaching  his
    Determination nor that he has reached a decision which is  unreasonable
    or otherwise not properly open to him on the evidence.

16.   In these circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is  dismissed.






H J E LATTER
CHAIRMAN


