
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |DB (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection - IFA) Algeria CG|
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 01013          |
|On 25 February 2002        |        |APPEAL NO CC16253-2000      |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|05.04.2002                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J R A Fox                                                      |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Mr G J Brown, JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|DJAMEL BRACHEMI                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant a citizen of Algeria has been given leave  to  appeal
        to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr F R
        C Such) dismissing his appeal against the refusal of the respondent
        to grant him asylum.

     2. At the hearing the  appellant  was  represented  by  Miss  Wood  of
        Counsel and the respondent by Ms Malhotra of the Home Office.

     3. The appellant was born on 17 February 1970  and  is  a  citizen  of
        Algeria.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 2  May  1999  without
        any travel documents.  He claimed asylum at the port.

     4. He was interviewed on 2 May 1999 and the respondent then considered
        the application and refused the same and the  reasons  for  refusal
        are set out in a letter dated 27 March 2000.

     5. The appellant appealed and the appeal was heard by  an  Adjudicator
        who in a determination promulgated on 24 September  2001  dismissed
        his appeal.

     6. Numerous grounds of appeal were submitted.  Leave  was  granted  on
        the grounds that relating to the allegation that the GIA are acting
        throughout Algeria and therefore internal flight was not applicable
        for this appellant as he was persecuted by the GIA in Algiers.   At
        the hearing Miss Wood submitted an article from the Daily Telegraph
        dealing with the death of the leader of the GIA.

     7. She also submitted the reports of the various  incidents  namely  a
        wedding massacre in Algeria, massacre at Berrouhehia 60 miles south
        of the capital, the report of gunmen killing 10 people in Iran.  It
        showed that the GIA's activities were no  longer  confined  to  the
        countryside.  She knew there had been an attack at  seaside  resort
        Zeralda.

     8. She also relied on the US  State  Department  Report  of  2001which
        shows that armed  groups  committed  numerous  serious  abuses  and
        killed hundreds of civilians and that  there  was  an  increase  in
        violence as compared with 1999.

     9. In her submission there was no question of internal flight for this
        appellant in Algeria.  She sought to distinguish the facts in  this
        case from the Tribunal decisions in  Saidi  (00/TH02757),  Djerouni
        (01/TH/3396).

    10. In  her  submission  the  situation  was  still  volatile  and  the
        appellant was still at risk because he had  a  brother  who  was  a
        commander in the army.  She  submitted  that  he  fell  within  the
        definition of a person in need of protection  as  set  out  in  the
        UNCHR Guidelines.   There was a reasonable likelihood that he would
        be targeted on his return by the GIA.

    11. The appellant had worked in the suburb of the capital in Algeria.

    12. We were also told by her his parents lived in Kabylie.

    13. Miss Malhotra said that the GIA was no longer active.  The violence
        in the countryside had largely been brought under  control.   Their
        main activities had been in the mountains.  She relied on the  CIPU
        Report to that effect.  She drew our attention to paragraphs A5 and
        Annex F.

    14. Her submission there was a sufficiency  of  protection.   She  also
        submitted that the various articles that had been  put  in  by  the
        appellant did not assist his  claim  and  did  not  show  that  the
        authorities were unwilling to provide a sufficiency  of  protection
        and that it was possible for him to relocate.

    15. In this appeal the relevant rule is paragraph 336 of HC  395.   The
        appellant has to show that there is a reasonable likelihood that he
        will be persecuted for a Convention reason if returned to Algeria.

    16. This appeal is confined to his asylum claim  as  the  decision  was
        taken prior to the Human Rights Act coming into force.

    17. In determining the claim the Tribunal has regard  to  the  guidance
        given in Sivakumaran and the majority of the decision in Kaja.  The
        Tribunal has referred to the Court of Appeal judgment in Noune  and
        its own decisions in Saidi and Djerouni.

    18. Additionally the objective evidence is to be  examined  as  at  the
        date when the appellant left Algeria and the date of  decision  and
        the date of the hearing.

    19. The Tribunal has before it a US State Department  Report  on  Human
        Rights  Practices  2000.   It  refers  to  measurable  improvements
        particularly in addressing the problems of  torture  and  arbitrary
        detention.  The human  rights  situation  was  generally  poor  and
        serious  problems  persisted   including   significant   government
        restrictions on  citizens  political  and  association  rights  and
        failure to account for past  disappearances  and  the  massacre  of
        civilians by armed terrorist groups continuing.

    20. The Tribunal also had before it a CIPU Report October 2001 and  one
        of the sources for that report is the US State Department Report.

    21. Those reports refer to the events of 2001.  There is a reference to
        the April riots in the Kabylie region  following  the  death  of  a
        young man  in  police  custody  during  the  annual  Berber  spring
        demonstrations.

    22.  It  reveals  that  a  number  of  riots   and   antic   government
        demonstrations took place in Kabylie in the following months and up
        to 80 people were killed and several hundreds were injured  in  and
        around the towns of Tizi Ouzou and Bejaia.

    23. It also records that on 3 May there was a demonstration  of  10,000
        people in Algiers which passed off  peacefully.   It  records  that
        senior officials  stated  that  the  gendarme  would  work  towards
        rebuilding the British population  between  the  regions  that  had
        witnessed incidents.  The gendarme were put on trial in  connection
        with the use of firearms bringing the total so far to  12  gendarme
        referred  to  the  specialised  justice.   The  demonstrations  and
        violence incidents occurred in early July in Kabylie.

    24. Those demonstrations are largely link  to  the  traditional  Berber
        agitation for language in cultural recognitions.

    25. It also states that meanwhile killings by armed groups continued in
        rural areas as the year progressed although the  main  cities  were
        generally secure.  It also records that a bomb exploded in  Algiers
        (the first since 1998) near the Casbah wounding 34 people.

    26. The security situation indicates that the worst affected  areas  at
        the height of the violence were the three urban areas to the  south
        of Algiers,  Boufarik, Blida and Medea.

    27. At A7 the report records that violence has continued in 2001  at  a
        similar level to the  previous  year  despite  the  security  force
        operations.

    28. The government claims that the security  forces  mainly  kill  when
        there are armed clashes with terrorists and as a matter  of  policy
        disciplinary action is taken against members of the security forces
        who are guilty of violating human rights.  The government told  the
        Human Rights Watch in 2000 that 348  persons  associated  with  the
        security forces including  members  of  the  self-defence  militias
        being prosecuted for human rights abuses since 1992.

    29. In 1998 an eminent panel appointed by the Secretary General of  the
        United Nations visited Algeria with the remit to gather information
        on the  situation  to  provide  the  international  community  with
        greater clarity.  It reported that  terrorism  had  passed  through
        four stages.  In the first it was  aimed  at  security  forces  and
        government employees; in the second it was aimed at  intellectuals,
        journalists, lawyers, artists and foreigners; in the third stage it
        was aimed  at  the  general  infrastructure  of  the  country  e.g.
        bridges, schools, railways  and  electricity  supply;  and  in  the
        current stage i.e. since 1998 was aimed at the current population.

    30. In January  2002  the  AIS  and  another  smaller  group  the  LIDD
        disbanded in response to the amnesty for  armed  groups  under  the
        President's civil concorde initiative.  They had been  observing  a
        unilateral cease-fire since October 1997.   It  also  records  that
        1,000 GIA members were also reported to have surrendered under  the
        Amnesty.

    31. It goes on to state in the short term there is nothing  to  suggest
        that the armed groups now  operating  will  lay  down  their  arms.
        Reports vary from several hundred to several thousand of the number
        of terrorists who remain  operational.   The  numbers  have  become
        smaller since the amnesty.

    32. It goes on to state the most terrorist incidents take place in  the
        countryside and the smaller  towns  as  the  security  forces  have
        largely forced the insurgents out of the cities.   It  states  that
        essentially rural terrorism is taking place in the  strongholds  of
        the armed groups.

    33. It records that the situation in Algiers and  Constantine  is  very
        calm.  There are some networks in Annaba and  sporadic  attacks  in
        Blida.  In Oran and Nostagan is also calm.

    34. It states that more than 50% of the attacks in  2000  were  carried
        out in areas west of Algiers in the provinces of  Medea  Ain  Defla
        and Tipaza to a lesser degree  relatively  speaking  in  the  chief
        regions.

    35. The Tribunal has reviewed the material supplied  by  the  appellant
        and it is reports of incidents.

    36. Those reports can be summarised as follows.  On 27 September  there
        was a massacre at a wedding and 22 people were killed in Larba.  On
        the 12 February 26 were  killed  in  an  area  60  miles  south  of
        Algiers.  There was a report of 12 civilians  being  killed  on  17
        January 2001.  There was a report 17 being killed in a road block.

    37. There is a report of the bomb incident in Algiers and  there  is  a
        further report that 10 were killed in Iran, and 7 were killed on  a
        highway on 14 September.

    38. There was an attack in Zeralda a beach resort on 5 September when 7
        were killed.  There was a further report of 11 village guards being
        killed by the TSPC on 15 October.   On  5  February  2002,  2  were
        killed in an area south of Algiers.

    39. Reference has been made to the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
        the case of Noune.  That judgment turns on very special  facts  and
        relates to  the  experiences  of  women  working  in  a  government
        department namely the Telegraph department.

    40. The Tribunal reviewed the objective evidence in Saidi  heard  on  3
        December 2000 and promulgated on 24 January 2001.

    41. The Tribunal were provided with statistics showing the  results  of
        enquiries made of France, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.  In
        the case of France there were 1, 306 applications  for  asylum  for
        which 39 were granted and 1,118 were  refused.   Details  were  not
        provided of returns.  In relation to Germany 490 were returned.  It
        is recorded that Algerian nationals expelled to Algeria  are  often
        taken into police custody after arrival at  the  airport  and  that
        could last for 4 days and the purpose is to establish identity  and
        examine whether a person is suspected of a criminal  act,  military
        service, desertion or evasion and ih the latter case detention  can
        take up to 2 weeks.

    42. In relation to the Netherlands there were 81 forced returns and  18
        guided returns.

    43. The Netherlands also stated that it does not have reason to believe
        that a rejected asylum seeker will upon return be persecuted by the
        Algerian authorities mainly  because  he  has  applied  for  asylum
        elsewhere.

    44. In Djerouni which the Tribunal heard on 29  November  2001  and  it
        again reviewed the objective evidence and found that one of the two
        principle opposition organisations of the FIS was  now  playing  an
        active part in government and its terrorists.   An armed  wing  had
        been  virtually  disbanded.   It  found  that  the  only  terrorist
        organisation which remains in the country would appear  to  be  the
        GIA and even that it would appear  is  divided  into  a  number  of
        factions.

    45. The  US  State  Department  revealed  that  much  of  the  campaign
        perpetrated by those terrorists relate to  the  opposition  to  the
        amnesty programme.

    46. The Tribunal accepted that  the  US  State  Department  Report  did
        indicate a significant increase in violence against security  force
        members and civilians.  The violence would appear to  be  terrorist
        randomly targeted civilians in an apparent attempt to create social
        disorders.  It also found that the violence now seems to take place
        primarily in the countryside as the security  forces  have  largely
        forced the insurgents out of the cities.   Recently the killing  of
        civilians  appeared  to  be  the  result  of  opposition   to   the
        President's amnesty programme and to facilitate the theft and goods
        needed by the army groups.

    47. The Tribunal also had reference to the Canadian Report which  found
        "the security situation has largely been brought under  control  by
        the authorities and it does not impact on most peoples day  to  day
        lives.  Most people living in the cities are able to lead a  normal
        lifestyle such as precautions about travelling in  uncertain  areas
        especially at night.

    48. "With some exceptions most  of  the  killings  were  in  relatively
        remote areas where the armed groups can  operate  and  escape  more
        easily in the rough terrain.  It is more difficult for the security
        forces to intervene.  Civilian victims are most often poor peasants
        and shepherds although there is some targeting being done dependent
        on who the perpetrators are".

    49. There is a further Canadian report which states "However  the  view
        that it has had most frequently which appears  to  have  widespread
        acceptance amongst Algerians is that the killings or  the  work  of
        the variety of groups  and  interests.   Their  motives  are  often
        obscure but are believed by most interlocutors to include the  full
        range from  pure  banditry  to  the  settling  of  schools  to  the
        protection of turf to the Islamic ideological struggle to  organise
        crime to excesses by isolated elements in the security forces.

    50. The basis of the applicant's claim is that prior to leaving Algeria
        he was employed  by  the  authorities  and  run  a  workshop  which
        repaired military vehicles and he had a brother who was a commander
        in the army and that he had been specifically targeted by the GIA.

    51. The Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant  was  employed  as  a
        civilian by the army and that he left that employment on 7 November
        1998 and there is indeed a certificate to that effect.  He accepted
        that the appellant's brother was in  the  army  and  the  appellant
        together with many people in army or  connected  with  it  received
        three letters from the GIA the last of which was in 1995.   He  did
        not place any reliance on the appellant's statement that 36  people
        in his department had been assassinated by the GIA.  He  found  the
        evidence that the GIA shot at the brothers in a car in 1995 and  on
        another occasion following them in 1996  as  possible  but  tenuous
        grounds that it could have been  any  one  doing  these  acts.   He
        accepted that the appellant received no  more  letters  after  1995
        since his brother arranged for him to live  in  the  barracks.   He
        also accepted that the appellant lived with his parents  from  1998
        to his departure for South Africa in April 1999.

    52. He did not find it credible that he  was  able  to  avoid  the  GIA
        whilst staying with his parents.

    53. He went on to conclude that whilst the appellant  may  have  had  a
        well-founded fear of persecution while working as a civilian in the
        army although he felt safe in barracks it would be unreasonable  to
        expect him to live in  the  barracks  all  his  working  life.   He
        assessed when the appellant left his civilian work with the army he
        would in a short time cease to be targeted by the GIA.

    54. He also noted that the CIPU Report reports that the GIA  is  mainly
        active in the central and western parts of the country and  has  no
        presence in Cabylie which is where his parents live.

    55. Paragraph 13 states that the situation in Algeria  and  Constantine
        are calm as are Oran and Nostagan.

    56. He did not accept the appellant's contention that GIA  were  active
        everywhere in Algeria.  There is no error of law  in  that  finding
        and indeed the reports produced by the appellant  do  not  indicate
        any increase on the level of activity by the GIA.

    57. The situation in Algeria  is  far  from  ideal.   The  Tribunal  is
        satisfied applying the tests as set out in Horvath that there is  a
        sufficiency of protection for the appellant in  Algeria  if  he  is
        returned there.  He no longer  works  for  the  army.   Whilst  the
        Tribunal accepts that he has brother who is a commander in the army
        the indications are that the GIA can no longer get at relatives  or
        family members of the military.   The  Reports  indicate  that  the
        target is the general populace but this does not detract  from  our
        finding that there is a sufficiency of protection.

    58. The Tribunal is satisfied  applying  the  tests  to  which  it  has
        referred that this appellant no longer has a well-founded  fear  of
        persecution for a Convention reason if returned  to  Algeria.   The
        facts in this case bear no relation to the facts in Noune.

    59. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



                                                   J R A Fox
                                                   Vice President





