
CH
|Heard at Field House       |        |DP (Risk - Lissouba Region) |
|                           |        |Republic of Congo           |
|                           |        |Brazzaville CG [2002] UKIAT |
|                           |        |02773                       |
|On 3 May 2002              |        |HX60021-2000                |
|Dictated 9 May 2002        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                    |Date Determination notified:|
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |                            |
|                                    |17 July 2002                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (CHAIRMAN)                                        |
|MRS R FAUX                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|DIANE PITHER                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|APPELLANT                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|RESPONDENT                                                        |

Appearances:

For the Appellant      Mr C Jacobs of Counsel instructed by White
                       Ryland, solicitors

For the Respondent           Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Appellant, Diane Pither, a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Congo,
      appeals with leave against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D J
      Dulwich, who dismissed her appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision
      made on 20 March 2001 giving directions for her removal following  the
      refusal of her claim for asylum.


   2. The Appellant claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  on  24  July
      2000, although she could not provide any  evidence  of  lawful  entry.
      She applied for asylum on 25 July 2000.  The basis of the  Appellant's
      claim as set out in her statement  of  evidence  form  and  subsequent
      interview can be briefly summarised as  follows.   The  Appellant  was
      born in Pointe Noire in the Congo.  In 1994 she  won  the  Miss  Congo
      competition, becoming well known all over central  Africa.   She  then
      worked for President  Lissouba in the  Protocol  Nationale.   She  was
      secretary of the Youth  Department  of  the  Union  Panafrican  de  la
      Democracie Sociale (UPADS) from November 1995 to  October  1997.   The
      civil war in Congo broke out  in  1997  when  a  coup  took  place  in
      Brazzaville.  The war was between President Lissouba,  who  came  from
      the south, and Denis Sassou Nguesso from the north.  When the fighting
      started, the  appellant  and  her  family  locked  themselves  in  her
      parents' home for three or four days.  The situation deteriorated  and
      on 15 October 1997 the family decided to leave Brazzaville.   In  the
      chaos of the evacuation her  family  were  separated.   The  Appellant
      decided to make her way to Pointe Noire in the south but there were no
      trains.  She walked to Nkaye and then flew by cargo  plane  to  Pointe
      Noire, arriving in November 1997.  Life was normal there and  remained
      peaceful until July 2000 when the Cobras, President  Nguesso's  secret
      police, came to the Appellant's home.   They  burst  into  her  house,
      smashed everything and abducted her husband.  He was held for a  week,
      tortured  and  interrogated  about  the  Appellant's  activities   and
      whereabouts.  The Appellant contacted someone she had known  for  many
      years called Colonel Ngomam and asked him if he knew where her husband
      was being  held.   He  located  her  husband  and  had  him  released.
      Arrangements were made for both her and her husband to leave the Congo
      using forged passports.  They flew to the United Kingdom, arriving  on
      24 July 2000.


   3. The Appellant's claim for asylum was refused.  She  appealed  and  her
      appeal was heard  by  the  Adjudicator  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on
      30 August 2001.  He heard oral evidence from the Appellant.  She said
      that as a result of being Miss Congo she was well known  by  everybody
      there.  She was considered to be an icon and regarded as  someone  who
      was well off  and  successful.   She  had  appeared  in  national  and
      international magazines.  When she became secretary of the Youth Party
      in 1995, it was reported in the media.  Due to  her  profile  as  Miss
      Congo, she had a good image and the party thought that  she  would  be
      the best person to project the party's  image  and  message  to  young
      people.  In this capacity, she  addressed  two  or  three  meetings  a
      month.  There would be thousands of people present.  The meetings were
      reported in the press.  During the Lissouba years in the Congo,  UPADS
      was the largest political party and everything involving it had a high
      profile.  As a result of her political  work  she  was  on  television
      about two or three times a month.

   4. The Appellant obtained her job  in  the  Presidential  Protocol  as  a
      result  of  her  uncle's  influence,  who  was  the  Chairman  of  the
      Presidential Cabinet.  The Appellant had assisted in two  presidential
      trips abroad in 1995 and 1996, one to China and one to France.  During
      the coup in 1997 some people who  had  worked  in  the  protocol  were
      arrested and others were killed.  Three of her colleagues were killed,
      two had been doing the same job as her.  With the outbreak of the  war
      all those who had worked for the Lissouba regime  were  being  sought.
      This is why she escaped to Pointe Noire.   She  claimed  that  if  she
      returned to the Congo, she was at risk of being killed because she had
      served under the Lissouba  regime.   It  was  true  that  some  former
      ministers had returned to the Congo but they were from the  north  and
      were people who had served under Nguesso before he was president.  The
      Adjudicator also heard evidence from the Appellant's husband.

   5. Having reviewed their evidence in the light of the submissions made on
      the Appellant's behalf, he did not find them to be credible witnesses.
       He said that the only thing he did believe about the  case  was  that
      the Appellant had been Miss Congo in 1994, but that did not  have  any
      political significance.  He did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had
      been the secretary of the youth section of  UPADS.  He did not believe
      that as Miss Congo she would be known throughout central  Africa,  nor
      that she had been known even in  the  whole  of  the  Congo  for  this
      reason.  He commented that despite her celebrity status the  Appellant
      had been able to live in Pointe Noire from November 1997 to July 2000,
      apparently without being recognised either in her own right or because
      of her husband who  she claimed was  a  well  known  businessman.   He
      noted that  ex-ministers  under  the  former  President  Lissouba  had
      returned to the Congo.  One of those named, M. Poignet,  had  in  fact
      come from  the  southern  part  of  the  Congo,  not  the  north.  The
      Appellant's children had been left behind in the Congo  when  she  and
      her husband fled.  He also noted that in the screening  questionnaire,
      the last address given in the country of origin was Brazzaville.   For
      all these reasons, the Adjudicator came to the view that the Appellant
      did not have a well founded fear  of  persecution  in  the  Congo  and
      dismissed her appeal.


   6.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are  lengthy.   They  seek  to  attack  the
      Adjudicator's findings of fact and credibility.  They assert that  the
      findings are  unreasonable  and,  in  more  general  terms,  that  the
      findings are against the  weight  of  the  evidence.   It  is  further
      asserted that the Adjudicator has acted in  breach  of  the  Surendran
      guidelines as approved and set out in MNM [00/TH/02423*].

   7. At the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Jacobs  produced  further
      evidence relating to the Appellant's uncle, who had obtained her  post
      in the Presidential Protocol.  The first document is an attestation in
      which Martial De-Paul Ikonga, certifies that the Appellant was one  of
      the first employees of UPADS and served in the Presidential  Protocol.
      Mr Ikonga's passport  is  produced.   It  is  a  diplomatic  passport
      describing him as a minister.  There are also documents  showing  that
      he has been granted refugee status by the Republic of Benin.   He  now
      holds a Convention travel document issued for all countries  save  for
      Congo Brazzaville.  There is also a letter from the  UNHCR  certifying
      that Mr Ikonga is recognised as a refugee.

   8. Mr Jacobs  said  that  his  instructing  solicitors  had  been  making
      continuous efforts to try and discover from the Secretary of State who
      the  legal  representatives  were  for  President  Lissouba,  who  was
      believed to be in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  produced  a  bundle  of
      correspondence showing what efforts had been made, although there  had
      been no response from the Secretary of State.  This matter had in fact
      been raised when the appeal was listed for hearing on 28 January 2002.
       On that occasion the appeal was adjourned for two reasons.  The first
      was to  enable  the  Appellant's  representatives  to  obtain  further
      evidence and the second to give the representatives an opportunity  to
      pursue  the  issue  of   the   identity   of    President   Lissouba's
      representatives.  At that hearing I  had  indicated  that  I  was  not
      prepared to make a direction that the Secretary of State disclose  the
      identity of President  Lissouba's representatives.   In  my  view,  it
      fell outside my  jurisdiction  and  in  any  event  would  not  be  an
      appropriate order to make.  No further steps have been  taken  in  the
      meantime to seek any remedy elsewhere.  Although Mr Jacobs tentatively
      raised the issue of a further  adjournment, the Tribunal was satisfied
      that  there  would  be  no  justification  at  all  for  yet   another
      adjournment.


   9. Mr Jacobs  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  accepted  that  the
      Appellant had been Miss Congo.  There was now evidence to support  her
      contention that an uncle who had  been  a  minister  in  the  Lissouba
      government had used his influence to obtain her an appointment in  the
      Presidential Protocol.  It would not be unreasonable  to  assume  that
      the Lissouba government would have taken advantage of the  Appellant's
      status as a celebrity to appoint her to the youth wing of UPADS.   She
      had a high profile.  She had travelled with the presidential party  to
      France and China.  She was someone who was  linked  closely  with  the
      Lissouba regime.  It may well be  the  case  that  an  ordinary  UPADS
      member or supporter would not be at risk but there was  still  a  real
      risk  for  those  with  close  political  connections  with  President
      Lissouba.

  10. Mr Deller submitted that  there  had  been  very  little  evidence  of
      substance before the Adjudicator.  The  additional  evidence  provided
      some support for a contention that the Appellant might  be  linked  in
      the eyes of the current government with the  former  Lissouba  regime.
      However, it was difficult to see that she would be treated as being on
      the same level as former ministers in the Lissouba government.

  11. The Tribunal have not found this an easy  appeal  to  determine.   The
      Appellant gave oral evidence at some length  before  the  Adjudicator.
      Her  husband  also  gave  oral  evidence.   The  Respondent  was   not
      represented  and  there  are  limits  to  the  extent  to  which   the
      Adjudicator can question evidence, which gives him cause for  concern.
      He is constrained by the guidelines set out in MNM although these must
      now be read in the light of the comments of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Maheshwaran [2002].  One of Mr Jacobs' original  complaints  was  that
      the Appellant gave evidence at  length,  adopting  her  interview  and
      written statement.  She had given a consistent account and  there  was
      no adequate basis for the Adjudicator's adverse  credibility  finding.
      However, the Tribunal do not feel that there is any proper  basis  for
      criticising the way the Adjudicator conducted the hearing.  Looking at
      the record of proceedings, he raised matters which concerned him.   He
      noted Mr  Jacobs'  submissions,  which  inevitably  were  focussed  on
      seeking to persuade the Adjudicator that the Appellant was a  credible
      witness.  For the reasons which the Adjudicator set out at some length
      in his determination, he rejected her evidence.  On the basis  of  the
      information before him, it is clear to the  Tribunal  why  he  reached
      those views.


  12. However, there is additional evidence before the Tribunal  which  puts
      the Appellant's evidence in a different light.  At the  heart  of  her
      claim is her assertion that she was actively  involved  in  the  youth
      section of UPADS and was a member of the Presidential Protocol.  There
      is now evidence from  the  Appellant's  uncle  who  has  been  granted
      refugee status in Benin, which supports the following contentions:  he
      was a minister in the Lissouba government, he has been granted refugee
      status and the Appellant was  indeed  a  member  of  the  Presidential
      Protocol. The fact that he has been granted asylum in  Benin  provides
      some support for the submission made by Mr Jacobs that  ministers  and
      those closely linked to the Lissouba regime may  have  a  well-founded
      fear of persecution.

  13. The Tribunal also have a witness statement  by  Michel  Mboungou.   He
      confirms that he knew the Appellant as the Youth Secretary  of  UPADS.
      He knows this because at conferences this is how she  was  introduced,
      but he also recognised her as Miss Congo.  Mr Mgoungou  had  been  the
      Sports Secretary of UPADS in the region of Bouenza.  Although  he  did
      not  know  the  Appellant  personally  in  the  Congo,  he   met   her
      subsequently in the  United  Kingdom.   This  additional  evidence  is
      documentary rather than oral, but the Tribunal see no reason to  doubt
      the truth of  the  contents.   Bearing  in  mind  the  relatively  low
      standard of proof in asylum claims, the Tribunal  are  satisfied  that
      the account the Appellant gave of  her  political  activities  in  the
      Congo is true, or at least might be true.

  14. This leads to the issue of whether  it  would  now  be  safe  for  the
      Appellant to return to the Congo.  It is accepted that some members of
      anti-government groups supporting  President  Lissouba  or  his  prime
      minister,  Bernard  Kolelas,  have  been  permitted  to  rejoin  their
      previous employers, for example in the Ministry of Interior: US  State
      Department Report 2001, page 1.  It is also reported at page 4 of this
      report that in  1999  President  Nguesso  signed  a  law  implementing
      regulations to grant amnesty for acts committed during  various  civil
      conflicts including those of 1997, and 1998 -  99,  but  this  amnesty
      does not cover the political "authors" of those conflicts.   In  2000,
      the former Prime Minister, Kolelas was tried, convicted and  sentenced
      to death in absentia on charges of having maintained  private  prisons
      in which opponents were tortured during the  1997  war.   In  1999,  a
      court convicted and sentenced  to  twenty  years  imprisonment  former
      President Lissouba and three other government officials on charges  of
      having conspired to kill President Nguesso in June 1999.  It is  clear
      from an article produced  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  from  Africa
      International,  May  2001,  that  former  President  Lissouba  has  no
      intention of being reconciled with  the  present  authorities  in  the
      Congo.  He still considers himself to be the constitutional president.


  15. Looking at the Appellant's background and circumstances in  the  light
      of the evidence relating to the situation in the Congo,  the  Tribunal
      are satisfied that there is at lease a serious  possibility  that  the
      Appellant would be at risk of persecution were she now  to  return  to
      the Congo because of the particular nature of her close links with the
      Lissouba regime.


  16. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.




                                                             Mr H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

