
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX52444-2000
On 8 July 2002         LS (Persecution-CIO) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 03342


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             1 August 2002

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE
                               Mr D R Bremmer


                         LINDON MANDHLENKOSI SIWARDI

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, appeals, with leave, against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J J Molloy, dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 25 March 2000 to refuse leave
     to enter and refuse asylum

  2. Mr P Morris represented the Appellant.  Mr  A  Sheikh,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The issues in this appeal are relatively limited  and  straightforward.
     The Appellant was a businessman from Zimbabwe who conducted business in
     the Democratic Republic of Congo  from  late  1997,  selling  food  and
     clothing.  He returned to Zimbabwe in the middle of 1998  in  order  to
     renew his passport and to purchase more goods for  sale.   He  did  not
     return to the Democratic Republic of Congo  as  foreigners  were  being
     advised to stay away, due to the security situation.  He noticed he was
     being followed by a particular car. He received a number  of  anonymous
     telephone calls telling him to watch out and that he would be next.   A
     friend, who worked for the Central Intelligence Organisation then  told
     him that they believed he must be  involved  with  the  rebels  in  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo and he should hide. He went to  stay  with
     friends in Harare.  His friend told him some time later that because he
     had gone into hiding the CIO had decided to arrest him if he  could  be
     found. The Appellant went to stay with his mother in Bulawayo for a few
     days and then went into hiding until he left for  the  United  Kingdom.
     He arrived here in 1998.
  4. The Adjudicator found that the Applicant was  an  honest  and  credible
     witness and accepted his evidence of what happened to him.  However  he
     also found that this evidence and the assumptions, which he  made  from
     it, were rather tenuous.  He considered that the CIO's interest in  the
     Appellant was a low level.  There was no evidence to link  him  to  the
     rebels beyond his having been in the Democratic Republic of  Congo  for
     some time. Whilst the  Mugabe  regime  was  extremely  unpleasant,  the
     Appellant appeared to have suffered no direct unpleasantness and if the
     CIO had he wanted him they would have taken  him  when  he  was  within
     their view. If he were to return to Zimbabwe  now  and  were  asked  to
     account for himself he would be able to  satisfy  the  CIO  as  to  his
     innocence "without any unpleasantness."

  5. Mr Morris argued that this was an unrealistic assessment  of  the  ill-
     treatment which the Applicant  was  likely  to  receive  on  return  to
     Zimbabwe, given the objective evidence about the behaviour of the  CIO.
     Mr  Sheikh  argued  that  there  was  no  flaw  in  the   Adjudicator's
     assessment. The Tribunal reserved its decision.

  6. This is a case which turns upon the assessment of risk  on  return  and
     which, on its facts, is marginal in the  sense  that  there  are  valid
     arguments both ways. We are grateful  to  both  advocates,  who  argued
     their cases with clarity and brevity.

  7. The Tribunal has decided that the Adjudicator erred in  his  assessment
     of risk for the following reasons.  The objective evidence  shows  that
     the Mugabe regime in Zimbabwe is  irrational  and  brutal  towards  its
     opponents, real  and  perceived.  The  CIO  behaves  with  considerable
     brutality and impunity. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant was  a
     credible witness in his recital of facts.  This means that the CIO  was
     aware that he had been in the DRC for some time and on his  return  had
     taken an interest in him as a possible rebel supporter. He was followed
     and anonymous phone calls were made, no  doubt  to  see  what  reaction
     would follow.  In the event the  Appellant  went  into  hiding  on  the
     advice of his friend in the CIO and, given the paranoid nature  of  the
     regime, it is reasonable to suppose that the CIO concluded he therefore
     had something to hide, as his friend later confirmed to him.   The  CIO
     then decided to arrest him but he left the country before this could be
     implemented. Given these circumstances and given the fact that the  CIO
     now controls the airport at Harare, there must be a real risk that  the
     Appellant will be detained on return for questioning by them.   He  may
     indeed ultimately be able to persuade the CIO of his actual  innocence,
     but there is nothing in the background material to  suggest  that  this
     process would be likely to be conducted "without  any  unpleasantness."
     The CIO routinely commits serious human rights  abuses,  which  include
     torture.  This is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Respondent  is  not
     returning anyone to  Zimbabwe  at  the  present  time.  Given  the  CIO
     interest in the Applicant and their suspicion that he might be involved
     with the enemies of the regime, we conclude there is a real risk,  even
     after some 3 years, that he will suffer ill-treatment in  interrogation
     amounting  to  persecution,  on  account  of  his  perceived  political
     opinion, as well as ill-treatment in  breach  of  Article  3.  For  the
     reasons given above this appeal is allowed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
