
H-ATS-V3
                                                 Appeal Number :CC19734-2002
       CO (Sufficiency of Protection-Internal Relocation) Nigeria CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT 04404

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  15th August 2002                        |                25-9-2002    |
|Dictated : 15th August 2002                   |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                           Mr D K Allen - Chairman
                                Mr N Kumar JP


between
                           Clement Ohagbuan OLUYA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who has been  granted  to  leave
    to appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an  Adjudicator,
    Mr M E J Rush,  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision refusing to grant him asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 15th August 2002.  Mr S  Revindran
    of the Refugee Legal Centre appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant,  and
    Miss A Holmes of the Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit appeared  on
    behalf of the Respondent.

3.    Mr Revindran argued that the Adjudicator's  determination  was  flawed
    by his failure to take into  account  the  evidence  in  the  US  State
    Department Report about the Odua People's Congress operating in  Lagos.
    This was a crucial issue since arguably  his  findings  concerning  the
    Appellant's credibility would have been different  had  he  taken  that
    evidence into account.  If he were credible then the issue of  internal
    flight arose and that depended upon the credibility  of  the  claim  to
    have been pursued to Lagos  by  the  OPC.   He  raised  a  question  of
    internal flight and indeed state protection if they were  intending  to
    target him as the last male member of his  family  and  complete  their
    task against his family accordingly.

4.    In her submissions Miss Holmes resisted remittal of the  appeal.   She
    argued that  even  if  the  Adjudicator  had  taken  into  account  the
    objective evidence as he  should  then  it  did  not  appear  from  the
    unequivocal nature of his conclusions that he would  have  reached  any
    different view.  He was entitled to  find  inherently  implausible  the
    Appellant's claims as to what had happened in Lagos.  He had heard  and
    seen the Appellant and was entitled to conclude as he did.   Lagos  was
    an enormous city and Nigeria was a vast country and  even  if  he  were
    found to be credible it was unlikely in the extreme that he would  come
    to the attention of his enemies.

5.    Mr Revindran had no further points to make by way of reply.

6.    We reserved our determination.

7.    The Appellant's case was that he  feared  persecution  from  the  Odua
    People's Congress (OPC).  He said  that  because  his  father  did  not
    support the OPC's actions they had killed him and also the  Appellant's
    two elder brothers.  He himself was away cocoa trading at the time  and
    on return found out what had happened.  He believed that he was  to  be
    the OPC's next target and, with the view of wiping out his family.   He
    decided to travel to Lagos and went to stay with a cousin  there.   For
    the first two days he was content but on the third day he  went  for  a
    walk to get food and on his way back from the town he was told that men
    had been out looking for him and showing his  photograph  and  children
    recognised him since he was new to the area and they told the men  that
    he had gone away.  He went with his cousin to  the  police  station  to
    lodge a complaint and the police said they would investigate,  but  the
    Appellant said that he was too scared to follow  them  to  his  cousins
    home so he went elsewhere with another  friend  and  then  subsequently
    went to stay with his sister and he was  later  advised  to  leave  the
    country and did  so.   The  Adjudicator,  in  a  robust  determination,
    concluded that he believed the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a  complete
    invention.  He noted the Appellant had given no indication of where  he
    was going when he left the village and he did not find it credible that
    children should have warned him that people were out looking for him in
    the area where he was staying in Lagos, producing a picture and  asking
    the children to identify him.  He considered that even  if  there  were
    the slightest chance that the Appellant's story was true he had availed
    himself of state protection.

8.    As  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  contend,  there  is  objective  evidence
    indicating that the OPC do operate in Lagos.  Thus,  in  the  US  State
    Department report on Nigeria for 2001 there is reference to the OPC  as
    a vigilante group in Lagos state, other reports of them beheading  four
    suspected robbers in Lagos state and also reportedly crucifying  a  man
    in a district of Lagos.  It is said that  in  September  2001  the  OPC
    announced that it would stop its vigilante activities.  A leader of the
    OPC was arrested and charged with murder and robbery in August  and  he
    was released on bail in October.  It seems that the OPC was outlawed in
    2000.  The Human Rights Watch Report for 2002 on Nigeria refers at page
    28 of the Appellant's bundle to the OPC as operating in  the  southwest
    and have been responsible for scores of death of alleged armed robbers.
     The group is referred  to  as  being  an  explicitly  political  group
    claiming to advocate for the Yoruba cause and as having been officially
    banned in 1999.  It is said that it had many violent clashes  with  the
    police, attacking police stations and killing and  injuring  policemen.
    We bear in mind that Lagos is in the southwest of Nigeria.  The  bundle
    also contains extracts of objective evidence concerning Nigeria,  which
    was set out in full before the Adjudicator.  There  was  mention  among
    other things of police ineffectiveness in controlling  the  high  crime
    rate and the inadequate size of the force,  low  morale,  poor  working
    conditions and insufficient training.  There is reference in the  State
    Department Report to police and security forces failing to  respond  to
    ethnic clashes involving beatings or  severe  injury  to  thousands  of
    people.

9.    Clearly the Adjudicator should have taken account  of  the  fact  that
    the OPC operate in  the  Lagos  area  in  coming  to  his  findings  on
    credibility.  However, having given the matter careful thought, we have
    concluded that we are in agreement with Miss  Holmes  that  we  do  not
    consider that it would or indeed should have made any difference to his
    conclusions.  Lagos  is  an  extremely  large  city,  and  we  find  it
    inherently implausible that as the Appellant claimed, within  a  couple
    of days of him leaving his village several hours away  from  Lagos  the
    OPC were looking for him in the area where he was staying, showing  his
    photograph.  It is simply inherently lacking in credibility  that  this
    should be the case.  Credibility is not materially enhanced by the fact
    that the OPC are active in the Lagos area.

10.   Even if the story were  true,  we  consider  there  is  force  in  the
    Adjudicator's reasoning that the Appellant did avail himself  of  state
    protection.  Although clearly the police have problems  in  maintaining
    law and order, there is clear evidence of  police  action  against  the
    OPC.  For example there is reference at  page  28  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle in the Human Rights Watch Report for 2002 to heavy handed police
    response to the OPC with many  real  or  suspected  OPC  members  being
    arrested and  several  killed.   We  consider  therefore  that  if  the
    Appellant's claim were true then he would properly have placed reliance
    on state protection.  Even if we are wrong in this regard, we  bear  in
    mind the fact  that  Nigeria  is  a  vast  country,  and  the  evidence
    indicates that the OPC are only active in the southwest of the country.
     We can see no reason why a young man in his early thirties  would  not
    have been able to relocate elsewhere in Nigeria.  Arguments are set out
    in the Appellant's skeleton argument before the Adjudicator  concerning
    the problems attached to internal flight in  Nigeria.   The  fact  that
    tribal warfare exists in Nigeria and that internally  displaced  people
    experience problems does not indicate that it would be unduly harsh for
    this Appellant to locate elsewhere in Nigeria.  Therefore  even  if  we
    are wrong in our support of the Adjudicator's credibility  finding,  we
    consider that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  locate  successfully
    elsewhere in Nigeria without that being unduly harsh.

11.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.





                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                                    CHAIRMAN





