
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX 12565-01       |
|On  30 October 2002        |        |MT (Refugee - Communist     |
|                           |        |Party) Iran CG [2002] UKIAT |
|                           |        |06995                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|03/03/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr K Drabu (Chairman)                                             |
|Mr P Rogers                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Mohammed Topaesfandyari                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Miss C Ganning of Counsel, instructed by Halliday
                       Reeves Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals to us with leave against  an
      Adjudicator's (Mr D J B Trotter) decision  who  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision giving directions  for  his  removal
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

   2. The grounds upon which the Adjudicator's decision  is  challenged  run
      into four pages of typed text and are twenty in  number.   In  summary
      the grounds contend (a) that the Adjudicator failed to pay any or  due
      regard to the experts views, (b) that his adverse credibility findings
      are erroneous and unsafe, and (c) that he was wrong in his refusal  to
      accept the appellant as a member of the Communist Party of Iran.

   3. Before us Miss Ganning asked that the appeal be allowed  and  remitted
      for a fresh hearing before a  different  Adjudicator.   She  contended
      that the findings of fact made by  the  Adjudicator  were  unsafe  and
      unsustainable.  She argued that  the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  the
      appellant's evidence had been unduly influenced by  the  Adjudicator's
      own values and his speculation.  She argued that  the  centrepiece  of
      the appellant's evidence and claim in this case is his  membership  or
      involvement with the Communist Party in Iran.  Miss Ganning  suggested
      that the Adjudicator's evaluation  of  the  case  was  incomplete  and
      incoherent.  According to her any Iranian national who returns to Iran
      without documentation is investigated on  entry.   Those  without  any
      adverse history are allowed to proceed but those who have a record  or
      "who have a background" are interrogated and tortured.  She said  that
      the appellant would certainly be interrogated  and  tortured  for  his
      involvement with the  Communist  Party:   She  reminded  us  that  the
      appellant would be at a greater risk as he  comes  from  a  "dissident
      family".  She took us through the contents of paragraphs 7  and  9  of
      the appellant's written  statement  to  show  that  the  Adjudicator's
      findings in respect of the leaflet  distribution  etc  were  based  on
      misinterpretation and  misconstruction  of  evidence.   We  drew  Miss
      Ganning's attention to the previous decision of the  Tribunal  in  the
      case dated 10 December 2001 and pointed  out  that  the  Tribunal  had
      directed remittal  on  specified  issues  and  had  given  appropriate
      directions to that effect in paragraph 9 of  its  determination.   The
      Tribunal  noted  that  at  the  previous  hearings  both  before   the
      Adjudicator as  well  as  the  Tribunal  Miss  Ganning  had  been  the
      appellant's representative.  She submitted that by looking at all  the
      issues in the case the Adjudicator (Mr D J P Trotter) had committed  a
      material error.  When asked whether as the appellant's  representative
      she had conducted the  appellant's  case  on  the  lines  set  out  in
      paragraph 9 of the Tribunal determination we were not able to get much
      help.  We then asked her for her views on the Tribunal itself, looking
      at all the relevant evidence and determining the appeal.  She said she
      could not argue that in law  there  would  be  any  difficulty  in  us
      following that path but she thought  it  would  be  "unjust"  for  the
      appellant.  She could not explain why it would be "unjust".  She  then
      asked us to bear the terms of the experts report in mind and find that
      suspected opposition persons, like the appellant in  this  case,  face
      real risk of persecution in Iran on return and also that  the  Iranian
      Secret Service had infiltrated groups in the United Kingdom which made
      it particularly dangerous for the appellant.   Miss  Ganning  was  not
      able to point to any evidence of the appellant or that of  the  expert
      which matched or supported the submissions she had made to us.

   4. Mr Ekagha for the respondent argued asked us to dismiss the appeal  as
      in his view the case had no merit either on the asylum aspect  or  the
      human rights matter.   He  argued  that  in  the  context  of  Iranian
      objective evidence mere membership of the Communist  Party  would  not
      lead to persecution.  He asked us to look at page 9,  paragraph  2  of
      the expert's report, which according to Mr Ekagha does not support the
      contentions which had been made on behalf of the appellant.  Mr Ekagha
      said that the appellant had never paid any dues, he  had  never  shown
      any commitment to the Party and had never met any member.  He drew our
      attention to the decision in Madjidi [2002] UKIAT 02245 and  asked  us
      to follow it.  Mr Ekagha reminded us that although it was claimed that
      the appellant comes from a family of dissidents, we should  note  that
      nothing adverse has happened to any of them of late.  His brother  had
      been free to carry supplies  for  him  when  he,  the  appellant,  was
      supposedly living in hiding.  Mr Ekagha said that the appellant before
      us had obtained a membership card simply to bolster his claim.  He has
      done nothing for the Party ever and therefore the  issue  of  low  and
      high profile does not apply to someone like him.  Even if intelligence
      people come to know about his membership, they would  see  him  as  an
      uncommitted person and hence would have  no  interest  in  him.   Miss
      Ganning in her final response said that intelligence  personnel  would
      not be aware that the appellant had not paid his  membership  dues  to
      the party or that he had not attended any of their rallies.  She  said
      that the reason the appellant had not paid  his  membership  dues  was
      because he did not have money.  It was not  an  issue  of  commitment.
      Miss Ganning asked us not to  rely  on  the  decision  in  Madjidi  as
      according to her that decision was pending an appeal before the  Court
      of Appeal.  She asked us to look at the objective evidence  ourselves.
      She drew our attention to the decision granting leave in  this  appeal
      and suggested that it was appropriate for us to remit it or  allow  it
      outright on the basis that the appellant is a refugee sur place.

   5. We have given careful consideration to the arguments  advanced  before
      us, the written grounds of appeal,  the  Adjudicator's  determination,
      and all the relevant evidence.  We note that  this  case  has  a  long
      history having once before been  heard  and  remitted  for  a  further
      hearing before an  Adjudicator.   It  seems  to  us  that  the  second
      Adjudicator (Mr D J B Trotter) did not appreciate that the appeal  had
      been remitted for a further hearing only on limited issues.   How  and
      why this happened we shall never know for sure but we  would  like  to
      say that although Miss Ganning knew of the terms of the remittal  when
      she appeared before Mr D J B  Trotter,  there  is  no  record  of  any
      objection from her  when  the  Adjudicator  proceeded  to  review  all
      aspects of the case.  The Adjudicator heard  the  case  afresh  taking
      oral evidence from the appellant as is evident from the  Adjudicator's
      determination which was promulgated on 8 April 200.  He appraised  the
      evidence that was before him and did not believe the appellant's claim
      that he had fled Iran because the authorities were interested in  him,
      that he had been involved in distributing anti-regime leaflets in Iran
      and that he was a member of  the  Workers  Communist  Party  of  Iran.
      Against these  adverse  findings  of  the  second  Adjudicator,  which
      incidentally  are  in  conflict  with  the  findings  of   the   first
      Adjudicator, the appellant was granted leave to appeal.  It  is  clear
      that there has been some confusion in the handling of this case but it
      is equally clear that it is the appellant who has benefited from  this
      confusion.  He can hardly complain, having had the opportunity to give
      oral evidence before two different Adjudicators and then argue  before
      the Tribunal that both had erred in dismissing  his  appeal.   On  the
      first occasion he succeeded in part in that the issue of  refugee  sur
      place was remitted  for  consideration  by  a  different  Adjudicator.
      Having set out the long history of this case it could not have come as
      any surprise to Miss Ganning that we were unimpressed by her  pleading
      for another remittal.  We saw no need for a  remittal.   In  our  view
      there was no merit in any of the criticisms made by  Miss  Ganning  of
      the Adjudicator's determination.  For the reasons he has given in  his
      determination the Adjudicator was perfectly entitled  not  to  believe
      the appellant's evidence on leaflet distribution, the interest of  the
      authorities  in  him,  the  reasons  for  him  leaving  Iran  and  his
      membership of the Workers Communist Party of Iran.

   6. The real issue in this case, as far as we are  concerned,  is  whether
      the Adjudicator's findings in respect of that evidence which  goes  to
      the issue of the appellant being Refugee  Sur  Place  are  correct  on
      facts and in law.  Miss Ganning says that  it  was  not  open  to  the
      Adjudicator to reject the appellant's evidence of  membership  of  the
      Workers Communist Party as it was certified by a document that has not
      been shown to be bogus.  We  do  not  think  much  of  this  argument.
      Whether or not the appellant is a member of this organisation  is  not
      the material issue.  The material issue is whether his membership,  if
      true, caused him to be persecuted by the authorities or is  likely  in
      future to cause him to be persecuted.  The Adjudicator's  approach  to
      this issue has been along the lines that we have set out  and  he  has
      found that he did not suffer any persecution while  in  Iran  for  his
      membership of this party.  He rejected his  evidence  of  distributing
      leaflets and the authorities having come to know of it.  The appellant
      we  note  has  claimed  in  his  written  statement  that  he  started
      supporting this party in January 1997.  His only  activities  for  the
      party according  to  his  statement  was  "distributing  leaflets  and
      adverts" and it was not until November 2000 that the  authorities  got
      interested in him following the arrest of his colleague.  His  written
      statement, we note, does not claim that he had become a member of  the
      party while he was in Iran.  Not  surprisingly  in  the  circumstances
      that the Adjudicator was not satisfied that he was  a  member  of  the
      Party while in Iran.  With regard to his  claimed  membership  of  the
      Party while in the United Kingdom the Adjudicator noted  that  he  had
      produced a document which confirmed that he had become a member but he
      correctly concluded that such membership does not by itself  make  the
      appellant a refugee sur place.  We do not find any material errors  in
      his reasoning or in his conclusion  on  this  aspect  as  set  out  in
      paragraph 21 of his determination.  We have  taken  due  note  of  the
      report of Maria T O'Shea of February 2002.  We note  that  on  page  9
      paragraph 2 of  the  report,  the  expert  says  that  "It  should  be
      possible, as Mr  Topaesfandyari  notes,  to  request  details  of  his
      involvement with the WCPI from their headquarters in London".  We have
      seen no evidence of this.  We have also noted the contents of a letter
      dated 8 March 2002 from Maria T O'Shea addressed to  Ms  Ganning.   We
      note that the expert has not stated in that the appellant's membership
      of the WCPI in the UK would in itself  expose  him  to  real  risk  on
      return.

   7. We support and endorse the Adjudicator's conclusions on the  issue  of
      refugee sur place.  In our respectful view these conclusions are fully
      supported by evidence and are consistent with the principles laid down
      by the Court of Appeal in Danian and as applied by the Tribunal in the
      case of Madjidi [2002] UKIAT 02245.  We have also  considered  whether
      the appellant faces a real risk of persecution or if any of his rights
      under the ECHR would be infringed on return as a failed asylum  seeker
      from the United Kingdom.  In this context we have taken account of the
      contents of the CIPU on Iran as well  as  the  relevant  part  of  the
      report from the expert.  We do not find it established  on  the  lower
      standard applicable that there is such risk in  the  circumstances  of
      this case.

   8. Accordingly we dismiss this appeal.





K Drabu
Vice President
