
H-TH15-WEC -V1
                                                       Appeal No :HX23903-01
                                         MN (Risk-MDC) Zimbabwe CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT 02246


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at :  Field House                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  6 March 2002                            |                             |
|Dictated : 20 May 2002                        |....28th june                |
|                                              |2002.........................|
|                                              |..                           |


                                  Before:-


                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                              Mr A G Jeevanjee
                       Professor B L Gomes Da Costa JP



between
                               MBONGENI NDLOVU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representatives
For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin of Counsel, instructed by Steele  Ford  &
                  Newton, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  He is an ethnic  Ndebele  who
      comes from the Nkete area of Bulawayo.  He entered the United  Kingdom
      on 16 May 2001 and claimed asylum on arrival.   On  22  May  2001  the
      Respondent refused to grant asylum  and  made  the  decision  to  give
      directions for his removal from the United  Kingdom  to  Zimbabwe  for
      reasons set out in his letter of the same date.   His  appeal  against
      the Respondent's  decision  was  heard  by  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  Paul
      Chambers)  on  16  October  2001  and  in  a   written   determination
      promulgated on 5 November 2001 the Adjudicator  dismissed  the  appeal
      and gave his reasons for doing so.

2.    On 17 December 2001 the Appellant was granted leave to appeal  to  the
      Tribunal.  In its decision to grant leave the Tribunal (Dr H H Storey)
      said, "Arguably the Adjudicator was wrong not to  make  a  finding  of
      past persecution and to oppose the issue of current risk in the  light
      of  past  persecution  against  the  backdrop  of   increasing   state
      repression against persons who have been involved with the  MDC.   The
      grounds disclose an arguable case with real prospect of success."

3.    We heard oral submissions from Ms Cronin and  Mr  Ekagha.   Mr  Ekagha
      for the  Respondent  argued  that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  was
      correct despite having found that the Appellant  had  been  kidnapped.
      He submitted that the findings of fact made by  the  Adjudicator  lack
      proper reasoning and he asked that we allow the appeal but  direct  it
      to be heard afresh by a different Adjudicator.  When asked to  specify
      the findings of fact which in his view lacked sufficient reasoning, Mr
      Ekagha was not able to do so.  Ms Cronin argued that the findings made
      by the Adjudicator were clear and reasoned but  his  conclusions  were
      flawed.  She pointed out that paragraph 24 of  the  determination  was
      "speculative" and "fanciful" and that the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
      believing that in order to succeed in his claim the Appellant  had  to
      show that he  had  been  individually  targeted.  She  relied  on  the
      decision in Jeyakumaran v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [1994] Imm A R 45. and submitted that if the Adjudicator had  directed
      himself properly he would have concluded that the Appellant  would  be
      at real risk of persecution for a  Convention  reason  on  removal  to
      Zimbabwe.

4.    At the conclusion of the hearing we announced our  decision  to  allow
      this appeal and we now give our detailed reasons for  concluding  that
      the Appellant has established his  claim  for  asylum  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Our conclusion is based partly on the findings of fact  made
      by the Adjudicator on the claims of the  Appellant  and  setting  them
      into context of the objective evidence that  was  before  us  when  we
      heard the appeal.  It is also partly based on evidence  which  in  our
      view the Adjudicator rejected without good reason and  which  we  have
      accepted as credible.

5.    In this appeal the Adjudicator had made the  following  findings.   He
      had found that the Appellant was a member of the MDC and as  a  member
      the Appellant had given active assistance to the MDC.  The Adjudicator
      had said that although the role played by the Appellant in the MDC was
      not of great significance but it may have brought him to the notice of
      the Zanu-PF.  In August  2000  the  Appellant  and  his  friends  were
      kidnapped by the War Veterans while they were playing football.   They
      were not physically assaulted but they were held against  their  will.
      They were kidnapped at gun point, blindfolded  and  taken  to  a  farm
      where they were detained for four days under armed guard and forced to
      sing political songs.  After four days the Appellant escaped from  the
      farm.  In March 2001 while he was  at  an  MDC  rally  the  rally  was
      attacked by the War Veterans and the police.  The Appellant  sustained
      injuries as a result of this attack.  The  Adjudicator  also  accepted
      that the  Appellant's  mother  was  involved  with  the  MDC  and  her
      involvement was known to the Zanu-PF.  The Adjudicator did not  accept
      that the two incidents amounted to persecution.  He concluded that  in
      neither of the incidents had the Appellant been targeted specifically.
       With respect we disagree with the Adjudicator  on  both  counts.   We
      find that the two incidents  considered  cumulatively  did  amount  to
      persecution for a Convention reason.   The  harm  inflicted  upon  the
      Appellant was serious and it was due to his association with the  MDC.
      The harm was inflicted upon him  by  the  state  and  those  (the  War
      Veterans) who, the objective evidence, establishes are working at  the
      behest or at the very least with the protection of the authorities  in
      Zimbabwe.  We find that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  find  on  the
      evidence before him that the Appellant had not been persecuted in  the
      past.  He was equally wrong to determine the  issue  of  current  risk
      without regard for  past  persecution.   In  our  view  the  Demirkaya
      principles were clearly applicable and relevant to this case.  As  the
      Tribunal said in granting leave to appeal, the past experiences of the
      Appellant had to be given due weight in evaluating the future risk  of
      recurrence  of  such  worse  persecution  against  the   backdrop   of
      increasing state repression against those seen to be  associated  with
      the opposition.   With  regard  to  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  on
      targeting, we find merit in the arguments advanced by Ms  Cronin.   It
      was clearly  held  in  the  case  of  Jeyakumaran  that  there  is  no
      requirement that a person be singled  out  for  persecution  to  be  a
      refugee.  In our judgment the Adjudicator clearly mis-directed himself
      in this regard.   The  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
      evidence that on 1 May 2001  the  Criminal  Intelligence  Organisation
      members visited the Appellant's home looking for  him.   According  to
      the Appellant he saw them coming from his living room  window  and  he
      escaped out of the back of his house.  The Adjudicator  rejected  this
      evidence saying "I do not accept if they had come to arrest him,  that
      it would have been such a simple matter to have  escaped  undetected".
      We do not see it that way at all - especially as  there  has  been  no
      inconsistency or embellishment  of  any  kind  in  this  part  of  the
      evidence or indeed in any other part of the Appellant's evidence.  The
      Appellant left Zimbabwe due to the fear caused by this  visit  and  he
      fled his home in Zimbabwe and took shelter first in  an  aunt's  house
      and then in a friend's house before coming to the United Kingdom.  The
      Adjudicator did not accept the Appellant's evidence that when he spoke
      to his parents after getting to the  United  Kingdom  and  asked  them
      whether the Criminal Intelligence Organisation had visited  again,  he
      felt that "they are withholding something".   He  rejected  it  saying
      that it "did not seem truthful".  No reason as to why it did not  seem
      truthful has been given and again  looking  at  the  totality  of  the
      evidence including the young age  of  the  Appellant,  we  accept  his
      evidence on this point.  We see no reason to disbelieve his assertions
      in this regard.  The objective evidence does not contradict  the  real
      possibility of people in the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  being
      sought by the authorities  at  the  time.   Having  reviewed  all  the
      evidence we concluded that  the  Appellant  had  by  a  narrow  margin
      established his claim to asylum.  The detailed knowledge shown by  the
      Appellant about the MDC and its leadership structure has satisfied  us
      that he was genuinely involved with the MDC and  this  involvement  is
      reasonably likely to put him at real risk of persecution on removal to
      Zimbabwe.  In the  circumstances  we  do  not  find  it  necessary  to
      consider the Appellant's claim on the  human  rights  aspect  of  this
      appeal.  This appeal is allowed.





                                                                     K Drabu

                                                              Vice President

