
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC28509-2002      |
|On 28 October 2002         |        |YK (PSG-Women) Turkey CG    |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 05491          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28 November 2002                                                  |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. R. Chalkley (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Yasemin Kircicek                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. Mr M O'Donell, Counsel instructed by Brighton Housing Trust appeared on
     behalf of the respondent and Miss V Sigley, a  Home  Office  Presenting
     Officer, appeared on behalf of the appellant.

  2. The appellant, the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  appeals
     with leave against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Ms  C  Jarvis,
     allowing an appeal against the applicant's decision on 22 April 2002 to
     issue removal directions after refusing  asylum.   The  respondent  (to
     whom we refer as "the claimant") is a citizen of Turkey who was born on
     7 June 1977 and who arrived in the United Kingdom  on  26  March  2000.
     She was granted leave to enter to work as an au  pair  until  26  March
     2002 and sought asylum by post on 21 March 2002.

  3. The claimant had maintained a fear of persecution from her father,  who
     it was claimed, has arranged her marriage  without  her  consent.   She
     fears persecution also from her intended husband and his family.

  4. Addressing us on behalf of the appellant, Miss  Sigley  said  that  the
     Adjudicator had found that the claimant had  a  well  founded  fear  of
     persecution in the whole of Turkey on her return there now by reason of
     her membership of a particular social group. That was "Women in  Turkey
     who have transgressed social norms and are  accused  of  having  bought
     dishonour and shame  upon  their  families".   The  Adjudicator,  quite
     rightly, referred to the decision of the House of Lords in Shah & Islam
     [1999] Imm AR 283 in  paragraph  47  of  her  determination.   However,
     submitted Miss Sigley,  Turkey  is  not  comparable  to  Pakistan.   In
     Pakistan laws existed which actively discriminated against women.  That
     could not be said to be the case in Turkey.  She  referred  us  to  the
     Country Information and Policy Unit Assessment dated April 2002 and  to
     paragraphs 5.1.47 and 5.1.48.  These say:

           "5.1.47. Spousal abuse is serious and  widespread.   Legislation
           passed in January 1998 made spousal abuse illegal and either sex
           may  file  civil  or  criminal  charges.   However,  police  are
           reported to be reluctant to intervene in domestic  disputes  and
           frequently advised women to return to their husbands.   "Honour"
           murders - the killing  by  immediate  family  members  of  young
           unmarried girls who are  suspected  of  being  unchaste  -  have
           become less common but continue in rural areas.  The  government
           banned he practice of forced virginity testing in January  1998.
           Under the  new  law,  a  girl  cannot  be  medically  tested  to
           establish  her  virginity,  unless  those  demanding   it   have
           authorisation  from  the  Justice   Ministry.    In   1998   the
           Constitutional Court annulled Article 440  of  the  Penal  Code,
           which punished women, but not men, for infidelity.


           5.1.48 With effect from 1 January 2002 Turkey's civil  code  was
           revised so that the man is no longer head of the household,  and
           giving both man and woman equal rights in the management of  the
           marriage and the household.  The woman can keep her maiden  name
           and add her husband's  last  name  to  her  name.   The  minimum
           marriage age for both men and women was increased to 17."

  5. Miss Sigley suggested that reference in paragraph 5.1.47 to the  police
     being "reluctant to intervene in domestic disputes", is not  indicative
     of the police being unwilling to investigate crime.  Even the police in
     the United Kingdom are reluctant to intervene in domestic disputes, she
     added.

  6. Miss Sigley then referred us to page 69 of the claimant's bundle  which
     referred to, "a sweeping overhaul of Turkey's Civil  Code  intended  to
     end discrimination against women" which came into force  on  1  January
     2002 and was said to be part of the country's initiatives to bring  its
     laws into line with the European Union.

  7. By defining the social group as "women in Turkey who have  transgressed
     social norms and are accused of having brought dishonour and shame upon
     their families" it is not clear that the group can exist  independently
     of the persecution.  The only two sources of  her  fear  are  from  her
     father and from her intended husband.  They would not wish to persecute
     anyone else who might fall within the Adjudicator's definition  of  the
     group.

  8. At paragraph 34 of her determination, the Adjudicator says,

          "There is nothing before  me  to  show  what,  if  anything,  the
          authorities could or would do for a woman such as the  appellant,
          were she to report to them on her arrival in Turkey."


      She suggests that the authorities could not give protection.  However,
      submitted Miss Sigley, the objective evidence clearly shows  that  the
      authorities in Turkey are not only willing  but  also  able  to  offer
      protection. She referred to paragraph 5.147 of the  CIPU  Report  (see
      above) and to page 5 in the claimant's bundle and the section  headed,
      "Women", in the US State Department report.  It says:-

           "The law allows women to apply for  restraining  orders  against
           their husbands  and  therefore  to  stay  in  their  own  homes.
           Observers and government officials noted that this provision has
           been very successful in some of the cities and  rural  areas  of
           the country but less so in the more traditional south east."

  9. It  also  referred  to  nine  government  sponsored  shelters  and  six
     consultation centres for  battered  women  in  addition  to  the  Child
     Protection and Social Services Agency provision of services to  victims
     of domestic violence through 19 social centres.  In describing  "honour
     killings", it said that the government authorities have tried to send a
     clear message of intolerance for this practice through the  prosecution
     of those responsible for killings.  Reference was also made in  the  US
     State Department report to sentence reductions for juvenile  observers.
     It reported that young male relatives are often designated  to  perform
     the killing and referred a case  in  June  where  three  brothers  were
     convicted of murdering their 15-year old sister after she ran away from
     an arranged marriage for an older man.  The Court imposed sentences  of
     between four and twelve years.  She asked us to consider this:  if  the
     authorities in Turkey do not act, then why  is  it  that  families  use
     young children to perform honour killings?  She suggested that  it  was
     because it is known that younger  people  receive  a  lighter  sentence
     after they have been convicted.  The point is, she submitted, that  the
     government do act and do investigate and prosecute people.

 10. In paragraph 43 of her determination the Adjudicator suggests there  is
     a lack of evidence of protection being offered by the  government,  but
     at page 42 of the claimant's bundle it was clear  that  the  government
     were trying to respond.  Page 75 of the claimant's bundles referred  to
     having spirited away someone to  a  secret  location,  in  the  certain
     knowledge that if her male relatives found out where she were she would
     be killed.  At page 76 of the claimant's bundle reference was  made  to
     the local gendarmerie who, if they were to find a girl who has run away
     from home to elope or escape death before her male relatives found her,
     she would immediately be sent to a state foster  home  in  Ankara.   It
     also referred to a witness protection programme where girls are given a
     new secret identity and forwarded to another Turkish city, the name  of
     which is kept secret.  It appeared, submitted  Miss  Sigley,  that  the
     Adjudicator had not considered this evidence.

 11. In paragraph 44 of her determination, the Adjudicator speculated on the
     question of relocation.  She  suggested  that  the  claimant  would  be
     required to register with the local authority  if  she  were  to  move,
     which in turn would make enquiries of the authorities in Izmir, who  in
     turn may disclose her whereabouts to her  family.   However,  paragraph
     4.10 of the Country Information and Policy Unit report  suggested  that
     the practice of anyone taking up residence in or leaving  a  particular
     neighbourhood and then reporting to the local head man,  the  "Muhtar",
     is often not done.  It  was  pure  speculation  that  if  the  claimant
     relocated, her details would be  passed  to  her  local  authority  and
     similarly that the local authorities in her area would  then  tell  her
     family.

 12. In paragraph 45 of the determination, the  Adjudicator  refers  to  the
     Fazilet Party having been banned but says,

          "There is nothing in the evidence to  show  that  Osman  and  his
          family would not be in  a  position  to  use  the  links  of  the
          successor parties to the Fazilet  Party  to  seek  and  find  the
          [claimant]."

      However, submitted Miss Sigley, there was no  evidence  to  show  that
      they would.  The US State Department report (reproduced at page  5  of
      the claimant's bundle) shows that women generally  receive  equal  pay
      for equal work in the professions, business and civil service jobs and
      were she to relocate she would be able to obtain employment,  just  as
      anybody else with her skills and intellect would  be  able  to.   Miss
      Sigley acknowledged that, as a single  woman  she  may  face  acts  of
      discrimination, but  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  such
      discrimination would reach the threshold to engage  her  rights  under
      Article 3.

 13. She invited us to allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

 14. Mr O'Donell had taken  the  time  and  trouble  to  prepare  a  written
     submission.  The Tribunal were most grateful  to  him.   We  have  very
     carefully read  the  submissions.   As  a  preliminary  point,  it  was
     suggested that since the Secretary of State had  not  sought  to  argue
     before  the  Adjudicator  that  the  claim  did  not  engage  the  1951
     Convention, it was not open to the Secretary of State now to  challenge
     the Adjudicator's findings that the claimant came within  the  category
     of a particular social group.  He agreed, however, that  there  was  no
     explicit concession made by the Secretary of State that the  claim  did
     engage the 1951 Convention.

 15. He submitted that the claimant's  fear  existed  independently  of  the
     definition used by the  Adjudicator.   The  claimant  has  transgressed
     social norms because she is not now  a  virgin  and  this  will  become
     known.  Discrimination will be tolerated by  the  State.   The  law  in
     Turkey clearly does discriminate against women and one example of  this
     is the lesser sentences imposed for those involved in honour  killings.
     Judges consider tradition and there is great community pressure on them
     to lighten the sentence.  Women occupy secondary status in  Turkey  and
     although Turkish law does not go as far as it does in  Pakistan,  there
     is no significant distinction.  She forms a member of a  social  group,
     namely women who have transgressed social norms in Turkey.

 16. As to internal flight, Mr O'Donell suggested that the  Adjudicator  had
     found that the claimant had a well-founded fear throughout Turkey.   As
     a result, since there had been no challenge to  the  finding  that  the
     claimant had a fear throughout Turkey  it  was  not  now  open  to  the
     Secretary of State to raise this issue.  Leave had been granted on  the
     basis of the claimed lack of Convention reason and internal relocation,
     but it had been found by the Adjudicator that the claimant had a  well-
     founded  fear  of  persecution  throughout  Turkey  and,  consequently,
     internal  relocation  was  not  applicable.   He  conceded   that   the
     Adjudicator had been wrong to allow the claimant's Article 12 claim but
     suggested that the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  Article  8  would  be
     breached had not been challenged and could not therefore be  raised  by
     the appellant.

 17. Responding, Miss Sigley acknowledged that the application for leave had
     not specifically referred to Articles 8 and 3, but submitted  that  the
     whole appeal must either  stand  or  fall  together.   The  appellant's
     attack on the determination is a  general  one.   The  Adjudicator  was
     wrong, she submitted, to find that the  claimant  was  a  member  of  a
     particular social group, but in any event was also wrong to  find  that
     the government in Turkey could not,  or  would  not  offer  protection.
     What the Adjudicator had  effectively  done  in  paragraph  53  of  her
     determination, was to say that in the light of her findings in  respect
     of the refugee aspect of the appeal, it followed that  she  must  allow
     her claim under Articles 3 and 8.  It was clear from the  determination
     itself  that  the  Presenting  Officer  who  had  appeared  before  the
     Adjudicator had specifically made reference to relying on the Secretary
     of State's refusal letter and that itself claims that the claim did not
     engage the Convention.

 18. It was clear, she said, that the State were  not  either  unwilling  or
     unable to offer State protection.  If protection is available  then  it
     is clear that the claimant could go and live elsewhere in Turkey.

 19. We reserved our determination.

 20. The Tribunal is satisfied that,  on  the  evidence  placed  before  the
     Adjudicator, it is clear  that  the  authorities  in  Turkey  are  both
     willing and able to offer protection to unfortunate young women in  the
     claimant's situation.  The article  "Loss  of  Honour  Means  Death  in
     Turkish Region" reproduced at pages 75, 76 and  77  in  the  claimant's
     bundle clearly shows that the authorities do act  to  offer  protection
     where it is sought.  Reference was made to one specific case where  the
     authorities had spirited away a  girl  to  a  secret  location  in  the
     knowledge that, if her male relatives found out  where  she  were  they
     would kill her.  Reference was also  made  to  the  fact  that  if  the
     gendarmerie were to "get hold of a girl who has run away from  home  to
     elope or escape death before her male relatives do, she is  immediately
     sent to a state foster home in Ankara".  Reference  was  also  made  to
     witness protection programmes, which would ensure that  such  a  person
     would be given a new identity and sent to a secret location in  Turkey.
     In the report of the Special Report on Violence Against Women submitted
     to the Economic & Social Council of the United Nations  and  reproduced
     in the claimant's bundle, reference is made (at page  95)  to  killings
     being carried out mainly

          "by under-age males of family to reduce the punishment.  They are
          then treated as heroes.  The action is further endorsed by  their
          fellow inmates in prison, if they are sent there, who wash  these
          young boys' feet and tell them they are now "complete" men."

      That suggests that the State  do  punish  those  involved  in  "honour
      killings".  The extracts from the US State Department  report  clearly
      show that the government sponsor shelters and consultation centres for
      battered women.  Changes in the law recently introduced  make  spousal
      abuse illegal and now acknowledge the equal  roles  of  both  men  and
      women in the management of the marriage and household.

 21. In paragraph 47 of her determination, the Adjudicator referred to  Shah
     and Islam.  Referring to the judgment of the House of Lords, she said,

          "Women in Pakistan are members  of  a  particular  social  group.
          They all share the immutable characteristics of  gender  and  are
          discriminated against by the society in which they live and as  a
          group are unprotected by the State".

      The same  cannot,  however,  be  said  of  women  in  Turkey.   Whilst
      undoubtedly they still suffer acts  of  discrimination,  they  can  no
      longer be said to be discriminated against by the law  and,  we  find,
      they are not unprotected by the State.  We do not find  that  societal
      discrimination against women is either condoned or sanctioned  by  the
      State in Turkey.  There is clear  evidence  to  the  contrary  in  the
      claimant's bundle which, we note, was before the Adjudicator.

 22. The Tribunal finds that the claimant's fear is not  one  which  engages
     the Refugee Convention.  It also finds that on her return to Turkey she
     can and will be offered protection by the Turkish  authorities,  should
     she choose to seek it.  Her rights  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  the
     European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
     Freedoms will not be breached.

 23. The Tribunal allows the Secretary of State's appeal.




                                                             Mr. R. Chalkley
                                                              Vice President







