
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO CC00848-2001      |
|On 9 September 2002        |        |      Up-FARC         [2002]|
|                           |        |UKIAT05736                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..............10 December 2002............................        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C M G Ockelton (Chairman)                                      |
|Mr D K Allen                                                      |
|Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|GERSAIN HENAO - RENGIFO                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Colombia who has been granted  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator,
      Mrs C Bart-Stewart, who dismissed his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision of 9 December 2000 refusing leave  to  enter,  asylum  having
      been refused.


   2. The hearing before us took place on 9 September 2002. Ms  S  Naik  for
      Pullig & Co appeared on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  Mr  J  McGirr
      appeared on behalf of the respondent.

   3. The appellant claims to fear persecution and/or breach  of  his  human
      rights on return to Colombia on account of his membership of the Union
      Patriotica (UP) and collaboration with and  implied  association  with
      Fuerzas Armadas Revolutionaire  De  Colombia  -  Ejercito  del  Pueblo
      (FARC). He had been detained twice  on  this  account  and  also  been
      present at a shooting  incident  where  two  of  his  associates  were
      killed.

   4.  The  appellant  was  detained  in  1996  and  1998   whilst   at   UP
      demonstrations, but was accused of being a  member  of  FARC.  He  was
      released following intervention by his lawyer. The  Adjudicator  found
      this claim to be credible. The lawyer confirmed that  the  reason  for
      arrest was  suspicion  of  involvement  with  the  FARC,  rather  than
      membership of  UP.  On  the  occasion  of  the  first  detention,  the
      appellant said that he was beaten and threatened with death, though on
      the second occasion he was held for ten days, but not mistreated.

   5. He claimed to have left Colombia on account of a shooting incident. In
      a statement dated 5 February 2001, he said that he attended a  meeting
      on 17 October 1998 in  Cali  at  the  Education  Ministry,  which  was
      attended by various officials of his party and also the  Dean  of  the
      Institute, the head  of  the  District  Educational  Council  and  the
      Minister of Education for Palmira. Also, the  education  secretary  of
      the entire province was there. He said that after he left the meeting,
      together with two of his party members (from the UP) people armed with
      handguns started to shoot. He managed to hide between cars and did not
      know what to do and both  of  his  friends  died  on  account  of  the
      shooting. He left Colombia soon afterwards.

   6. He produced a death certificate relating  to  his  brother,  and  also
      death certificates concerning the  colleagues  killed  on  17  October
      1998.  The  Adjudicator  had  serious  doubts  as   to   whether   the
      certificates were genuine. She gave her reasons for this and they were
      not challenged in the grounds of appeal, nor by Ms Naik before us. The
      Adjudicator concluded that there  was  no  Refugee  Convention  reason
      since the appellant had left Colombia in what appeared to be a  single
      isolated incident, and it could not be said with certainty that he was
      a specific target. Nor did she consider that  his  claim  engaged  the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Human  Rights  Convention.  She
      dealt with this matter  briefly  and  gave  no  consideration  to  the
      Article 3 point, though it had been raised in the  grounds  of  appeal
      before her. No doubt she was also in error in stating  that  it  could
      not be said with certainty that the appellant was a specific target in
      the shooting incident. That misstates the proper  standard  of  proof.
      The grounds of appeal also rightly criticise her with  regard  to  her
      description of the nature of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.
      As ground 3 of the grounds of appeal points out, Article 3 is absolute
      and unqualified and there is no question  of  an  apparent  breach  of
      Article 3 being showed to be justified by the Secretary of State.  She
      also misstated the standard of proof, as is criticised at paragraph  3
      of the grounds of appeal. There is no reason however why these matters
      cannot be properly considered by us.


   7. Ms Naik invited us to accept that, on the proper standard of proof  in
      asylum and human rights cases, given that the appellant was leaving  a
      political  meeting  when  the  shooting  took  place,  the  state   or
      paramilitaries were reasonably likely to have been the perpetrators of
      this incident. There is evidence, for example at  page  1  of  the  US
      State Department Report on Colombia for 2001 in  the  final  paragraph
      that members of the security  forces  in  Colombia  collaborated  with
      paramilitary groups which committed  abuses.  She  argued  that  as  a
      consequence there was an  insufficiency  of  protection.  It  was  not
      argued that the appellant was a  specific  target,  but  there  was  a
      campaign of violence against FARC. The  UP  were  a  lawful  political
      party, but  were  the  political  wing  of  FARC  and  therefore,  the
      appellant was at risk of being identified with FARC, as could be  seen
      from the reasons for his two arrests and detentions.

   8. A difficulty we have with Ms Naik's argument is that it has  not  been
      shown in our view, to the proper standard of proof,  that  the  attack
      was directed at all. There are very significant levels of violence  in
      Colombia, which derive from a variety of causes. 3,700  citizens  were
      estimated to have died in political and extra-judicial killings during
      2001, according to the US State Department Report for 2001 at page  3.
      Of particular relevance in this context is the situation of the UP. It
      is the case that currently there are very few mentions of problems for
      UP members in the objective evidence. Clearly, the situation has  been
      somewhat different in the past,  and  that  could  be  seen  as  being
      evidenced by the appellant's previous history of two detentions  as  a
      UP member deemed to  be  associated  with  FARC.  There  is,  however,
      nothing in the March 2000 United Nations Economic and  Social  Council
      Commission on Human Rights Report on Colombia concerning  shooting  of
      UP members. There is we think, force to the point we put to  Ms  Naik,
      that the fact that he was arrested twice previously  and  released  as
      there  was  not  enough  evidence,  would,  in  effect  apply  to  any
      Colombian, who might be at risk of being arrested when  there  was  no
      evidence, and then released.


   9. We were referred by Ms Naik to the determination of  the  Tribunal  in
      Torres (00/TH/00657). The Tribunal in this  case,  heard  a  Colombian
      appeal on 28 January 2000 and allowed it, and derived assistance  from
      an expert report of Dr Pearce from the Department of Peace Studies  at
      the University of Bradford. Among other  things,  Dr  Pearce's  report
      noted that 1,500 UP leaders had been killed between 1985 and 1994  and
      levels of political violence in Colombia had escalated since then.  It
      was also said that  most  human  rights  observers  would  agree  that
      persecution of the UP in Colombia had been systemic  since  the  party
      was believed to have links with FARC. We bear in  mind  however,  that
      this was a determination some two and a half years old and taking into
      account a report of similar age. It  is  true  that  the  Tribunal  in
      Clavijo - Hoyos (00/TH/02313) also allowed a  Colombian  appeal  on  8
      August 2000, and again taking account of a report from Dr Pearce.

  10. We bear in mind that the evidence of Dr Pearce provided in respect  of
      both of those appeals, is at least two years old. We have been able to
      find very little in the objective evidence to support  the  contention
      that members of the UP are at risk on  any  account  today.  There  is
      nothing in the Amnesty International Report in the bundle, nor in  the
      Human Rights Watch Report. The only mention in the US State Department
      Report 2001 is to be found at page 12, where there is reference to the
      UP's 1996 complaint, charging the government with "action or omission"
      in what the UP term "political genocide" of the UP and  the  Communist
      Party. It is said that as part of the process, since  June  2000,  the
      government has provided protection through the  Interior  Ministry  to
      surviving UP and Communist Party members, but despite  these  efforts,
      NGOs reported to the Inter American Commission on Human  Rights,  that
      at least 20 persons associated with the  UP  were  killed  during  the
      year. We have had no evidence put before us as  to  what  the  current
      membership of the UP might be. We note also the section in  the  April
      2002 Colombia Country Assessment by the Home Office.  At  paragraph10,
      it is said that since 1999 the UP  has  faded  from  any  position  of
      political significance and has not featured as  being  active  in  any
      news report. That section of this document contains  some  information
      about the problems historically experienced by the UP since it was set
      up in 1985, but refers to no specific incidents since 1997. It is true
      that there are general statements such as that at the commencement  of
      the Amnesty document concerning political killings  in  Colombia,  but
      the evidence concerning the UP is no more  than,  as  we  have  stated
      above.


  11. In our view, this evidence does not show a real risk to the  appellant
      on return. Clearly, there must be a slight risk that as  somebody  who
      has been a member of the UP, he might be harmed  on  return.  We  take
      that from the evidence  concerning  the  20  or  so  people  who  were
      reported to the Inter American Commission on  Human  Rights,  to  have
      been killed during 2001, and being  people  associated  with  the  UP.
      Otherwise, the absence of  references  to  problems  for  UP  members,
      whether in their own right  or  as  being  associated  with  FARC,  is
      clearly of significance. The position has improved significantly since
      the time when the Tribunal's considering these issues in Torres and in
      Clavijo - Hoyos. We do not consider that the evidence shows why it was
      that the appellant was involved in the shooting incident in 1998. Even
      if it were a case of identification  of  him  and  his  colleagues  as
      members of the UP, some four years have  passed  since  then,  and  we
      consider that the objective evidence shows a significant  change  with
      regard to risk of UP members whether in their  own  right  or  through
      association with FARC. We see  no  real  risk  of  persecution  and/or
      breach of his rights under Article 3 for the appellant  on  return  to
      Colombia. Nor do we see any real risk that  any  of  his  other  human
      rights may be breached. As regards any breach of his Article 5  rights
      in particular, we note that  he  has  experienced  no  more  than  two
      arrests and detentions at a time when UP and its association with FARC
      was very much more highlighted than it is now.


  12. This appeal is dismissed.




                                                                   D K Allen

                                                                    Chairman
