
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX/55774/2001
On 25 June 2002        PT (Risk-Bribery-Release) Sri Lanka CG  [2002]  UKIAT
03444



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                   5TH AUGUST 2002


                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                               Mrs J Chatwani


                       POOPALASINGAM THARMAKULASEELAN

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals, with leave, against the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J H Bryan,  dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 7 April 2001 to refuse  leave
     to enter and refuse asylum

  2. Ms S Taylor represented the Appellant. Mr J  P  Jones,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.



                           The Proceedings To Date


  3. The Appellant claimed to fear both the Sri Lankan army  and  associated
     bodies such as PLOTE, and also the LTTE, if he should be returned to  a
     part of the country controlled by it. He never joined the LTTE  but  he
     and all his family were supporters and helpers,  who  attended  rallies
     between  1993  and  1996,  helped  the  wounded,   dug   trenches   and
     occasionally sheltered LTTE members  in  their  home.  All  the  family
     members had been arrested at one time or another.  The  Appellant  lost
     his identity card in 1995 and gave no  evidence  of  having  sought  to
     obtain another.  The Appellant was arrested on various  occasions.   On
     23 October 1996 he was arrested with his mother in a round up.  He  was
     taken to an army camp in Vavuniya and was detained for 11 months before
     he was released on the payment of a bribe.  During  this  detention  he
     was severely tortured by being suspended upside down and  being  forced
     to inhale petrol fumes, and by being burned with  cigarette  butts.  In
     1997 he was arrested on two occasions.  On the first he was detained at
     the police station for one day. On the second occasion he was  detained
     by PLOTE and held for one to two weeks and ill  treated,  before  being
     released on payment of a bribe. He claims he was arrested for a  fourth
     time in March 2000, and after his release made  arrangements  with  the
     help of his mother and his family to leave the country.

  4. The Adjudicator found that some core  elements  of  this  claim  lacked
     credibility because there were numerous serious inconsistencies between
     the various  accounts  given  by  the  Appellant  of  the  problems  he
     encountered in Sri Lanka and when they occurred. The  Adjudicator  gave
     details of the inconsistencies both in his recital of  the  Appellant's
     claim and in his findings and reasons. As  a  result,  the  Adjudicator
     accepted as credible only a part  of  the  claim.  He  found  that  the
     Appellant lost his identity card in 1995 and he  and  his  family  were
     displaced as a result of the fighting in the early 1990s.  He found the
     Appellant was not a member of the LTTE but  an  active  supporter,  who
     attended rallies and demonstrations and assisted the LTTE, even to  the
     extent of harbouring its  members.  He  concluded  therefore  that  the
     Appellant had nothing to fear from the LTTE in the event of his return.



  5. With regard to his claimed fear  of  the  government,  the  Adjudicator
     found that the claimed arrest in March 2000 was a fabrication and  that
     the Appellant left Sri Lanka in the late autumn of  1999.  He  accepted
     that the Appellant was last arrested in 1997 and that he and his family
     then moved to an LTTE controlled area to avoid  further  problems  with
     the army, especially as the Appellant did not have an ID card. He found
     that there was serious doubt about the reason why  the  Appellant  left
     Sri Lanka in late 1999, as his last arrest was some two years  earlier.
     He found his account of his journey to Colombo  and  his  exit  through
     Colombo airport to be improbable. He did not make any specific  finding
     about whether the Appellant paid a bribe for his first release from the
     army.

  6. He then found, in the light of  the  facts  as  established,  that  the
     Appellant would not now be at any material risk  of  ill  treatment  on
     return from the authorities. In reaching his conclusion he  found  that
     it was not reasonably likely that the Appellant's name would appear  on
     any wanted list.  If he was a serious suspect he would  not  have  been
     released twice even on payment of a bribe. He did not consider that the
     Appellant's visible scars would lead to him to be perceived as an  LTTE
     member or supporter. His position was no different  to  that  of  other
     young  Tamils  living  in  Government  controlled  areas.  He  made  an
     assessment of the ceasefire, though of course in February 2002  it  was
     still in its infancy.

  7. Leave to appeal was granted on three bases. The passage of  time  would
     allow a firmer assessment of the ceasefire. The Tribunal  may  wish  to
     revisit the decision in  Vasu  on  the  significance  of  release  from
     detention on payment of a bribe. The Adjudicator's  assessment  of  the
     Appellant's scars should be reviewed.

  8. We heard submissions from Ms Taylor and Mr Jones on these three issues,
     which are set out in the record of proceedings and we have  taken  them
     into account, along with the  documents  submitted  by  them.  We  then
     reserved our decision, which we now give.


                                The Ceasefire


  9. We first considered the current position regarding  the  ceasefire  and
     the peace process. Some 4 months have now passed since the date of  the
     hearing.  In May, after leave  to  appeal  had  been  granted  in  this
     appeal, the Tribunal made a detailed  assessment  of  the  up  to  date
     material on the ceasefire in Brinston  [2002]  UKIAT  01547.   We  have
     similar material before us, with  the  addition  of  some  more  recent
     evidence generated over the last month.

 10. Whilst we accept that previous ceasefires  in  Sri  Lanka  have  broken
     down, we agree with the Tribunal in Brinston  that  the  present  peace
     process is operating at a more substantial level than  before  and  has
     created a material change in the circumstances  in  that  country.   Of
     course we have no crystal ball to enable us to foretell the future  and
     there may be difficulties to come. There have been some minor incidents
     to which Ms Taylor has referred us. There are mutual  suspicions.  Full
     negotiations in Thailand are due to  start  shortly  but  have  slipped
     somewhat as the parties  strike  negotiating  positions.   However  the
     first direct talks between the Sri Lankan government and the LTTE in  7
     years took place on 21 May 2002, during which they  discussed  ways  to
     return conflict areas to normality and speed up the  implementation  of
     the ceasefire agreement. The LTTE chief negotiator,  Anton  Balasingam,
     in an interview on 4 June 2002 referred to the positive element of  the
     current peace process as being that the ceasefire has held for the last
     four months without any major incidents of truce violations.

 11. Ms Taylor has urged  us  to  regard  the  delay  in  getting  the  full
     negotiations under way as potentially destabilising. We do  not  agree.
     We consider that the continuing observation of  the  ceasefire  without
     major mishap, and  the  progress  made  thus  far,  suggests  that  the
     stability  of  the  process  remains   reasonably   robust,   even   if
     negotiations may  inevitably  take  time  as  the  parties  jockey  for
     position. There is a real change in realities in Sri Lanka.

 12. As to the extent of that change on the  ground,  we  can  see  no  good
     reason, with the benefit of a further month of experience, to  disagree
     with the broad acceptance by the Tribunal in Brinston of the  evidence,
     referred to in the March 2002 CIPU visit report, from  the  Sri  Lankan
     CID and from UNHCR, through its Sri Lanka Protection  Officer  and  its
     London office.

 13. The Senior Superintendent of the Criminal Investigation  Department  in
     Sri Lanka is recorded as stating as follows
           "6.1  The Director explained that if a returnee were not  wanted
                 they would not be stopped at the  airport.   However,  when
                 the CID are certain that the individual  has  committed  or
                 been convicted of an offence then they would be stopped.  A
                 computer holds the  name,  address  and  age  of  a  wanted
                 person.  The police purely go on records - scars would  not
                 make a difference and the  authorities  would  not  make  a
                 decision on this basis.
           6.2   We were told that there had been no round-ups of Tamils in
                 Colombo in the last six months.
              3. The Director thought that the Human Rights Commission (HRC)
                 was very effective.  The HRC are able  to  visit  and  make
                 enquiries.   Therefore  the   procedures   are   open   and
                 investigated and the police are not  able  to  do  anything
                 untoward.
              4. The Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) is  still  in  force.
                 The government are seriously considering repealing the Act,
                 and there has been an order not to make any  arrests  under
                 the PTA, only under common law.  [This is part of the  text
                 of the cease-fire agreement].  The CID is now  allied  with
                 the Ministry of the Interior and  the  Director  felt  that
                 this was a positive  move  as  the  police  were  now  more
                 closely linked to the public.
              5. Failure to comply with  reporting  restrictions  would  not
                 warrant reporting or recording."

 14. We take into account the possibility  that  some  of  the  comments  on
     behalf of the CID may to some extent have been  self-serving,  and  the
     PTA is still in force  and  being  used  for  subordinate  legislation.
     However, if what the Superintendent said in March about relaxations  at
     Colombo and the Airport were materially untrue, we would have  expected
     the emergence,  in  the  three  months,  which  have  passed,  of  some
     significant contradictory evidence. There is none before us. Ms  Taylor
     suggested that the position was complex and UNHCR did not have adequate
     monitoring resources. However the background  material  shows  opinions
     from various sources and there is a Human Rights Commission.  If  there
     were material untruths these would by now be apparent.

 15. This view is partially corroborated by the UNHCR evidence,  also  cited
     in Brinston. Their Sri Lankan Protection Officer,  Mr  Lindenbauer,  is
     quoted as saying
           "Checks on returnees at the Colombo Airport have been eased with
           many returned rejected asylum seekers simply being waived  [sic]
           through since December 2001.  This is in sharp contrast to  what
           happened previously where basically every returnee was  referred
           to CID and thereafter referred to the magistrate in  Negombo  in
           order to carry out relevant checks, where they  were  necessary.
           Most returnee cases that underwent this process were released on
           the same day.  Scarring is not seen to be a  significant  issue,
           although obvious scarring could draw  attention  and  result  in
           further enquiries and detention by the authorities."

 16. The letter from the Deputy Representative of the  UNHCR  in  London  of
     15th April 2002 specifically indicates that it  does  not  seek  to  be
     inconsistent with the position taken by Mr Lindenbauer  and  offers  an
     overview in these terms.
           "Although steps towards peace  have  been  taken  in  Sri  Lanka
           recently, it is still premature to advocate that  the  situation
           has reached a satisfactory level of safety to warrant the return
           of all unsuccessful asylum applicants to  Sri  Lanka.   In  this
           regard,  UNHCR  has  been  aware  that  returning   Tamils   are
           potentially open to  risk  of  serious  harm  similar  to  those
           generally  encountered  by  young   male   Tamils   in   certain
           circumstances.  This risk may be triggered by suspicions (on the
           part of the security forces) founded on various factual elements
           relating to the individual  concerned,  including  the  lack  of
           identity  documents,  the  lack  of  proper  authorisation   for
           residence and travel, the fact that the individual concerned  is
           a young Tamil male from an 'uncleared' area or the fact that the
           person has close family members who are or  have  been  involved
           with the LTTE. . . . In UNHCR's view, the  presence  of  torture
           related scars on the body of a returnee  should  be  a  relevant
           consideration in assessing likelihood of danger upon the  return
           of Sri Lankan  Tamil  asylum  seekers.   Where  such  scars  are
           related to human rights abuses, they would  likely  be  seen  as
           evidence  of  the  security  forces  previous  interest  in  the
           particular individual.  This could  in  turn  serve  to  trigger
           further adverse attention to that individual.  While every  case
           should be assessed on its own merits, UNHCR would reiterate  its
           view that special care should be taken in relation to the return
           of failed asylum seekers to Sri Lanka."

 17. This advice has been amplified by UNHCR in London in a letter dated  13
     May 2002.  This states that
           "UNHCR's advice revolves around the fundamental  principle  that
           in matters of status determination as well as removals each case
           deserves  individual  consideration  on  its  own  merits.   Our
           approach has been to highlight the need for this principle to be
           observed in the Sri Lankan context and to  stress  that  despite
           recent prospects for  peace  the  principle  remains  valid  and
           should continue to be applied to unsuccessful Sri Lankan  asylum
           seekers.  This approach is  based  on  the  view  that  where  a
           decision to remove is  principled  and  carefully  taken  on  an
           individual basis it is defensible and less open to challenge and
           the asylum seeker's return is more likely to be durable. . .  In
           the light of the current situation in  Sri  Lanka  we  reiterate
           UNHCR's view that removal decisions should be based  on  careful
           consideration of individual circumstances."

 18. In sum, the UNHCR advice suggests that there have been improvements for
     returnees but it is premature for all unsuccessful asylum applicants to
     be returned to  Sri  Lanka  as  yet.  It  properly  restates  the  long
     established need to examine each case  on  its  own  merits.  This  was
     supported by the Tribunal in  Jeyachandran  [UKIAT]  01869.  We  agree.
     There is cause for optimism but it is premature to  accept  that  every
     Tamil who has claimed asylum in the UK can as yet  safely  return.  The
     examination of each case on its merits necessarily includes the need to
     consider a person's police/security record as well as the  significance
     of torture related scars, to which we now turn.







                 Release from Custody on Payment of a Bribe


 19. The grant of  leave  suggested  that  the  Tribunal  decision  in  Vasu
     01/TH/10431, might need to be revisited.  Ms  Taylor  in  her  skeleton
     argument and oral submissions suggested that  it  did  not.  She  cited
     Paramalingham  01/TH/  03535  and  Sivakumar  00/TH/02306.   Mr   Jones
     disagreed and cited Amalathaasen [2000]  UKIAT  01308  and  Karanakuran
     01/TH/00339.

 20. Of course as the Tribunal held in Paramalingam, each  case  has  to  be
     decided on its own facts. However that is  not  inconsistent  with  the
     ability to extract some general propositions rooted in  the  background
     material and in common sense as was done in Amalathaasen.

 21. When someone has been in custody for a significant period of time it is
     reasonable to presume that some record was made of  the  detention  and
     this record may still exist and be  available  for  inspection  by  the
     authorities. If the record does still exist  one  may  also  reasonably
     presume that it  includes  a  reference  to  the  individual's  current
     status. By  this  we  mean  whether  he  is  currently  wanted  by  the
     authorities, or whether his release concluded the authorities'  adverse
     interest in him. These presumptions are supported by the statement from
     the CID superintendent, set out above, that their computer  only  holds
     the name and address and age of wanted people. We also note in  passing
     that this record kept by the CID does not include people who failed  to
     comply with reporting restrictions after a release.

 22. It is then frequently argued on behalf of Appellants that  the  payment
     of a bribe means even in relatively routine cases there was an assisted
     escape rather than a release and this will mean that the escapee is  on
     the wanted list. This argument found some support in  the  decision  of
     the Tribunal in Vasu. It held that
           "Whilst we accept that release on bail indicates that the person
           concerned is no longer any serious  suspect,  the  Secretary  of
           State accepts that this Appellant was irregularly released  from
           detention on payment of a substantial bribe.   How  the  Officer
           concerned would have  recorded  the  release  is  necessarily  a
           matter of speculation.  We do not accept that after a  prolonged
           period of detention it is likely there will be no record of  his
           detention.  That would involve destroying or falsifying official
           records built up over a period of some six weeks.   We  consider
           that it is more likely there will be some  recorded  explanation
           as to why the Appellant is no longer in custody and  this  might
           be either that he has escaped or has been released on the  basis
           of insufficient evidence against him.  The underlying  point  is
           that the real reason will not be recorded."

 23. We accept Ms Taylor's point that this subject must to  some  extent  be
     based on speculation, as said in Vasu, as people are not going to admit
     freely that they were bribed. However some clarification was offered by
     the report by CIPU on its visit to Sri Lanka on 14-23 March 2002,  part
     of which was quoted in  Brinston.  The  report  also  quotes  UNHCR  as
     stating that
           "Cases of escapes from army  custody  are  not  known  to  UNHCR
           although there have  been  reports  of  people  held  in  police
           custody who have allegedly escaped.  Obtaining release from army
           custody on the payment of a bribe appears to be  a  possibility;
           it is possible that  such  releases  would  be  recorded  as  an
           official release without charge."

 24. This evidence is not wholly unequivocal in its terms but it  reinforces
     the view taken by the Tribunal on common sense grounds in  Amalathaasen
     that
           "It seems to us that it is highly improbable to  say  the  least
           that a police officer, releasing a man on payment  of  a  bribe,
           would record it as an escape.  There is certainly no need to  do
           so.  If the police wanted to keep an interest in  him  all  that
           was necessary was to note that he might be of  interest  in  the
           future.  Normally if someone is released on payment of  a  bribe
           or otherwise it is indeed because the authorities take the  view
           that there is no good reason to detain him even if there is some
           involvement with the LTTE at a very level."

 25. We agree and conclude, in the light of  the  UNHCR  observations,  that
     bribery related releases, especially from army custody, would  not,  in
     the absence of some special  and  credible  reason,  be  likely  to  be
     treated as escapes, and would  not  result  in  the  inclusion  of  the
     individuals involved on a wanted list.

 26. Indeed one can realistically  go  further  than  that.  The  background
     material shows that bribery is widespread in Sri Lanka, even though the
     government is trying to control it.  The extent of this bribery culture
     is inevitably speculative but  what  it  can  mean  is  that,  even  in
     relatively routine matters, some officials  may  expect  to  receive  a
     payment from interested parties - even if they are only being asked  to
     do what they might otherwise ordinarily be expected to do in the course
     of their work.  Thus the mere fact of the payment of a bribe  does  not
     in itself imply that the bribe is procuring  action,  which  would  not
     otherwise in time be taken. Nor does  it  necessarily  imply  that  the
     person bribed would be willing to take a serious personal risk  by  for
     example releasing a suspected  terrorist.  Payment  of  a  bribe  on  a
     release may mean nothing more than that a person in detention who is no
     longer of adverse interest to the authorities may be expected to  offer
     a bribe to his custodians to initiate the release procedure.

 27. Having said that, each case has to be decided on its own  facts.  There
     may be examples where bribery has procured an assisted escape.  However
     in  routine  cases  that  would  require  some  clear   and   plausible
     explanation, when common sense suggests that the easier and less  risky
     method is by official release with appropriate paperwork.



                                    Scars


 28.  The commonsense approach to scars and the risk generated  by  them  on
     return by failed  asylum  seekers,  has  been  well  assessed  in  many
     Tribunal decisions. It has been stressed in  decisions  like  Iyangaran
     [2002] UKIAT 0191, that scars should not be  considered  in  isolation.
     The issue is whether and to what extent the relaxing  of  the  security
     arrangements in Colombo following the ceasefire should be part of  that
     consideration. The material new factors are  as  quoted  above  in  the
     March  CIPU  visit  report  arising  from  the  comments  of  the   CID
     Superintendent and UNHCR.
           1. Checks on returnees at Colombo airport have been  eased  with
              many returned rejected  asylum  seekers  simply  being  waved
              through.
           2. If a returnee was not wanted he would not be stopped  at  the
              airport.
           3. Scarring is not seen  to  be  a  significant  issue  although
              obvious scarring could draw attention and result  in  further
              inquiries and detention by the authorities.
           4. Most returnee cases undergoing checks were  released  on  the
              same day.
           5. There is complete freedom of movement in the Colombo area.

 29. As Ms Taylor argued, each case must turns on  its  own  facts  and  the
     normal risk factors have to be assessed in each case, but  we  consider
     these new developments are material in reducing the  general  level  of
     risk and should be taken into account  in  any  assessment.  They  also
     serve to focus on the importance of whether a returnee is on the wanted
     list.





                            Assessment of Appeal


 30. We now apply  these  principles  to  the  facts  of  this  appeal.  The
     Adjudicator found  that  the  Appellant  and  his  family  were  active
     supporters of the LTTE in the North.  He was arrested and  detained  on
     three occasions in 1996 and 1997 by the army, the police, and PLOTE. He
     was tortured in detention.  His last release followed the payment of  a
     bribe and we consider it  probable,  though  the  Adjudicator  made  no
     finding on this matter, that the first release was also accompanied  by
     the payment of a bribe as claimed. However on none of  these  occasions
     was the Appellant ever charged. His releases were not even  subject  to
     reporting conditions,  and  there  is  no  credible  evidence  that  he
     remained on anybody's wanted list after his last release in early 1997.
     The Adjudicator found, and we accept, that the Appellant fabricated his
     account of an arrest in 2000 and of his flight  through  and  from  Sri
     Lanka, in order to embellish his claim for asylum here. He would now be
     returned to Sri  Lanka  on  emergency  travel  papers  in  the  changed
     circumstances, and  would  be  able  to  obtain  proper  documents  for
     himself.

 31. As there was some question over the  significance  of  the  Appellant's
     scars,  the  Tribunal  examined  them,  though  it  appears  that   the
     Adjudicator did so as well. Irrespective  of  whether  the  Appellant's
     scars would be visible by reason of his clothing, we consider  that  if
     the scars as a whole were seen by a security officer  on  return,  they
     would not now arouse suspicion or create material risk for  him.   Many
     scars are small and faded and barely noticeable, and in aggregate  they
     are relatively insignificant, especially to a non-medical observer.

 32. Taking the evidence as a whole  and  in  context,  we  reach  the  same
     conclusion as  the  Adjudicator  that  the  Appellant  would  not  face
     persecution or a breach of his human rights on return to Sri Lanka,  or
     whilst arranging his travel to his family home in the North, or in  the
     North itself, if that is where he wants to live. Having said  that,  if
     he so chose, he could also remain in Colombo without difficulty.

 33. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
