
                                                                   Appeal
No:   CC19224-2000
      | |                         BN (War Crimes - Ethnic Serb - Fair Trial)
                                               Croatia CG [2002] UKIAT 05750




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 5th December 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                ....11 December 2002........................

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes
                              Mrs M Padfield JP

Between:




                                     BN


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Croatia and is of Serbian  ethnicity.   He
    appeals following the  quashing  of  an  earlier  determination  of  the
    Tribunal against the determination of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  T  J  Cary,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  on  20th
    August 2000 refusing him leave to enter and refusing asylum.   His  case
    was one of those originally considered by the Tribunal with S  &  others
    (01/TH/00632) and it is for that reason that the Court of Appeal  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 539;  [2002] INLR 416, in line with its decision in S,  ordered
    that his appeal be reconsidered by the Tribunal.  Before us today he has
    been represented by Mr Mullins, instructed by Sutovic  &  Hartigan,  and
    the Respondent is represented by Mr Saunders.

 2. The Tribunal has recently considered a number of matters relating to the
    return of ethnic Serbs to Croatia in its determination in  SK  &  others
    sub nom S & K [2002] UKIAT 05613, issued on Tuesday of  this  week.   At
    the beginning of the proceedings before us today,  Mr  Mullins  told  us
    that he was instructed to seek an adjournment of  these  proceedings  on
    the basis that there might be evidence arising subsequent to the hearing
    in SK & others which might be relevant to these  proceedings.   No  such
    evidence was specifically identified other than that which has been  put
    in the bundles for the hearing today.  It was for that  reason  that  Mr
    Saunders objected to the matter being adjourned.  Indeed, as it  appears
    to us, no proper reason has been given making it just for there to be an
    adjournment in this case.  We therefore  refused  the  adjournment,  but
    have heard submissions based not only on the Tribunal's determination in
    SK & others, but also on the evidence which is in the  bundles  prepared
    for this hearing and which Mr Mullins tells us is new.

 3. We do not need to consider the facts of  the  Appellant's  case  in  any
    great detail because Mr Mullins, with  his  customary  conciseness,  has
    invited us to direct our attention to three issues only and, in  respect
    of one of those issues, merely in order to make no finding on  it.   The
    issue on  which  we  are  asked  to  make  no  finding  relates  to  the
    Appellant's son's state of health.  In view of the date of the  decision
    in this case, only matters relating to  asylum  fall  to  be  considered
    today.  For that reason, it is appropriate that we take  no  account  of
    issues relating only to  human  rights  and  we  readily  accede  to  Mr
    Mullins' suggestion that we should ignore matters  arising  out  of  the
    Appellant's son's state of health.

 4. The second issue raised by Mr Mullins is that of  the  possibility  that
    the Appellant would be prosecuted for, and perhaps convicted of,  a  war
    crime if he were to be returned.  The determination of the  Tribunal  in
    SK & others has set out  in  paragraph  38  principles  which  we  shall
    endeavour to follow. Unless there is any particular  reason  to  suppose
    that an individual would be at risk of prosecution for war  crimes,  the
    mere suggestion that others may be so prosecuted would not be enough  to
    make a person a refugee.

 5. Mr Mullins' primary response to that is that is that there  is  evidence
    not available to the Tribunal in SK & others  demonstrating  that  there
    has been a recent increase of prosecutions of individuals,  particularly
    of Serbian ethnicity, for alleged crimes which took  place  in  the  war
    that has now been over for some seven years.  The evidence to  which  he
    points derives from  two  sources.   The  first  is  a  non-governmental
    organisation called Veritas.  We have been shown material  derived  from
    Veritas'  website  and  from   Mr   Mullins'   instructing   solicitors'
    correspondent at Veritas.  Although  Veritas  was  established  in  late
    1993, and although Mr Mullins' solicitors' correspondent  addresses  the
    solicitor in relatively familiar terms, we are  assured  by  Mr  Mullins
    that the material now before us simply could not be obtained in time for
    the hearing of SK & others before the Tribunal,  less  than  two  months
    ago.

 6. The aims and objectives of Veritas are set out in  its  website  and  we
    will record them in full.  They are as follows:

         "Collecting documents pertinent to the pre-war,  war  and  post-war
         property and sufferings of Serbs  on  the  territory  of  the  then
         Republic of Serbian  Krajina  and  of  all  citizens  of  the  then
         Republic of Croatia;


         To exhibit,  publish  and  publicise  findings  of  these  document
         searches to the public;


         To prepare and disseminate evidence to national  and  international
         institutions that portrays a different 'truth' regarding events  to
         the territory of the former Socialist Republic of Croatia,  and  to
         initiate court proceedings against perpetrators of crimes committed
         against humanity and the international law;


         To unearth  information  pertinent  to  destinies  of  all  Krajina
         residents who failed to flee Krajina in May and August 1995 and who
         are either dead or alive;


         To co-operate with the Commissions for the exchange of prisoners of
         war and the hand-over of bodies of those killed on either  side  of
         the  conflict,  and  to  work   with   international   humanitarian
         organisations in order to release all prisoners  of  war  and  hand
         over the bodies of those  killed  to  their  families  as  soon  as
         possible;


         To  provide  legal  aid  to  former  Krajina  residents,  including
         compensation for physical and emotional suffering and  the  damaged
         and destroyed property."


    The website also contains a  list  of  publications  of  Veritas  up  to
    February 2002  and  a  note  of  projected  publications.   Amongst  the
    projected publications are what is described as "A book of Croat  crimes
    against the Serbs in 1990 to 1995 war" in five volumes.  There  is  also
    to be a video cassette on the same topic.  The website  notes  that  "So
    far, Veritas has prepared some twenty files regarding crimes against the
    Serbs".  They are then specified.  And  the  note  continues,  "Most  of
    these files have been forwarded to the Hague Tribunal".


 7. We do not wish to mis-state the aims of Veritas, but the  extracts  that
    we have given from the website appear to us to give a fair impression of
    them. It is evidently a Serbian organisation, whose primary  aim  is  to
    make the point that the story  told  by  the  Croats  is  not  the  only
    "truth".  It is in that context that we evaluate  the  material  derived
    from Veritas.

 8. It is said in a recent exchange of correspondence between the  President
    of  Veritas  and  Mr  Mullins'  instructing  solicitor  that  there  are
    proceedings issued through Interpol against 4,530  people  whom  Veritas
    regards as mainly ethnic Serbs.  Those proceedings are for  alleged  war
    crimes.  Mr Mullins has told us that  these  proceedings  only  came  to
    notice of the solicitors when a person in the  United  Kingdom  was  the
    subject of an international arrest warrant served through Interpol.   We
    have been provided with a list of some of those  against  whom  Interpol
    has been asked to assist  proceedings.   It  is  said  that  the  recent
    history of  Croatia  indicates  that  there  is  an  increase  in  newly
    commenced proceedings against alleged war criminals and, in  particular,
    against Serbs.  We have to say that so far as the evidence before us  is
    concerned, we are not easily able to see that the new material  supports
    a suggestion that there has been a change since  the  hearing  of  SK  &
    others.

 9. Mr Mullins also referred to the OSCE Mission, which  reported  again  at
    the end of October (the report itself is dated 18th November 2002,  that
    is to say after the hearing in SK & others).  The OSCE notes as follows:

         "From May until the end of October 2002, there were 18 new  arrests
         for war crimes (15 Serbs, 3 Croats), involving  10  Serb  returnees
         and 8 long-term residents (5 Serbs and 3 Croats).  [Of  18  persons
         arrested since May, 7 have subsequently been released as  a  result
         of charges being  dropped  or  courts  allowed  persons  to  defend
         themselves from freedom.]  Twenty Serbs and one Bosniak  have  been
         convicted since early May, while 5 Croats  were  acquitted.   While
         statistics about the outcome of prosecutions  are  not  necessarily
         probative, disparities can indicate a  different  weighing  of  the
         evidence and guilt of defendants, or may  simply  result  from  the
         higher number of proceedings initiated against Serbs.  [The Mission
         is currently monitoring 59  cases  involving  Serb  defendants,  11
         cases involving Croat defendants and 1  case  involving  a  Bosniak
         defendant.  Of the 59 cases (including in absentia  cases)  against
         Serbs (involving 330 persons), 67  percent  involve  one  defendant
         whereas 33 percent involve groups of defendants.  Half of the cases
         against Serbs are in  the  Danube  Region.   Of  the  11  cases  (4
         individual  and  7  group  cases)  against  Croats  (involving   34
         persons), the majority (6 of 11) are in the Knin area  in  Southern
         Croatia.]"


    In that quotation, the parts which we have inserted in  square  brackets
    derive from the footnotes to the report.


10. Veritas alleges that at least  eight  Serbs  have  been  arrested  since
    August of this year.  That is in an e-mail of 8th November.  It does not
    appear to us that either the figures in the OSCE  Report,  or  those  in
    Veritas' material, indicate a major increase, since the hearing of SK  &
    others or at all, in arrests of Serbs, or indeed  of  anybody,  for  war
    crimes.  Veritas also suggest that the process is different for  Serbian
    defendants and for Croatian defendants.  So far  as  Serbian  defendants
    are concerned, it is said that they are liable to be dealt with by means
    of a joint indictment and that they may be prosecuted and tried, even if
    they were only in the area where a crime was committed.   On  the  other
    hand, where Croatians  are  tried,  it  is  on  the  basis  strictly  of
    individual responsibility.  Although we do not doubt  the  sincerity  of
    Veritas in giving that opinion, it is not supported  by  the  individual
    statistics mentioned by the OSCE.  Insofar, therefore,  as  Mr  Mullins'
    submissions rely on new evidence relating to a tendency to prosecute for
    war crimes not apparent at the time when the Tribunal heard SK & others,
    we reject them.

11. In any event, the issue is not general risk to others, but the  risk  to
    the Appellant.  So far as that is  concerned,  we  accept  Mr  Saunders'
    submission that there is  no  material  at  all  to  suggest  that  this
    Appellant is at risk of prosecution for war crimes.  If he  were  to  be
    prosecuted, he would be able to deal with it in the way we are  informed
    happened in one case which is given as a vignette in Veritas'  material.
    Here, we are told about the arrest of a group of villagers, five or  six
    of them, and proceedings in  Krajina.   Veritas'  President  records  as
    follows:

         "However, I do know that all  of  the  arrested  were  subsequently
         released and that the proceedings were never completed ie no person
         was  ever  convicted  of  committing  that  crime.   Following  his
         repatriation, M was kept in  a  Croatian  prison  and  after  fresh
         proceedings were organised, he was released from prison.  I  assume
         that he must have provided  evidence  to  the  court  that  he  was
         nowhere in the vicinity of the crime scene  at  the  time  it  took
         place, and that was the reason he was released from detention."


    We see no basis at all in the evidence before us to suggest that if  the
    Appellant were to be accused of a  war  crime,  he  could  not  properly
    defend himself on precisely the same basis.  Mr Mullins acknowledged  to
    us that there is nothing to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was  in  the
    vicinity of the commission of a  war  crime  at  any  time.   For  those
    reasons,  we  reject  the  submissions  based  on  the  possibility   of
    prosecution for war crimes.


12. We turn then to Mr Mullins' other primary submission, which was  related
    to the Appellant's access to housing if he were to be  returned  to  his
    country.  Mr Mullins relied on a new supplementary witness statement  by
    the Appellant, which contains the following passage:

         "9.      I visited my family home for the second  time  in  January
           1999 to see if there was any possibility of being able to return
           there.  The situation was much the same, save that three elderly
           women were now living in the village,  in  the  ruins  of  their
           former homes.


         10.      My mother has since returned  to  the  village,  she  went
           there in May 1999 and she is living in the kitchen part  of  our
           former home, which has been made habitable.  My mother could not
           bear to live as a refugee any longer and wanted to  die  in  her
           own home and on her land.


         11.      There are no young people returning to Croatia.   To  this
           day, there are only a  few  elderly  women  living  in  my  home
           village.  My mother informs me that they do have electricity for
           the past year.  There is still no school, doctor or bus service.
            It would be physically impossible for my family and I  to  live
           there."

13. Mr Mullins submits that those  facts  suggest  that  the  Appellant,  if
    returned, would have no access to living accommodation.  We have to  say
    that, on the facts, we regard  that  submission  as  not  entirely  well
    supported.  This is not a case where it is alleged  that  the  Appellant
    and his family have lost their living accommodation through confiscation
    or occupation.  It is clear that the Appellant's family, represented  by
    his mother, is still in occupation of their house, albeit ruined.

14. Mr Mullins refers in particular to the OSCE Report,  to  which  we  have
    already made reference.  On page 12 of the  Report,  under  the  heading
    "Return, Reintegration and Restitution of Property:  The Return  Process
    from, to and within Croatia", we find the following passage:

         "According to  the  most  recent  official  data,  96,534  minority
         returns have been registered to Croatia since the end of the  armed
         conflict [that is to say, 1995];  68,154 returned from the  Federal
         Republic of Yugoslavia, 5,716 from Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  while
         22,668 were regarded  as  internally  displaced  persons  from  the
         Danube Region.  However, for personal and objective  reasons,  many
         individuals return only to settle  their  affairs  and  sell  their
         properties prior to returning to their countries of asylum.  Others
         wish to remain, but cannot because their properties remain damaged,
         destroyed  or  occupied,  or  they  do  not  receive  redress   for
         terminated occupancy/tenancy rights."


15. Mr Mullins argues that a person who wishes to remain  but  cannot  is  a
    person who may be a refugee.  He derives  that  conclusion  as  follows.
    Lack of access to accommodation is an infringement upon an  individual's
    rights.  If  the  lack  of  access   to   accommodation   derives   from
    discrimination, it might be persecutory.  A person who  is  returned  to
    his own country but cannot remain there is a person therefore who may be
    fleeing persecution if the reason that he cannot remain  is  because  of
    discriminatory lack of access to accommodation.

16. Whilst not wishing  to  comment  in  full  on  those  submissions  which
    clearly raise general issues which do  not  arise  in  this  appeal,  it
    appears to us that they do not have any substance in the context of  the
    present  appeal.   It  is  quite  clear  firstly,   that   despite   the
    difficulties to which reference is made in the  paragraph  of  the  OSCE
    Report which we have  cited,  OSCE  nevertheless  continues  to  support
    returns to Croatia.  The conclusions, at pages 21 and 22 of the  report,
    refer to the difficulties of obtaining accommodation, but do not suggest
    that returns are unlawful where  accommodation  is  not  available.   We
    accept that there are those who have been returned to their own country,
    but seek to leave because of lack of access to accommodation.  If it  be
    right to say that the lack of accommodation was predictably persecutory,
    then the return must have been unlawful, which  OSCE  does  not  suggest
    that it was.  Mr Mullins seeks to translate an unwillingness  to  remain
    following a lawful removal, into unlawful removal.  That, in  our  view,
    cannot be done.  Removal to Croatia of a person who  has  no  access  to
    accommodation is not prohibited by the Refugee Convention.  That is  the
    result of applying SK & others.  It is also the result  which  we  would
    have reached without applying SK &  others.   Nothing  in  the  material
    which Mr Mullins has put before us relating to those who wish to  remain
    but it is said "cannot do so" causes us to change our view.

17. For the foregoing reasons, we reject Mr  Mullins'  submissions  as  they
    stand, and we reject also his submission that  matters  have  materially
    changed since the Tribunal heard SK & others on 16th and 17th October of
    this year.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
