
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX/51623/2001     |
|On 20 November 2002        |        |TG (Mixed Ethnicity)        |
|Dictated 21 November 2002  |        |Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |07289                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|18th March 2003                                                   |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr A A Lloyd, JP                                                  |
|Rt Hon the Countess of Mar                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|TIGIST GETACHEW                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:


For the appellant:           Mr B Hussain, of Counsel, instructed by

                       Aston Clarke, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr D Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by Tigist Getachew, a citizen of  Ethiopia,  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs C M A  Jones)  who  dismissed
      her appeal against the respondent's decision made  on  25  March  2001
      giving directions for her removal following the refusal of  her  claim
      for asylum.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 April 1998  using  a
      false passport.  She claimed asylum on 23 April 1998.  Her  claim  was
      supported by a statement dated 30 August  2000.   She  said  that  her
      father was a prominent and one of the regional leading figures of  the
      All-Amhara  People's  Organisation  (AAPO).   She  supported  him   by
      providing secretarial services and working as a  liaison  between  him
      and the group under him.  Her claim was based on her political opinion
      as a supporter of AAPO.  She claimed that on 15 November 1998 she  had
      been arrested and detained for 3 months.  During that period  she  was
      subjected to  ill-treatment  including  beatings  and  rape.   In  her
      statement she said that her mother disappeared because of her origins.
       In her interview she explained that her mother was Eritrean  and  had
      been deported to Eritrea.  For the reasons which  the  respondent  has
      set out in his reasons for refusal letter dated 21  December  2000  he
      was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution.  He noted that the appellant claimed that her father  had
      been arrested in 1995 and held for  a  year  but  he  still  lived  in
      Ethiopia.

   3. The Adjudicator has summarised the appellant's account in paragraphs 4-
      8 of her determination.  She said that the appeal was first listed for
      hearing on 8 May 2002 when the appellant raised a fresh basis for  her
      asylum claim, her mixed ethnicity  and  the  fact  that  her  Eritrean
      mother had been deported to Eritrea.    The  case  was  adjourned  for
      this issue to be  reconsidered.   The  Home  Office  maintained  their
      decision.  The appeal was heard on its merits by the Adjudicator on 18
      June 2002.  It was the appellant's claim that she became involved with
      and gave secretarial assistance  to  AAPO,  gradually  increasing  her
      involvement to attending demonstrations  and  assisting  with  leaflet
      distribution.  She said that her role increased in importance and  she
      became involved in youth  recruitment  and  secret  conferences.   Her
      father was arrested in May 1995, and brutally beaten in front of  both
      her and her mother.  He was detained for a year.   On 15 November 1997
      the appellant herself was arrested because  of  her  involvement  with
      AAPO.  She spent 3 months in detention where she was beaten,  tortured
      and raped.  In February 1998 she was released on  condition  that  she
      report fortnightly to the police  station.   She  says  that  she  was
      constantly watched, followed and intimidated. Sometimes she was picked
      up and taken to a police station for no apparent  reason.   Unable  to
      tolerate this level of harassment she decided to flee the country  and
      did so in April 1998.

   4. The Adjudicator's assessment of the appellant's credibility is set out
      in paragraphs 28-34 of her determination.  The Adjudicator noted  that
      the appellant had claimed  she  was  released  from  detention  on  27
      February 1998 in her SEF whereas as interview she said that it was  27
      February 1997.  The Adjudicator did not accept  her  explanation  that
      she had not adapted to a change to the European calendar.   She  found
      the appellant's description of the circumstances  of  her  arrest  far
      fetched.  She commented that  although  the  appellant  had  indicated
      throughout that she was of mixed ethnicity, she had failed  until  the
      hearing date on 8 May 2002 to reveal that she  feared  persecution  on
      that account.  She found it  extraordinary  that  she  had  failed  to
      mention this fear earlier and accepted the respondent's  assertion  in
      his letter of 14 June 2002 that this issue was added in an attempt  to
      enhance her claim to remain in the United Kingdom.


   5. The background  evidence  supported  the  appellant's  description  of
      prison conditions as poor but the  Adjudicator's  examination  of  the
      objective material did not reveal to her a predilection on the part of
      the guards for the rape of female prisoners.  She  came  to  the  view
      that the appellant had grossly exaggerated her claim.  She accepted as
      reasonably likely the fact that she was  of  mixed  Ethiopian/Eritrean
      race and was a low level supporter of AAPO but she was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant had been arrested, detained tortured  or  raped  as
      she alleged.  In the light of those findings  she  was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution nor that  to
      return her would be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under
      the Human Rights Convention.

   6. Mr Hussain sought to challenge the reasons on  which  the  appellant's
      account had been rejected.  In particular he  submitted  that  it  was
      wrong to draw an adverse inference from  the  appellant's  failure  to
      raise her fear of persecution due to her mixed  ethnicity  before  the
      hearing on 8 May 2002.  The position was that at  the  hearing  on  13
      March 2002  the Secretary of State's representative had  informed  the
      Adjudicator that he wished to seek an adjournment so that the issue of
      ethnicity could be covered as it was a matter not dealt  with  in  the
      refusal letter.  The appellant had not sought  the  adjournment.   The
      issue had been raised by the Secretary of State.  Even if he  came  to
      the view that  it  did  not  give  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution, it was wrong to criticise the appellant  by  saying  that
      she had attempted to enhance her claim.

   7. Mr Hussain also submitted that  the  Adjudicator  had  been  wrong  to
      attribute weight to a simple error as to the date of her release  from
      detention.   The Adjudicator was right that  the  background  evidence
      did show there  was  no  general  problem  with  the  rape  of  female
      prisoners but it did not follow that the rape had  not  occurred.   On
      the basis that the appellant had been an activist for AAPO, she  would
      still  be  at  risk.   Mr  Hussain  referred  the  Tribunal   to   the
      determination in Assefa [2002] UKIAT 02897.   On  the  facts  of  that
      case it was accepted that the position in  Ethiopia  was  sufficiently
      unstable that the claimant may be at risk of forced deportation.   The
      Tribunal asked Mr Hussain whether it was his submission that there was
      still  a  risk  of  forced  removal  evidenced   in   the   background
      information.  He conceded that he could not show that there would  now
      be a real risk of deportation for the appellant.


   8. Mr Ekagha submitted that the Adjudicator had been  entitled  to  reach
      her findings on credibility on the basis of the evidence  before  her.
      He did accept in the light of the record of proceedings on the  appeal
      file that the initiative in investigating the claim on  the  basis  of
      the appellant's mixed ethnicity did come from the Presenting officer.

   9. It is clear from the record of proceedings that when this  appeal  was
      listed for hearing on 13 March 2002, an application was  made  by  the
      Secretary of State's representative for an adjournment  so  that  this
      issue could be considered.  The Adjudicator's note reads as follows:

        "H/O apply adjournment.... The RFR letter not consider  (issue)  of
        mixed ethnicity.   To  be  considered.   Possibility  ELR  will  be
        granted ... mixed ethnicity came to light late".

  10. The response to this further investigation is set out  in  the  letter
      dated 4 June 2002.  The respondent explains why he has decided not  to
      alter his decision to refuse asylum.   The  letter  asserts  that  the
      appellant when interviewed with regard to her  asylum  claim  did  not
      mention the fear of persecution due to her ethnicity.  In the light of
      this he was of the opinion that if  what she was claiming was true  it
      was reasonable to expect that she would have mentioned  this  part  of
      the alleged claim during her interview.   He was of the  opinion  that
      she had attempted to enhance her claim  in  order  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom.

  11. The Tribunal take the view that  it  is  wrong  to  draw  any  adverse
      inferences against the appellant on this basis.  She had not sought to
      enhance her claim.  She has stated that her father  is  Ethiopian  and
      that her mother is Eritrean.  The respondent indicated at the  hearing
      on 13 March 2002 that he wished  to  reconsider  this  aspect  of  the
      claim.  The appellant can hardly be  criticised  for  agreeing  to  an
      adjournment on this basis.  It  seems  to  the  Tribunal  that  it  is
      unjustified in these circumstances to assert that she  has  sought  to
      enhance her claim in order to remain in the United Kingdom.

  12. Dealing with the issue of the rape, it is reported in para 4.35 of the
      CIPU Country Assessment April 2000 that female  prisoners  are  housed
      separately from males and that rape does not appear to be  a  problem.
      We were referred to the US State Department Report at  page  16  (A85)
      that a guard had been accused of raping a  female  prisoner.   He  had
      been arrested and was awaiting trial.  If anything, this tends to show
      that if a matter came to the attention of authorities, they would take
      action.   However, as the grounds assert, the fact that rape  may  not
      be prevalent does not indicate that it did not occur on this  occasion
      although of course the prevalence of rape is a relevant factor  to  be
      taken into account.

  13. In our view the Adjudicator wrongly attached weight to the failure  to
      assert a risk on the grounds of mixed ethnicity regarding this  as  an
      attempt to enhance the claim.   This fact taken with the other factors
      to which we have referred lead us to have a real doubt as  to  whether
      the adverse finding on credibility  is  properly  sustainable  on  the
      evidence.

  14. The  Tribunal  have  considered  whether  we  should  remit  this  for
      rehearing or whether on the basis of the information before us we  are
      able to make our own assessment as to the credibility of the evidence.
       We have reminded ourselves of the guidance in Karanakaran [2000]  Imm
      AR 270 and in particular at 304 where  Sedley  LJ  said:   "testing  a
      claim ordinarily involves no choice between conflicting  accounts  but
      an  evaluation  of  the  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  credibility,   and
      ultimately  the  significance  of  the  applicant's  case....What  the
      decision makers ultimately make of the material is a matter for  their
      own conscientious judgement, so long as the procedure  by  which  they
      approach and entertain it  is  lawful  and  fair  and  provided  their
      decision logically addresses  the  Convention  issues.   Finally,  and
      importantly, the Convention issues from first to last are  evaluative,
      not factual.  The facts, so  far  as  they  can  be  established,  are
      signposts on the road to  conclusion  on  the  issues;  that  are  not
      themselves conclusions.   How far  this  process  truly  differs  from
      civil or criminal litigation need not detain us now."


  15. The Tribunal have reviewed the evidence given by the appellant in  her
      SEF, her interview, her written statements and her  oral  evidence  as
      recorded by the Adjudicator.  We have taken into account the  conflict
      between what was said  at  interview  that  she  had  charges  brought
      against her and was released on bail  whereas  in  her  SEF  form  and
      during cross-examination she  said  she  had  no  outstanding  charges
      against her.  We note also that her father has remained  in  Ethiopia.
      However, there appears to be no  evidence  that  he  continues  to  be
      active on behalf of AAPO.  We have  considered  the  circumstances  in
      which she was detained.  Looking at the evidence as  a  whole,  whilst
      accepting that there are a number of areas of doubt, we  do  not  feel
      that we can reject the appellant's evidence  as  untrue.   Bearing  in
      mind the relatively low standard of proof in an asylum claim  and  the
      need to avoid undue delay in the determination  of  appeals,  we  have
      come to the view that in the interests of justice do not require us to
      remit this case so that the appellant's credibility can be tested  all
      over again by a different Adjudicator.  On the facts of this  case  it
      seems to us to be wrong in principle where  we  have  found  that  the
      Adjudicator's reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  account  to  be
      unsustainable, to subject the appellant to  having  the  whole  matter
      reheard when on the basis of the evidence before us we  are  satisfied
      that there is at least a serious possibility that what  she  has  said
      might be true.

  16. The Tribunal will therefore proceed on the basis  that  the  appellant
      was arrested, detained and ill-treated as she had described.  She  has
      been active in her support of AAPO since 1994.  Her role on this basis
      was not limited to distributing leaflets but acting as a link  between
      her father and his group before he was arrested  and  detained  for  a
      year because of his political activities.  It is the appellant's claim
      that after she was released from detention she was watched,  followed,
      intimidated and sometimes picked up and taken to the police station.

  17. Mr Hussain submitted that the  background  evidence  did  not  draw  a
      distinction between high profile and low profile members of AAPO.   He
      referred to a report dated 21 March 2001 at A59 following the  student
      demonstrations which said that  over  30  members  of  AAPO  had  been
      detained and remained in detention.   Issues relating to AAPO are  set
      out in paras 5.55-9 of the CIPU Country Assessment April 2002.   There
      is further information at A62-69, albeit in a now  out-dated  reported
      from P S Gilkes.  In the light of the background evidence the Tribunal
      are not satisfied that there would now be no risk to the appellant  on
      return.   The Tribunal refer to the  extract  from  the  Human  Rights
      Watch  Ethiopia  Report  for  2001  set  out  in   the   Adjudicator's
      determination.   This refers to a deterioration of civil liberties  in
      Ethiopia during 2001 and the arrest of 400 AAPO members between  April
      and June 2001.   The Tribunal is not satisfied that it is  only  those
      with high profile positions in AAPO who would be at risk.  Looking  at
      the appellant's own circumstances, for the reasons we have given,  the
      Tribunal have come to the view that her fears of  persecution  because
      of her membership and support for AAPO are well-founded.

  18. If the claim were to be based solely on the appellant's mixed Eritrean
       - Ethiopian ethnicity, the Tribunal would not be satisfied that  that
      factor by itself would put the appellant at risk.  There is no current
      evidence before us of forcible deportations to Eritrea and in our view
      no real prospect of that happening to the appellant.

  19. However, for the reasons that the Tribunal have given, this appeal  is
      allowed.



                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President

