
jls
                                               Appeal No:  HX/12337/2000 | |
Heard at Field House                                   FK (Persecution-
Refugee-Political Writer) Iran CG [2002] UKIAT 01328
On 18 April 2002



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date Determination notified:

                                          02.05.2002


                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Collins (President)
                              Mrs S Hussain JP
                               Mr A A Lloyd JP

Between:





                           FARSHAD KIANI DEH KIANI


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He left Iran in  July  2000.   He
      left illegally in the sense that he did not tell the authorities there
      that he was leaving, nor did he obtain a visa to come  to  the  United
      Kingdom.   He  used  either  false  documents  or  no  documents   and
      certainly, when he arrived in this country, he arrived as  an  illegal
      entrant.  He claimed asylum.  That claim was refused by the  Secretary
      of State and his appeal to an Adjudicator, Mr J Hallam,  was  rejected
      on 12 November 2001.  He now appeals, by leave, to the Tribunal.

   2. The Appellant himself had worked as a writer in Iran.  He  points  out
      in his statement that there is  no  freedom  of  the  press  and  that
      anything written in public which is opposed to the  government  or  to
      the state ideology is likely to lead the author into trouble.  He says
      that, as a result, he was afraid to express  his  real  opinions.   In
      February 2000, he wrote an article for a newspaper which was  critical
      of the company for which he was  working  and  its  management.   That
      company was a state-owned petroleum company and, as a result, he  said
      that his article was critical of the state.  Not only did he write the
      article, but he was also involved in a hunger strike at  the  company.
      He produced leaflets which criticised the management of  the  company.
      Indeed, the editor of the newspaper had, it seems,  been  killed.   He
      said that as a result of this he was subject of  surveillance  at  his
      home address and he was observed by people  in  an  unmarked  car  and
      other people  were  making  enquiries  of  his  neighbours.   However,
      nothing positive had happened to him other than that the  company  had
      refused to pay him in full following his activities in April 2000.  He
      felt the pressure was increasing on him and that, at  any  moment,  he
      would be likely  to  be  reported  to  the  revolutionary  guards  and
      arrested for his anti-state activities and views.   As  a  result,  he
      decided in July to leave Iran.  As we say, he did so in a  clandestine
      fashion.

   3. The Adjudicator accepted his account of  what  had  happened  to  him.
      There was no question about his credibility, but the Appellant went on
      to say that he had not in fact suffered  any  ill-treatment  from  the
      authorities in Iran.  He had not established whether or not the hunger
      strike and his articles and leaflets had made any  difference  to  the
      way that his fellow employees were treated, although he had  said,  in
      evidence, that the management had indicated that they would respond to
      the hunger strike so that the employees  could  and  would  return  to
      work.  But, the Adjudicator went on to say  that  he  was  not  to  be
      treated as an editor of the paper and therefore he  would  not  be  at
      risk.  In paragraph 19, he says this:

           "Taking  all  matters  into  account  I  cannot  find  that  the
           Appellant can establish that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution.  I cannot find that the  Appellant  can  claim  the
           Convention ground of social group  because  he  could  well  not
           write any more articles along the lines of the articles that  he
           had been writing and in addition he could as  suggested  to  him
           apologise for the articles that he had already written".


  4. There are, as it seems to us,  two  aspects  to  the  question  as  to
     whether he has established a real risk of persecution were  he  to  be
     returned.  There is first the question whether he would be ill-treated
     so as  to  amount  to  persecution  if  he  continues  to  work  as  a
     journalist, or as a writer in any way, in Iran.  He would have to take
     special care to ensure that he said nothing which could  be  construed
     in any way as being against the state.  The reason for that is that he
     has been identified already and has been  the  subject  of  suspicion.
     Accordingly, he would be foolish to continue to write publicly at all,
     unless he wrote nothing which could, as we say, be  construed  in  any
     way as anti-state.  He would have, of course,  to  consider  that  the
     construction to be placed upon what he wrote would be that  placed  by
     someone who wanted to find an  anti-state  view  in  whatever  he  did
     write.

  5. Secondly, there is the problem as to  what  might  happen  to  him  on
     return.  The mere fact that someone has left Iran to claim  asylum  is
     not of itself regarded as a political act by the  authorities  and  is
     not punishable as such.   That  is  the  conclusion  to  be  found  in
     paragraph 7.24 of the October 2001 CIPU  Report.   He  will  face  the
     possibility of prosecution for having left  unlawfully,  but  that  in
     itself is not something that can  be  regarded  as  persecution.   The
     sentences can range from one month to three years imprisonment  and/or
     a fine. Those penalties are not in any  way  disproportionate  to  the
     offence which has been committed.  But, again, he is someone who would
     have been under suspicion.  He left the  country  unlawfully.   He  is
     then returned two years later.  It seems to us, as a matter of  common
     sense, that he would then be regarded with  heightened  suspicion  and
     there would then be a real risk that  he  would  be  detained  and  if
     detained, would be treated in such a way as amounted  to  persecution.
     There is ample evidence which suggests that those who are regarded  as
     being against the state and are  picked  up  by  the  authorities  are
     indeed liable to  ill-treatment.   But,  even  without  ill-treatment,
     detention itself is capable in certain circumstances of  amounting  to
     persecution if it is detention for a reason  which  falls  within  the
     Convention.  Here that reason would clearly be political opinion.

  6. What largely triggered the grant of leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal
     were the conclusions of the Adjudicator at paragraph 20 where he  says
     this:

           "So far as political opinion is concerned it is clear  that  the
           Appellant was not a member of any particular political party and
           he does not claim that he was reported in any way by  any  other
           political group and this being the case I find  that  he  cannot
           make out he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  the
           grounds of his political opinion."


      It is not necessary to be a member of a political party, or indeed  to
      be a supporter of any political group, to show that persecution is  on
      the basis of political opinion.  Any member of  the  public  may  have
      views about the government of a particular country without  being  any
      way actively involved in politics or political parties, and  if  those
      views are expressed, and if those views are contrary to the state, and
      if the state is a form of dictatorship which ill-treats and persecutes
      those whom it regards as being opposed to it, then there is a  classic
      case of persecution for the reason of political opinion.


  7. Mr Deller has, correctly, not sought to argue that  the  Adjudicator's
     views in paragraph 20 can be upheld.  The thrust of his  argument  has
     been that the Adjudicator was entitled to find, and indeed was correct
     to find on the evidence that there was no real  risk  of  persecution,
     but he accepts that if the Tribunal is persuaded that that  is  wrong,
     then it clearly was for a Convention reason.  Bearing in mind the  low
     standard of proof that is appropriate in these cases,  we  are  indeed
     persuaded that there is a real risk of persecution were this Appellant
     to be removed to Iran.  It is true that he has not been ill-treated in
     such a way as to amount to persecution in the past, but that cannot be
     determinative.  It is not necessary for someone who has a genuine fear
     of persecution to wait until it happens before deciding to  leave  the
     country.  This Appellant  has  anticipated  the  persecution  that  he
     feared by leaving before anything particularly  untoward  happened  to
     him, but that does not mean that he does  not  face  a  real  risk  of
     persecution were he to return.

  8. For the reasons we have given, as we say, we are persuaded that he has
     discharged that low standard of proof and accordingly  we  allow  this
     appeal and declare that this Appellant is to be treated as a refugee.














                                             Mr Justice Collins

                                             President


-----------------------
      1


