
jls
|Heard at Field House       |        |WC (Illegal Departure-      |
|                           |        |Failed Asylum Seeker) China |
|                           |        |CG [2002]UKIAT 03295        |
|On 1st July 2002           |        |CC/01822/2002               |
|                           |        |...............             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|29TH JULY 2002                                                    |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes                                      |
|                                                                  |
|Between:                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|WEN YING CHEN                                                     |
|APPELLANT                                                         |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel, instructed by Central
London Law Centre

For the Respondent:    Miss C Cooper, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is a citizen of China, born on  4th  August  1973.   She
     claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 10th August  1998  and
     she was certainly here by 17th August 1998 when  she  claimed  asylum.
     After interview, her asylum application was refused  for  the  reasons
     set out in a letter dated 29th January 2001.  On  7th  February  2001,
     directions were given for her removal to China as an  illegal  entrant
     after refusal of her  asylum  application.   She  appealed  on  asylum
     grounds only, but at the subsequent hearing before an Adjudicator  (Mr
     Warren L Grant) on 12th February  2002  that  claim  was  expanded  to
     include arguments of breach of her human rights under  Articles  2,  3
     and 8 of the European Convention.  The Adjudicator did not address the
     arguments in respect of Article 8.  Leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal
     was given in respect only of the failure  to  address  the  Article  8
     submissions.

  2. Mr Slatter attempted before us to widen the grounds of appeal, but  we
     see no basis on which that can properly be done.  We  do  not  sit  in
     judgement on our fellow Vice Presidents who have considered the  bases
     of appeal, and there is no reason to think that there was any flaw  in
     the approach of the Vice President who granted leave in deciding  that
     there was no arguable issue in relation  to  credibility  findings  or
     certain procedural matters which were raised in the grounds of appeal.
      We have therefore been concerned only to deal with  the  question  of
     whether the return of the Appellant to China would lead to a breach of
     her human rights under Article 8 of the Convention.

  3. This claim was not advanced before us by any reference to any  current
     family life enjoyed by  her  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr  Slatter's
     submission was that her treatment as a returned failed  asylum  seeker
     who may illegally have left China was such that it would amount to  an
     interference with her right to private life  under  Article  8(1)  and
     that,  although  he  conceded  the  removal  was  in  pursuance  of  a
     legitimate purpose under Article 8(2), it was  his  argument  that  it
     would be disproportionate to do so.

  4. Mr Slatter sought to make his submissions on the very broad basis,  as
     he finally accepted when pressed by us on the point, that it would  be
     in breach of the human rights of any  failed  asylum  seeker  who  had
     illegally left China to return them.  We are therefore concerned  with
     a proposition in the broadest possible terms on his part.   It  was  a
     substantial part of his argument that if the Appellant were in any way
     exposed to imprisonment in China, that  would  inevitably  lead  to  a
     breach of her right to private life.  He accepted that any such breach
     would have to be of such gravity as virtually to destroy  that  right,
     and in the light of the starred Tribunal decision in Devaseelan,  that
     is undoubtedly correct.

  5. He sought to refer us to  passages  in  the  Country  Information  and
     Policy Unit (CIPU) Assessment of April 2002 and  to  passages  in  the
     current US State Department  Report  dealing  with  the  questions  of
     prison conditions and torture in China in very broad-brush terms.   We
     do not dispute that there may be instances of torture during detention
     or that prison conditions  in  China  are  generally  harsh.   In  our
     judgement, however, Mr  Slatter  has  to  demonstrate  to  us  on  the
     background evidence that there is a reasonable  likelihood  that  this
     Appellant might suffer such treatment were she to  be  returned  to  a
     point which would very nearly equate to treatment  in  breach  of  her
     human rights under Article 3 of the European Convention.

  6. We accept Miss Cooper's submissions to us that the proper approach  to
     this is to look at the specific background evidence dealing  with  the
     situation of returnees who have departed illegally from China  to  see
     what is likely to happen to  them  on  return.   This  is  dealt  with
     initially at paragraphs 6.154 onwards in the CIPU assessment,  and  is
     the most  comprehensive  treatment  of  any  to  which  we  have  been
     referred.  Paragraphs 6.154 and 6.155 are as follows:

           "6.154      The government accepts the repatriation of  citizens
                 who have entered other countries or territories  illegally.
                 Returnees  generally  are  fined.   Those  who  have   been
                 repatriated a second time typically are sent to labour camp
                 in addition to being fined again.  Those who are identified
                 as people smugglers ('snakeheads') are liable  to  criminal
                 prosecution.


           6.155 The main conclusion of the  Political  Counsellor's  fact-
                 finding report with regards to returning is:


                       'There is evidence of  wilful  deception  of  foreign
                       governments as to sanctions against returned  illegal
                       immigrants.  Much touted policies of prison sentences
                       and extensive re-education  programs  are  apparently
                       most not implemented.  Rather we have become aware of
                       preferential economic  policies  and  business  loans
                       made available to returnees by local governments.  We
                       are assured that children under 16 returned to  China
                       would not  be  subject  to  incarceration  under  any
                       circumstances.'

  7. This is very much in line with what is said earlier  in  dealing  with
     people smugglers at paragraphs 6.109 onwards in the  CIPU  assessment.
     We note that at paragraph 6.115 it is recorded that the act of exiting
     mainland China without permission is an offence and  if  this  is  the
     only unlawful act committed by the immigrant then  they  are  punished
     under Article 14 of the Law of the People's Republic of China  on  the
     Exit and Entry of Citizens (1986).  The prescribed penalties for  this
     offence are that they "may be given a warning, or placed in  detention
     for not more than 10 days by  a  public  security  organ".   Paragraph
     6.116 points out that there are certain overlapping  provisions  under
     which it is possible for fines to be levied  and  that  the  rate  may
     depend upon where they have come from.  At paragraph 6.117 it is  said
     "one expert noted that  the  Chinese  government  does  not  generally
     mistreat returnees unless the person has been deported to  China  more
     than once.  If a returnee is held to  be  involved  in  the  smuggling
     operation, then they are  subject  to  the  criminal  procedure  law."
     There is also further, at paragraph 6.120, reference  to  the  Chinese
     governments, both at  provincial  and  at  state  level,  having  been
     publicly committed to combating 'snakehead' operations and it is clear
     from this material that the Appellant, if now returned, stands only in
     the situation at worst of being someone who  left  illegally  and  not
     being concerned in some smuggling operation as such.

  8. At paragraph 6.161 onwards, there is a review of the varying views  of
     several experts in Chinese matters.  It shows that there is a range of
     opinion amongst those experts, one of whom says that the  offence  may
     lead to administrative sentence of  three  months,  but  most  of  the
     experts agree that for a first offence only a fine  is  likely  to  be
     imposed with one expert saying that such fines are rarely  imposed  in
     practice anyway and another saying that usually two days detention  is
     imposed instead and then referring to a very low  fine  for  a  second
     offence.  At paragraph 6.164 it is reported that all the  experts  are
     agreed that there are no long-term repercussions for returnees or  any
     evidence that they are treated differently depending on where they are
     returned to.

  9. Given all that background information as to what might happen if it is
     accepted that this Appellant left illegally, and for the  purposes  of
     this determination we are prepared to make that  assumption,  it  does
     not seem to us that the treatment referred to is such as would lead to
     any breach of the Appellant's human rights at all.  We have to look at
     this on the basis of what  is  reasonably  likely  to  happen  to  the
     Appellant on her return and not what may possibly apply either to  her
     or to the whole range of those who are charged with  serious  offences
     under the Chinese Criminal Calendar.

 10. It is in that respect that it is our view that Mr Slatter has not  put
     forward the matter on  the  correct  basis,  but  that  we  prefer  Ms
     Cooper's approach of specific consideration of the case with which  we
     are dealing.

 11. For the reasons, as we say, we do not accept that there would  be  any
     breach of the Appellant's human rights at all by returning her at this
     stage so that Article 8(1) would not be breached.  If we are wrong  in
     that respect, however,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  nature  of  the
     treatment  referred  to  is   such   that   removal   would   not   be
     disproportionate  having  regard  to  the  public  interest   in   the
     maintenance of an effective immigration  policy  and  the  removal  of
     those aliens who have no right otherwise to be in the United  Kingdom.



 12. For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.






                                  J Barnes

                               Vice President
