
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO  HX/48290/2001    |
|On 23 August 2002          |        |FA (Risk-ELF-RC-Activity)   |
|                           |        |Eritrea CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |05039                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|31st October 2002                                                 |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (Chairman)                                        |
|MR A A LLOYD                                                      |
|MR C A N EDINBORO                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Freweini Ashmelash                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:


For the appellant:           Mr D Mukherjee of Counsel

                       instructed by Scudamores, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr I Graham, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by Freweini Ashmelash, a citizen of Eritrea, against
      the determination of an Adjudicator (Ms A Dhanji)  who  dismissed  her
      appeal against the respondent's decision made on 26 May 2001  refusing
      to vary her leave to remain following the refusal  of  her  claim  for
      asylum.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  28  January  1996  as  a
      domestic servant with a family who travelled from  Sudan.   After  two
      days she took the opportunity of running away.  She made a call to  an
      Eritrean community centre and was provided with help and support.   On
      31 January 1996 she went to the Home Office  in  Croydon  and  claimed
      asylum.

   3. The background to her claim can be briefly described as follows.   The
      appellant was born in Eritrea in December  1964.   In  the  1970s  she
      lived with her parents in Asmara but because  of  the  civil  war  her
      father sent the appellant and her mother back to  Adi  Teklay  in  the
      Hamassien Province.  This area was an ELF stronghold and the appellant
      became involved in a children's project called  the  Pioneer  Project.
      She was sent to a training camp  where  she  learned  combat  tactics,
      politics and literature. She also graduated from  a  medical  training
      centre and worked in Hamib hospital until 1980 looking  after  injured
      fighters.  In 1980 the fighting between the two  liberation  movements
      the ELF and the EPLF intensified and in 1981 the military wing of  the
      ELF was driven out of Eritrea.  The appellant along  with  many  other
      members of the ELF left for Sudan. She  lived  in  Korokom  for  seven
      months with a group of ELF fighters until June 1981.  She  then  moved
      to Kassala where the ELF had a hospital and an office.  The  ELF  were
      unable to accommodate her and she obtained employment  as  a  domestic
      worker.

   4. The appellant continued with her activities with the ELF as  a  member
      of the women's association.  In 1985 she moved to Khartoum.   In  1991
      the EPLF liberated Eritrea and following liberation the EPLF with  the
      help of the Sudanese  government  attacked  ELF  groups  in  the  Gash
      district.   Many  ELF  members  were  deported.   In  1992  she   took
      employment with a particular family as a domestic worker.   They  were
      devout Moslems and from the beginning she was under pressure to change
      her faith.   The  appellant  says  that  she  remained  loyal  to  her
      Christian faith and to her political ideologies which kept  her  alive
      during these years.  In January 1996 a  few  days  before  the  family
      travelled to London, her employer told her that she had to travel with
      them.  She contacted a fellow ELF member in Khartoum who told  her  to
      get in touch with the Eritrean community if she went  to  London.  She
      was given a telephone number.

   5. Both the Secretary of State and the Adjudicator took the view that the
      appellant would not be at risk of persecution on  return  to  Eritrea.
      The Adjudicator accepted the core of her evidence that she had  had  a
      long involvement with the ELF albeit  at  a  fairly  low  level.   She
      accepted that the appellant left  Eritrea  at  the  time  and  in  the
      circumstances  that  she  had  described.    She  accepted  that   the
      appellant had been attending  ELF  meetings  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      However, for the reasons  which  she  gives  in  paragraph  7  of  her
      determination she was not satisfied that the appellant  would  face  a
      risk of persecution on return.  It was her view that the appellant was
      not politically sophisticated.  She had left Eritrea in 1981 when  she
      was about 17 years old.  She had never been arrested  or  detained  by
      the Eritrean authorities.  She was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
      would  attract  any  particular  adverse  attention  were  she  to  be
      returned.  She dismissed the claim on both refugee  and  human  rights
      grounds.  She was not satisfied  that  there  would  be  a  breach  of
      Article 3 nor Article 10.

   6. At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr Mukherjee submitted that on  the
      basis of the Adjudicator's findings the appellant would  be  returning
      to Eritrea as a known ELF member.  The CIPU  report  April  2002  said
      that the government continued to detain numerous members of  the  ELF.
      He referred to Suleman (00/TH00038), a  Tribunal  determination  which
      held that there was evidence  that  some  ELF-RC  former  members  and
      sympathisers had returned to Eritrea but had subsequently disappeared.
       He referred to the report from Dr Amrit  Wilson,  a  report  prepared
      after the hearing before the Adjudicator, in support of his contention
      that there was evidence of ELF-RC members  returning  to  Eritrea  and
      then being picked up and jailed without charge.  He further  submitted
      that there would be a breach of Articles 3, 8 and 10.   The  appellant
      was an unmarried mother with a young daughter.  The father was  having
      contact with the child.  He referred to the father's witness statement
      dated 26 July 2002 saying that he had access twice  a  month  and  was
      providing emotional and financial support.

   7. Mr Graham submitted that as the appellant had not taken  part  in  any
      acts of terrorism or violence, she would  not  be  at  risk  from  the
      authorities in Eritrea.  Members of the ELF-RC were not prevented from
      returning.  The appellant had been away from Eritrea for twenty  years
      and it was fanciful to  think  that  she  would  now  be  at  risk  of
      persecution on return. The sources used in the report by Dr Wilson had
      not been identified.  In reality there was no family life between  the
      appellant's daughter and her father.  Although a psychological  report
      had been produced the position was not sufficiently serious  to  bring
      the appellant within either Article 3 or Article 8.

   8. It is clear that numerous members of the ELF have returned to Eritrea.
       According to the CIPU report there are unconfirmed reports that  some
      members have been detained but others have been appointed as governors
      as part of the government's attempt to integrate different sections of
      Eritrean society in to the administration.  It also reported that some
      ELF members have  taken  up  posts  in  government  departments.   The
      government's reaction to returning members depends upon  the  position
      held  in  the  organisation  and  the  type  of  activity  undertaken.
      According to the report from Dr Wilson, the ELF-RC members  have  been
      persecuted widely by the Eritrean government simply for being members.
       It is said that this has also happened in Sudan where there have been
      a number of disappearances and also in Britain.  The government  takes
      a defensive attitude and hounds its critics even in London.  A  number
      of ELF-RC members have been picked up by the regime and jailed without
      being charged with no chance of a trial.   This  is  particularly  the
      case for low profile party  workers  who  do  not  have  influence  or
      contacts to campaign for their release.  The fact that  the  appellant
      had been a nurse rather than directly involved in the  armed  struggle
      would make no difference.  What would count against her would  be  her
      long term political  affiliation  and  the  fact  that  she  would  be
      categorised as a critic of the government and as a traitor.

   9. Dr Wilson's report goes on to consider the appellant's situation as  a
      single mother were she to be returned.  It is Dr  Wilson's  view  that
      she will be seen as an easy target for rape and  sexual  assault.   If
      she tried to move to another part  of  Eritrea  her  reputation  would
      follow her through the close-knit traditional networks.  The fact that
      she had lived in Sudan would go against her too as there is  a  common
      belief that divorced women in Sudan end up as prostitutes.  She  would
      be  socially  and  economically  ostracised,  making  survival  almost
      impossible.

  10. The Tribunal also have a report from  a  psychologist,  Edini  Fejzic.
      According to this report the appellant suffered post-natal  depression
      after the birth of her daughter.  She has become  very  depressed  and
      feels rejected and  devalued  as  a  human  being.   She  still  feels
      terribly guilty that her baby was not born in marriage.

  11. The Tribunal also have a statement from a Mrs  Lule  Tekeste  who  has
      been granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.   She  describes
      herself as an active member of the ELF-RC who worked in Eritrea as  an
      assistant  nurse.   It  is  her  belief  that  the  present   Eritrean
      government will tolerate no opposition.  She  is  a  member  with  the
      appellant of the London branch of the ELF-RC.  She claims to be  aware
      of the Eritrean government being able to obtain  detailed  information
      about ELF members as  they  have  many  supporters  in  the  UK.   She
      believes that the appellant would be in grave danger were  she  to  be
      returned to Eritrea.

  12. In the light of this evidence the Tribunal have come to the view  that
      there is a  serious  possibility  the  appellant  might  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities on return and be at risk  of  persecution
      because of her continuous support for the ELF-RC.  The fact  that  the
      appellant would be returning as a single mother  with  a  young  child
      might in itself make her a person of additional interest and hostility
      from what Dr Wilson describes as the local power  structures  and  the
      close traditional networks.  The fact of the appellant's long standing
      support for ELF and her  continued  participation  in  its  activities
      assessed in the light of the background evidence to which we have been
      referred, lead the Tribunal to the view that the risks  the  appellant
      might  face  can  properly  be  categorised  as   real   rather   than
      speculative.

  13. In the light of these findings the Tribunal is  satisfied  that  there
      would be a risk of persecution under the  Refugee  Convention  and  of
      treatment contrary to Article 3.  For the sake of completeness in  our
      view a return to Eritrea, taking into account the length of  time  the
      appellant has been away from  Eritrea and her current circumstances in
      the United Kingdom, would be a breach of her rights  to  private  life
      under Article 8.  The removal of her daughter would be a breach of her
      right to family life as it would mean  a  loss  of  contact  with  her
      father who, although of Eritrean  ethnic  origin,  is  now  a  British
      citizen who would not be able to maintain contact with his daughter if
      returned to Eritrea.  In the  light  of  all  the  circumstances,  the
      Tribunal would not be satisfied that removal would be proportionate to
      a legitimate aim within Article 8(2).

  14. In these circumstances, this appeal is allowed.






                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President




