
AJB
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX11275-2001      |
|On 12 April 2002           |        |SA (Kashmiri Muslim -       |
|                           |        |Activism) India CG [2002]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 02884                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|Dictated on 18 April 2002                                         |
|22 July 2002                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr R Chalkley                                                     |
|Mrs S Hussain JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SYED MOHAMMED INAYATULLAH ANDRABI                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances:
For the appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel instructed by Noden & Co.,
solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr J G Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal by Syed Mohammed Inayatullah Andrabi, a  citizen  of
      India, against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs E  S  Martins)
      who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision made on  25
      January 2001 refusing  to  grant  him  leave  to  remain  following  a
      decision that he was not entitled to asylum.


   2. The appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain until 25 January
      2004 but sought to upgrade his  leave  to  full  refugee  status.  The
      Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   had
      established a well founded fear of persecution. There  was  an  appeal
      under the provisions of Section 69(3) of the 1999 Act. The Adjudicator
      in her determination held that the appeal could  not  succeed  as  the
      appellant  had  the  protection  which  he  sought  in  the  form   of
      exceptional leave to remain until 2004 and it would be impossible  for
      her to decide whether the requirement for him to leave at  that  stage
      would be contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
      Convention because the situation in Kashmir may change and it would be
      impossible to forecast what might happen in the future. These comments
      were in line with the  Tribunal's  determination  Meles  00/TH/02433).
      However, the Court of Appeal has considered this issue in Saad, Diriye
      and Osorio (19 December 2001) and come to the view,  when  considering
      the wording of section 8(2) of the 1993 Act, that a claim  for  asylum
      following the grant of a period of exceptional leave to remain  should
      be allowed if the appellant can show that he is  entitled  to  refugee
      status at the time of the appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  should  be
      assumed that such a state of affairs will subsist at the time when the
      exceptional leave comes to an end.


   3. The Adjudicator did not consider the merits of the appellant's  claim.
      When the matter was first listed before the Tribunal  directions  were
      given so that the Tribunal could  consider  the  legal  issues  as  to
      whether the judgement in Saad,  Diriye  and  Osorio  also  applied  to
      section 69(3) of the 1999 Act and also the merits of  the  appellant's
      claim for asylum.

   4. At the hearing before the Tribunal the appellant produced a bundle  of
      documents ("A") indexed and paginated 1 - 379 and a skeleton argument.
      Mr Jones produced a copy of the CIPU Report October 2000 for India.

   5. The Tribunal heard oral evidence from the appellant. He confirmed that
      the contents of his witness statement at A28  -  45  and  the  further
      statement at A47 - 50 were true. The appellant's case can  briefly  be
      summarised as follows. He is a Kashmiri Muslim who grew up in Srinagar
      in Jammu and Kashmir. From 1995 to 1997 he studied at  Aligarh  Muslim
      University for a Master's Degree  in  Linguistics  and  then  returned
      briefly to Kashmir before moving on to Poona to undertake a PhD in the
      Centre for the Advanced Study in Linguistics. It was during this  time
      from 1978 to 1983 that he became interested in politics,  joining  the
      Students Islamic Movement of India. In about 1981 he came into contact
      with Sheikh Tajammul Islam, who was the  founder  and  leader  of  the
      Party known as Islami Jamatalbah  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  The  appellant
      became  involved  in  highlighting  the  fact  of  India's   continued
      occupation of Kashmir as his party saw it.

   6. In late 1983 Sheikh Tajammul was forced to flee  the  country  due  to
      harassment from the authorities. The appellant was entrusted with  his
      responsibilities and was elected President of  Islami  Jamatalbah.  He
      adopted a more low key approach to the leadership because he  did  not
      want to put his employment at risk. Between 1983 and  1986  he  feared
      that he would be arrested by the authorities. As he had taken over the
      leadership secretly it was not entirely clear to the  authorities  who
      had taken the place of the Sheikh. However, the intelligence  services
      began asking about his activities and in autumn 1986  there  were  two
      visits to his home. In September 1986 the Kashmir police came  to  the
      family home asking for him.


   7. The appellant says that he married in October 1986. His uncle who  was
      influential negotiated with the police to allow the marriage  to  take
      place without interference. Four days later the Kashmir police  raided
      his home again although the appellant was not there. It is his  belief
      that he would certainly have been  arrested  if  he  had  been  there.
      During this raid his brother was arrested and  although  there  was  a
      threat that his brother  would  only  be  released  if  the  appellant
      surrendered, in fact the police released his brother after a week.

   8. In 1996 the Muslim United Front (MUF) emerged  in  Kashmir  comprising
      all anti-Indian elements. The Islami Jamatalbah did not join but  even
      though not part of this organisation, the appellant  did  attend  some
      gatherings and gave speeches. In July 1987  he  was  arrested  without
      warrant and then detained for 15 days. This was a preventative measure
      in anticipation of Martyrs' Day in Kashmir. According to the appellant
      his  profile  gradually  increased.  In  early  1988  he  attended   a
      conference in London and upon his return in March 1988  gave  a  press
      conference in Srinagar. His home was raided in April 1989. His brother
      was arrested again and held for about two months. This coincided  with
      the beginning of the armed struggle. The  Indian  authorities  wrongly
      thought that he was one of the people involved.

   9. The appellant continued to work at the University of Kashmir but began
      to experience increasing problems. There was a time  when  he  was  in
      hiding and he received intelligence  from  individuals  of  the  local
      security  service  helping  him  to  remain  one  step  ahead  of  the
      intelligence services. In 1990 he  left  Kashmir  travelling  under  a
      false identity. In 1991 he with four others decided to found  Mahaz  E
      Islami which was intended to be a party with broad appeal. In 1993 the
      appellant travelled to the United Kingdom and Canada under an  assumed
      name and later returned to India on foot from Kathmandu. In  1993  his
      sister, an activist, was imprisoned with her husband and 9  month  old
      baby for more than a year. They had been accused of being  incited  by
      the appellant to carry out anti-Indian activities.  Different  members
      of his family fled from India to Pakistan. His parents fled in  around
      1994 and his brother had previously left in 1991.

  10. In 1993 the appellant received a letter from the Indian Foreign Office
      in New Delhi saying that his passport had been impounded. Between 1989
      to 1994 his home was raided on several occasions.  In  September  1984
      one of his close colleagues Mohamed Shafi Shaheen had been killed, the
      appellant believes by Indian security forces. The appellant  was  told
      that he was on a hit list and was at risk. He decided that he  had  no
      choice but to leave India. He travelled to Calcutta, obtained  a  visa
      for Bangladesh and then made his way to the United Kingdom  travelling
      on a passport in an assumed name.


  11. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in November 1994. He  went
      to Pakistan in 1995 to see members of his family. He  was  interviewed
      on a television programme about Kashmir. News  of  his  appearance  on
      this programme appeared in a leading English daily paper  from  India.
      When he was in Pakistan he  began  to  receive  threatening  telephone
      calls and  in  November  1995  he  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.
      Subsequently his wife and children have joined him. In 1996 his cousin
      Jalil Andrabi was murdered by the Indian security forces. He had  been
      a lawyer by profession and  a  human  rights  activist.  He  had  been
      working discreetly and was not a high profile activist.

  12. The appellant in his oral evidence confirmed that he had been  outside
      Kashmir since 1994. The authorities would be interested in him  as  he
      was regarded as a supporter of the secessionist movement. He had  been
      surprised when a cousin's sister had wanted  to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom and had been asked what she knew about  the  appellant.  There
      had been uproar when his sister had been detained with a baby. He  did
      not know where she was now, but she was not in Kashmir. It  would  not
      be possible for the appellant to live in any other part of India.

  13. In cross-examination  the  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  become
      involved in politics between 1978 and 1983. He had joined the party in
      1979/80. He said that whoever was opposed to Indian  rule  in  Kashmir
      was at risk of being arrested in time. He had never had a peaceful day
      at home in Kashmir.  In  1988  he  had  left  Kashmir  using  his  own
      passport. He was away for three days. In 1990 he  had  travelled  from
      India to Pakistan, not using his  own  passport,  but  using  a  false
      identity.  His  travel  in  1993  had   been   arranged   through   an
      intermediary.

  14. Mr Jones submitted that  the  appellant's  account  was  not  entirely
      credible. He had  travelled  to  and  from  Kashmir  without  apparent
      difficulty. Until recently at least his sister had remained there. She
      had retained her political views. Although the appellant referred to a
      fear of arrest, it was not possible that he had lived in hiding or  in
      fear as he has sought to describe. The CIPU Report did refer to action
      being taken against militants, but not against people  solely  because
      their views  were  against  Indian  rule  in  Kashmir.  There  was  no
      reference in the CIPU report to the appellant's political party.

  15. Mr Fripp submitted that the appellant's credibility had not  seriously
      been challenged prior to the hearing. In any event there was no  valid
      reason for doubting the account which  he  gave.  If  the  appellant's
      account was true, he was entitled to asylum. His  own  activities  and
      political opinions would put him at  a  risk.  Other  members  of  his
      family had been driven into exile. His brother had  been  detained  on
      two occasions and a cousin had been killed.

  16. The first point for the Tribunal to consider is whether the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgement in Saad, Diriye and Osorio applies to section 69(3)
      of the 1999 Act. Mr Fripps submits that it does and Mr Jones  has  not
      sought to argue that it does not. Section 69(3) provides that where  a
      person has been granted limited leave to enter or  remain  which  will
      not expire within 28 days of being notified of  the  decision  he  may
      appeal to an Adjudicator  against  the  refusal  on  the  ground  that
      requiring him to leave the United Kingdom after the  time  limited  by
      that leave would be contrary to the Convention. Section 69(3) is a new
      provision providing an "upgrade" appeal which was not present  in  the
      1993 Act.

  17. The Court of Appeal were concerned with Section  8(2)  which  provided
      that where a person had limited leave to enter he could appeal against
      a refusal to vary that leave on the grounds that it would be  contrary
      to the United Kingdom's obligations for him to be  required  to  leave
      after the time limited by the leave. The words in  issue  were  "after
      the time limited by the leave". Previous Tribunal authorities had held
      that the effect of these words was to place  upon  the  appellant  the
      burden of proving that when exceptional leave  to  remain  expired  he
      would enjoy refugee status and that his refugee status at the time  of
      appeal was not in issue. The Court of Appeal asked themselves  whether
      Parliament could have intended section  8(2)  to  operate  in  such  a
      bizarre manner. When noting the provisions of section 69 of  the  1999
      Act the Court  of  Appeal  commented  that  they  had  not  had  their
      attention drawn to any policy  considerations  which  might  have  led
      Parliament in 1999 to be more generous in relation to rights of appeal
      for asylum seekers than Parliament had been in  1993.  They  concluded
      that Parliament's intention in Section 8 was to permit a claim  to  be
      considered as at the date  of  the  hearing  on  the  basis  that  the
      Adjudicator or Tribunal could properly assume that a state of  affairs
      prevailing at the date of hearing would continue until the  expiry  of
      any period of limited leave.


  18. The Tribunal are satisfied that the same position applies to  a  claim
      under section 69(3). Parliament could hardly have intended to grant an
      upgrade appeal to those with leave to remain subject to a  curtailment
      so drastic as to negate the right of appeal in most cases to which  it
      would apply. The Tribunal therefore approach this appeal on the  basis
      that if the appellant has a well founded fear of  persecution  at  the
      date of the hearing, his appeal should be allowed on the  premise,  at
      least in the absence  of  any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  the
      situation will remain until his leave expires in 2004.


  19. The Tribunal now turn to the substance of the  appellant's  claim.  We
      have heard the appellant give evidence. There may be  some  cause  for
      concern about peripheral aspects of  his  evidence  but  the  Tribunal
      accept that the substance of his account is true. We accept  that  the
      appellant's political activities have been as he described. We believe
      that he left Kashmir for the reasons, which he  has  given.  He  is  a
      person known to the Indian authorities who has been part  of  a  long-
      standing campaign for Kashmiri secession from India.

  20. The  background  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  has  been  helpfully
      summarised by Mr Fripp  in  paragraph  9  of  his  skeleton  argument.
      Kashmir was a former principality largely populated by Muslims and  it
      was expected on partition in 1947 to join Pakistan rather than  India.
      However, since 1947 the territory has been in  dispute  between  India
      and Pakistan for historical reasons which are  not  relevant  to  this
      determination. It has been the cause  of  two  regional  wars  between
      India and Pakistan. There has been active and continuing insurgency in
      Kashmir. There have  been  many  reported  breaches  of  human  rights
      observances by the  authorities  in  Kashmir.  The  objective  country
      evidence is set out in A259 - 329.

  21. The documents appearing at A50 - 179  are  of  particular  importance.
      They include references to the death of the appellant's  cousin  Jalil
      Andrabi. He is referred to in  the  Amnesty  International  report  at
      pages 139 and 170-171. His body was found on 27 March  1996,  nineteen
      days after he was seen being taken away by military  personnel.  In  a
      report at A50 prepared by Amnesty International dated 26  March  2001,
      there is a reference to efforts by the state to  stall  legal  redress
      which has produced the impression that perpetrators can get away  with
      abuses and that the state shields its agents  from  being  brought  to
      justice. Those allegedly responsible for the death of the  appellant's
      cousin had not by the date of that report been brought to trial.


  22. The Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant is a prominent politician
      and activist whose views are known to the authorities. His family have
      all fled Kashmir. His sister's whereabouts are not known.  Looking  at
      all these circumstances in the light of the background  evidence,  the
      Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant does have a well founded fear
      of persecution in his home area. It is not seriously suggested that he
      could avail himself of the  option  of  internal  flight  and  we  are
      satisfied that he is not able to do  so.  In  the  light  of  all  the
      evidence we are satisfied that the appellant does qualify for asylum.

  23. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.





                                                                H J E Latter

                                                              Vice President
