



                        APPEAL NO:  HX62913-2000



                       TJ (Risk-Returns) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 01869



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                   Date of  Hearing:  21
May 2002
                                                   Date Determination
notified:

                                                               10 June 2002


                                   Before:


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                               Mr R Baines JP
                                Mr C P Mather




                             THAVEM JEYACHANDRAN

                                                    APPELLANT
                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                  RESPONDENT



Represented by:  Mr D Lawson of Counsel instructed by Tony Purton
Solicitors, for the Appellant

                                 Mr D Buckley, HOPO, for the Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant in this case is a Tamil from Sri Lanka who was  born  in
      May 1969.  In 1985 his father was  killed  by  soldiers  following  an
      explosion which had  killed  some  other  soldiers  and  in  1988  the
      appellant himself was detained and was he said  tortured  by  soldiers
      from the Indian army.  That resulted in some  scarring  to  his  legs.
      Between 1986 and 1992 the appellant was a full time student  and  then
      between 1992 and 1999  he  ran  alone  a  tutorial  college  first  at
      Chavakacheri and then at Kilinochi.  The former school was next to  an
      LTTE hospital and the appellant said  that  he  was  forced  to  print
      leaflets for the LTTE.  When the army took Jaffna  he  fled  and  then
      started up the second college.  Again he had problems  with  the  LTTE
      because in July 1999 he was compelled to dig bunkers.   There  was  an
      attack by the army, either bombing or shelling and  according  to  the
      appellant he took the opportunity to escape, indeed he ran  away  from
      the shelling and escaped from the LTTE.  But he was he said wanted  by
      the army and his name was put on a wanted list because  the  army  had
      discovered the materials which he had printed for the LTTE when he had
      been operating at Chavakacheri and thereafter he was on a wanted list.
       He knew that because his mother was living in an area  controlled  by
      the army and she was not allowed to  leave  that  area  until  he  was
      produced to the army.  He was still on the wanted list, albeit he  had
      never supported nor had he fought for the LTTE willingly.  Anything he
      had done for them was as a result of pressure and threats.


   2. His asylum claim was refused by the Secretary of  State  who  was  not
      entirely happy with the account that he had given.  He appealed to  an
      adjudicator and his appeal was heard on 20 February 2001 by  the  then
      Chief Adjudicator, His Honour Judge Dunn QC.  Judge Dunn accepted  the
      account which he had given and that he was  an  honest  witness.   The
      only reservation he had was about his running away and  escaping  from
      the LTTE when the shelling or bombing occurred.  But,  as  Judge  Dunn
      indicated, that had no effect on his overall credibility  and  on  the
      basic account which had been established to  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood.  He dealt with a fear of persecution by the LTTE resulting
      from his unwilling assistance and his escape and that he rejected.  He
      said that it did not constitute a case of persecution in the  past  by
      the LTTE and was not a basis for a well founded fear of persecution by
      the LTTE were he to return.  Mr Lawson has attacked that  finding  and
      has submitted that his home area was where the LTTE was operating  and
      he could not go there.  It now transpires that it may well be that  at
      least where he lived for part of the time has now been taken  over  by
      the army and were he to return there he would not be  in  danger  from
      the LTTE.  The reality is in our view that the claim of persecution by
      the LTTE is now irrelevant.  This case depends upon whether  there  is
      reasonable likelihood of persecution by the authorities in the form of
      the army or any other security forces were he to return  initially  to
      Colombo where he would be, it is said, interrogated at the airport, or
      if he were to return to his home area which is now under army  control
      where the same fate would await him.

   3. The significant finding by the Chief Adjudicator is that he  is  on  a
      wanted list and that is confirmed by the prohibition upon  his  mother
      leaving the area until he, the appellant was  produced  to  the  army.
      That is a finding which the Chief Adjudicator was entitled  to  reach.
      He heard the appellant and he assessed the evidence that he  gave  and
      decided that he believed the account that he was giving.   Whether  we
      would have reached the same conclusions is nothing to the  point.   We
      only interfere in findings of fact if we are persuaded that  they  are
      clearly wrong or if there is no evidence which can properly found such
      a finding of fact.  That is not the  situation  in  this  case.   That
      being so we have to regard this appellant as someone who  if  returned
      to Sri Lanka, will be likely to be recognised  when  his  identity  is
      examined on return as  someone  who  is  wanted  by  the  authorities.
      Until recently that would undoubtedly have created a real risk of some
      lengthy interrogation having regard to  the  usual  practices  of  the
      security authorities in Sri Lanka and there would  have  been  a  real
      risk that he would be tortured in the course of that investigation.


   4. The question for us is whether the recent changes in  Sri  Lanka  have
      altered that situation.  We should say that  the  reason  why  it  has
      taken some time for this case to reach the  Tribunal  is  because  the
      Chief Adjudicator dismissed the appeal on the basis that he  had  been
      an unwilling helper of the LTTE and that the authorities would if they
      examined him reach the conclusion that because he was unwilling he was
      not in any way involved and thus  there  was  no  risk  of  his  being
      persecuted.  Not  surprisingly  the  Administrative  Court,  leave  to
      appeal having been refused by the Tribunal, took the  view  that  that
      was an erroneous approach and indeed it  clearly  is  erroneous.   The
      reality is that it is whether assistance has been given or not that is
      important, not whether it has been given willingly.   So  far  as  the
      investigating authorities are concerned, there is ample material which
      supported the view that at the time the Chief Adjudicator reached  his
      conclusion the process of investigation of someone who  was  suspected
      of involvement with the LTTE was  likely  to  involve  torture.   That
      would be so if there were substantial grounds for believing that  such
      an involvement had taken place, and  there  were  in  this  case  such
      grounds, whether or not the involvement was willing.

   5. The situation has changed in recent months.  There was a ceasefire  in
      February of this year and the most recent CIPU report for  April  2002
      records  some  of  the  relaxations  that  have  occurred  since  that
      ceasefire.  Paragraph 3.67 notes that in April 2002 the LTTE opened  a
      political office in a Government held area in the north of the country
      and that that had been  inaugurated  under  the  ceasefire  agreement.
      There had been permission for LTTE cadres wearing cyanide capsules  to
      move back to an LTTE  controlled  area  and  those  who  were  clearly
      recognised as being LTTE  activists  were  permitted  to  move  around
      unmolested.  On 13 April the LTTE signed a pact with  the  Sri  Lankan
      Muslim Congress and agreed that nearly 100,000 Muslims  expelled  from
      the north by the Tamil Tigers would be allowed to  return.   All  this
      indicates a change of the situation and gives hope that the  situation
      will stabilise to such  an  extent  that  the  persecution  which  has
      existed in the past and the havoc created by the civil war will cease.
       The likelihood of any difficulties on return has also been considered
      by a fact finding mission to Sri Lanka which visited that  country  at
      the end of March this year and those involved discussed the  situation
      with among others the Director and the Senior  Superintendent  in  the
      Criminal Investigations Department.  The  report  records  that  if  a
      returnee were not wanted he would not be stopped at the  airport.   We
      underline 'if a returnee were not wanted' because there is of course a
      finding in this case that the appellant was  wanted.   He  went  on  a
      computer which holds the name, address and age of a wanted  man.   The
      police purely go on records, scars would not make a difference and the
      authorities would not make a decision on this basis.


   6. Accordingly it seems to us that  it  is  clear  that  there  is  every
      likelihood that on return this appellant would because  he  was  on  a
      wanted list, be investigated.  He would be stopped at the airport  and
      would be questioned.  That should not of itself mean necessarily  that
      he would be tortured but although the Government  has  regularly  said
      that it is taking  steps  to  prevent  torture  by  the  investigating
      authorities, that has not been achieved.   Mr  Buckley  has  submitted
      that the only basis upon which  the  appellant  could  be  wanted  was
      because of a political involvement in  that the LTTE materials that he
      had been involved in printing had been found at his Tutory.  We do not
      know on what basis the authorities wanted him and what suspicions they
      may have had.  We note the finding about his mother.   That  does  not
      suggest to us that he was necessarily to be regarded  as  someone  who
      was only a low level supporter who would not  be  considered  to  have
      been involved with assisting the LTTE militarily.  We do not feel that
      we would be justified in making the assumption  that  it  was  in  the
      circumstances merely as a political sympathiser.


   7. We note that the UNHCR has indicated that although in general  it  may
      be that asylum seekers can properly be returned and that scarring  was
      perhaps not a significant factor, nonetheless it could not be accepted
      that there was even now no risk to  anyone.  The  situation  is  still
      somewhat fluid, although there are reasons to be optimistic.  The fact
      is that this ceasefire has only been in place for a  relatively  short
      period and the authorities are still  interested  so  far  as  we  are
      aware, and it would be surprising if they were not, in those  who  may
      have been involved in active assistance of the terrorists in the past.
       There are signs from reports that there is still a degree of mistrust
      and suggestions that the Tigers are taking some opportunity to regroup
      and possibly even to re-arm.  Whether that in fact will  result  in  a
      breakdown of the ceasefire in due course we do not know.  We hope that
      it will not but we cannot at this stage be sure about it.

   8. The reality is in our judgment that it is as yet premature  to  accept
      that everyone who has claimed asylum in this country would be able  to
      return safely.  We certainly are of  the  view  that  in  the  present
      situation and having regard  to the present  trends  it  is  only  the
      exceptional cases that will not be able  to  return  in  safety.   The
      question is whether this appellant is such an  exceptional  case.   In
      our judgment he is for the reasons that we have indicated, namely that
      he is someone who is wanted and is someone in our  view  who  must  be
      wanted in a relatively serious fashion, if we may  put  it  that  way,
      because of the attitude in relation to his mother.  We  do  not  think
      that the scars add anything to the danger.  They were inflicted a very
      long time ago and, as the Chief Adjudicator found, they were in no way
      prominent nor were they caused in any form of combat.  He did conclude
      that there was a possibility that he might be investigated because  of
      the scars.  We regard that as a  remote  possibility  and  we  do  not
      believe that there is indeed a real risk  that  the  scars  themselves
      would have resulted in any danger.  However we have to have regard  to
      the scars in conjunction with the fact that he was on a  wanted  list.
      They are in that context of perhaps some marginal relevance.


   9. We make it clear that the Tribunal is  in  a  difficult  position,  as
      indeed are all Adjudicators at this time in  relation  to  Sri  Lankan
      Tamils.  It is still too early to be satisfied that the situation  has
      changed to such an extent  that  there  is  now  no  risk  to  anyone.
      Equally we take the view that there are few who now would be at  risk,
      but it is necessary always  to  consider  the  circumstances  of  each
      individual case.  That can only be done by considering  the  facts  of
      that individual case  against  the  information  that  exists  at  the
      precise date on which the Adjudicator or the Tribunal has to  reach  a
      decision.  If things are seen to be improving the time may  well  come
      and may well come soon when it can be said that all can  be  returned.
      Equally it may be unfortunately that things do not turn out  quite  so
      well.  The problem is yet again the Home Office practice  of  granting
      'indefinite leave to remain' to all these cases which is not what  the
      rules provide for.  In these sorts of cases, as may be obvious,  where
      the situation is somewhat fluid, it would surely be sensible  to  give
      some limited leave.  However that is not a matter for  us;   it  is  a
      matter for the Secretary of State.  He has decided the policy, we  can
      only look at the situation as it now is in relation to the  individual
      appellant and as we have said in the case of this individual appellant
      we take the view that this appeal must be allowed.










MR JUSTICE COLLINS

