
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX14413-2002      |
|On 28 August 2002          |        |DK (Ethiopian - Eritrean -  |
|                           |        |Return - Eritrea) Eritrea CG|
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 05243          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..............13 November 2002............................        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (CHAIRMAN)                                        |
|MR P ROGERS, JP                                                   |
|MR A F SHEWARD                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Debru Kadane                                                      |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:


For the appellant:           Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:          Mrs F Webber of Counsel
                       instructed by Brighton Housing Trust Immigration
                       Legal Service


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an  Adjudicator (Mr D C Gerrey) who allowed the respondent's appeal
      against the decision made on 13 February 2002 refusing  to  grant  him
      leave to enter following the refusal of his claim for asylum.  In this
      determination the  Tribunal  will  refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
      applicant.

   2. The background to this appeal can  be  set  out  quite  shortly.   The
      applicant was born on 9 September 1983 in Shashemem in  Ethiopia.   He
      speaks Amhirc.  His parents are both of Eritrean origin.  They went to
      live in Ethiopia when they were young adults and never  returned.   In
      his witness statement the applicant says that he considers himself  to
      be Ethiopian and has no connection with  Eritrea.  He has  never  been
      there and he has no living relatives there.  In his  evidence  to  the
      Adjudicator he said that he thought his father was aged 50 to  55  and
      his mother 45 to 50  but  he  did  know  their  dates  of  birth.   He
      continued to live in Shashemem until he left  Ethiopia  travelling  by
      air to the United Kingdom on 8 November 2000.

   3. According to the applicant until the war between Ethiopia and  Eritrea
      started  in  1998,  his  father  had  been  a  successful  businessman
      importing  and  exporting  cars.   In  August   1999   the   Ethiopian
      army/police came to his home looking for his  father.   He  was  taken
      away and the applicant has  not  seen  him  since.   His  mother  made
      efforts to try and find out what had happened to him but to no  avail.
      The applicant used to see the police and army searching  for  Eritrean
      families during the night.  They would take one  family  member  first
      and then later take another.  In July 2000 the police returned  saying
      that they had come to  take  everyone  away.   The  applicant  escaped
      through the back door and out of the garden.  He does  not  know  what
      happened to his mother but assumes that she was taken along  with  his
      younger brother and sister.  The applicant went to hide in the home of
      an Ethiopian school friend.  With the help of his family he  was  able
      to make arrangements to leave Ethiopia.

   4. The applicant does not have a passport.  He  says  that  he  considers
      himself to be Ethiopian but the Ethiopian authorities  would  not  now
      recognise him as such because he has  Eritrean  parents.   If  he  was
      returned to Eritrea he would be forced to undertake military  service.
      He had never been to Eritrea and had no connection with it.   He  says
      that he could not get an Eritrean passport because  he  would  not  be
      able to prove that he was an Eritrean.  He has no witnesses to support
      such a claim.

   5. The Adjudicator accepted that the applicant was an honest and credible
      witness.  He accepted his evidence as to where he had  lived  all  his
      life, his lack of knowledge of his family and his total  lack  of  any
      connection with anyone of  Eritrean  origins  who  would  be  able  to
      support a claim for Eritrean citizenship. The Adjudicator said that it
      was plain to him that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  would  regard  the
      applicant as Eritrean and would not grant him  Ethiopian  citizenship.
      He was equally satisfied that the applicant did  not  have  sufficient
      evidence available to support an application for Eritrean  citizenship
      even if he wished  to  apply  for  it.   He  was  satisfied  that  the
      applicant was effectively stateless.

   6. On that basis he went on to assess the applicant's claim on the  basis
      that Ethiopia was his country of former habitual  residence.   He  was
      satisfied on the basis of the evidence he heard that the applicant had
      suffered persecution for a Convention reason prior  to  his  departure
      from Ethiopia.  He was also satisfied that he would  have  a  fear  of
      persecution in the event of return to Ethiopia.   He  noted  that  the
      removal  directions  were  for  Eritrea  but  he  commented  that  the
      applicant did not have evidence available to  support  an  application
      for citizenship of that country.  It  was  far  from  clear  that  the
      applicant would be accepted by Eritrea.  He summarised his conclusions
      on the asylum  appeal  by  saying  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
      applicant currently had a well-founded fear of persecution if sent  to
      Ethiopia and he did not see how he could be removed to Eritrea.

   7. He went on to consider the claim on  human  rights  grounds.   He  was
      satisfied that whether in Eritrea  or  Ethiopia  the  applicant  would
      suffer treatment which would not  acknowledge  his  basic  rights  and
      where  he  would  be  denied  all  rights   normally   incidental   to
      citizenship.  He was satisfied that  if  the  applicant  was  sent  to
      either to Eritrea or Ethiopia there was a serious possibility that  he
      would be imprisoned without charge and denied very basic human rights.
       He was satisfied that there would be a  breach  of  Article  3.   The
      Secretary of State appeals against this determination.

   8. Ms Sigley indicated that she only relied on grounds 2  and  4  of  her
      grounds of appeal.  Ground 2 argues that the  Adjudicator  in  stating
      that the  applicant  did  not  have  enough  evidence  to  support  an
      application for Eritrean citizenship was speculating on  the  approach
      that might be taken by the Eritrean authorities.  He made no reference
      to any evidence having been obtained from  those  authorities  and  in
      these circumstances his findings were unfounded and flawed.  Ground  4
      asserts that the Adjudicator has not given any reasons  or  identified
      the objective evidence he is relying on for his belief that there is a
      serious possibility that the applicant  would  be  imprisoned  without
      charge in Eritrea.  He had not set out  the  objective  evidence  from
      which he believed the applicant would be denied basic  citizenship  in
      Eritrea.

   9. Ms Sigley confirmed that it was not the Secretary of State's intention
      to attempt to return the applicant to Ethiopia.   She  submitted  that
      there was no adequate basis for finding that the applicant would be at
      risk of persecution or ill treatment in Article 3.  It was open to him
      to apply for Eritrean citizenship and he could reasonably be  expected
      to do so. He could not be regarded as stateless until he had  made  an
      application for citizenship and that  application  had  been  refused:
      Bradshaw (1994) AIMMR 359.  The Adjudicator was wrong to say that  the
      applicant  was  effectively,  currently  stateless.   He  was   either
      stateless or he was not.  She referred to the CIPU report for  Eritrea
      and the conditions of citizenship in paragraph  5.69.   It  was  clear
      from A24 that an enquiry had been made of the Eritrean Embassy but  it
      had not been said that he had no claim to  Eritrean  citizenship.   It
      would be reasonably easy for him to  find  evidence  of  his  Eritrean
      ethnicity so that he could qualify.  There was  no  adequate  evidence
      that he would be at risk of persecution or ill treatment  in  Eritrea.
      If he objected to military service, that did not provide a  Convention
      ground for a claim.  There was no reasonable likelihood that he  would
      be deported from  Eritrea to Ethiopia.

  10. Ms Webber submitted that the  applicant  was  Ethiopian.   Looking  at
      paragraph 5.69 of the CIPU report he  did  not  qualify  for  Eritrean
      citizenship as it could not be shown that his  parents  were  resident
      there in 1933.  There was no further evidence as to what  requirements
      may be necessary in  order  to  qualify.   It  was  not  open  to  the
      Secretary of State to argue that his appeal should be allowed  on  the
      basis that an obligation should be put on  the  applicant  to  acquire
      citizenship of a country he did not wish to  go  to.    The  applicant
      could not be returned to Eritrea.  There was no reason to believe that
      he would be admitted.  In any event there was evidence that there  was
      a risk of refoulment.

  11. There were two appeals before  the  Adjudicator.   The  first  was  on
      asylum grounds under Section 69(1) and  the  second  on  human  rights
      grounds under Section 65.  There was no  appeal  against  the  removal
      directions.  By reason of the provisions of Section 59(4) and  Section
      67 there can only be an appeal objecting to the country to  which  the
      applicant would be removed in accordance  with  the  directions  if  a
      different country is specified by him.  The  removal  directions  have
      been made for Eritrea  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State
      understands that the government of Eritrea would be prepared to accept
      him as an Eritrean national on the basis of the  information  provided
      about his family background:  see paragraphs 3 and 11 of  the  reasons
      for refusal letter dated 5 February 2002.

  12. The initial issue to be considered in assessing the  claim  under  the
      refugee Convention is the applicant's citizenship or nationality.  The
      Convention is founded on the principle that national  protection  when
      it is available takes precedence over  international  protection.   An
      applicant for asylum is normally expected to look to his own state for
      protection.  Where an applicant has dual or even multiple  nationality
      he must show that he is unable to look to each  of  the  countries  of
      which he is a  national  for  protection  before  he  is  entitled  to
      international protection.  This principle is clear from the wording of
      Article 1A(2).  It is only where  an  applicant  cannot  look  to  his
      country or countries of nationality for protection that he is entitled
      to look to the international community.  For the sake of  completeness
      the Tribunal note that this  is  not  an  absolute  principle  as  the
      Convention recognises that there may  be  circumstances  in  which  an
      applicant is unwilling to avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  his
      country or countries of nationality.

  13. It is therefore essential when there is a  dispute  about  nationality
      for that issue to be resolved before an asylum claim can  properly  be
      assessed.   It  is  by  reference  to  the  country  or  countries  of
      nationality that an applicant's claim must be assessed.  It is only if
      there is no country  of  nationality  that  a  claim  is  assessed  by
      reference to the country of habitual residence.

  14. Although  the  Adjudicator  took  the  view  that  the  applicant  was
      effectively stateless, the Tribunal are satisfied that he was  not  in
      fact stateless.  There is no doubt that he is  an  Ethiopian  citizen.
      There is no evidence to show that he has  been  formally  deprived  of
      citizenship.  However,  the  Adjudicator  did  go  on  to  assess  the
      applicant's claim in relation to Ethiopia on the  basis  that  it  had
      been his country of habitual residence.  For the reasons which he gave
      and with which the Tribunal agree, the Adjudicator was satisfied  that
      the applicant would be at risk of persecution were he to  be  returned
      to Ethiopia.

  15. In substance the Secretary of State contends  that  the  applicant  is
      also a citizen of Eritrea and that he is not entitled to asylum unless
      he also shows that he would be at risk of persecution in  Eritrea  and
      is unable to look to the Eritrean  authorities  for  protection.   The
      applicant accepts that he is of Eritrean ethnic origin but  says  that
      he is not a citizen of Eritrea.  It may be open to him  to  apply  for
      citizenship but he has made it clear that he does not wish to  do  so.
      Enquiries have been made on his behalf by  his  representatives.   The
      results of  this  enquiry  are  set  out  at  A124.   Ms  Jessop,  his
      representative, was advised by the Eritrean Embassy  that  there  were
      two possibilities.  If the applicant could get witnesses in the United
      Kingdom who he knew in Ethiopia  and  who  could  be  trusted  by  the
      Embassy to show that they were  Eritreans  and  to  witness  that  his
      parents were Eritreans, then they would consider an  application.   If
      that was not possible then if he could find a relative in Eritrea  who
      would provide  statements  they  would  consider  an  application  for
      Eritrean documentation to enter the country.  Ms  Jessop  was  advised
      that many Ethiopians wanted to use the opportunity to come to  Eritrea
      and they were very strict but once they  had  proved  that  they  were
      Eritrean they could obtain a passport although  the  Embassy  not  yet
      started issuing them.

  16. Ms Sigley points to paragraph 5.69 of the CIPU report.   This  records
      that the rules governing  eligibility  for  Eritrean  nationality  are
      contained in the Eritrean  Nationality  Proclamation  number  21/1992.
      People are Eritrean by birth if they are born in Eritrea or where born
      abroad if their father or mother  is  of  Eritrean  origin,  which  is
      defined as meaning any  person  resident  in  Eritrea  in  1933.   The
      proclamation goes on to contain  provisions  for  the  acquisition  of
      Eritrean nationality by naturalisation. The applicant was not born  in
      Eritrea.   He  was  born  in  Ethiopia.   The  evidence   before   the
      Adjudicator was that the  applicant's  parents  were  indeed  born  in
      Eritrea but even taking his father's age as 55 and his mother  as  50,
      they were certainly not resident in Eritrea in 1933.   As  it  is  the
      Secretary of State who asserts that the  applicant  is  Eritrean,  the
      onus is on him to establish that.  On the basis of the evidence before
      us, we are not satisfied that the applicant is  entitled  to  Eritrean
      citizenship still less that  he  is  now  an  Eritrean  citizen.   The
      Tribunal was referred to Bradshaw.  In that  case  it  was  held  that
      before a person could be regarded as stateless there must have been an
      application made for citizenship of those  countries  with  which  the
      person was most closely connected and  those  applications  must  have
      been refused.  That principle makes obvious sense in  the  context  of
      that case.  The issue before the court was whether a person  could  be
      said be stateless within the terms of the definition of the Convention
      on the Status of  Stateless  Persons  (1954)  which  provided  that  a
      stateless person meant a person who is not considered as a national by
      any state under the operation of its law.  It is clear why  the  court
      took the view that someone could not be regarded as stateless if  they
      failed to make an application to  a  state  which  might  consider  an
      applicant to be its national.  However, the applicant in  this  appeal
      does not assert that he is stateless.  He asserts that he is a citizen
      of Ethiopia whereas the Secretary of  State says that  he  is  also  a
      citizen of Eritrea.   It may be and the Tribunal  would  not  wish  to
      express a final view on it that there could be circumstances in  which
      the Secretary of State  could  rely  on  this  principle  that  it  is
      reasonable to expect an application to be made for  citizenship  to  a
      country where there is clear prima  facie  evidence  that  citizenship
      would be acknowledged.  The position in our view is  rather  different
      when the evidence shows at best a  possibility  and  certainly  not  a
      probability of a grant of Eritrean citizenship and where the applicant
      is saying he does not wish to return to Eritrea for good  reason  even
      though  the  reasons  may  not  amount  to  a  well  founded  fear  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to the Human Rights Act.

  17. The Tribunal will therefore proceed on the basis that it is not  shown
      that the applicant is a citizen of  Eritrea.   We  must  consider  the
      effect in this appeal of the fact that the removal directions are  for
      Eritrea.  It is conceded by Mrs Webber both in her  skeleton  argument
      and her oral submissions that there was no adequate  evidential  basis
      for the Adjudicator's finding that the applicant would be at  risk  of
      persecution in Eritrea.  However, to return the applicant  to  Eritrea
      would be to return him to a country of which he is not a national or a
      citizen.  On the basis of the evidence before us, the Tribunal are not
      satisfied that the government of Eritrea would be prepared  to  accept
      the applicant as an Eritrean citizen.  This by itself  does  not  mean
      that the Secretary of State  would  not  be  entitled  to  return  the
      applicant to Eritrea.   The  United  Kingdom's  obligation  under  the
      Convention is not to return a refugee to the frontiers of  territories
      where his life or freedom would be threatened for a Convention reason.
       This includes an obligation not to return a refugee to a country from
      which  he  might  be  returned  to  a  country  where  he  would  face
      persecution without a proper consideration  of  his  claim  under  the
      Convention.

  18. It would therefore be permissible for the United Kingdom to return the
      applicant to Eritrea provided he is not  at  risk  of  persecution  in
      Eritrea and provided he is not returned to Ethiopia  by  the  Eritrean
      authorities.  It is not contended that the applicant would be at  risk
      of persecution in  Eritrea.  It was argued that there was a risk  that
      the Eritrean authorities would return him to  Ethiopia.   Reliance  is
      placed on documents on A4-5.  However the Tribunal do not accept  this
      contention.  The concern expressed in this evidence is that  those  of
      Ethiopian  ethnic  origin  might  be  returned  by  the  Eritreans  to
      Ethiopia.  The Tribunal do not find there is any reasonable degree  of
      likelihood on the evidence before us that if the applicant is accepted
      as an Eritrean citizen because of  his  Eritrean  background  that  he
      would then be returned to Ethiopia.

  19. However, this  is  speculation  as  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
      applicant would be accepted into Eritrea as an Eritrean citizen.   The
      practical situation seems to us to be that he  is  not  likely  to  be
      allowed into Eritrea in the first place.  If the Secretary of State is
      relying in effect on a safe third country removal, he must  of  course
      produce evidence that  he  has  the  statutory  power  to  remove  the
      applicant to the proposed third country.  His powers are  set  out  in
      paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act.  The Tribunal are not
      satisfied that Eritrea is a  country  of  which  the  applicant  is  a
      national or a citizen.  He did not embark from Eritrea for the  United
      Kingdom.  He does not hold an  Eritrean  passport  or  a  document  of
      identity.  The only remaining ground is whether Eritrea is  a  country
      or territory to which there is reason  to  believe  that  he  will  be
      admitted.  Looking at the evidence as a whole we do not  believe  that
      there is reason to believe that he  will  be  admitted.   If  he  fell
      within the rules governing eligibility  for  Eritrean  nationality  in
      paragraph 5.69, there probably would be  reason  to  believe  that  he
      would be admitted but on the evidence  before  us  he  does  not  fall
      within that category.  As the  power  to  remove  to  Eritrea  is  not
      proved, the issue of a third country removal does not arise.

  20. Parliament has provided a specific procedure for  certifying  removals
      to third countries where the  removal  is  to  take  place  without  a
      consideration of the merits of the asylum appeal.  It cannot have been
      Parliament's intention that by the use  of  removal  directions  under
      Section 69(1) or (5) that third country appeals could  be  dealt  with
      without the matter being certified within the provisions  of  Sections
      11 and 12.  The Tribunal are not  suggesting  that  the  Secretary  of
      State is seeking any such circumvention in the present appeal  as  the
      removal directions are made to Eritrea on the basis that the applicant
      is or is entitled to  Eritrean  citizenship.   If  in  any  particular
      appeal it is to be argued that a third country  is  safe  and  removal
      there will not be a refoulment that issue must be  clearly  identified
      in the decision letter so that a party has  a  proper  opportunity  of
      dealing with the issue.

  21. A number of difficulties relating in particular to removal  directions
      have arisen because of the way section 69 of the  1999  Act  has  been
      drafted.  An asylum appeal can only be made following the one  of  the
      immigration decisions identified in S69(1)-(5).  It is  important  not
      to be side-tracked in an asylum appeal into considering the  technical
      validity of the immigration decision when the real issue is whether an
      applicant is entitled to be recognised as a refugee.  This is assessed
      by reference to Article 1A(2) of the Convention.  If the Secretary  of
      State asserts that the removal of a  refugee  (i.e.  someone  who  has
      shown that he falls within Article 1A(2)) will not be a breach of  the
      Convention under articles 32 or 33, the onus lies on the Secretary  of
      State to establish this.  If he seeks to make a third country  removal
      without consideration of the merits of the claim under Section  11  or
      12 of the 1999 Act, he must follow the  procedure  set  out  in  those
      sections.

  22. In conclusion, in the view of the Tribunal, the applicant's claim  for
      asylum is entitled to succeed on the basis that he  is  a  citizen  of
      Ethiopia who has a well-founded fear of persecution on return.  It  is
      not shown that he is a citizen of Eritrea and so he  is  not  able  to
      look to the Eritrean authorities for  protection.   The  Secretary  of
      State has not sought to establish that he is entitled  to  return  the
      applicant to Eritrea under either the provisions of Articles 32 or  33
      nor has he sought to establish that Eritrea is a  safe  third  country
      within the provisions of Section 12 of the 1999 Act.

  23. In these circumstances this appeal is dismissed.


                                                             Mr H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
