
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX/56384/2001
On 2 September 2002

                                                                       Sinan
Tunc (Dev Sol) Turkey CG [2002] UKIAT 04883



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . 17/10/2002 . . . . . . .
. . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby


                                 SINAN TUNC

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals, with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs F M Kempton, dismissing his appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on  11  October  2001  to  issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr A Devlin represented the Appellant. Mr R  Pattison,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Adjudicator found the Appellant had been persecuted  in  the  past,
     prior to leaving Turkey in 1999, as a  consequence  of  his  low  level
     support and activities for Dev Sol (DHKP-C), a  terrorist  organisation
     committed to armed struggle, but if returned to Turkey now would not be
     at risk of persecution because he  had  a  viable  internal  relocation
     option to another part of Turkey other than Trabzond. Leave  to  appeal
     was granted on  the  limited  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
     Appellant would still face some real risk on return to Istanbul on  the
     basis of centrally held police records and this has to  be  decided  on
     the  basis  of  up-to-date  evidence  as  to  the   current   political
     developments in Turkey and police practice on return.

  4. The Tribunal considered the objective material relating to the risk  on
     return. The current CIPU report for April 2002 pulls together  evidence
     from a variety of quoted sources including Amnesty International and in
     our view offers a broad and measured  perspective.  The  most  relevant
     passages are from 5.80 to 5.84. They state as follows.


          5.80 There is no organisation or government that consistently and
          formally monitors the treatment of returnees  to  Turkey.........
          in principle the Turkish  police  can  questioning  any  deported
          citizen upon their arrival at the  airport.   This  interrogation
          aims to establish the identity of  the  individual  and  also  to
          check whether they have been implicated in any  common-law  case.
          In general there is no follow-up unless  the  individual  is  the
          subject of legal proceedings.  If the returnee is  known  to  the
          police for whatever reasons, he is possibly  taken  into  custody
          for more interviews.  Amnesty International in Germany takes  the
          view that while it is still true that  most  asylum  seekers  all
          returnees are released after the  routine  interview,  there  has
          been increasing number of cases  where  returned  asylum  seekers
          were picked up later by unknown men and beaten up or arrested  by
          the police and taken into police custody.  The report goes on  to
          say that this mistreatment is carried  out  in  order  to  obtain
          confessions from suspected persons. 5.81 The  German  immigration
          authorities  state  that  in  general  rejected  asylum   seekers
          returning to Turkey do not risk persecution.  A  rejected  asylum
          seeker returning  voluntarily  can  pass  through  entry  control
          unhindered provided that he/she  is  in  possession  of  a  valid
          Turkish travel document.  The fact that the returnee is a  failed
          asylum seeker does not lead to different treatment.  The  Turkish
          authorities  are  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  many  Turkish
          nationals apply for  asylum  only  for  the  purpose  of  getting
          temporary authorisation to  remain  in  Germany......The  Turkish
          government now  recognised  that  the  overwhelming  majority  of
          Turkish nationals who had applied for asylum overseas had done so
          purely for economic reasons.  They were of no interest to Turkish
          government and would not be imprisoned on return. 5.83  Returnees
          without documents will be questioned.  This is likely to be an in-
          depth questioning by the Turkish  border  police  and  is  to  be
          distinguished from the routine identity check  on  arrival.   The
          German authorities state that, as a rule, the questions refer  to
          personal  data,  date  and  the  reasons  for  departing  Turkey,
          possible criminal record in Germany  and  contacts  with  illegal
          Turkish organisations.  In some cases further enquiries  will  be
          made via other offices  (e.g.  prosecutor's  office,  registrar's
          office at the last Turkish residence of the returnee) in order to
          find out if the returnee is liable to prosecution for a  criminal
          offence.  These enquiries can take from several hours to  several
          days, during which time the returnee will  be  kept  in  custody.
          Currently  available  information  indicates  that   undocumented
          returnees generally are not  ill  treated  while  being  kept  in
          custody.  However ill treatment cannot  be  ruled  out  in  cases
          where  returnees  are  suspected   separatists.    5.84   Amnesty
          International in Germany states,  in  relation  to  returns  from
          Germany, that the Turkish  authorities  are  more  likely  to  be
          suspicious in cases where a person returning  to  Turkey  is  not
          carrying  any  valid  personal  documents  in   accordance   with
          regulations,  or  is   carrying   documents   indicating   asylum
          proceedings abroad. 5.85 Being of  Kurdish  origin  does  not  in
          itself constitute a higher risk of inhuman treatment.  Everything
          depends on the  individual  and  his  activities  in  Turkey  and
          abroad.  The Dutch Ministry of Foreign  Affairs  notes  that  PKK
          activist and sympathisers who are thought to be of great interest
          to the  Turkish  authorities  risk  being  insulted,  threatened,
          maltreated or tortured during the questioning.  A  representative
          of the Turkish Human Rights Foundation stated that a clear  shift
          from physical to more psychological  pressure  on  detainees  had
          recently been observed

  5. Mr Pattison referred us to paragraph 5.91, which related to the  return
     under UNHCR auspices  of  Turkish  nationals  from  northern  Iraq.  It
     reported that UNHCR was satisfied that returnees as a category have not
     been subject of persecution or reprisals in Turkey. However this is not
     of particular significance in  this  appeal,  where  the  Appellant  is
     claiming to have been persecuted in the past for his Dev Sol  supporter
     and to be likely to face further similar ill-treatment on return.

  6. Mr Pattison also referred us to  paragraph  5.87  and  annex  D,  which
     showed that the number of reported incidents of ill-treatment on return
     over some years, was extremely  small  when  compared  to  the  overall
     number  of  returnees.  He  argued  that  even  if   these   statistics
     understated the overall number of incidents, if the  reality  was  much
     greater it would by now have become apparent through the  work  of  the
     international agencies. Mr Devlin responded by saying that there was no
     proper monitoring of the ill-treatment of returnees and that  again  in
     the Appellant was not a returnee per se but a person suspected  of  Dev
     Sol activities and thereby at much greater risk.

  7. Annex B describes the Dev Sol as  seeking  to  overthrow  the  existing
     Turkish system of government by armed revolution and to replace it with
     a Marxist Leninist  state.   Its  terrorist  operations  are  aimed  in
     particular at the Turkish security forces and public figures,  as  well
     as bodies seen by the group as symbols of imperialism

  8. Our assessment of this material identifies a distinction  in  terms  of
     risk between a failed asylum seeker returning undocumented and one with
     proper and genuine papers.  The latter will be  able  to  pass  through
     entry control unhindered.  The former will face in-depth questioning by
     the Turkish border police, during which enquiries will be made of other
     databases in order to establish their identity and history.  Even  then
     the  risk  of  material  ill-treatment  is  statistically  very  small.
     However if an individual falls within a category of particular  adverse
     interest to the Turkish authorities,  by  reason  of  connection  to  a
     separatist organisation or a terrorist group, then the risk that the in-
     depth investigation may extend to ill-treatment and torture  cannot  be
     ruled out. However, the fact that something that cannot be ruled out is
     a more stringent test than the test of real risk, applicable in  asylum
     and human rights appeals. Each case must therefore be assessed  on  its
     own merits to see whether the level of involvement and suspicion  found
     to  be  credible  by  an  Adjudicator  supports  a  valid   claim   for
     international protection.

  9. In this appeal the Adjudicator made a number  of  positive  credibility
     findings, which have not since been challenged.  She accepted that  the
     Appellant was a supporter of Dev Sol and of its basic  aims  though  he
     was a low level supporter whose involvement  consisted  mainly  of  fly
     posting  and  distributing  leaflets  and   attending   demonstrations.
     However,  he had been picked up by the police on two or three occasions
     and tortured and held  for  some  days  before  being  taken  before  a
     prosecutor and released  due  to  lack  of  evidence.  The  Adjudicator
     accepted that these detentions were due to his  perceived  support  for
     Dev Sol. On one occasion the police had obtained an  extension  of  one
     day in detention from a prosecutor, but they were never able to  pin  a
     crime upon him.  The  Adjudicator  found  that  this  constituted  past
     persecution but that the authorities had no continuing interest in him.



 10. The Adjudicator then made some rather  contradictory  conclusions.  She
     said  that  on  return  to  Istanbul  he  would  be  perceived  as   an
     undocumented failed asylum seeker and would be subject  to  questioning
     and as a result of the questioning it would become clear  that  he  had
     previously been detained  by  the  police.   She  continued  "In  those
     circumstances there is a  serious  possibility  that  he  would  suffer
     further persecution by reason of being a failed asylum seeker  even  if
     he were to be returned to a large city such as Istanbul.  He  would  be
     arrested at the airport and taken into custody immediately.   He  would
     be liable to very close questioning.  He could be held for a number  of
     hours or even the number of days.  However  given  that  there  are  no
     outstanding warrants against the Appellant then there is no reason  why
     the authorities should take any further interest in him  after  he  has
     been questioned."

 11. Quite what that means is not clear.   However  the  Tribunal  considers
     that the Adjudicator was in  error  in  concluding  that  the  lack  of
     outstanding warrants would in itself indicate that the authorities  had
     no further interest in the Appellant. It is a relevant factor but  only
     one amongst others. She had already found that he had been detained  up
     to and in 1999 specifically because of suspicion  surrounding  his  Dev
     Sol activities.  He had actually been taken to a prosecutor on  several
     occasions.  Leave had been obtained from a  prosecutor  to  extend  his
     detention on one occasion. He had been released for lack of evidence by
     the prosecutor, presumably against the wishes of  the  police  or  they
     would have released him themselves. The records of his detentions would
     now be available centrally to the border police  as  Istanbul  airport.
     Whatever the reality of  his  activities  for  Dev  Sol,  the  positive
     findings of fact by the Adjudicator relating to his history indicate  a
     higher level of interest in  him  by  the  authorities  than  would  be
     consistent with merely low level support. The Appellant claimed that at
     his last arrest he  had  been  accused  of  fundraising  for  Dev  Sol.
     Perhaps this is why a higher level of interest had been  shown  in  him
     than would otherwise be justified but one cannot speculate.

 12. However, given the positive findings of credibility by the Adjudicator,
     she erred in concluding that the authorities would  had  no  continuing
     adverse interest in the Appellant concerning his linkage with Dev  Sol.
     The authorities take Dev Sol very seriously indeed and are entitled  to
     do so because of  their  terrorist  activities  though  that  does  not
     justify torture by them of suspects. The Appellant's  risk  profile  on
     return to Istanbul airport would therefore,  on  the  particular  facts
     accepted by the Adjudicator as credible, be significantly  higher  than
     for example for a returnee, who had been subjected in the past only  to
     untargeted arrests and harassment  and  had  not  been  linked  by  the
     authorities  in  any  meaningful  way   with   a   specific   terrorist
     organisation. On the facts of this appeal as found by the  Adjudicator,
     we conclude that the Appellant would be at real risk of persecution and
     of treatment in breach of Article 3 on return to Istanbul airport.

 13. We therefore allow this appeal for asylum and under Article  3  of  the
     1951 Convention






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
