
H-AA-V2
                                                Appeal Number : CC23028-2002
                                                              HG (Risk -
                  Eritrean) Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 05689
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  7 October 2002                          |             9 December 2002 |
|Dictated :                                    |.............................|
|                                              |..............               |


                                   Before:


                           Mr D K Allen - Chairman
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE
                               Mr D R Bremmer


between
                            Hirut GHEBREYOHANNES
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The Appellant, who, as was  pointed  out  by  the  Vice-President  who
    granted leave, gives her nationality as Eritrean but has  been  treated
    by the Secretary of State as having the nationality  of  Ethiopia,  has
    been granted leave to appeal to the Tribunal against the  determination
    of an Adjudicator, Mr J J Molloy, who dismissed her appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision giving directions for her removal from the United
    Kingdom, asylum having been refused.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 7 October  2002.   Miss  J  Farbey
    for Fisher Meredith appears on behalf of the Appellant, and Mr A  Sheik
    appeared on behalf of the Respondent.

3.    The Appellant was found  to  be  credible  by  the  Adjudicator.   He,
    therefore, accepted that her parents were both born in Eritrea and that
    she herself was born in Addis Ababa and  attended  school  in  Ethiopia
    until she was around 15.  Her father had joined  in  the  struggle  for
    liberation in 1977, and died in 1982.  In 1987 the  Appellant  together
    with her mother and her three younger brothers emigrated to Sudan, this
    was because of her father's involvement with the ELF.  Her  mother  was
    constantly under  heavy  security  detention  by  the  former  military
    government.  Problems developed toward the  end  of  1992  between  the
    Islamic government of Sudan and the  government  of  Eritrea  and  this
    began to cause problems for her family who were in a refugee camp.   In
    February 1993, she fled together with several  other  people  to  Egypt
    where she worked until June 1996 when she was introduced  to  an  agent
    who obatined an Egyptian  passport  for  her.   She  went  to  Ethiopia
    briefly and then left for the United Kingdom in August 1996.

4.    She did not say anything about her nationality in that statement.   In
    the asylum screening unit  report  at  A1  of  the  bundle  as  she  is
    described as Ethiopian  but  her  current  nationality  on  the  asylum
    application at B1 is described as Eritrean.  It seems that she came  to
    the United Kingdom on the Ethiopian passport.  On  the  SEF  form,  the
    word Ethiopian is crossed out against nationality and she is  described
    as Eritrean/Ethiopian.  The removal directions are to Ethiopia.

5.    Though he believed  the  Appellant,  the  Adjudicator  concluded  that
    there was no real risk that she would be persecuted or that  her  human
    rights would be breached on return to Ethiopia.  His first  reason  for
    this, which is challenged in ground 1 of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  is
    because the Appellant said that she did not accept  and  recognise  the
    government of Ethiopia, she could not claim to be  persecuted  by  that
    government or to suffer a  breach  of  her  Article  3  rights,  should
    Ethiopia refuse to grant her citizenship or nationality or entry to the
    country.   We  indicated  in  the  hearing  that  we  agreed  with  the
    contention by Miss Farbey in her grounds of appeal that, as  is  summed
    up at paragraph 1(iii) of the grounds, the  Appellant's  disinclination
    towards Ethiopian citizenship does not mean that  various  consequences
    set out in ground 1, such as denial of nationality or residency rights,
    should not be categorised as serious harm to her.  At (ii) of ground 1,
    attention is  drawn  to  various  matters  in  the  objective  evidence
    concerning the treatment of persons perceived as having Eritrean  links
    who are returned to, or are in, Ethiopia.  We  shall  return  to  these
    shortly.

6.    The Adjudicator went on to  express  the  view  that  there  were  not
    substantial grounds for believing that there was a real risk  that  the
    Appellant would suffer serious harm if removed to Ethiopia.  He did not
    accept that her  views  concerning  non-recognition  of  the  Ethiopian
    government would be made known to the Ethiopian authorities and that as
    a consequence they would not seek to deprive her of citizenship  and/or
    nationality and/or residence.   He  also  considered  that  though  the
    documentation showed there was a risk of some continuing deportation of
    ethnic Eritreans in Ethiopia, the risk was not  assessed  or  otherwise
    quantified and there was therefore a lack of evidence.

7.    We return to the objective evidence in this regard as is indicated  in
    the grounds of appeal and in Miss Farbey's skeleton argument before the
    Adjudicator which is also contained in the bundle before  us.   In  the
    letter from UNHCR of 20 February 2002 at pages 89 to 90 of the  bundle,
    there is reference to instances where Eritreans and Ethiopian nationals
    with Eritreans links  have  faced  serious  risks  from  the  Ethiopian
    authorities, including arbitrary deprivation of Ethiopian  nationality,
    summary expulsion   to  Eritrea  and  internment  as  enemy  nationals.
    UNHCR's general understanding  is  that  the  practice  of  deportation
    persists despite the signing  by  both  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia  of  the
    Cessation  of  Hostilities  Agreement  of  18   June   2000   and   the
    comprehensive Peace Agreement of 12 December  2000.   This  is  clearly
    evidence of significance.  There is also reference at page  52  of  the
    bundle in the Human Rights Watch World Report of 2002  on  Ethiopia  to
    the forcible expulsion by Ethiopia  in  June  2001  of  772  people  it
    identified as Eritreans from its territory without  prior  notification
    to the International Committee of the Red Cross  as  anticipated  under
    Article 2 of the Truce Agreement.  In the same report, at  page  54  of
    the bundle, there is reference in the second paragraph to both  Eritrea
    and Ethiopia continuing  to  evict  those  identified  as  the  other's
    nationals causing great suffering to the  victims  and  their  kin  and
    blatantly violating international human rights norms in the process.

8.    In the US State Department Report for  2001,  there  is  reference  at
    page 26 of the  Appellant's  bundle  to  evidence  that  the  Ethiopian
    government has the ability to find out whether a  person  has  Eritrean
    origins.  It is said that in 1999,  all  Eritreans  and  Ethiopians  of
    Eritrean origin over 18 years of age who had taken  part  in  the  1993
    referendum on Eritrean independence were required to register with  the
    Security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs  Authority  and  to  complete
    residence application forms.  After registration,  applicants  received
    identity cards and residence permits valid for six  months.   According
    to the authorities, all Eritreans or Ethiopian of Eritrean descent were
    registered by year's end.  Elsewhere in that report, at page 35 of  the
    bundle, it is said that there were credible  reports  that  during  the
    2000 national elections, citizens who tried to register  to  vote  were
    told by government personnel that they had to prove  their  citizenship
    in order to  register  as  under  the  law,  only  citizens  can  vote.
    Reportedly, Ethiopians of Eritrean origin were not allowed to  register
    or vote.

9.    In our view, the matters that we have set  out  above  are  sufficient
    for us to dispose of this appeal.  Some time and effort was devoted  to
    examining the relevant authorities concerning the question  of  whether
    there was a burden on the Appellant to approach the  Ethiopian  Embassy
    to see if she qualifies for Ethiopian citizenship.  In our  view,  this
    is an argument better left for another day where it  actually  requires
    to be determined.  In our view, the objective evidence that we have set
    out above is such as to show there is a real risk of the  Appellant  of
    not just denial of civic rights which by itself arguably would not give
    rise to persecution, but  more  significantly  risks  of  detention  or
    deportation to Eritrea which, in our view, would amount to  persecution
    or breach of her human rights.  We consider the  evidence  to  be  such
    that the authorities would  be  well  able  to  discover  her  Eritrean
    origins and there is a real risk as can be seen from such  examples  as
    the forced expulsions of 772 people to Eritrea, and the  evidence  also
    set out in the grounds of appeal concerning persons who have  not  been
    called to renew residence permits which expired, and in particular  the
    risk of internment as an enemy national to be risks which are  such  as
    to meet the lower standard applicable in asylum and human rights cases.

10.   We consequently allow this appeal.




                                                                   D K Allen
                                                                    CHAIRMAN
