
|jls                                                                   |
|Appeal No: CC22728-2001                                               |



                                                           [2002] UKIAT05869


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 3rd October 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                             2 January 2003

                                   Before:

                           Miss K Eshun (Chairman)
                        Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes


Between:






                            KUMARAVEL SOORIYAKALA


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr N Wray, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence
Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M Walton, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appeals,  with  leave  of  the
    Tribunal, against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs  S  J  Frudd)
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  made  on
    10th January 2001 to refuse her leave to enter and asylum.

 2. As the certification of the Appellant's asylum claim was upheld  by  the
    Adjudicator, the Appellant now has only a right of  appeal  against  the
    dismissal of her human rights claim in the light of the Court of  Appeal
    decision in Zenovics.

 3. The relevant grounds of appeal state as follows:

           "2.   As a matter of law, the Appellant has a right of appeal to
                 the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on the human rights  claim.
                 The IAA, therefore, erred in law in stating that  no  right
                 of appeal existed.
           3.    This is material in that the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
                 is entitled to take into account fresh  evidence  that  was
                 not before the  Adjudicator.   In  the  instant  case,  the
                 Tribunal  would  be  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
                 contents of the video presented  to  the  Adjudicator,  but
                 which the Adjudicator refused to admit."


  4. In granting leave, the Vice President said that the grounds of appeal,
     particularly relating to the failure  to  view  the  video  presented,
     appear to give rise to  an  arguable  basis  for  an  appeal  to  this
     Tribunal.

  5. Counsel submitted that the video evidence  was  corroboration  of  the
     Appellant's brother's martyrdom in the LTTE.  It was relevant  to  the
     assessment of the Appellant's credibility, which the  Adjudicator  was
     not satisfied about.

  6. Counsel accepted that, although no medical report has been obtained to
     support the Appellant's allegation of rape, a psychiatric  report  has
     now  been  obtained.   Counsel  submitted  that  whether  or  not  the
     Appellant has a family member who is currently a member  of  the  LTTE
     becomes a real issue on risk of persecution on return.   If  there  is
     corroborative evidence which was not  considered,  then  the  negative
     findings of the Adjudicator would not be safe.

  7. Mrs Walton submitted that this is the first time ever we have heard of
     a psychiatric report.  There was ample  time  before  today  to  bring
     forward supporting evidence as to what happened to  the  Appellant  in
     the past.  Such evidence is now too late to be considered.   Rape  was
     never raised at her interview.  The grounds of  appeal  did  not  even
     mention the rape and did not even mention which Articles of the  Human
     Rights Act were going to  be  argued  before  the  Tribunal.   In  the
     circumstances, she would ask that this evidence is not accepted.

  8. As regards the video evidence, Mrs Walton said that  it  takes  us  no
     further forward.  We have before us everything the  Appellant  had  to
     say.  Her family member was involved with the LTTE and  that  she  was
     raped.  The Adjudicator found that evidence  not  credible  and  found
     that she did not qualify for asylum.  Even if we  saw  the  video  and
     accepted that her brother was on the video, a concord has been reached
     between the LTTE and the government and this means that the  Appellant
     will not be at risk on return.  Furthermore, the  Appellant  today  is
     expecting a child.  Her circumstances now are completely different  to
     when she left Sri Lanka.  There is no reason to suggest that she would
     be in any way at risk.

  9. Counsel submitted that the grounds of appeal and the  grant  of  leave
     acknowledges that there has been a failure to account for  significant
     evidence.  Therefore  the  negative  finding  by  the  Adjudicator  is
     unsafe.  Whether or not her brother was involved with the  LTTE  is  a
     live issue.  The psychiatric report is relevant in the  assessment  of
     the Appellant's credibility.  It is generally accepted that some women
     have some reservation about talking about rape.

 10. The Tribunal decided to clear the courtroom in order to deliberate  on
     the issues presented to us.  Having done so, we informed  all  parties
     that even if the video was viewed and the  Adjudicator  accepted  that
     the Appellant had been raped, this evidence did not  take  the  appeal
     any further forward.  Therefore, in the interests of justice  we  were
     going to proceed with the hearing of this appeal rather than remitting
     it to be heard afresh by another Adjudicator.

 11. First of all we need to establish whether video evidence was  actually
     presented to the Adjudicator.  We have examined closely the  assertion
     in the grounds that the video was presented to the Adjudicator but she
     refused to admit it.  At paragraph 37(ix), the Adjudicator states:

           "The Appellant claims she has visited the LTTE offices in London
           and indicates there is a video containing details  of  her  dead
           brother.  I attach no weight to this evidence as  the  Appellant
           should  have  made  the  video  available  at  the  hearing   to
           corroborate her assertion."


 12. In the Adjudicator's record of proceedings, the Appellant is asked  in
     examination-in-chief whether she has a fear of return and/or of  being
     raped again.  The Appellant's  reply  is  "In  addition,  I  could  be
     arrested as my younger brother was in the LTTE and has since died.  In
     a video which is widely available are details of my  brother  and  all
     details about us, name and other things are there.  The video  may  be
     in the possession of the army. "  In cross-examination, it was put  to
     the Appellant that "The mention about  the  video  was  new  evidence,
     wasn't it?" and the Appellant asked "When?"  It was then said  to  her
     that the video was not mentioned at interview and asked  why  she  was
     mentioning it now.  She said that "It was only when I  came  here  and
     got a video cassette it will be proof"  The next question was  "Video,
     like rape, has turned up since you have been turned down by  the  Home
     Office".  The Appellant's reply was "When I arrived here,  I  obtained
     the video in order to take it to court".

 13. In paragraph 37(ix),  considered  the  Appellant's  claim  as  to  the
     content of the video evidence and attached no weight  to  it  for  the
     reason that the video should have been made available at  the  hearing
     to corroborate her assertion.  It is this Tribunal's  view  that  this
     evidence does not show that the video was actually produced in  court.
     There is also no evidence  in  the  record  of  proceedings  that  the
     contents of the video was presented to the Adjudicator  and  that  she
     refused to admit it.  Indeed, we find  that  ground  3  is  in  itself
     contradictory.   In  effect,  it  says  that  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal is entitled to take into account fresh evidence that was  not
     before the Adjudicator and then, on the other hand,  claims  that  the
     contents of the video  were  presented  to  the  Adjudicator  but  she
     refused  to  admit  it.   Either  the  evidence  was  put  before  the
     Adjudicator, or it was not.  On our examination of  the  evidence,  we
     find that, although the Adjudicator was told about the content of  the
     video by the Appellant in oral evidence, and that  this  evidence  was
     recorded by her in paragraph 23 of her determination, we find that the
     actual video itself was not placed before the Adjudicator for viewing.

 14. We now turn to Counsel's submissions in relation  to  the  Appellant's
     human rights claim.  He  submitted  that  it  would  be  a  breach  of
     Articles 3 and 8, namely, the Appellant's physical and moral integrity
     to remove her to Sri Lanka.  The  UNHCR  letter  which  says  that  an
     Appellant who has a family member currently in the  LTTE  or  who  has
     been a member of the LTTE in the past, is still relevant.  It  is  not
     the case that no Tamil is at risk of persecution  if  returned;  there
     have to be exceptional factors.  Although Counsel  accepted  that  the
     peace process is underway and this was considered in Brinston, as also
     the UNHCR letter,  because the Appellant had a family member who was a
     member of the LTTE, she falls into the exceptional category.

 15. Mrs Walton submitted  that  the  Appellant  is  one  of  a  number  of
     thousands of displaced people since the start of the  conflict,  which
     is now resolved.  There is an accord between the  government  and  the
     rebels.  Despite how individual the Appellant is, there is nothing  to
     bring her  within the recommendation of the UNHCR.  She left Sri Lanka
     and arrived here without difficulty.  Her  asylum  appeal  before  the
     Adjudicator has been dismissed. This finding goes hand  in  hand  with
     the Article 3 determination, given the finding by the  Adjudicator  of
     the lack of credibility of her claim.   There  is  no  fresh  evidence
     today that changes that.

 16. In relation to Article 8, Mrs Walton submitted that we do not have any
     evidence as to what family has been established here.   The  Appellant
     has family in Sri Lanka.  There are no insurmountable obstacles to the
     Appellant returning to her country of origin where she  was  born  and
     raised, and to the bosom of her family without risk.

 17. Counsel responded by saying that the Appellant's claim under Article 8
     is in relation to her moral and  physical  integrity.   There  is  the
     psychiatric evidence which is of significance.   The  Adjudicator  did
     not give sufficient weight to the  Appellant's  brother's  involvement
     with the LTTE, which would have put her in the exceptional category.

 18. The Tribunal then reserved its determination.

 19. The Tribunal finds that Counsel's  arguments  on  the  safety  of  the
     Adjudicator's credibility findings impinge on her determination of the
     asylum appeal.  His arguments were largely based on the video evidence
     and the psychiatric report.

 20. Firstly, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to re-open the determination
     of the asylum appeal given the fact that  the  certification  of  that
     claim was upheld by the Adjudicator.  Any flaws in that  determination
     can only be subject to judicial review.

 21. Secondly, having found  that  the  video  was  not  presented  to  the
     Adjudicator for viewing, and having  found  that  evidence  about  the
     content of the video was fully considered and found not to be credible
     by the Adjudicator, it is our view that the video evidence was not new
     evidence.

 22. In the light of Kacaj, the standard of proof in an  asylum  appeal  is
     the same when considering an Article 3 claim.

 23. Although the Adjudicator did not, in paragraph  37(viii)  accept  that
     the circumstances of the Appellant's rape fitted in with her  original
     story, she did, in paragraph 39, make the  finding  that  the  alleged
     rape was not reported to the police so therefore they were  not  given
     an opportunity to investigate the allegation.  It can be implied  from
     this that the Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was raped by one
     of the soldiers who visited the family, sometime between October  1999
     and April 2000.  We accept that this was degrading treatment in breach
     of Article 3.  However, in the  light  of  the  current  circumstances
     prevailing in Sri Lanka, we do not believe  that  this  is  likely  to
     happen again were she to return to Sri Lanka.  If, in  any  event,  it
     did happen again, we find that the authorities would be able to  offer
     her adequate protection.

 24. As regards the issue of her brother having been a member of the  LTTE,
     it is apparent from the determination that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
     accept that evidence. We find that the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
     make  that  finding  in  the  light  of  the  evidence   before   her.
     Nevertheless, even if he was, again in the light of the peace process,
     the lighting of the ban on the LTTE and the opening of offices by  the
     LTTE, we do not believe that the Appellant is likely  to  suffer  ill-
     treatment amounting  to  Article  3  as  a  result  of  her  brother's
     involvement with the LTTE, were she  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The
     appellant is therefore not an exceptional case.

 25. We now turn to Article 8 of the ECHR.  We note  that  this  was  being
     raised by Counsel for the very first time.  We also note that  Counsel
     did not argue a breach of family life in the  United  Kingdom.   Given
     that it was not an issue at the date of the Respondent's decision,  it
     was wise of Counsel not to raise it before the Tribunal as it  is  not
     an issue that we could have considered in the light of s 77(4) of  the
     1999 Act.  Counsel based his arguments  solely  on  a  breach  of  the
     Appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity  in  the  light  of   the
     psychiatric report that has now been obtained.  The report was written
     on 5th August 2002, some nine months after the hearing of  the  appeal
     by the Adjudicator.

 26. The psychiatrist says that the Appellant  describes  chronic  symptoms
     following  an  alleged  rape  occurring  about  two  years  ago.   The
     psychiatrist opined that  the  Appellant  provided  a  consistent  and
     coherent account of herself and  her  alleged  assault  while  in  Sri
     Lanka.  The Tribunal has already  accepted  that  by  implication  the
     Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was raped.

 27. The psychiatrist is then of the view that because of  the  Appellant's
     pregnancy,  her  psychological   symptoms   should   be   dealt   with
     psychologically and non-pharmacologically.  The Appellant is not  keen
     to take medication of any kind  for  fear  of  harming  the  baby  and
     although it is possible to take  SSRI  type  anti-depressants  in  the
     third trimester of pregnancy without fear of teratogenesis, it is also
     understandable that the Appellant would prefer  not  to  do  so.   The
     psychiatrist  therefore  recommended  that  the   Appellant   receives
     psychological work from her local psychiatric services, which her  own
     GP should be able to organise.  At the time of  the  hearing  of  this
     appeal, we had no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  receiving  any
     psychological work from her local psychiatric services.   Furthermore,
     we had no evidence that such treatment would not be available  to  her
     in Sri Lanka.  In the circumstances, we have no reason to believe that
     the Appellant's physical and moral integrity would  be  breached  were
     she to be removed to Sri Lanka.

 28. Accordingly, her human rights claim is dismissed.










                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
                                                     -----------------------
      6


