

   Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka *
                                                          [2002] UKIAT 00702


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Dates of hearing: 19 July 2001
                                                              15 August 2001
                                      Date determination notified: 13/3/2002




                                   Before:
                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                               Mr D. K. Allen
                              Mr P. R. Moulden




Between:

                         JUSTIN SURENDRAN DEVASEELAN

                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



SUMMARY


   1. This 'starred' determination gives the Tribunal's view on a number  of
      issues raised by human rights appeals and, particularly, human  rights
      appeals by Tamils from Sri  Lanka.   At  paragraphs  39-42  there  are
      guidelines  on  how  a  second   Adjudicator   should   approach   the
      determination of another Adjudicator who has heard an  appeal  by  the
      same Appellant.   Our  views  on  the  'extra-territorial  effect'  of
      Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  are  at
      paragraph 110.  Our conclusions on whether, in general, the removal of
      Tamils to Sri Lanka breaches  Articles  3,  5,  6,  8  or  14  of  the
      Convention are at paragraphs 82, 87, 112, 124 and 126-7.

INTRODUCTION

a.  The history of this appeal

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  His date of birth  is  given
      as 22 September 1975.  He came to the  United  Kingdom  on  22  August
      1996.  He was carrying a false passport.  He claimed  asylum.   On  30
      October 1996 he was refused asylum.   He  appealed.   His  appeal  was
      heard by an adjudicator  on  2  May  1998.   The  Appellant,  who  was
      represented by an experienced firm of solicitors, expressly elected to
      have his appeal determined on the basis of the documentary evidence on
      file.  The adjudicator considered that evidence,  which  included  the
      record of the Appellant's interview in which he set out his  story  of
      what he claimed had happened to him in  Sri  Lanka.   The  adjudicator
      studied the evidence.  He concluded that the Appellant's story was not
      the truth.  He wrote as follows:

           'I do not accept that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant
           was detained, ill-treated and released in the circumstances that
           he has described.  This alleged incident is the only activity by
           the  authorities,  which  was  deliberately  targeted   at   the
           Appellant.  I have accepted that his home  may  well  have  been
           damaged during the military offensive, but I do not accept  that
           the  conduct  of  the  military  offensive  can  be  classed  as
           persecution of the Tamil population in the Jaffna Peninsula,  or
           of  the  Appellant  and  his  family  in  particular.   For  the
           foregoing reasons, I do not accept that the Appellant had a well-
           founded fear of persecution by the authorities when he left  Sri
           Lanka.  Nor do I accept the claim, at paragraph 2 of the grounds
           that Tamils in Sri Lanka are a persecuted group per se.'

   3. He went on to examine the country evidence, and  to  consider  whether
      the Appellant could, in his own particular circumstances, be  lawfully
      returned to Colombo.  He concluded that  returning  the  Appellant  to
      Colombo would not breach the  Refugee  Convention.  He  dismissed  the
      appeal.

4. A party dissatisfied with the determination of an  adjudicator  has  (and
   at the time in question had under section 20 of the Immigration Act 1971)
   a right of appeal to the Tribunal,  subject  to  any  requirement  as  to
   leave.  The Appellant did not apply for leave  to  appeal.   He  did  not
   challenge the adjudicator's decision.  His only claim to be in the United
   Kingdom had failed.  He had no right to  remain  here.  Yet  he  did  not
   leave; and, so far as we are aware, the Secretary of State took no  steps
   to remove him.

5. On 2 October 2000 the Human Rights Act  1998  came  into  force.   On  10
   October solicitors on behalf of the Appellant, Sri and Co., wrote to  the
   Immigration Office at Heathrow.  They were not the  Appellant's  previous
   solicitors:  they said they had  been  instructed  only  that  day.   The
   letter includes a new claim for asylum.  It is based on the   solicitors'
   expressed opinion that "the situation has  deteriorated  further".   That
   opinion  is  supported,  in  the  letter,  by  selective  references   to
   documentation, some of which was already quite old.  The letter suggested
   that documents not available earlier should  be  taken  into  account  in
   assessing whether the Appellant is, after all,  a  refugee.   It  further
   suggested that, if the Immigration Officer were not minded to consider  a
   fresh claim for asylum, he refer the case to an adjudicator under section
   21 of the 1971 Act. That,  as  the  solicitors  should  have  known,  was
   impossible: for 2 October 2000 also saw the repeal of section 21 together
   with the whole of the relevant Part of the 1971 Act.

6. The solicitors' letter went on to claim,  as  an  alternative,  that  the
   Appellant's removal would be a breach of the European Convention on Human
   Rights.  With astonishing ignorance of the field of law in which they  do
   so much work, Sri and Co. write of "Art. 3 ECHR,  which  is  soon  to  be
   incorporated into domestic law in the form of the Human Rights Act."   If
   Sri and Co. were not, on 10 October 2000, aware that the Human Rights Act
   was already in force, that is entirely reprehensible.

7. The Secretary of State replied to the solicitors' letter on  21  November
   2000.  He indicated that, in  his  view,  the  matters  set  out  in  the
   solicitors' letter did not show that the claim to asylum now  being  made
   was sufficiently different from  that  which  was  made  originally.   He
   declined to entertain the letter  as  a  fresh  claim.   He  went  on  to
   consider the Appellant's claim that his removal would breach the European
   Convention on Human Rights, specifically Articles 3, 5 and 14,  to  which
   the solicitors' letter had referred.  He said that he  had  decided  that
   the information before him did not merit a grant of exceptional leave  to
   remain - that is to say, a guarantee against removal.   He  informed  the
   solicitors that the Appellant had a  right  of  appeal  on  human  rights
   grounds. He served a One-Stop Notice.

8. As the Secretary of State's letter  points  out,  the  Appellant  had  no
   right of appeal to the Appellate Authority against the  decision  not  to
   treat the letter of 10 October as a fresh claim  for  asylum.   The  only
   possible challenge would be by judicial review.  So far as we are  aware,
   no such challenge was made.  The  position  so  far  as  the  Appellant's
   refugee claim is concerned is that he failed to establish  that   it  was
   based  on  truth;  that  there  have  been  judicial  and  administrative
   decisions that he  is  not  a  refugee;  and  that  he  has  not  pursued
   challenges to those decisions.

9. The Statement of Additional Grounds attached to the One-Stop  Notice  was
   completed and returned.  It claims that the  Appellant's  return  to  Sri
   Lanka would breach Articles 3, 6, 9  and  14.   The  Secretary  of  State
   replied  that he did not consider that that would be the case, and issued
   appeal forms.  The grounds of appeal, sent in  by  a  different  firm  of
   solicitors again, Tony Purton Solicitors, are that the Appellant's return
   would breach Articles 2, 3, 5  and  14.   The  Appellant's  human  rights
   appeal was heard by an adjudicator, Mr A.J. Olson, on 16  February  2001.
   Articles 2, 3 ,5 ,6 and 14  were  argued.   The  adjudicator  heard  oral
   evidence from the Appellant. He dismissed the appeal.

10. It is against that determination  that  the  Appellant  appeals  to  the
   Tribunal. The grounds of appeal raise Articles 3, 5, 6 and 14.

11. Leave was granted because, in the opinion  of  a  Vice  President,  "the
   grounds raise several  important  issues  including  to  what  extent  an
   adjudicator in an appeal based solely on human rights grounds should rely
   on finding made in a previous determination dealing with an asylum claim.
    The parties will need to address the  question,  among  others,  of  the
   relevance to this case of the findings of the  European  Court  of  Human
   Rights in the TI v UK case."  The findings  in  TI  v  UK  are,  as  both
   parties have acknowledged, of no direct relevance to this  appeal.   They
   are concerned with return of a Sri Lankan Tamil to Germany; the court did
   not consider the merits of the claimant's claim that his  return  to  Sri
   Lanka would breach the Convention; and, in any event, as Miss  Giovanetti
   pointed out, the most recent document before the court dated from 1998.

12. We are, however, concerned with the relevance of findings in a  previous
   determination relating to the same Appellant, and we are  concerned  with
   whether this Appellant's return to Sri Lanka would  breach  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights.  Mr Lewis, who appeared  for  the  Appellant,
   instructed by Tony Purton solicitors,  expressly  disavowed  reliance  on
   Articles 2 and 9, but argued Articles 3, 5, 6,  14  and  (for  the  first
   time) 8.  The Secretary of State was represented by Miss  L.  Giovanetti,
   instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.  We have been very greatly assisted
   by the submissions on both sides, and for the orderly way  in  which  the
   copious documentary material has been presented.

  13. We intend no criticism of Mr Lewis, who put all his arguments with his
      usual elegance and conciseness.  We would, however,  generally  expect
      that an Appellant who claims that his  human  rights  are  threatened,
      would be able to say, at an early stage,  precisely  what  rights  are
      being threatened.  The Human Rights Act 1998 and  section  65  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 are intended to protect human  rights;
      and,  in  appropriate  cases,  they  provided   that   protection   by
      prohibiting  an  individual's  expulsion.   As   a   result,   certain
      individuals may have a claim to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   But
      that is not the purpose of the legislation.  A claimant who chops  and
      changes between various Articles may raise the suspicion  that  he  is
      not actually trying to protect any human rights of his but  is  merely
      seeking to use whatever means he can to remain in the United Kingdom.

  14. The hearing before the Tribunal was on 19  July  2001  and  15  August
      2001. There were then further written submissions  by the Secretary of
      State. No date had been fixed  for  the  Appellant's  reply  to  those
      submissions.  No reply has been received.

b.  The situation in other European countries

  15. One point was unresolved at the  hearing  and  is  in  a  sense  still
      unresolved.  As we shall in  due  course  explain,  and  as  Mr  Lewis
      readily accepted, many of the human rights arguments deployed by  this
      Appellant could be deployed with equal force by almost any young  male
      Tamil from Sri Lanka.  They are not  necessarily  any  the  worse  for
      that.  But, if those arguments are successful, the consequence is that
      almost no young male Tamil can be returned to Sri Lanka without  there
      being a breach of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   Again,
      that is no reason for not regarding the arguments as having substance.
      The position we  find  ourselves  in,  however,  is  that  the  United
      Kingdom, although an  original  signatory  of  the  Convention,  is  a
      newcomer to human rights law as a central part of the  national  legal
      system.  The rights which are incorporated into United Kingdom law  by
      the 1998 Act are, however, not new rights.  They are  the  rights  set
      out in the Convention, and explored and refined in half a  century  of
      decisions of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Strasbourg.
      Section 2 of the 1998 Act makes that clear.  They are also the  rights
      that have been part  of  the  national  law  of  many  other  European
      countries for many years.

  16. As Lord Steyn expounded in the House of Lords in R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
      Adan [2001]  2  WLR  143,  153,  the  task  of  a  court  applying  an
      international convention is to discover the autonomous meaning of  the
      treaty in question.  The jurisprudence of individual countries is  not
      an infallible guide to that meaning, as Adan itself demonstrates.  But
      the practice of other parties to  the  convention  must  be  relevant,
      especially where, as in the case of the European Convention  on  Human
      Rights, the  correctness  of  individual  governmental  decisions  can
      readily be tested by application  to  a  judicial  body  charged  with
      applying the Convention.  If a particular event occurs frequently, and
      has not been the subject of successful challenge,  even  in  countries
      that have had the European Convention on Human Rights as part of their
      national law for many years, it may be that that event  does  not,  in
      truth, breach the Convention. We should be rather cautious in reaching
      a conclusion that the regular practices of other countries, that  have
      a much more developed national law of human rights than we  have,  are
      practices which breach the Convention.

  17. Asylum claims by young male Tamils from Sri  Lanka  are  by  no  means
      unique to the United Kingdom.  UNHCR  figures  show  that  there  were
      17,455 applications for asylum by Sri Lankans in the year  2000.   Not
      all those applications were in Europe:   nearly  three  thousand,  for
      example, were in Canada.  The leading destination for asylum claimants
      was the United Kingdom, with 6,035  applications.  France  had  2,117,
      Germany had 1,170 new applications and, under a  procedure  unique  to
      Germany, 722 repeat applications;   the  Netherlands  and  Switzerland
      each had the best part of a thousand.   The  vast  majority  of  these
      claims were unsuccessful in achieving either refugee  or  humanitarian
      status.  The recognition rate of refugees in Germany was  9%,  in  the
      Netherlands, 20 cases, an entirely  insignificant  proportion  of  the
      total applications, which, when rounded to the nearest  whole  number,
      is  entered by the UNHCR as '0%' - although the figures  rises  to  5%
      when appeal reviews are included;  in Switzerland '0%';  in the UK 7%.
       In France the figure is much higher, at 43%, but even there there are
      well over a thousand individuals who failed to obtain  refugee  status
      in 2000.  In each of the countries  we  have  mentioned,  there  is  a
      separate possibility of achieving what  is  called,  for  purposes  of
      analysis, 'humanitarian status', if the claimant  does  not  establish
      that he is a refuge.  The number  of  grants  of  such  status  -  the
      reasons for  which  would   include  (but  not  be  limited  to)  non-
      returnability for human rights reasons - was 8 cases in Germany,  none
      in France, and 71 cases in the Netherlands.  The figure in Switzerland
      was much higher.  The reason for  this  is  unclear,  but  it  may  be
      related to the fact that Switzerland began the year with  an  enormous
      backlog of applications from previous years.  Although there were very
      few decisions recognising refugee status, 53%  of  decisions  were  to
      grant humanitarian status.  The figures still show that -  because  of
      the processing of the backlog - there  were  7,095  individuals  whose
      claims were rejected outright.  The total outright rejections in  2000
      for the four countries we have mentioned was 9,784.

  18. We are aware that other  European  countries  do  return  unsuccessful
      asylum claimants to Sri Lanka.  Not only that, but the figures we have
      quoted show that there are very substantial numbers  whose  return  is
      threatened, because they have failed to obtain status in their country
      of claimed refuge.  It is not suggested that this is a new feature  in
      the year 2000.  We therefore asked Mr Lewis if he was able to point to
      any decision  in any national court in any European country indicating
      that the return of young Tamils to Sri Lanka was  a  breach  of  their
      human rights protected by the Convention.

  19. He was unable  to  do  so.   Since  the  hearing  we  have  made  such
      researches as we have been able, and we also have not  discovered  any
      such decision.  Mr Lewis accepted that the lack of  information  meant
      that he was unable to show that there are human rights  objections  to
      the removal of Tamils to Sri Lanka from any other European countries.

  20. That is, of course, not a conclusive argument against  the  Appellant.
      It may be that none of the other countries has properly understood the
      meaning of the Convention.  Or it may be  that  no  Tamils  threatened
      with removal to Sri Lanka have been properly advised.  Or there may be
      some other explanation.  But the absence of any specific  support  for
      the Appellant's arguments,  in  the  host  of  similar  cases  arising
      elsewhere in Europe, is  a  factor  that  we  must  bear  in  mind  in
      attempting to assess what impact the Convention has on his case.

SECOND APPEALS

a.  The approach of the second adjudicator in this appeal


  21. We must first consider in some  detail  the  approach  of  the  second
      Adjudicator, Mr Olson, to the evidence  tendered  on  the  Appellant's
      behalf and to his fact-finding role.  We  have  already  set  out  the
      first Adjudicators conclusions on the evidence on which the  Appellant
      relied  in  attempting  to  establish  his  claim  under  the  Refugee
      Convention.

  22. At the hearing before Mr Olson, the  Appellant's  representative  said
      that the Appellant wanted to raise the issue of scarring.  That is  to
      say, he claimed that scars on his body would expose  him  to  risk  on
      return.  He showed the Adjudicator his scars.  He  then  briefly  gave
      oral evidence, which was noted by the Adjudicator as follows:

           'I was i/v'd on arrival in England.  Everything I said was true.
            I adopt record of i/v.  I have scars on body, which are  result
           of accident.
           XX If I was sent back - you know situation in  Sri  Lanka  young
           boys lives are under threat.  I found out  that  those  returned
           are put in jail for 3 years.  They tortured them I'm  frightened
           of going there.  I found out thro his friend.  I had  the  scars
           when I left Sri Lanka.  I  left  by  plane  thro  airport.   The
           authorities didn't notice the scarring then.


           In my asylum claim I was only detained once  I'd  lived  in  Sri
           Lanka 21 years.'

23.   There was no other oral evidence.  The Adjudicator  heard  submissions
      from both representatives.  There was reference to authorities and  to
      documentary  evidence.   Mr  Olson  expressed  his  decision  in   the
      following way.

           6.    Decision


           6.1   This is an appeal under Section 65 (1) of the  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999 on the grounds that removal of the Appellant
           to Sri Lanka would be in breach of Articles 2, 3, 5  and  14  of
           the ECHR and Human Rights Act 1998.


           6.2   The Appellant must demonstrate that there are  substantial
           grounds for believing there is a real risk that one or  more  of
           the Articles will be breached.


         6 The Appellant has previously appealed against the refusal of his
           asylum  claim  and  the  appeal  was   dismissed   because   the
           Adjudicator was not satisfied that it was reasonably likely that
           the Appellant was detained,  ill-treated  and  released  in  the
           circumstances that he described and he did not accept  that  the
           Appellant  had  a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  by  the
           authorities when he left Sri Lanka.


           6.4   The Appellant accepted that in his  asylum  claim  he  had
           only been detained on one occasion and although he said  he  had
           scars when he left Sri Lanka, he admitted that they were  caused
           as a  result  of  an  accident  rather  than  through  any  ill-
           treatment.


           6.5   Mr O'Callaghan relies mainly on the background evidence to
           support the Appellant's case, rather than the  evidence  of  the
           Appellant himself.  I have noted the decision  of  the  European
           Court in Vilvarajah -v- United Kingdom (1991) 14 EHRR 60 that it
           was not considered enough that there was a  generally  political
           situation in Sri Lanka and that some Tamils might be detained or
           ill-treated.


           Claim under Articles 2 and 3.


           6.6   Having regard to the Appellant's background and  the  fact
           that he had on  his  own  account  only  been  detained  on  one
           occasion and failed to satisfy  either  the  Respondent  or  the
           Adjudicator to the lower standard of proof  required  in  asylum
           cases that he had been ill-treated.   I  do  not  consider  that
           there is a serious or real risk that he will be targeted by  the
           authorities on his return  or  be  killed,  tortured  or  suffer
           inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.


           6.7   At worst he might be questioned about his identity  before
           being allowed to go.


           Claim under Article 5.


           6.8   I have noted the decision of the European Court in  Murray
           & Ors -v- United Kingdom (1996) 22 EHRR 29 in which it was  held
           that the level of suspicion required need not be  sufficient  to
           charge the detainee and in  Brogan  &  Ors  -v-  United  Kingdom
           (1998)  11  EHRR  117  detaining  suspects  to  further   police
           investigations by  way  of  confirming  or  dispelling  concrete
           suspicions of terrorism did not breach the Convention.


           6.9   I did not consider that there were any substantial grounds
           for believing that any detention to which the Appellant might be
           subjected for identification for identification purposes on  his
           return to Sri Lanka would be in breach of Article 5.


           Claim under Article 6


           6.10  As pointed out by the Respondent's representatives in  his
           submission, there was no evidence that the Appellant would  face
           a trial or hearing before a Court in Sri Lanka, let  alone  that
           he would face an unfair trial.  The  mere  possibility  that  he
           might at some stage in the future  be  brought  before  a  Court
           where he could not understand the proceedings was not in my view
           sufficient to show a real risk of a breach of Article 6.



           Claim under Article 14



           6.11  As has been accepted by both parties to this appeal,  this
           Article is not "freestanding" and as the Appellant has not shown
           that there is a real risk of  a  breach  of  any  of  the  other
           Articles of the ECHR.  I have concluded that he  has  failed  to
           show a "difference in treatment" that he would suffer on  return
           to  Sri  Lanka,   which   had   no   reasonable   or   objective
           justification.


           6.12  He has failed to  show  that  he  would  be  treated  less
           favourably than others who are in a similar situation to himself
           as a returning failed Tamil asylum seeker.


           6.13  For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


  24. It is clear that the second Adjudicator took the  first  Adjudicator's
      determination of the Appellant's asylum appeal as his  starting  point
      in reaching his conclusion on the Appellant's human rights appeal.

b.  The phenomenon of second appeals

  25. The coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 and section  65  of
      the 1999 Act has led, in a large number of cases, to  the  possibility
      of a second appeal to an Adjudicator.  Those individuals whose appeals
      were (originally) determined  well  before  2  October  2000  may,  if
      removal is now threatened, make an allegation that their removal  will
      breach their human rights.  They have a right of appeal under  section
      65.  Those who had an appeal pending on  2  October  2000  against  an
      immigration decision taken before that date cannot,  in  that  appeal,
      raise matters relating to their human  rights,  because  the  relevant
      provisions of the 1999 Act apply  only  to  decisions  taken  after  1
      October.  It is perhaps arguable that human  rights  issues  could  be
      raised in a pending appeal to an Adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  under
      section 7 (1) (b) of the 1998 Act: but in Pardeepan (00 TH  2414)  the
      Tribunal accepted an undertaking by the Secretary of State  that  such
      individuals  would  be  allowed  to  raise  human  rights  issues   if
      threatened with removal after the dismissal of  their  appeal.   Their
      position is thus assimilated to  those  whose  appeals  ceased  to  be
      pending before 2 October 2000.

  26. The 1999 Act is designed to encourage claimants  to  put  forward  all
      their grounds for  staying  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  one  appeal.
      Typically, therefore, where the appeal  is  against  a  decision  made
      after 1 October 2000, the Adjudicator will consider such human  rights
      grounds as are raised before him.  If the claimant attempts to reserve
      human rights points for a  later  allegation,  he  may  be  met  by  a
      certification under section  73  (2)  of  the  1999  Act,  essentially
      putting an end to his claim.  But if there is  no  certification  (for
      example, if the human rights claim depends on facts that  have  arisen
      only since the date of the appeal), then again there may be  a  second
      appeal to an Adjudicator if actual removal is threatened.

  27. The possibility of a second appeal will continue to arise in  practice
      because the Secretary of State does not, in  the  majority  of  cases,
      attempt promptly to enforce decisions  of  the  Immigration  Appellate
      Authorities.  Broadly speaking, an adverse decision by an  Adjudicator
      or the Tribunal has no immediate effect on  the  claimant's  continued
      presence in the United Kingdom (although it does affect the payment of
      benefits to him).  An unsuccessful claimant is the subject of proposed
      removal (if at all) only after a passage of time.  In that time he may
      have been able to discover more about the situation and his  prospects
      in his own country; or the situation  in  his  own  country  may  have
      changed for the worse; or  he  may  have  developed  family  links  or
      medical conditions relevant in considering  rights  under  Article  8.
      These are, of course, only examples.

  28. Parliament clearly recognises the possibility of a second appeal to an
      Adjudicator within the structure of the 1999 Act.  The  considerations
      set out above show that a second appeal is, and will continue  to  be,
      by no means unusual.  In this context the question we have  to  decide
      is what effect the determination  of  the  Adjudicator  in  the  first
      appeal should have on the decision-making process of  the  Adjudicator
      in the second appeal.


  29. The law relating to the previous Adjudicator's determination  when  an
      appeal is remitted is of no relevance here.  It  is  well  established
      that when an appeal is remitted for rehearing  an  Adjudicator  should
      have no regard to any previous determination, and should not even look
      at it except with the consent of all parties.  But that is because the
      previous determination has been set  aside.   In  cases  such  as  the
      present, the determination has not been set aside.  It remains in full
      force as the determination of the Appellant's original claim.

c.  Submissions relating to procedure

  30. Mr Lewis complained that the second Adjudicator  failed  to  make  any
      explicit reference in his decision to the copious documentary evidence
      before him, some of which referred to frequent, routine  ill-treatment
      of detainees.  He argued that, although the  first  Adjudicator  found
      that the Appellant had not established that he had been beaten 'to the
      extent claimed', he had apparently made  no  finding  on  whether  the
      Appellant had suffered some lesser  form  of  physical  ill-treatment.
      In  basing  his  findings  so  firmly  on  the   first   Adjudicator's
      conclusions, the second Adjudicator had  failed  to  give  independent
      consideration to these issues, which might establish a breach  of  the
      European Convention  or  Human  Rights.   Mr  Lewis  argued  that  the
      circumstances of this case illustrate the 'potential errors in relying
      upon a factual assessment in an asylum appeal when considering a human
      rights appeal'.

  31. Mr Lewis went on to submit that in a case such as this,  the  previous
      determination is merely 'a relevant matter to be taken  into  account'
      in the human rights appeal, but that  neither  the  findings  nor  the
      conclusions of the first  Adjudicator  are  binding  upon  the  second
      Adjudicator.  He further said that it is  'of  significance'  in  this
      case that the Appellant did not appear before  the  first  Adjudicator
      but gave evidence before the second Adjudicator.  His written skeleton
      argument on this issue concluded as follows:

           '2.10 In the circumstances  it  is  submitted  that  the  second
           Adjudicator  has  erred  in  failing  to  make  an   independent
           assessment  of  the  Appellant's   history,   and   further   or
           alternatively in failing to set out with sufficient clarity  his
           primary factual findings and the reasons for those findings.


           It is further submitted that these errors are compounded by  the
           second Adjudicator's  failure  to  make  any  reference  to  the
           background evidence.


           2.11 Further to the above it is submitted that  this  deficiency
           in the second Adjudicator's determination can only  be  remedied
           to the Appellant's satisfaction by either an acceptance  in  its
           entirety of his account, or a fresh hearing (either  before  the
           IAT or by way of remittal to a different adjudicator).'

  32. In his oral submissions Mr Lewis pointed out that in relation  to  new
      evidence, Ladd v Marshall  [1954]  1  WLR  1489  could  not  apply  in
      proceedings such as the present, because the appeal is a new one.   He
      acknowledged, however, that where an Appellant relied before a  second
      Adjudicator on material that (for no good reason) he did not tender to
      the  first  Adjudicator,  there  may  need  to  be  an  assessment  of
      credibility.  He also submitted that  the  second  Adjudicator  should
      give  his  reasons  for  agreeing  or  disagreeing  with   the   first
      Adjudicator's  assessment.   He  asked  us  to  look  at   the   first
      Adjudicator's determination not as something that ought  generally  to
      be applied to the determination of the second appeal,  but  merely  as
      part of the background.  The second  Adjudicator  was,  in  his  view,
      entitled simply to differ from the first Adjudicator and to  determine
      the appeal accordingly.

  33. Miss Giovanetti agreed  that  the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
      cannot  be  regarded  as  binding  on  the  second  Adjudicator.   She
      submitted,  however,  that  it  was  entirely  proper  for  a   second
      Adjudicator to have regard to the first  Adjudicator's  findings,  and
      that the second Adjudicator should only  differ  from  those  findings
      where there is good reason to do so.  If the human rights  appeal  was
      based on the same factual matrix as the asylum appeal, a  good  reason
      might be found in a change in the situation in the country of  origin,
      or the  availability  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  the  first
      Adjudicator.  If the human rights  claim  was  based  on  a  different
      factual matrix, it would generally be necessary to make new  findings,
      probably on additional evidence.  The different factual  matrix  would
      itself be a good reason for  not  following  and  applying  the  first
      Adjudicator's determination.  Otherwise,  however,  legal  and  policy
      considerations  demanded  that  the  Appellant's  second   appeal   be
      determined  in  line  with  his  first.   She  identified  four   such
      considerations.

  34. The first is fairness: it would be unfair to  an  Appellant,  who  had
      satisfied the  first  Adjudicator  that  his  account  of  events  was
      credible, to deprive him of the benefit of that finding.  If  that  is
      right, it must follow that an Appellant who has failed to  satisfy  an
      Adjudicator of his credibility  is  not  entitled  to  have  the  same
      evidence re-assessed by a second Adjudicator.  It is not fair  to  the
      public for there to be a system in which favourable findings stand but
      unfavourable findings  are  always  questionable.   Secondly,  general
      principles of consistency and finality  in  litigation  are  important
      even in the absence of a rule of res judicata.  Thirdly,  the  general
      approach to findings of fact in immigration cases both  on  appeal  to
      the Tribunal and outside the IAA (e.g. ex parte Danaie [1998]  1mm  AR
      84) is that findings of fact stand unless  there  is  good  reason  to
      displace them.  Fourthly, it would, in Miss  Giovanetti's  submission,
      be contrary to good administration to have a system which allowed  for
      the continuing existence of two undisturbed determinations of the  IAA
      containing inconsistent findings of  fact  in  relation  to  the  same
      individual.

  35. Miss Giovanetti also submitted that it is clear from the 1999 Act that
      the human rights appeal is not truly independent of an asylum  appeal.
      We do not accept that: there may be cases where the two  are  properly
      linked, but in a case such  as  the  present  there  are  clearly  two
      appeals.

  36. We should also say at this point that, at the hearing, there was  some
      discussion of the possible applicability  of  rule  44,  which  allows
      summary determination where "the issues raised in an appeal have  been
      [already]  determined  ...  in  previous  proceedings  to  which   the
      appellant ... was a party,  on  the  basis  of  facts  which  did  not
      materially differ from those to which the appeal  relates."   Rule  44
      applies to a situation where, in a second appeal, the  issues  may  be
      the same as in the first although the evidence might  (if  the  matter
      proceeded to a hearing) be different.  The present  problem  is  in  a
      sense the reverse: the evidence might be  largely  the  same  and  the
      facts might be largely the same but the issue is  one  which  has  not
      been already determined.  The first Adjudicator determination whether,
      at the date of his determination, the Appellant's return to Sri  Lanka
      would breach the Refugee Convention; whereas  the  second  Adjudicator
      determines whether at the date of his determination,  the  Appellant's
      return to Sri Lanka would be in breach of his human rights.   Rule  44
      has no obvious application to cases such as the present.

d.  Our guidelines on procedure in second appeals

  37. We consider that the proper approach lies between that advocated by Mr
      Lewis and that advocated by Miss Giovanetti, but  considerably  nearer
      to  the  latter.   The  first   Adjudicator's   determination   stands
      (unchallenged, or not successfully challenged) as an assessment of the
      claim  the  Appellant  was  then  making,  at   the   time   of   that
      determination.  It is not binding on the second Adjudicator;  but,  on
      the other hand, the  second  Adjudicator  is  not  hearing  an  appeal
      against it.  As an assessment of the  matters  that  were  before  the
      first Adjudicator it should simply be regarded  as  unquestioned.   It
      may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of the hearing before
      the second Adjudicator may be quite different  from  what  might  have
      been expected from a reading of the first determination only.  But  it
      is not the second Adjudicator's role to consider arguments intended to
      undermine the first Adjudicator's determination.

  38. The second Adjudicator must, however be careful to recognise that  the
      issue  before  him  is  not  the  issue  that  was  before  the  first
      Adjudicator.  In particular, time has passed; and the situation at the
      time of the second Adjudicator's determination  may  be  shown  to  be
      different from that which obtained previously.  Appellants may want to
      ask the second Adjudicator to consider arguments on issues  that  were
      not - or could not be  -  raised  before  the  first  Adjudicator;  or
      evidence that was not - or could not have  been  -  presented  to  the
      first Adjudicator.

  39. In our view the second Adjudicator should treat such  matters  in  the
      following way.

   1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always be  the  starting-
      point.  It is the authoritative assessment of the  Appellant's  status
      at the time it was made.  In principle  issues  such  as  whether  the
      Appellant was properly represented, or whether he gave  evidence,  are
      irrelevant to this.

   2) Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination can always
      be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.  If those facts  lead
      the second Adjudicator to the conclusion that,  at  the  date  of  his
      determination and on the material before him, the appellant makes  his
      case, so be it.  The previous decision, on  the  material  before  the
      first Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.

   3) Facts happening  before  the  first  Adjudicator's  determination  but
      having no relevance to the issues before him can always be taken  into
      account by the second Adjudicator.  The  first  Adjudicator  will  not
      have been concerned with such facts, and his determination is  not  an
      assessment of them.

40.   We now  pass  to  matters  that  could  have  been  before  the  first
      Adjudicator but were not.

   4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought to the attention
      of the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant  to  the  issues
      before him, should be treated  by  the  second  Adjudicator  with  the
      greatest circumspection.  An Appellant who seeks, in a  later  appeal,
      to add to the available facts in an effort to obtain a more favourable
      outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point of view  of
      credibility.  (Although considerations  of  credibility  will  not  be
      relevant in cases where the existence of the additional fact is beyond
      dispute.)  It must also be borne in mind that the first  Adjudicator's
      determination was made at a time closer to the events alleged  and  in
      terms of both fact-finding and general  credibility  assessment  would
      tend to have the advantage.  For this reason, the  adduction  of  such
      facts  should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration   of   the
      conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

   5) Evidence of other facts - for  example  country  evidence  -  may  not
      suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but should be treated
      with caution.  The reason is different from  that  in  (4).   Evidence
      dating from before the determination of the  first  Adjudicator  might
      well have been relevant if it had been tendered to  him:  but  it  was
      not, and he made his determination without it.  The situation  in  the
      Appellant's own country at the time  of  that  determination  is  very
      unlikely to be relevant in deciding whether the Appellant's removal at
      the time of the second Adjudicator's determination  would  breach  his
      human rights.   Those  representing  the  Appellant  would  be  better
      advised to assemble up-to-date evidence than to rely on material  that
      is (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.

41.   The final major category of case is where the  Appellant  claims  that
      his removal would breach Article 3 for the same reason that he claimed
      to be a refugee.

   6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies  on  facts  that
      are not materially different from those put to the first  Adjudicator,
      and proposes to support the claim by  what  is  in  essence  the  same
      evidence as that available to the Appellant at that time,  the  second
      Adjudicator  should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the   first
      Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line  with  that
      determination rather than allowing the matter to be re-litigated.   We
      draw attention to the phrase 'the same evidence as that  available  to
      the Appellant' at the time of the first determination.  We have chosen
      this phrase not only in order to accommodate guidelines  (4)  and  (5)
      above, but also because, in respect of evidence that was available  to
      the Appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices about how  it
      should be presented.  An  Appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  present
      evidence of which he has no knowledge: but if (for example) he chooses
      not to give oral evidence in his first appeal, that does not mean that
      the issues or the available evidence in the second appeal are rendered
      any different by his proposal to  give  oral  evidence  (of  the  same
      facts) on this occasion.

42.   We offer two further comments, which are not less important than  what
      precedes then.

      (7)   The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4) and (6)  is
      greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why the  Appellant's
      failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the  first  Adjudicator
      should not be, as it were, held against him.  We  think  such  reasons
      will be rare.   There  is  an  increasing  tendency  to  suggest  that
      unfavourable decisions by Adjudicators are brought about by  error  or
      incompetence on the  part  of  representatives.   New  representatives
      blame old representatives; sometimes representatives blame  themselves
      for prolonging the litigation by their inadequacy (without, of course,
      offering the public any compensation for the  wrong  from  which  they
      have profited by fees).  Immigration  practitioners  come  within  the
      supervision of the Immigration Services Commissioner under part  V  of
      the 1999 Act.  He has power to register, investigate  and  cancel  the
      registration of any practitioner, and solicitors and counsel  are,  in
      addition, subject to their own professional  bodies.   An  Adjudicator
      should be  very  slow  to  conclude  that  an  appeal  before  another
      Adjudicator has been materially affected by a  representative's  error
      or incompetence; and such a finding should always be reported (through
      arrangements  made  by  the  Chief  Adjudicator)  to  the  Immigration
      Services Commissioner.

      Having said that, we do accept that there  will  be  occasional  cases
      where the circumstances of the first appeal were such that it would be
      right for the second Adjudicator to look at the matter as if the first
      determination had never been made.  (We think  it  unlikely  that  the
      second Adjudicator would, in such  a  case,  be  able  to  build  very
      meaningfully  on  the  first  Adjudicator's  determination;   but   we
      emphasise that, even in such a case, the first determination stands as
      the determination of the first appeal.)

      (8)   We do not suggest that, in the foregoing, we have covered  every
      possibility.  By covering  the  major  categories  into  which  second
      appeals fall, we intend to indicate the principles  for  dealing  with
      such appeals.  It will be for the second Adjudicator to  decide  which
      of them is or are appropriate in any given case.


e.  Application of the guidelines to this appeal

  43. The Appellant's human rights appeal before the second Adjudicator  was
      based on the same factual matrix as that on which  he  had  relied  in
      attempting to prove that he was a refugee, with one addition, that  is
      to say his scars.

  44.  In addition, Mr Lewis submits that the first Adjudicator did not make
      findings on matters which, although not establishing past persecution,
      might give rise to a successful human rights appeal.  He  argues  that
      the first Adjudicator, in declining to believe that the Appellant  had
      been 'beaten to the extent claimed' appeared to be accepting that  the
      Appellant had been beaten to some extent.  He  further  suggests  that
      the first Adjudicator made no finding on  whether  the  Appellant  was
      made to eat cow dung and drink urine during his detention.

  45. There is no merit in those  submissions,  which  rely,  like  so  many
      submissions  relating   to   Adjudicators'   determinations,   on   an
      unrealistic reading of parts of the determination and a disinclination
      to read the determination as a whole.  If an Appellant claims to  have
      suffered in a particular way and the Adjudicator does not believe that
      he has suffered in that way, the Adjudicator is entitled  to  say  so.
      It does not follow from what the Adjudicator says that he thinks  that
      the Appellant suffered in some other way that he did not mention.  The
      position is that the Appellant has failed to show that his evidence is
      worthy of belief.  As a result, there is no  evidential  basis  for  a
      finding in his favour.

  46. The first Adjudicator in the Appellant's  appeal  considered  all  the
      evidence adduced by the  Appellant  relating  to  his  claim  to  have
      suffered and to be at risk of suffering persecution.    He  concluded,
      on the basis of the evidence relating to the history of Sri  Lanka  at
      the relevant time, that it was 'quite  likely'  that  the  Appellant's
      family house was damaged, that he and many others from his village had
      to leave the area, and that the family ended up in a refugee  camp  in
      Vavuniya.   Following his review of the Appellant's story about how he
      had been treated, he said that he did not think that, if the Appellant
      had been beaten with the severity he claimed, he would  have  not  had
      any signs of the beating  to  show  when  he  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  That is a rejection of the Appellant's story of his beating.
       There was no other  story  of  beating.   In  the  circumstances  the
      Adjudicator would have been quite wrong to find that the Appellant had
      been beaten in any other way, and he did not do so.

  47. Indeed, after further analysis of the Appellant's story, he said this:
       'I do not accept that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant  was
      detained, ill-treated and released in the circumstances  that  he  has
      described'.  The same  observations  apply.   The  Appellant  had  not
      provided an alternative story.   The  Adjudicator  rejected  the  only
      evidence there was of the  Appellant's  detention,  ill-treatment  and
      release.  That was a clear and complete finding.

  48. It is true that in making that finding he did not  specifically  refer
      to the Appellant's claim that he had been made to  eat  cow  dung  and
      drink urine.  He did not need to do so.  Those claims were  claims  of
      ill-treatment.  The Adjudicator said comprehensively that he  did  not
      believe the evidence on such claims.  There can be no doubt,  however,
      that all that the Appellant said in relation to his past ill-treatment
      was relevant to his asylum claim, for persecution  may  consist  of  a
      cumulation of individual events of ill-treatment.  The 'lesser form of
      physical ill-treatment' to which  Mr  Lewis  refers  in  the  hope  of
      showing that the Adjudicator's finding was incomplete might  not  have
      been enough by themselves to establish  persecution.   But  they  were
      part of the Appellant's story of ill-treatment, all of which was  told
      in an effort to establish that he had  been  persecuted,  and  all  of
      which had been rejected.

  49. Mr Lewis then says that the Adjudicator should have made reference  to
      the documentary evidence.   It  is  clear  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      documentary evidence in mind, for he made findings on the basis of it,
      relating to the flight of the Appellant's family from  their  village.
      The purpose that  would  have  been  served  by  his  making  specific
      references  is  entirely  unclear.   The  evidence  is  said  to  have
      demonstrated 'the frequent, routine ill-treatment of detainees'.  But,
      first, the Adjudicator had rejected the Appellant's claim to have been
      'detained' (although accepting that he had spent  time  in  a  refugee
      camp); secondly, the Adjudicator did not suggest that the evidence did
      not tell, within its limits, an accurate story; and thirdly, the  fact
      that something is said to happen  routinely  does  not  mean  that  it
      happened to the Appellant.

  50.  Before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relied on  evidence  that
      (with the exception of the scars) differed in  no  material  way  from
      what was before the first Adjudicator and was  considered  by  him  in
      making his determination.  The first Adjudicator's  determination  has
      never been challenged and, even before us, it was not  suggested  that
      it was not a perfectly adequate determination  of  the  issues  before
      him.  For the reasons we have given, we regard it also as a sufficient
      assessment of the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  the
      matters relevant to his present claim.   In  our  view  there  was  no
      reason at all for the second Adjudicator not to follow it and to  make
      his own findings in line with it, as he did.

  51. There is no doubt that the Appellant has some scars.   They  therefore
      fall within the words in brackets in guideline 4.  The evidence of the
      scars needed to be built on to the Appellant's  failure  to  establish
      that he had been ill-treated in the past.  This the second Adjudicator
      also  attempted  to  do,  in  paragraphs  6.4,  6.6  and  6.7  of  his
      determination.  Here, however, the second Adjudicator fell into error.
       Two things are clear about scars in  Sri  Lankan  Tamil  cases.   The
      first is that not every scar makes a person a refugee.  The second  is
      that it is not the cause of the scars, but their effect, that  counts.
      The question is whether the scars are such as to give rise to the risk
      that a Sri Lankan official will think that the person is an insurgent.
       The Adjudicator was wrong to treat the scars as of no importance  for
      the reason  simply  that  they  were  admitted  to  have  been  caused
      accidentally.

  52. Before him the only evidence about the nature of the scars was what he
      was invited to observe with his own eyes.  The first Adjudicator  had,
      as long ago as May 1998, adverted to the lack of any  medical  report,
      and had indeed made his findings partly  on  the  basis  that,  as  no
      medical evidence had ever been sought,  the  inference  was  that  the
      Appellant knew that  no  such  evidence  would  help  his  case.   The
      Appellant's human rights claim was made, as we have said, some two and
      a half years later, and this appeal was heard by the Tribunal nearly a
      year later again.  The Appellant's  representatives  put  in  material
      amounting in total to over 500 pages, but there is  still  no  medical
      report.  In other words, there is no proper description of  the  scars
      from which we or anybody else could assess what  risk,  if  any,  they
      pose to the Appellant.  In the circumstances there is no basis  for  a
      finding that the scars are such as to engender any risk.


f.  What has the Appellant established?

  53. The Appellant has failed to show a history of  ill-treatment  and  has
      failed to show that the condition of his body is such as to expose him
      to ill-treatment.  He is in the same position as any other young  male
      Tamil: there are no personal factors heightening the risk.

THE APPEAL ON HUMAN RIGHTS GROUNDS

a.  Introduction: the general law

  54. He nevertheless presses  his  human  rights  claim  on  the  basis  of
      evidence not relating to himself particularly but to Tamils generally.
       Mr Lewis does not shrink from  the  implications  of  this.   If  the
      Appellant can succeed in this appeal,  no  young  male  Tamil  can  be
      returned to Sri Lanka.  That is why we  made  some  reference  to  the
      international position in paragraphs 13-18 of this determination.

  55. It is to the Appellant's general  human  rights  claim  that  we  must
      therefore turn and we  begin  by  setting  out  the  Articles  of  the
      European Convention on Human  Rights  to  which  we  shall  be  making
      reference.

                                  Article 1

                     Obligation to respect human rights


           The High Contracting Parties shall  secure  to  everyone  within
           their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section  1
           of this Convention.


                                  Section 1


                             Rights and freedoms



                                  Article 2

                                Right to life



           1.    Everyone's right to life shall be protected  by  law.   No
           one shall be deprived of his  life  intentionally  save  in  the
           execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a
           crime for which this penalty is provided by law.


           2.    Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted  in
           contravention of this article when it results from  the  use  of
           force which is no more than absolutely necessary:


                  a    in defence of any person from unlawful violence;


                 b   In order to effect as lawful arrest or to prevent the
           escape of a person lawfully detained;


                 c    in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a
           riot or insurrection.


                                  Article 3

                           Prohibition of torture



           No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading
           treatment or punishment.


                                  Article 5

                        Right to liberty and security



           1.    Everyone has the right to liberty and security of  person.
           No one shall be deprived of his liberty save  in  the  following
           cases ad in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:


                 a  the lawful detention of a person after conviction  by  a
           competent court;


                 b   the lawful arrest or detention of  a  person  for  non-
           compliance with the lawful order of  a  court  or  in  order  to
           secure the fulfilment of an obligation prescribed by law;


                 c   the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for
           the  purposes  of  bringing  him  before  the  competent   legal
           authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence
           or when it is reasonably considered  necessary  to  prevent  his
           committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;


                 d   the detention of  a  minor  by  lawful  order  for  the
           purpose of educational supervision or his lawful  detention  for
           the  purpose  of  bringing  him  before  the   competent   legal
           authority;


                 e  the lawful detention of persons for  the  prevention  of
           the spreading of infectious  diseases,  of  persons  of  unsound
           mind, alcoholics or drug addicts or vagrants;


                 f    the lawful arrest or detention of a person to  prevent
           his effecting an unauthorised entry into the  country  or  of  a
           person against whom  action  is  being  taken  with  a  view  to
           deportation or extradition.


           2. Everyone who is arrested shall be  informed  promptly,  in  a
           language, which he understands, of the reasons  for  his  arrest
           and of any charge against him.


           3.   Everyone  arrested  or  detained  in  accordance  with  the
           provisions of paragraph 1.c of this  article  shall  be  brought
           promptly before a judge or other officer authorised  by  law  to
           exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within  a
           reasonable time or to release pending  trial.   Release  may  be
           conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.


           4. Everyone  who  is  deprived  of  his  liberty  by  arrest  or
           detention shall be entitled to take  proceedings  by  which  the
           lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court
           and his released ordered if the detention is not lawful.


           5.  Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in
           contravention of the provisions of his article shall have an
           enforceable right to compensation.


                                  Article 6

                            Right to a fair trial



           1. In the determination of his civil rights and  obligations  or
           of any criminal charge against him, everyone is  entitled  to  a
           fair  and  public  hearing  within  a  reasonable  time  by   an
           independent and impartial tribunal established by law.  Judgment
           shall be pronounced publicly but the press  and  public  may  be
           excluded from all or part of  the  trial  in  the  interests  of
           morals, public  order  or  national  security  in  a  democratic
           society, where the interests of juveniles or the  protection  of
           the private life of the parties so require,  or  to  the  extent
           strictly necessary in  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  special
           circumstances where publicity would prejudice the  interests  of
           justice.


           2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence  shall  be  presumed
           innocent until  proved guilty according to law.


           3. Everyone charged with a criminal offence  has  the  following
           minimum rights:


                 a   to  be  informed  promptly,  in  a  language  which  he
           understands and in detail,  of  the  nature  and  cause  of  the
           accusation against him;


                 b  to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation
           of his defence;


                 c   to defend himself in person or through legal assistance
           of his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient  means  to  pay
           for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests  of
           justice so require;


                 d  to examine or have examined witnesses against him and to
           obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf
           under the same conditions as witnesses against him;


                 e   to have the free assistance of  an  interpreter  if  he
           cannot understand or speak the language used in court.


                                  Article 8

                Right to respect for private and family life



           1.  Everyone has  the right  to  respect  for  his  private  and
           family life, his home and his correspondence.


           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as in accordance with the law
           and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the  interests  of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.


                                 Article 14

                        Prohibition of discrimination



           The enjoyment of the rights  and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
           such as sex, race,  colour,  language,  religion,  political  or
           other opinion, national or social  origin,  association  with  a
           national minority, property, birth or other status.



55.   Article 1 is not expressly incorporated into English law by the  Human
      Rights Act 1998.  The relevant sections of that Act are the following:

           1. The Convention Rights
           (1)    In this Act 'the Convention rights' means the rights  and
           fundamental freedoms set out in -
            (a) Articles 2 to 12 and 14 of the Convention
            (b) Articles 1 to 3 of the First Protocol, and
            (c) Articles 1 and 2 of the Sixth Protocol,
           as read with Articles 16 to 18 of the Convention.
           (2) Those Articles are to have effect for the purposes  of  this
           Act subject to any designated derogation or reservation  (as  to
           which see sections 14 and 15).



           2.  Interpretation of Convention Rights


           (1)   A court or  Tribunal  determining  a  question  which  has
           arisen in connection with a  Convention  right  must  take  into
           account any -
            (a)judgment, decision, declaration or advisory opinion  of  the
           European Court of Human Rights,
            (b)opinion of the Commission given in a  report  adopted  under
           Article 31 of the Convention,
            (c)decision of the Commission in connection with Article 26  or
           27(2) of the Convention, or
            (d)decision of the Committee of Ministers taken  under  Article
           46 of the Convention,
           whenever made or given, so far as, in the opinion of  the  court
           or tribunal, it is relevant to the  proceedings  in  which  that
           question has arisen.


           6.    Acts of public authorities
           (1)  It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which
           is incompatible with a Convention right.


           7.    Proceedings
           (1)  A person who claims that a public authority has  acted  (or
           proposed to act) in a way which is made unlawful by section 6(1)
           may -
            (a)  bring proceedings against the authority under this Act  in
           the appropriate court or tribunal, or
                 (b)  rely on the Convention right or rights  concerned  in
           any legal proceedings,
           but only if he is (or would be) a victim of the unlawful act.



  56. Section 65 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  gives  a  right  of
      appeal to the  Immigration  Appellate  Authorities  to  a  person  who
      alleges that an authority has acted in breach of his human  rights  in
      taking any decision  under  the  Immigration  Acts  relating  to  that
      person's entitlement to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   In
      this appeal it was not suggested that we have no jurisdiction  on  the
      ground that the decision against which the appellant appeals  was  not
      one relating to his entitlement to remain.  For the purposes  of  this
      determination we should state that we  follow  the  reasoning  of  the
      Tribunal  in  Kehinde  (01/TH/2668*)  and  that   of   Newman   J   in
      Kumarakuraparan [2002] EWHC 112 Admin, rather  than  that  of  Stanley
      Burnton J in Kariharan (CO/1692/2001).  Put briefly, the basis of  our
      view is that if a person has, as a result of the Human Rights  Act,  a
      right not to be removed from the United Kingdom, then a decision  that
      will result in his removal is a decision relating to  his  entitlement
      to remain.  (All the decisions mentioned in  this  paragraph  postdate
      the hearing of this appeal.)

b.  Meaning of 'Convention right' and 'act of a public authority'

  57. One primary question is whether the terms of section 6(1) of the  1998
      Act give greater protection in  an  immigration  case  than  the  mere
      enactment of the Convention would  have  done.  The  Convention  is  a
      treaty between States.  An individual may have a claim against any  of
      those States for breach of the rights that the State has contracted to
      afford him.  As will be seen in  the  course  of  this  determination,
      however, his right  to  inhibit  any  of  the  signatory  States  from
      removing him to a non-signatory State, which may not be so anxious  in
      the protection of human rights, is different.  Mr  Lewis  argues  that
      deciding to remove someone to a place where they are at risk of breach
      of a right protected by the Convention is an act 'incompatible with  a
      Convention right' and is therefore prohibited by section 6(1).

  58. This is, in essence, the  question of the  'extra-territorial  effect'
      of the Convention.  This was a matter dealt with in some detail by the
      Tribunal  in  Kacaj  (01/TH/0634).   As  we  pointed  out  there   (in
      paragraphs 22-26), the term is not really  apt,  because  what  is  in
      issue is indeed (as Mr Lewis argues) the act of the signatory State in
      deciding to expel the individual.  Depending on the  circumstances  of
      the case, a governmental act may be prohibited by the  Convention  not
      because it directly breaches the individual's human rights but because
      it puts him in a situation where others breach his human  rights.   We
      said this about Article 4:

           'In the context of this case, the adjudicator was  in  error  in
           concluding that Article 4 could not be relied on because it  did
           not,  as  he  put  it,  have  extra-territorial  effect.    That
           definition is misleading since there is no  question  of  extra-
           territorial effect in the true sense since the breach,  if  any,
           will have occurred within the jurisdiction by  the  decision  to
           remove which will have the effect of exposing the individual  to
           whatever violation of human rights is in issue.   We  have  used
           the word [extra-territorial]  as  a  convenient  label  for  the
           argument but, for the reasons given, we reject the argument.'

  59. That conclusion was reached without reference to section 6(1), but  it
      shows why that section takes the form it  does.   The  breach  of  the
      Convention, if  there  is  such  a  breach,  takes  place  within  the
      signatory State by the decision the effect of which is to  expose  the
      individual to treatment that is prohibited.  To  this  extent  we  are
      with Mr Lewis.  He invited us to follow Kacaj, which we should  do  in
      any event.

  60. But Mr Lewis wants to go further.  He says that the effect of  section
      6(1) is stronger still, in that  it  prohibits  the  exposure  of  the
      individual to any treatment that would be prohibited if it took  place
      in the United Kingdom.  It is difficult to deal coherently  with  this
      argument as it ignores the development of the  interpretation  of  the
      Convention and the requirement (in section 2(1) of the  Act)  to  take
      such development into account. The rights set out in the  Articles  of
      the Convention  are,  with  few  exceptions,  not  absolute;  and  the
      Articles of the Convention, although appended to a  statute,  are  not
      amenable to interpretation in the same  way  as  an  English  statute.
      Their meaning has been hammered out in  litigation  largely  over  the
      last twenty-five years.  If a young enquirer were to ask an old master
      'What is the meaning of Article such-and-such?  What rights  precisely
      are protected?', he would not be  told  'You  go  away  and  read  the
      Article, and then you will know as much about it as I do', but 'It all
      depends on the circumstances.  Bring your problem to me  and  we  will
      work together through the cases.'.

  61. It is for this reason that it would in  our  view  be  wrong  to  give
      section 6(1) a fuller meaning than that the scheduled Articles are  in
      force as part of the law of England.  Section 2 makes  it  clear  that
      the content of any 'Convention right'  has  to  be  established  after
      consideration of the jurisprudence.  That jurisprudence shows,  as  we
      shall see, that the rights protected by some of  the  Articles  differ
      according to the circumstances of the case.  Nothing, save for Article
      3, to which we shall shortly pass, is absolute.

  62. It should, however, be borne in mind that in a human rights appeal  it
      is the act of the public authority that is challenged.  In the present
      case, as usually in Sri Lankan appeals,  the  Respondent  proposes  to
      remove the Appellant to Sri Lanka.  That means in practical terms that
      he will fly by  scheduled  airline  to  Colombo  airport.  He  may  be
      expected to go from there to Colombo itself, where there  is  a  large
      minority Tamil population.  The authority's  decision  encompasses  no
      more.  If the Appellant goes from there to a place where he is on  any
      account at greater risk, the risk is not attributable to  the  act  of
      the public authority.


c.  Article 3

(i) Law

  63. It is now well appreciated that  Article  3  amounts  to  an  absolute
      prohibition on the ill-treatment specified in it.  The Article  admits
      of no derogation, justification or modification; and  it  prohibits  a
      signatory State from expelling a person to a place where  there  is  a
      real risk that he will suffer such ill-treatment.

  64. In order for there to be a breach of Article 3, it is clear  that  the
      ill-treatment  must  reach  a  sufficient  level  of  severity.   Miss
      Giovanetti referred us to a recent decision of the European  Court  of
      Human Rights in Kudla v  Poland  (application  30210/96;  judgment  26
      October 2000) as an illustration of the rule.  At paragraph 91 of that
      judgment, we find this:

           'However,  ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity
           if it is to fall within the scope of Article 3.  The  assessment
           of this minimum is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  relative;  it
           depends on all the circumstances of the case, such as the nature
           and context of the treatment,  the  manner  and  method  of  its
           execution, its duration, its physical or mental effects and,  in
           some cases, the sex, age and state of health of the victim.'


      There is then a reference to Raninen v Finland (1998) 26 EHRR 563,  to
      which Mr Lewis also referred us.  The wording in Ireland v UK (1978) 2
      EHRR 25 at paragraph 162 is almost identical.

  65. In expulsion cases, the harm that is the subject of the claim has  not
      yet been suffered.   The  issue  is  therefore  not  confined  to  the
      evaluation of the harm: there is another variable,  which  is  whether
      the claimant is at risk of suffering that harm.  Not  all  prospective
      ill-treatment, and not all claims of a prospective risk, are enough to
      engage this Article of the Convention.   The  individual  claimant  or
      Appellant needs to establish that he is  at  real  risk  of  suffering
      proscribed treatment.  In Bensaid v UK (application 44599/98; judgment
      6 February 2001) the Court was faced with clear facts relating to  the
      claimant's mental health, his prognosis, the availability  of  medical
      treatment both in the United Kingdom and in Algeria,  his  country  of
      nationality, the difficulty of travelling  in  Algeria,  the  cost  of
      medicines, the reaction of his family  to  his  illness,  and  so  on.
      Despite the clarity of the factors, the Court (at paragraphs 39-41 and
      48-49 of the judgment) regarded the risk of them  combining  to  cause
      the claimant to suffer treatment contrary to Article 3 (or Article  8)
      on his removal as 'largely speculative' and declined to  find  that  a
      real risk was established.

  66. The task, therefore, is to assess the risk of harm by reference at the
      same  time  to  the  seriousness  of  the  prospective  harm  and  the
      likelihood of its being inflicted on the claimant.  It  was  no  doubt
      the difficulties faced  by  a  claimant  in  establishing  the  double
      contingency that caused the Court in Bensaid to  refer  (at  paragraph
      40;  emphasis  added)  to  'the  high  threshold  set  by  Article  3,
      particularly where the case does not concern the direct responsibility
      of the Contracting State for the infliction of harm'.

(ii)  Evidence

  67. We turn then to the country evidence.  Mr Lewis has put before us  the
      2001 reports of the US Department of State and Human Rights Watch, the
      entry for Sri Lanka in the  2000  Amnesty  International  Yearbook,  a
      report 'The Situation of Tamils in Colombo', produced in November 1999
      by a Dutch body called Sri Lanka Werkgroep, a report  'Tamils  in  Sri
      Lanka' produced in September 1999 by the Dutch Foreign Ministry at The
      Hague; and a book 'Caught in the Middle:  a  Study  of  Tamil  Torture
      Survivors Coming to the UK from Sri Lanka', written by Dr Michael Peel
      and Dr Mary Salinsky, both of the Medical Foundation for the  Care  of
      Victims of Torture, and issued  by  that  body  in  June  2000.   Miss
      Giovanetti has put before us the 'Sri Lanka Assessment'  of  the  Home
      Office's Country Information and Policy Unit, dated  April  2001,  and
      correspondence relating to the documentation of  those  returned  from
      European countries to Sri Lanka.   We  also  have  the  benefit  of  a
      'Synopsis' and a 'Digest' prepared on behalf of the Appellant.

  68. Miss Giovanetti urges caution in dealing with some of  this  material.
      She is right to do so.  As she points out, much of what  is  sometimes
      called 'objective evidence' is unsourced.  Much  of  it  derives  from
      anecdotal evidence of asylum claimants,  without  any  proper  enquiry
      into whether what they say is the truth.   Miss Giovanetti  also  asks
      us to note the geographical context of what is  said  in  the  various
      reports.

  69. The Medical Foundation report, 'Caught in the Middle', is in our  view
      of extremely limited value as evidence - although it is the source  of
      over half those entries in Mr Lewis' 'Synopsis' under the heading 'The
      use of torture is widespread'.  We must explain the  reasons  for  our
      assessment of this report, because we should not want to  be  seen  as
      expressing anything other than admiration for the work the  Foundation
      does with and for its patients.

  70. The report is based largely on the views Dr  Peel  has  reached  as  a
      result of his medical examination of those who claim to have been ill-
      treated in Sri Lanka.  If he regards the injuries they display (or  do
      not display - see below) as consistent with the story they have  told,
      he writes a report indicating that that is the case.  The whole of the
      story told by such a person is then accepted, for the purposes of  the
      published report, as true, regardless of whether it  has  any  medical
      content, and regardless of whether  there  might  be  any  alternative
      explanation for the medical signs (or lack of them).  So, for example,
      the report states confidently that 'many  asylum  seekers  were  badly
      advised by their agents' (page 74).  This is a conclusion that, so far
      as we are aware, the authors' medical expertise does not entitle  them
      to draw.  What they mean is 'many asylum seekers say  that  they  were
      badly advised by their agents, and we do not challenge that'.

  71. As members of the Medical  Foundation  for  the  Care  of  Victims  of
      Torture the authors are no doubt perfectly within their rights not  to
      challenge a patient's story.  As lawyers we should not want to intrude
      into their medical expertise, but we should not be surprised to  learn
      that the medical care of any individual in the situation in  which  he
      finds himself is not likely in many cases to begin by accusing him  of
      lying.  But it is not the  role  of  the  doctor  to  provide  (either
      generally or in  particular  cases)  an  assessment  of  a  claimant's
      truthfulness.   That,  if  the  story  is  challenged,  is   for   the
      appropriate court.  (And, of course,  it  goes  without  saying  that,
      despite  the  title  of  the  body,  it  does  not  follow  that   the
      Foundation's patients have all been subject to  what  a  lawyer  would
      class as 'torture'.)

  72. An attitude of broad acceptance  to  evidence  is  appropriate  for  a
      doctor and carer but exactly how misleading it can be  in  a  forensic
      context is well illustrated by a feature of the  present  appeal.   On
      page 30 of the Report, Dr Peel writes:


           'I would not necessarily expect to see scarring on  someone  who
           had been detained for a few days and beaten in many of the  ways
           that are common in Sri Lanka, such as  punching,  kicking,   and
           being beaten with S-LON pipes, but not assaulted in other  ways.
           The absence of physical signs, however, does not mean  that  the
           person has not been tortured.'


  73. The whole of that passage, with  the  exception  of  one  word,  is  a
      valuable piece of medical advice.  Just because a person has no scars,
      it does not mean that he has not, in the past, suffered beatings.   As
      a medical judgement,  the  second  sentence  is  little  more  than  a
      repetition of the material in the first.  But the addition of the word
      'however' sets the second sentence against the  first,  and  makes  it
      look as though additional information is being  given  -  that  people
      without scars have (or may have) been tortured.  It is in  this  sense
      that the passage  has  been  understood  by  those  who  prepared  the
      'Synopsis' on the Appellant's behalf.  Under the  heading  'No  Trace'
      the passage  is  part  of  the  assemblage  of  material  designed  to
      establish that there is widespread torture in Sri Lanka.  The  absence
      of scars does not mean an absence of torture; but the absence of scars
      is no evidence at all of the presence of torture.

  74. We must also add that this Report is structured  as  a  reply  to  (or
      rebuttal of) the Home Office's reasons for refusing many Tamil  asylum
      claims.  Nobody could regard the whole report as anything  other  than
      partisan.  It is written against the Respondent,  by  those  who  have
      taken the side of Appellants.  In its proper place,  it  is  none  the
      worse for that.  But it should not under any circumstances be regarded
      as 'objective evidence'.

  75. We note that the CIPU Bulletin is also a partisan document, in that it
      comes from an organ of the Respondent.  It is,  however,  little  more
      than a compendium of material from other published sources, which  are
      listed in the bibliography.  They range from reports of  international
      organs, through various governmental bodies in Britain and abroad,  to
      news reports around the world.  The Bulletin is arranged in such a way
      that the source of each statement in it can readily be traced.

  76. We appear to have virtually no information on the nature  of  the  Sri
      Lanka Werkgroep.  It evidently takes a position opposed to  the  Dutch
      government on  the  treatment  of  Tamil  asylum-seekers.   The  Dutch
      Foreign Ministry report appears to make no mention of  the  Sri  Lanka
      Werkgroep in either its text or its  list  of  sources,  although  the
      Werkgroep had produced earlier publications (see footnote  21  in  the
      Werkgroep report).  Whether that is out of mere antipathy, or  because
      the Dutch government has good  reasons  for  ignoring  the  Sri  Lanka
      Werkgroep, or for some other reason, we do not know.

  77. What is important, however, is  that  the  report  of  the  Sri  Lanka
      Werkgroep is very  narrowly  based.   Although  there  are  occasional
      references (see the first paragraph of the report and footnote 33)  to
      a wider range of information, this report is 'based on nine interviews
      with deported Tamil asylum seekers in Sri Lanka, seven  of  whom  were
      deported by the Netherlands'.  We are told nothing  more  about  these
      nine prime sources of information, but no doubt many of them had their
      credibility assessed either administratively or judicially  (or  both)
      and were found wanting: their claims were unsuccessful and  they  were
      returned to Sri  Lanka.  In  the  circumstances  it  is  difficult  to
      attribute very much evidential value to  the  accounts  given  by  the
      individuals interviewed.

(iii)  Conclusions

  78. The Appellant claims that he faces a risk of  arrest,  either  at  the
      airport because of the documents on which he will be travelling, or at
      a checkpoint on the way to or in Colombo, or in a round-up in Colombo.
       He claims that if arrested he faces a serious risk of being subjected
      to torture or other serious ill-treatment: and that his return to  Sri
      Lanka therefore exposes him to real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3.

  79. Mr Lewis did not press the claim relating to the Appellant's  putative
      documentation.  He  was  right  not  to  do  so.   The  evidence  that
      returnees are subject to ill-treatment at the airport for this  reason
      is, to say the least, frail.  But he insisted that  the  general  risk
      for a Tamil is of being detained on one pretext or another and, during
      detention, suffering to severe ill-treatment.

  80. The evidence does not establish that there is  widespread  torture  in
      Colombo.  Miss Giovanetti  points  to  the  Dutch  Foreign  Ministry's
      report, indicating that in the year 1998  Amnesty  International  were
      aware of four case of torture in Colombo, and the  Sri  Lanka  Monitor
      reported only one other.  No  properly  quantified  reliable  evidence
      suggests the contrary.  A Tamil is not at  real  risk  of  torture  in
      Colombo.

  81. Following round-ups, the evidence is that the vast majority  of  those
      detained are released within a short period of time (up to 72  hours).
      The aim of the round-ups is the detection of LTTE activists: and there
      is little doubt that where there is reason to suspect that a  detainee
      is such a person, detention  may  be  prolonged  for  the  purpose  of
      enquiries.  Risk factors  mentioned  in  the  Dutch  Foreign  Ministry
      report are not being in possession of  an  identity  card,  not  being
      registered with the police, recent arrival from the north or east, and
      possession of scars leading to  suspicion  of  LTTE  membership.   The
      Appellant (in common with other  Tamil  returnees)  will  be  able  to
      collect an Emergency Certificate (equivalent to an identity  card)  on
      the first morning after his arrival in Colombo; he  will  be  able  to
      register; he will not have arrived recently from the  north  or  east,
      and has no scars likely to raise suspicions of his having been an LTTE
      member.  If he is rounded up, there is no reason to suppose  that  any
      detention will be other than brief.  There is nothing is his  case  to
      cause suspicion.

  82. If he were to be detained for a lengthier period,  the  risk  of  ill-
      treatment (short of torture)  would  be  higher.   But  that  risk  is
      largely speculative (to use the wording of Bensaid v UK),  because  he
      may never be detained at all and (if detained) is most likely  not  to
      be  detained  for  long.   The  Appellant  fails  to  establish  that,
      generally or universally speaking, a returned Tamil  asylum-seeker  is
      at real risk of being ill-treated in a way the breaches Article 3.

  83. We do not  ignore  the  fact  that  Mr  Lewis  argued  also  that  the
      Appellant's detention would itself breach the Convention and  that  he
      would be deprived of a fair trial.  These are claims  of  breaches  of
      Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention and  are  treated  in  section  'e'
      below.  Nor do we ignore the  claim  that  generalised  discrimination
      against Tamils in Sri Lanka amounts to degrading treatment.   We  have
      found it more convenient to treat this  issue  in  our  discussion  of
      Article 14, at paragraphs 117-124 below.

d.  Article 8

  84. The Appellant also claims that his return to Sri Lanka would interfere
      with his 'physical and moral integrity'  so  as  to  be  a  breach  of
      Article 8.  In his submissions, Mr Lewis acknowledged that this  claim
      depended on the same factual matrix as the claim under Article 3.   We
      have found that the Appellant has not established a real risk of being
      exposed to treatment breaching Article 3.  The risks are  speculative.
      For the same reasons we find that the Appellant fails to  establish  a
      real risk of interference with his physical or moral integrity.

  85. In any event, a breach of Article 8.1 may be justified, in  a  removal
      case, within the proportionality principles of  Article  8.2,  by  the
      need to maintain immigration control.  It is  for  the  Respondent  to
      establish proportionality: but whereas the general  need  to  maintain
      immigration control is a matter of which we take judicial  notice,  as
      well as being the reason behind numerous decisions of national  courts
      and the European Court of Human Rights, there is no evidence  on  this
      issue from  the  Appellant's  side.   In  these  circumstance  we  are
      entitled to decide, as we do, that any infringement of the rights  set
      out in Article 8.1 would not be disproportionate to that need.

  86. For the avoidance of  doubt  we  should  add  that  it  has  not  been
      seriously suggested that  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom to his country of nationality would interfere with his private
      or family life here: there  would  be  no  evidential  basis  for  any
      finding that it would.

  87. For the foregoing reasons we find no breach of Article 8.


e.  Articles 5 and 6



(i)  General

  88. We can take Articles 5 and 6 together, for the arguments in respect of
      them are sufficiently similar.  It  is common ground that  Articles  5
      and 6 are not 'absolute' in the sense that Article 3  is.   They  are,
      however, not 'non-absolute' in precisely the same way as Articles 8  -
      11.

  89. Each of  Articles  8-11  incorporates  a  general  provision  allowing
      interference or limitation of the right protected by  the  Article  in
      question.  As a result, a balancing exercise has to be undertaken when
      a breach of the Article is alleged; and in expulsion cases it may  be,
      for example, that the need for firm and fair immigration control  will
      be found to justify an interference with private or family life.  (See
      R v SSHD ex parte Mahmood [2001] 1 WLR 840,  CA;  Kacaj  (01/TH/0634),
      paragraph 25

  90. There is no such general provision in Articles 5  and  6.   Article  5
      lays down circumstances in which deprival of liberty  is  allowed  but
      with that reservation the two Articles are both expressed in  absolute
      terms.  Nevertheless, it has been the consistent approach of the Court
      that the rights guaranteed by Articles 5 and 6 are not absolute rights
      and that what appears to be a breach may be found to be justifiable in
      the light of all the circumstances. This is quite different  from  the
      equally consistent approach to Article 3:  if treatment  comes  within
      Article 3 at all, it cannot be justified.

  91. Miss Giovanetti submits that Articles 5  and  6  should  not  be,  and
      indeed have not been, interpreted in such a way  as  to  prohibit  the
      return or expulsion of individuals to non-signatory countries which do
      not observe the same standards in relation to liberty and a fair trial
      as are guaranteed by Articles 5 and 6.  In her  written  skeleton  she
      states that those acting for the Respondent have not  found  a  single
      instance where the Court or the Commission have  held  that  expulsion
      would be unlawful because it would expose the Applicant  to  treatment
      contravening Articles 5 and 6.  Nothing we heard from Mr Lewis  causes
      us to think that there was any instance that was not found.

  92. Miss Giovanetti also points out that the obligation to protect persons
      from treatment contrary to the Convention is  rather  limited  (except
      under Article 3) when the treatment is by  third  parties.   Even  the
      right to life is not absolute in this sense, even on the territory  of
      a country that is a party to the Convention.  In Osman v UK (2000)  29
      EHRR 245, the Court noted, at paragraph 115, that  Article  2  enjoins
      the State not only to refrain from the intentional and unlawful taking
      of life, but also to take appropriate steps to safeguard the  life  of
      those within its jurisdiction.  It  went  on  (at  paragraph  116)  to
      express its view that

           'bearing in mind the difficulties involved  in  policing  modern
           societies,  the  unpredictability  of  human  conduct  and   the
           operational choices which must be made in  terms  of  priorities
           and resources, such an obligation must be interpreted in  a  way
           which does not impose an impossible or  disproportionate  burden
           on the authorities.'

93.   In relation to Article 6, Miss Giovanetti cited Soering  v  UK  (1989)
      11 EHRR 439 and Drozd and Janousek v France and Spain (1992)  14  EHRR
      745.  In Soering, the UK proposed to extradite the  Applicant  to  the
      USA, which is of course, not a party to  the  Convention.   The  Court
      unanimously held that the Applicant's complaints  that  he  would  not
      have legal aid for his trial in the USA did not give rise to an  issue
      under Article 6(3)(c).  It said, at paragraph 113:

           'The right to a fair trial in criminal proceedings, as  embodied
           in Article 6, holds a prominent place in a  democratic  society.
           The Court does not exclude that an issue might exceptionally  be
           raised  under  Article  6  by   an   extradition   decision   in
           circumstances where the fugitive has suffered or risks suffering
           a flagrant denial of a fair trial  in  the  requesting  country.
           However, the facts of the present case do not  disclose  such  a
           risk.'

  94. The  legal  background  of  Drozd  is  somewhat  more  involved.   The
      Applicants, citizens of Spain and  Czechoslovakia  respectively,  were
      convicted of armed  robbery  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  by  the
      Tribunal de Corts in the Principality of  Andorra.   Following  normal
      procedure there the court was composed of French and  Spanish  judges,
      and  the  sentence  was  to  be  served  in  a  French  prison.   (The
      constitutional and legal system in Andorra is conveniently set out  in
      paragraphs 32 - 76 of the report).  Andorra is  not  a  party  to  the
      Convention; the Applicants claimed against France and Spain  that  the
      trial in which their judges took part was in breach of Article 6,  and
      against France that their imprisonment was in breach of Article 5.

  95. The Court found that not only is Andorra not a party to the Convention
      in its own right:  it is not subject to the Convention as a result  of
      its relationship with either France or Spain.   It also held  that  in
      exercising office as judges in Andorra, the French and Spanish  judges
      were not acting as French or Spanish officials, but as judges  of  the
      Principality.   Their  acts  as  such  judges   were   therefore   not
      attributable to France or Spain. The allegation of breaches of Article
      6 was therefore not within the jurisdiction of the Court.

  96. Having found that the alleged breach of Article 6 was not  within  its
      jurisdiction, the Court then proceeded to consider the claim that  the
      Applicants' detention in France was a  breach  (by  France)  of  their
      rights under Article 5.  The question was twofold.  First, was there a
      sufficient legal basis, in French law, for  the  detention?  Secondly,
      should the French authorities have exercised control over the judgment
      pronounced in Andorra?

  97. The first question was answered by reference to similar principles  to
      those which had motivated the decision on  Article  6.   There  was  a
      clear basis, valid in customary law, for the Applicants' detention  in
      France (or, indeed, Spain) following conviction by an Andorran  court.
      On the second question,  whether  France  should  have  exercised  any
      control over the Tribunal de Corts, so as to ensure that a sentence of
      imprisonment was imposed only in accordance with the  requirements  of
      Article 6, the Court's conclusion, in paragraph 110, was as follows:

           'The Court, like the Commission, considers that in this case the
           Tribunal de Corts, which pronounced the conviction of  Mr  Drozd
           and Mr Janousek, is the 'competent court' referred to in Article
           5(1)(a).  As the Convention does  not  require  the  Contracting
           Parties to impose its standards on third States or  territories,
           France was not obliged to verify whether the  proceedings  which
           resulted  in  the  conviction  were  compatible  with  all   the
           requirements of Article 6 of the Convention.  To require such  a
           review of  the  manner  in  which  a  court  not  bound  by  the
           Convention had applied the principles  enshrined  in  Article  6
           would  also  thwart  the  current  trend  towards  strengthening
           international cooperation in the administration  of  justice,  a
           trend which is in principle  in  the  interest  of  the  persons
           concerned.  The Contracting  States  are,  however,  obliged  to
           refuse their cooperation if it emerges that  the  conviction  is
           the result of a flagrant denial of justice.

           The Court takes note of  the  declaration  made  by  the  French
           Government to the effect that it could and in fact would  refuse
           its customary cooperation if it was a question of  enforcing  an
           Andorran  judgment  which  was  manifestly   contrary   to   the
           provisions of Article 6 or the principles embodied  therein.  It
           finds confirmation of this assurance in the  decisions  of  some
           French courts: certain indictments  divisions  refuse  to  allow
           extradition of a person who has been convicted in his absence in
           a court where it is not  possible  for  him  to  be  retried  on
           surrendering to justice, and the Conseil d'Etat has declared the
           extradition of persons  liable  to  the  death  penalty  on  the
           territory of the requesting State to be incompatible with French
           public policy.


           In the Court's opinion, it  has  not  been  shown  that  in  the
           circumstances of the case, France was  required  to  refuse  its
           cooperation in enforcing the sentences.'

  98. In his written  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Lewis  did  not  address  the
      question of the application of Articles 5 and 6 to acts having  effect
      outside the territory of  contracting  parties.   Instead,  he  simply
      argued, on the basis of the evidence, that the treatment to which  the
      appellant would be subject on his return would breach  those  Articles
      as they have been interpreted and applied by the  Court  in  assessing
      acts having an effect within the territory of the contracting parties.
       In his oral submissions, he argued that the authorities to which Miss
      Giovanetti had referred tended towards the opposite of the  conclusion
      she had urged on us.

  99. As Mr Lewis observed, in Drozd, the Court prefaced its  discussion  of
      the responsibility of the judges as French or Spanish authorities with
      the following (paragraphs 89 - 91)

           '89 ... In short, the objection of lack of jurisdiction  ratione
           loci [i.e. because the events took place on territory  not  part
           of a signatory State] is well-founded.


           90.          This  finding  does  not  absolve  the  Court  from
           examining whether the Applicants came under  the  'jurisdiction'
           of France or Spain within  the  meaning  of  Article  1  of  the
           Convention because of their conviction by an Andorran court.


           91.   The term 'jurisdiction' is not  limited  to  the  national
           territory of the High Contracting Parties; their  responsibility
           can  to  be  involved  because  of  acts  of  their  authorities
           producing effects outside their own territory.'

 100. Mr  Lewis  relies  on  paragraph  91  in  particular  to  support  his
      submission that the Court  is  -  and  hence  national  courts  are  -
      concerned with  the  effect,  outside  the  territory  of  contracting
      parties, of a decision made by the authorities in a State party to the
      Convention.  But that proposition is not in dispute. It is clearly  of
      concern under Article 3.  Mr Lewis referred generally  to  Article  8,
      but that may not be quite accurate.  In  many  expulsion  cases  under
      Article 8, the complaint is that the expulsion will interfere with the
      claimant's private or family life as it is at present enjoyed  in  the
      expelling country.  In such cases there is no need to see what are the
      effects outside the territory of that country.  It is clear,  however,
      that such effects may also fall to be taken into  account:   see,  for
      example, D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423.  What paragraph 91 of  Drozd  does
      not establish is that the Convention is engaged in  every  case  where
      the acts of authorities of contracting parties may produce  an  effect
      which, if it took place within the territory of a  contracting  party,
      would be within the jurisdiction of the court.

 101. On Soering, Mr Lewis submitted that the Court's view was that  Article
      5 was analogous to Article 3 in extradition  cases.   That  submission
      was based only on paragraph 85 of the judgment, which does not support
      it.  Article 5 is mentioned in the paragraph only in order to show (by
      the presence of the word 'extradition' in Article  5(i)(f))  that  the
      Convention imposes no universal prohibition  on  extradition.   It  is
      true that it repeats the proposition  that  expulsion  may,  "assuming
      that the consequences are  not  too  remote",  engage  the  Convention
      obligations  of  a  contracting  State.  But,  although  the  footnote
      reference is to Abdulaziz and others v UK  (1985)  7  EHRR  471  -  an
      Article 8 case - the discussion is confined to Article 3.

 102. The Court's decision in Drozd was by a bare majority. The views of the
      dissenting judges are of the very greatest of interest in the  present
      context.  Six of them (pages 796 and 800 of the report) took the  view
      that France had a liability under Article 6 of the Convention  because
      it was in France that the imprisonment was taking place.

           'As the case concerns a fact (a long term of imprisonment) which
           must  take  place  in  France,  the  Convention   is   certainly
           applicable.  And it would be contrary to the  Convention  for  a
           country which was bound by it to agree to deprive  a  person  of
           his liberty where he had been convicted in another country under
           conditions which did  not  appear  to  be  compatible  with  the
           Convention.'

 103. Those judges considered that the finding of a violation of  Article  5
      would "merely" entail the applicant's return  to  Andorra.   It  would
      then be the duty of  the  French  and  Spanish  authorities  to  apply
      diplomatic pressure on Andorra, but no more.

 104. The other five judges, in two separate opinions (pages 794 and 800  of
      the report) took the view that as the sentence was served  in  France,
      France had a duty to ensure that the conviction  was  compatible  with
      the minimum standards required by the Convention to  justify  deprival
      of liberty.

 105. It is to be noted that all the judges, whether agreeing or disagreeing
      on the result, paid great attention to the fact that Andorra is not  a
      party to the Convention.  Nobody  thought  that  it  was  possible  to
      require a non-party country to conform to the obligations  imposed  by
      the Convention. And, despite the criticisms of  the  Andorran  system,
      the majority of those judges who would have decided that the Court had
      jurisdiction would  have  confined  their  judgment  to  finding  that
      imprisonment in France was unlawful.  The consequence would,  as  they
      acknowledge, be the return of the applicants to the very country whose
      criminal justice system is said not to comply with the requirements of
      Articles 5 and 6.

 106. Miss Giovanetti submitted that, if the Convention were interpreted  so
      as to prohibit removal to countries  that  do  not  observe  the  same
      procedural safeguards as in Europe, it would place a  disproportionate
      burden  on  the  signatory  State.   It  would  also   constitute   an
      unwarranted fetter  on  the  right  of  signatory  States  to  control
      immigration.  We agree that it would impose a burden and be a  fetter.
      We agree also with her distinction between Article 3, which relates to
      the most fundamental of rights, and Articles 5 and  6,  which  provide
      procedural and substantive rights.  The fact that  there  would  be  a
      burden on signatory States would not, however,  of  itself  show  that
      that was not the effect of the Convention: and, if it were,  it  would
      not follow that the burden was disproportionate or unwarranted.

 107. We are, however, perfectly satisfied that it is not the  intention  of
      the Convention that any person who  can  make  his  way  from  another
      State, where the  rights  set  out  in  the  Convention  are  not  all
      protected, to a signatory State, can resist return on the  basis  that
      some human right of his may be infringed in his home  country.   There
      are three reasons.  First, that would  place  a  burden  on  signatory
      States so unacceptable that no such State could  be  thought  to  have
      undertaken it.  Secondly, the European Convention on Human Rights,  as
      interpreted  in  Strasbourg,  embodies  merely  one  approach  to  the
      delineation and protection of human rights.  Other  regional  treaties
      are not identical; nor is the approach of  the  United  Nations  Human
      Rights  Commission.   Europe  does  not  have  a   monopoly   in   the
      identification, hierarchy and enforcement of human rights.

 108. Thirdly,  such  an  approach  entirely  ignores  the  dynamic  of  the
      enforcement of human rights in Europe and the process by which the law
      of human rights develops in Europe.  If Sri Lanka were a party to  the
      Convention, an individual might bring proceedings against her  in  the
      European Court of Justice.    In reply, Sri Lanka might bring evidence
      to show that the matters described by the Appellant were not the whole
      story; and she  might  raise  arguments  directed  to  show  that  her
      position, and her practice, was not such as to give rise  to  breaches
      of the Convention.  She might even  be  able  to  show  that  she  had
      validly (under Article  15  of  the  Convention)  derogated  from  the
      Article  alleged  to  have   been   breached.    The   importance   of
      consideration of the situation in the country  in  question  is  amply
      demonstrated by the variety of results  in  claims  under  Article  6,
      reflecting the Court's recognition of a wide margin of appreciation.

 109. But Sri Lanka  is  not  a  party  to  the  Convention.   Whatever  the
      circumstances in that country, Sri  Lanka  cannot  derogate  from  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.   She  has  no  locus  standi  in
      Strasbourg.  Whatever is said about her, she  has  no  opportunity  to
      rebut or explain.  Sri Lanka is not and could not be a party to  these
      proceedings, and no party before us has either the  authority  or  the
      duty to put before us such arguments and evidence as  she  might  have
      put in response to the Appellant's claims.  In these circumstances, we
      cannot  judge  the  Appellant's  situation  on  return  there  by  the
      standards that would apply in a signatory State, because  a  signatory
      State would not be obliged to remain silent in the face of the  claim.
      We could judge the Appellant's situation only  by  reference  to  some
      idealised version of the standards of the Convention - which would, of
      necessity, be a standard higher than that imposed  by  the  Convention
      and the Court on any actual signatory State.  This consideration alone
      is enough to show that the Convention cannot, in general operate so as
      to prevent removal to  a  non-signatory  country  whose  human  rights
      standards are said in some respects to be less than would be  required
      in a signatory State.

 110. It is for these reasons,  we  apprehend,  that  the  Court  takes  the
      position exemplified in Drozd.  It is clear that the  Court  does  not
      attempt to impose the duties of the Convention on States that are  not
      party to it.  It is also clear that the fact  that  a  person  may  be
      treated in a manner that would, in a signatory State, be a  breach  of
      the Convention does not of itself  render  his  expulsion  to  another
      country unlawful, unless either the breach will be of  Article  3,  or
      the consequences of return will be so  extreme  a  breach  of  another
      Article that the returning State, as one of its obligations under  the
      Convention,  is  obliged  to  have  regard  to  them.   Following  the
      jurisprudence on Articles 5 and 6, this consequence will only arise if
      the situation in the  receiving  country  is  that  there  will  be  a
      flagrant denial or gross  violation  of  the  rights  secured  by  the
      Convention.  For this reason we have not needed to  consider  in  this
      determination the precise implications of  Articles  5  and  6  within
      signatory States.

 111. The reason why flagrant denial or gross violation is to be taken  into
      account is that it is only in such a case - where the  right  will  be
      completely denied or nullified in the destination country  -  that  it
      can be said that removal will breach the  treaty  obligations  of  the
      signatory State however those  obligations  might  be  interpreted  or
      whatever might be said by or on behalf of the destination State.

(ii)  Application to this appeal

 112. Mr Lewis took  us  through  a  great  deal  of  material  relating  to
      detention, imprisonment, charge and trial in Sri Lanka.  It does  not,
      in our view show that there is in Sri Lanka a flagrant denial or gross
      violation of the rights secured in signatory States by Articles 5  and
      6.  On the contrary, there is a developed criminal justice system, and
      a National Human Rights Commission.  Things may  not  always  work  as
      they ought to, but there  is  no  question  of  flagrant  denial.   It
      follows that the Appellant's removal to  Sri  Lanka  would  not  be  a
      breach by the United Kingdom of his rights under Article 5 or  Article
      6.

f.  Article 14

(i)  General

 113. Article 14 is not free-standing.  It prohibits discrimination only  in
      respect of the rights and freedoms set forth in other Articles of  the
      Convention.  Mr Lewis  pointed  to  the  existence  of  discrimination
      against Tamils in Sri Lanka.  He  submitted  that  in  general  racial
      discrimination might constitute an affront to dignity and so a  breach
      of Article 3, or an interference with private  life  or  'respect  for
      physical and moral integrity' and  so  a  breach  of  Article  8.   He
      further argued that discrimination  against  Tamils  in  the  criminal
      justice system in Sri Lanka - whether in detention policy,  in  prison
      awaiting trial, or in the  trial  process  itself  -  meant  that  the
      removal of a Tamil to Sri  Lanka  would  be  a  breach  (or  potential
      breach) of Article 5 or 6 taken with Article 14.

 114. Miss Giovanetti said in her skeleton simply that there was  no  breach
      of any of the other Articles relied on by the Appellant and  that  she
      therefore  had  no  need  to  deal  with  Article  14.   In  her  oral
      submissions, recognising that there can be a breach of Article 14 even
      when the conduct complained of would not of itself amount to a  breach
      of any other Article, she asked us nevertheless to find no  breach  of
      Article 14.  Any discrimination did not come within  the  ambit  of  a
      protected right, or was justifiable  in  the  light  of  the  security
      situation in Sri Lanka.

 115. We have not been shown any case in  which  Article  14  has  prevented
      expulsion to a non-signatory country on the ground  of  discrimination
      in that country.  There are cases in which Article 14 has been  relied
      on in expulsion cases, but the argument there was in  the  context  of
      discrimination by the expelling, signatory, country.  See Monstaquim v
      Belgium (1991) 13 EHRR 802; C v Belgium (96/25).  (The claim  was  not
      upheld in either of those cases.)

 116. Generalised discrimination is not enough to engage Article 14; nor  is
      discrimination in an area not within the 'ambit' of another applicable
      Article.  It is therefore necessary to consider the effect of  Article
      14 in conjunction with the other Articles  upon  which  the  Appellant
      relies.  We begin with Article 3.

(ii)  With Article 3

 117. As we said at the hearing, we have considerable  difficulty  with  the
      concept  of  a  combination  of  Articles  3  and  14,  save  in  very
      exceptional cases.  One example of such an exception is evidently  the
      East African Asians cases, (1973) 3 EHRR 76.  Here the Commission took
      the view that the removal of status on racial  grounds  was  degrading
      treatment and a breach of Article 3.  What was exceptional about  that
      case was not, in our view, the fact that the  removal  of  status  was
      contrary to legitimate expectation or that the degrading treatment had
      a public element.   It  is  that  the  removal  of  status  could  not
      conceivably be a breach  of  Article  3  except  when  accompanied  by
      discrimination.  It was the discrimination that made  the  removal  of
      status degrading.

 118. This is important because the East African Asians  cases  were  rather
      early and it is only  more  recently  that  the  rights  protected  by
      Article 3 have been clearly and indisputably established as  absolute.
      They are enjoyed by all individuals  and  breach  of  them  cannot  be
      excused.  Ill-treatment has to achieve a level of severity  before  it
      amounts to a breach of Article 3, however.  If it is at that level, it
      ought to be prohibited, whoever the victim is.  We  are  unwilling  to
      contemplate a situation where (in the case of a type of  ill-treatment
      that is clearly within the ambit of Article 3 even  if  discrimination
      is not alleged) the same level of ill-treatment is considered a breach
      of Article 3 taken with Article 14 if administered in a discriminatory
      manner, but not a breach of Article 3 if not so administered.

 119. We hesitate to give examples, for fear of  influencing  future  cases.
      Suppose, however, that there has been  some  sort  of  anti-government
      demonstration, which  has  been  violently  broken  up  by  government
      officials.  Suppose further that it  is  established  that  there  was
      generalised ill-treatment of  the  demonstrators,  but  that,  on  the
      whole, members of race A were treated worse than members of race B and
      that the reason for that is that in the country's society as  a  whole
      there is discrimination against race A.  Suppose further that a member
      of race A and a member of race B have been  ill-treated  in  precisely
      the same way, at a level which (though severe) is  not  sufficient  to
      amount to a breach of Article 3 on its own.  Is the member of  race  A
      entitled to claim that there was a breach of  the  Convention  in  his
      case because the ill-treatment had a discriminatory motive, while  the
      member of race B cannot establish  his  claim?  Surely  not.   Such  a
      conclusion would make severe inroads  into  the  absoluteness  of  the
      protection offered  by  Article  3;  and  indeed  would  diminish  the
      protection offered by Article 3 to members of  race  B.   Further,  it
      would make Article 3 almost impossible to apply, as there could be  no
      consensus as to the level of ill-treatment that made it applicable.

 120. In this example we have had the advantage of positing affairs  in  the
      past and a situation of identical ill-treatment.  In an expulsion case
      the relevant factors cannot be so clear-cut.  It is necessary to  look
      to the future, and to the risks.  Generalised discrimination may  make
      it easier for a member of race A to establish that he is  at  risk  of
      treatment at the higher level of severity: but in that case, his claim
      is made out because he shows that  he  is  at  risk  of  ill-treatment
      contrary to Article 3.  Article 14 has nothing to do with  it:  it  is
      the evidence of discrimination, not the allegation that discrimination
      breaches the Convention, that enables him to make his  case.   If,  on
      the other hand, (even with  the  evidence  of  discrimination)  he  is
      unable to show that he is at risk of treatment that,  if  administered
      to a member of the other race, would breach Article 3, then Article 14
      cannot lower the threshold for him.

 121. Our conclusion therefore is that Article  14  has  little  to  add  to
      Article 3 in the absolute sense that the latter has been  interpreted.
      The role of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 3 must  be  limited
      to showing the  degrading  nature  of  treatment  based  on  race  but
      otherwise entirely outside the ambit of Article 3.

 122. The question then is whether the general discrimination against Tamils
      in Sri Lanka amounts to degrading  treatment  within  the  meaning  of
      Article 3.  We accept that round-ups are likely to be of Tamils  only;
      but any particular round-up may be justified by the security situation
      and the fact that it is Tamils, not Sinhalese, who have been waging  a
      violent   campaign   against   the   government.    Requirements   for
      registration can be viewed similarly; but  it  is  to  be  noted  that
      permanent residents of Colombo, of  whatever  race,  do  not  need  to
      register (see the regulation appended to the  Dutch  Foreign  Ministry
      report).  It is difficult to see that the  evidence  of  round-ups  or
      registration  shows  any  clear   unjustifiable   differentiation   or
      discrimination against Tamils.

 123. Conditions in prisons are  very  poor:  but  they  are  poor  for  all
      prisoners.  The language of the state is not Tamil: but  being  spoken
      to in a language that is not one's own (but is  the  language  of  the
      majority in the country)  could  hardly  be  described  as  degrading.
      There may be, and no doubt  are,  individual  instances  of  degrading
      treatment that are entirely unjustifiable.  But that is not the point,
      unless the Appellant were able to show a real risk of  being  subject,
      on racial grounds, to one of those instances, which  he  cannot.   The
      evidence before us relates mostly to Tamils and does  not  purport  to
      present a balanced picture from which one could ascertain whether ill-
      treatment is administered in a discriminatory fashion.  But  there  is
      some evidence of ill-treatment or degrading treatment of Sinhala.

 124. The general situation is that Tamils are subject to  difficulties  not
      shared by other races in Sri Lanka,  but  we  do  not  find  that  the
      treatment of Tamils is  such  as  to  amount  generally  to  degrading
      treatment of them.  The Appellant has not established that  on  return
      he is at real risk of treatment amounting to a  breach  of  Article  3
      taken with Article 14.

(iii)  With Article 8

 125. So far as concerns Article 8 taken with Article 14, the  position  is,
      as we have indicated above, that Mr Lewis relied on  the  same  facts,
      and essentially the same arguments, to  support  his  claim  that  the
      Appellant's removal would breach Article 8  by  interfering  with  his
      'physical and moral integrity', as he had relied on in support of  the
      Article 3 claim.  Article 8, however, is not absolute.  There  is,  in
      principle,  no  reason  why  treatment  of  a  kind   which,   without
      discrimination, would not amount to an interference  with  private  or
      family  life,  could  not  be  found  to  do  so   if   motivated   by
      discrimination.

 126. On the other hand, Article 8 is also not unqualified.  As we noted  at
      paragraph 85, the claim under Article 8 is  subject  to  the  need  to
      maintain immigration control.  It is not said that that requirement is
      being applied in a discriminatory fashion, and, so far as concerns the
      Appellant's prospective position in Sri Lanka, we take the  view  that
      any interference with his private or family life  resulting  from  the
      Respondent's decision is proportionate, and so not a breach of Article
      8 even when that Article is taken with Article 14.

(iv)  With Articles 5 and/or 6

 127. We have also concluded that the return of  the  Appellant  (or  Tamils
      generally) to Sri Lanka would not be a breach by the United Kingdom of
      Article 5 taken with Article 14 or Article 6 taken  with  Article  14.
      We reach this result by either of two routes.

 128. First, we  note  that  Article  14  is  essentially  procedural.   Its
      language mirrors that of Article 1.  It regulates  the  way  in  which
      rights set forth in the Convention are  to  be  secured  by  signatory
      States: that  is,  without  discrimination.   As  we  have  shown,  in
      relation to expulsion to the territory of a non-signatory  State,  the
      right secured by the Convention is merely not  to  be  expelled  to  a
      state where there is a flagrant  denial  or  gross  violation  of  the
      principles of Article 5 or Article 6.  There is no suggestion that the
      United Kingdom applies improper discrimination in the  application  of
      its expulsion  policy.   Matters  of  detention  and  trial  procedure
      outside signatory States are not within the ambit of the Convention at
      all except in cases of gross violation  or   flagrant  denial  of  the
      rights.  Thus discrimination in  Sri  Lanka  in  matters  relating  to
      detention and trial, if it were  established,  would  not  affect  the
      securing by the  United  Kingdom  of  the  rights  set  forth  in  the
      Convention.  The discrimination alleged is not discrimination  against
      which the Convention protects the Appellant.

 129. The second route is quite different in principle but it leads  to  the
      same result on the evidence.  It is to take Article 14 with Articles 5
      and 6 in assessing the question whether  the  effect  of  the  claimed
      discrimination is to produce a flagrant denial of the rights protected
      by Articles 5 or 6  in  the  case  of  the  group  against  which  the
      discrimination operates.  That effect is, however, not established  on
      the evidence.  Tamils suffer, as we  have  said,  some  disadvantages.
      But those disadvantages are not such as to  enable  one  to  say  that
      there is in Sri Lanka a flagrant denial to Tamils  of  the  rights  of
      liberty and fair trial.

g.  Cumulation

 130. Mr Lewis' final argument was based on cumulation.  We have  considered
      the risks of ill-treatment cumulatively in our treatment of Article 3.
       But Mr Lewis submitted that a combination of factors,  not  breaching
      any single Article of the Convention, might add up as  a  whole  to  a
      breach of the  Convention.   He  drew  an  analogy  with  the  Refugee
      Convention: but the analogy is false.  Under  the  Refugee  Convention
      there is one composite question relating to the risk  of  persecution;
      and persecution is itself  often  established  by  the  repetition  of
      events each of which would not  individually  amount  to  persecution.
      Neither under the European Convention on Human Rights nor  within  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 is there any conception of  a  single  composite
      question.  The rights are individual; they (in the plural) are secured
      by the Convention; and section 6(1) of the Act makes unlawful  an  act
      inconsistent  with  a  (singular)  Convention  right.   There  is   no
      authority for Mr Lewis' claim that a  series  of  failures  to  breach
      Convention rights should be taken together as a breach of 'the  rights
      secured by the Convention'.  We reject it.

 131. Even if we are wrong about that, we see no breach of the Convention in
      the Appellant's removal to Sri Lanka,  whether  the  Articles  of  the
      Convention are taken together or separately.  His appeal is dismissed.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                                            Deputy President
                                                     -----------------------
      1


