
H-TH15-ATS-V4
                                                 Appeal Number :HX25930-2001
                     MH & Others (Article 3-FGM) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 02691

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated:   |
|on :  15th April 2002                         |                             |
|                                              |16 July 2002                 |
|Dictated : 30th April 2002                    |.                            |


                                  Before:-

                    Mr J A O'Brien Quinn QC - (Chairman)
                                Mrs W Jordan
                                Mr M L James


between
                           Mohamed Elkhair HASHIM
                         Fadwar Omer EIJALLI (wife)
                  Eamen Mohamed Elkhair Ismail HASHIM (son)
                     Hashim Mohamed Elkhair HASHIM (son)
                    Mustafa Mohamed Elkhair HASHIM (son)
                   Reem Mohamed Elkhair HASHIM (daughter)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The Appellants, citizens of Sudan, appeal  against  the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Mr D A Kinloch) who dismissed their appeal  against
      the decision of the Secretary of  State,  made  on  11th  April  2001,
      refusing their application for asylum or  Refugee  Convention  and  on
      human rights grounds.

2.    The Appellants were represented by Mr C Bekoe  -  Tabiri  (Solicitor),
      of Shah, Solicitors, while  Mr  M  Blundell,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the Secretary of State.

3.    The Grounds of Appeal are attached.

4.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted by the Tribunal (Mr H J  E
      Latter, Vice President) on 14th December 2001.  In granting  leave  to
      appeal the Tribunal stated as follows:-

      "In my view the Grounds of Appeal are properly arguable in  particular
        in relation to the issues arising from female genital mutilation."

5.    When the appeal opened before the Tribunal on  15th  April  2002,  the
      main points argued before us were on the human rights aspect.  It  was
      argued that, as the sixth Appellant, namely the daughter of the  first
      and second Appellant, was of an age  that  if  she  were  returned  to
      Sudan, she would face being forcibly circumcised.  The submission  was
      that female genital mutilation (FGM)  which  is  widely  condemned  by
      international  health  experts  as  damaging  to  both  physical   and
      psychological health, is widespread in Sudan, especially in the north,
      and as an estimated 90 per cent or more of females in the  north  have
      been subjected to FGM, with consequences  that  have  included  severe
      urinary  problems,  infections,  and  even  death,  which  is  usually
      performed on girls between  the  ages  of   4  and  7  by  traditional
      practitioners in improvised,  unsanitary  conditions,  causing  severe
      pain, trauma and risk of infection to the child,  if  the  child  were
      returned to the Sudan, it would be a breach of Article 3 of the  ECHR.
      It was submitted that the Adjudicator, in coming to his conclusions in
      the matter before him, had found, at paragraph 15, as follows:-

      "I should record that to my mind the question of whether  or  not  the
        practice of forced circumcision, especially with  crude,  unhygenic
        instruments, is inhuman or degrading treatment  has to be judged by
        the standards of society's views in the UK.  On this view  it  does
        not matter that the practice clearly commands widespread support in
        Sudan even amongst the female  population.   Taking  this  approach
        there is no doubt whatsoever, to  my  mind  that  it  is  degrading
        treatment."

6.    It was also submitted that the Adjudicator, at paragraph 16  had  held
      as follows:-

      "I should also record that even though the Appellant  would  not  have
        any degrading treatment applied directly to him, I accept  that  to
        send  the  Appellant  and  his  family  back  to  a  country  where
        circumcision would take place to the Appellant's daughter would  be
        degrading for the Appellant as a family member, and would amount to
        a breach of Article 3 of the Convention."

7.    It was also submitted that, although  the  Adjudicator,  in  paragraph
      17, had stated that although he had found as he did in  paragraphs  15
      and 16, he found, in paragraph 17, that he did not accept the claim of
      the first and second Appellant that they would be powerless to prevent
      their young daughter from being circumcised should they have to return
      to Sudan.  In making that decision, he noted that he had not heard any
      evidence from the first Appellant's wife (the second Appellant), as to
      the question of circumcision, although a letter which would appear  to
      have been from her, had been lodged during the process.

8.    The question of the son of the family, Mustafa, the  fifth  Appellant,
      being autistic, was also raised before the  Adjudicator,  and  it  was
      argued that he was not correct in finding that while  the  Adjudicator
      had accepted that it was true that the child was  autistic,  he  found
      that his return to the Sudan would not be in breach of Article 8 or of
      Article 11, for the reasons which he set out in paragraph  20  of  the
      determination.

9.    The main argument, in the first place, was whether or  not  the  sixth
      Appellant, the daughter, came within the category of  a  member  of  a
      "social group" under the Refugee Convention.

10.   Reliance was placed on the House of Lord's decision in Shah and  Islam
      [1999] Imm AR 283.

11.   We have given careful consideration to the submissions made to  us  in
      this matter, and, as we see it, we find that the question of  deciding
      whether or not an Appellant is a member of a particular "social group"
      we must first answer the following questions:-

      1.    What is the particular social  group  in  question  and  is  the
              group definable?

      2.    Does the "particular social  group"  have  an  identity  in  the
              country of origin in the eyes of

      (a)    the community at large, or

      (b)   the persecutors; or

      3.    Do the members of the particular social group have a shared  and
              mutable characteristic i.e. one which either

      (a)   is beyond the ability of the Appellant to change either  because
                    it is innate and unchangeable or because it is a  former
                    characteristic of the  Appellant  which  cannot  now  be
                    changed (e.g. previous membership of the army) or

      (b)   is so fundamental to their  identity,  their  human  dignity  or
                    conscience that they ought not to be required to change.

12.   We have also considered the words of the House of Lords  in  Shah  and
      Islam where it stated that it is generally agreed that the  particular
      social group must  constitute  a  recognisable  group  sharing  common
      characteristics which set its members apart from society at large  and
      for which they are jointly condemned by  their  persecutors.   It  was
      also stated that what constitutes a recognisable group is  a  function
      of the particular society in which it exists.  Further it was held  in
      Shah and Islam that a concept of a group  means  that  what  is  being
      dealt with are people who are grouped together because  they  share  a
      characteristic not shared by others, not with individuals and that the
      word "social" means that what is being asked is that a group of people
      which is  recognised  as  a  particular  group  by  society  could  be
      identified.

13.   In other words, as we see it, young girls in Sudan, as  such,  do  not
      form a particular social group as such, but only insofar as  they  may
      face persecution by the application of female genital mutilation.   In
      our opinion, they do not form a  particular  social  group  under  the
      Refugee Convention.

14.   However, under the Human Rights Act, the situation is  different.   We
      consider that the  Adjudicator  came  to  the  correct  conclusion  in
      finding that to send the first Appellant and  his  family  back  to  a
      country where circumcision would take place to the  first  Appellant's
      daughter, would be degrading for the Appellant as a family member, and
      would amount to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

15.   The main point to be considered is whether or not  the  Appellant  and
      his  wife  would  be  powerless  to  prevent  their   daughter   being
      circumcised should they have to return to Sudan.

16.    In  this  connection,  we  have  considered  the  arguments  and  the
      documents placed before us.  In the first place,  in  "Female  Genital
      Mutilation - a Human Rights Information  Pack",  issued  in  1998,  is
      stated as follows:-

      "Female genital mutilation is widely practised in northern Sudan,  and
        to a much lesser extent in the south.  Attempts have been  made  to
        eradicate FGM in the past 50 years.  Despite this, women are  still
        being infibulated.  Sudan was the first African country  to  outlaw
        FGM.  In 1946 the Penal Code prohibited infibulation but  permitted
        sunna, the less radical form of FGM.  The law was ratified again in
        1957, when  Sudan  became  independent.   In  1991  the  government
        affirmed its commitment to the eradication of the traditional  form
        of FGM.  In 1993 the Penal Code, however,  does  not  mention  FGM,
        leaving its status unclear."

17.   Further, it is also stated in a report on the history and practice  of
      FGM in Sudan, that, even though infibulation has been declared illegal
      and the trend was that people with higher degrees of education in  the
      cities started abandoning the circumcision, the practice proved to  be
      too deeply embedded in the traditional system of beliefs in the  rural
      areas of Sudan.  It was stated that, even in the cities, the  practice
      was not completely stopped or abandoned; instead less severe forms  of
      FGM started replacing infibulation.

18.   In addition, we have before us, as had  the  Adjudicator,  the  letter
      produced by the second Appellant, in which she gave a history  of  how
      she, herself, had come to be circumcised.  Her evidence is that,  even
      though her father was strongly against the practice  and  had  assured
      her that he would protect her from it, yet she  had  been  circumcised
      against her father's wishes when he had travelled out of the  country.
      She also stated that even though she and her  husband  did  not  agree
      with the practice, her mother and her mother-in-law and other  females
      on both sides of the family were strongly in favour  of  the  practice
      and that they would exert such pressure and employ  every  trick  they
      could muster to have her daughter circumcised if  they  were  to  find
      themselves back in Sudan.  She also pointed out that one of her nieces
      had died as a result of complications arising from being  circumcised,
      some two weeks after the event in 1998.  She stated that it is thought
      generally in Sudan that an uncircumcised girl was a  disgrace  to  the
      family, that she would be an outcast and would never get married.  She
      also stated that it was the  tradition  that  she  would  be  socially
      excluded and that if she wanted to live in the community or  have  any
      links with them, she would have to be circumcised.

19.   We also took account of a document produced by an organisation  called
      "Forward", where it states that the WHO (World  Health  Organisation),
      Working Party, defined four types of female genital mutilation, all of
      which involved the excision of certain parts of the  vaginal  area  of
      women, went on to deal with the Appellants in this particular  appeal,
      and stated that, while it agreed with the findings of the  Adjudicator
      in paragraphs 15 and 16 of his determination, they did not  agree  the
      Adjudicator, that the first Appellant and the second  Appellant  would
      be able to protect their daughter at all times should they be returned
      to the Sudan.  It was stated that, with the best will  in  the  world,
      the family structure and power relations that existed in Africa  would
      make it extremely difficult for them to  ensure  that  their  daughter
      would not have to undergo FGM.  They  drew  attention  to  the  second
      Appellant's letter with regard to her experiences, and agreed that the
      view is held that even  if  the  husband  and  wife  are  against  the
      practice, they would be considered to be "young" and  that  the  older
      women would know better.  It also stated that even if the parents were
      angry at the mutilation, they would still have to accept it  as  there
      is nothing they could do about it; FGM not being reversible.

20.   Forward also stated that the option of moving away to another part  of
      Sudan would not solve the problem as,  due  to  the  African  extended
      family  structure,  the  Appellant's  family  would  not  be  able  to
      completely escape from all members of their extended families.  It was
      stated that once there are women  older  than  the  first  and  second
      Appellant, they would be subjected to inordinate  pressure  for  their
      daughter to be mutilated.  It also stated that, although a law against
      infibulation had existed in Sudan since 1849, there was  no  effective
      policing of the law, as evidenced by the very high  numbers  of  women
      and girls who have been mutilated.

21.   We have also taken account of two determinations of  the  Tribunal  to
      us, namely Met Sula  [2002]  UKIAT  00295  intersec  Frantia  Katrinak
      [2001] ELR (June 12th 2001).

22.   Taking account of  the  traditional  situation  where  female  genital
      mutilation takes place in Sudan, despite the fact that it is  illegal,
      we are satisfied that it takes place and that, having  regard  to  the
      extended family situation in Sudan, whereas the first Appellant, as  a
      dentist, would, in all probability, carry on  his  profession  in  the
      cities, nevertheless we are satisfied  that  it  would  be  an  almost
      impossible task for the first and second Appellants to  protect  their
      daughter, at all times, from being taken  by  her  relatives  and  FGM
      performed upon her.  In those circumstances, we are satisfied that  to
      return the Appellants to Sudan would be in breach of Article 3 of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights, in that it would clearly  subject
      the sixth Appellant to  the  degrading  treatment  of  female  genital
      mutilation.

23.   With  regard  to  the  Refugee  Convention  grounds,  upon  which  the
      Adjudicator dismissed the  appeal,  we  find  that  we  are  fully  in
      agreement with the Adjudicator that  the  first  Appellant's  evidence
      fell far short of showing that there was any real risk of  persecution
      if he were to be returned to Sudan.

24.   With regard to the point raised with regard to the  family's  autistic
      son, the fifth Appellant, we are wholly in agreement  with  the  views
      expressed by the Adjudicator, in paragraph 20  of  his  determination,
      where, basing his findings on SCC v Sweden and Kay v the Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department  [2001] Imm AR 11, he found that he  was
      satisfied that it would not be a breach of the ECHR for him to be sent
      back to Sudan.

25.   This appeal is, now, allowed only on the question  of  there  being  a
      breach of Article 3 of the ECHR in respect of the 6th Appellant as  we
      find that, in the circumstances  which we have  considered  above,  it
      would constitute a breach of  Article  3  for  the  Appellants  to  be
      returned to Sudan, but the appeal is dismissed on all other aspects.





                                                        J A O'BRIEN QUINN QC
                                                                    CHAIRMAN


