
ar                                                           Appeal     No.
HX08203-2002     SA (Fair Trial-Prison Conditions) Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT
05631


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 4 October 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 05/12/2002.

                                   Before:

                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                              Mr C A N Edinboro




                                SOHAIL  AHMED


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant       : Mr R. Ghaffar, counsel, instructed  by  Nasim  Law
Associates
For the respondent    : Mr Ekagha, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan, appeals by leave  of  the
      Tribunal  against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr   C.B.
      Buckwell) dismissing his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse asylum and give removal directions  as  an  illegal
      entrant.  The grounds of appeal are in the bundle before us.

2.    The appellant arrived in this country in May 2000 with  his  wife  and
      four children and immediately claimed asylum.  The basis of his  claim
      is that he was a member of the Pakistan Muslim League and he had  been
      the private manager to Mr Mian Sharif,  father  of  the  former  Prime
      Minister, Mian Nawaz Sharif.  In addition, he  had  been  involved  in
      running a rice mill business. He joined the Muslim League at the  same
      time as he had been  appointed  private  manager  to  Mian  Sharif  in
      January 1993. The government of Nawaz Sharif had obtained  bank  loans
      in order to enable him to set up his rice mill business.

3.    When Nawaz Sharif was removed from power by  the  existing  regime  in
      Pakistan in 1999, the appellant was arrested and  maltreated.  He  was
      detained from 19 October 1999 to February 2000.  He  was  released  on
      condition that he disclosed information relating to  Mian  Sharif  and
      other members of the Sharif family to  the  authorities  and  that  he
      reported regularly to the police.  Shortly  thereafter  he  went  into
      hiding and with the help of the wife of Nawaz Sharif left the country.

4.     In  addition,  charges  have  been  brought  against  him  (which  he
      maintains are false) in relation to fraud  and  possible  embezzlement
      affecting the Railway Lahore Co., charges  having  been  made  by  the
      Deputy Director of that company.

5.    The Adjudicator has found the appellant to be credible but  has  found
      that there is no reasonable likelihood of persecution because it is  a
      matter of record  that  Nawaz  Sharif  was  tried  and  convicted  and
      sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  following  his  removal  from
      power, and that the Pakistani authorities have  subsequently  pardoned
      Nawaz Sharif on condition that he and  his  family  went  into  exile,
      which they did in December 2000  to  Saudi  Arabia.   The  Adjudicator
      takes the view that the authorities  have  by  now  obtained  all  the
      information in relation to the Sharif family  that  they  require  and
      which ultimately led to the sentencing  of  Nawaz  Sharif,  and  there
      would be no further motivation or interest in the Sharif family by the
      authorities and therefore in the appellant. So far as the  charges  in
      relation to the Railway Lahore Co. is concerned, the Adjudicator takes
      the view that the appellant faces prosecution rather than persecution.



6.    Mr Ghaffar in his submission pointed out that the appellant  had  been
      arrested in 1995 and 1996 (during the reign of the PPP party) and that
      he had been arrested in 1999 and released on certain conditions  which
      he had not fulfilled, having gone into hiding  and  subsequently  fled
      the country. Furthermore, there were now charges against him  relating
      to his rice mills.  In Mr Ghaffar's  submission  the  charges  in  the
      system were still there and the appellant faced a real risk  of  being
      detained in respect of those charges upon his return. Furthermore, the
      additional charges of fraud had been brought against him.  Even if the
      old charges had now lapsed the 1999 detention would be on  record  and
      the current charges which are false, in  the  appellant's  submission,
      are  certainly  outstanding  and  will  probably   result   from   his
      association with the Sharif family.

7.    The appellant had escaped from Pakistan and therefore the  authorities
      would still have an interest in him.  The military regime  were  still
      trying to obtain information relating to the Sharif family  and  there
      had been and probably still is a blanket policy  that  the  government
      would arrest anyone connected with that family. The appellant had been
      ill-treated when arrested and had  never  subsequently  been  produced
      before the courts. He had been targeted  after  the  family  had  been
      charged.

8.     In  Mr  Ghaffar's  submission  the  Adjudicator  had   not   properly
      considered the provisions of Article 3 and  Article  6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act. In this connection we would point out, as the  Adjudicator
      has pointed out, that there is no claim outstanding  under  the  Human
      Rights Act, the Home Office decision having been taken on 6 July 2000.
       The case of  Pardeepan  would  apply.  Mr  Ghaffar,  however,  relies
      largely on the outstanding charges in relation to the 1999 events.  He
      referred us to CIPU Report in regard  to  prison  conditions  and  the
      severe treatment  meted  out  by  the  police  to  detainees.   In  Mr
      Ghaffar's submission there was a real likelihood  that  the  appellant
      would be re-arrested and detained pending trial and  during  detention
      would be subjected to condition which would amount to persecution.

9.     Mr  Ekagha  in  his  submission  maintained  that  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions are perfectly valid.  There is no evident political motive
      behind the charges raised in 1999 in relation  to  the  railway  land.
      They have nothing whatever to do with the family. There is  no  reason
      why he should not return and face those  charges.  The  appellant  had
      been released from custody following the  trial of the  Sharif  family
      and there was no reason to assume  that  he  would  be  detained  now.
      There would be no reason to assume that the authorities would be still
      interested in him by virtue of his connection with the Sharif  family.
      There is no evidence to show that the appellant would be  singled  out
      for ill-treatment as a  prisoner.   Mr  Ekagha  points  out  that  the
      proclamation allowing the appellant to appear  in  court  on  1  March
      issued on 1 January gave the appellant three months  within  which  to
      appear which is hardly an indication of the court's extreme  eagerness
      to arrest the appellant.  It further indicates  that  the  authorities
      are approaching the case in a fair and reasonable manner.

10.   Mr Ghaffar in  a  final  submission  maintained  that  Mr  Ekagha  was
      comparing the United Kingdom justice system with that of Pakistan  and
      applying the standards applicable in this country to that.

11.   We do not attach a great deal of importance to the arrests  that  took
      place in 1995 and 1996. In 1995 the appellant was arrested during  the
      course of a demonstration and sentenced to one  month's  imprisonment.
      That offence can, therefore, have little relevance to this claim,  the
      sentence having been served. As to the 1996 arrest and detention, they
      were also after a rally, and we remind ourselves that this took  place
      during  the  reign  of  a  different  government  and  that,  if   the
      authorities had any interest in the appellant  following  that  event,
      they had ample opportunity to arrest him both in 1997 and 1999, and in
      fact when they arrested  him  in  1999  and  he  was  served  with  no
      proceedings in respect of the 1996 events. In fairness to Mr  Ghaffar,
      he did not place a great deal of importance on these  earlier  events,
      concentrating instead on the 1999 arrest and the warrant that year  in
      relation to the railway land.

12.   It is common ground between the parties that Nawaz Sharif was  charged
      and found guilty in April 2000 of various offences  and  sentenced  to
      life imprisonment. In December that year  a  presidential  pardon  was
      granted and Nawaz Sharif and his wife and  seventeen  members  of  his
      family were allowed to leave the country  to live in  exile  in  Saudi
      Arabia. In return Nawaz Sharif relinquished his personal and  business
      assets and promised not to return to Pakistan for  ten  years  and  to
      remain out of politics for a further twenty-one years.

13.   In paragraph 41 of the determination, the Adjudicator  finds  that  by
      reason of the events which we have  recounted  above  in  relation  to
      Nawaz Sharif, the authorities would no longer have any interest in the
      appellant and therefore he has no well-founded fear of persecution  by
      reason of his connection with that family or his subsequent  departure
      from the country. We would entirely agree with that finding.  We would
      also comment on the fact that the appellant left the  country  in  May
      2000, a month after Sharif had been sentenced following his trial.  As
      the Adjudicator points out, the authorities would by then have all the
      information at their disposal that they required  in  connection  with
      the Sharif family and there was little of  value  that  the  appellant
      could give to them and, it would seem, nothing that could in  any  way
      have affected the trial of Nawaz Sharif which took  place  before  the
      appellant left the  country and on the basis of the information  which
      the authorities already had.

14.   We find ourselves in entire agreement with the Adjudicator that  there
      is no reasonable likelihood of this appellant being re-arrested  as  a
      result of his earlier arrest  in  October  1999  in  relation  to  his
      connection with the Sharif family. We would assume that Nawaz Sharif's
      father left Pakistan with him as seventeen members of his family  went
      into exile.  There is no contention before us that the father is still
      subject to prosecution and therefore that the appellant  might  be  of
      interest because he was the father's business manager.

15.    This  leaves  the  question  of  the  current  charges  against   the
      appellant.  These were laid in November 1999 by the deputy director of
        Railway  Lahore  and  maintain  that  the  appellant  'tampered  the
      government record and got the land measuring two kanal mutated in  his
      own favour  which  was  the  property  of  railway  and  received  the
      consideration amount himself instead of depositing it to the  national
      exchequer.' These charges, as  we  read  them,  amount  to  fraud  and
      embezzlement.  There are two arrest warrants,  one  dated  4  February
      2000 and one dated 3 March 2001 and a proclamation dated 2 March 2002,
      all relating to this particular charge. We say that they all relate to
      this charge because the case no. 800/99 appears at  the  head  of  the
      first information report  and  on  the  other  three  documents.   The
      Adjudicator has dealt with this aspect shortly  by  stating  that  the
      appellant will face prosecution.  As Mr Ghaffar  rightly  points  out,
      the Adjudicator has not  considered  whether  such  prosecution  could
      amount to persecution by reason of the fact that there is a reasonable
      likelihood that the appellant would be  persecuted  whilst  in  prison
      pending trial and would not in any event receive a fair trial.   These
      two aspects also come within the provisions of the  Human  Rights  Act
      and we would emphasise that there is no Human Rights Act claim  before
      us. Our consideration of the  two  aspects  therefore,  although  they
      would appear to embrace Articles 3 and 6 are limited to whether  there
      would be a Refugee Convention prosecution rather than a  Human  Rights
      Act claim.

16.   The relevant objective evidence in relation to this  is  contained  in
      paragraphs 4.58 to 4.62. of the CIPU Report. The  current  regime  has
      created  a national accountability bureau with special courts  to  try
      cases of corruption as part of its policy to stamp out  corruption  in
      Pakistan. Whether or not the appellant's claim would come within these
      courts is far from clear and we notice in particular the  proclamation
      is issued specifically under the Criminal Procedure Code,  so  it  may
      well be that the appellant will not come within  the  jurisdiction  of
      these new courts.   We mention these relevant paragraphs, however,  as
      useful  objective  material  with  regard  to  the  attitude  of   the
      government towards  past  corruption  in  Pakistan.  It  is  also  not
      insignificant to note, from  the point of view of the impartiality  of
      the courts, that the Supreme Court in Pakistan modified  the  ordnance
      setting up of these new courts and  reduced  the  period  under  which
      persons could be held without charge from ninety days to fifteen  days
      and the maximum period of disqualification for political  office  from
      twenty-one years to ten years.  This to us indicates  the  concern  of
      the Supreme Court with regard to the constitution of Pakistan and  the
      treatment of those charged by the authorities  and the impartiality of
      the courts in preparing to intervene in relation to  a  structure  set
      out by an authoritarian regime.

17.    We  observe  in  relation  to  the  judiciary   that   although   the
      constitution has been suspended by the present regime it  did  provide
      for an independent judiciary, although again that judiciary appears to
      be subject to executive  branch  and  other  outside  influences.  The
      government has taken steps to move the government itself from judicial
      oversight, thus ensuring that all courts functioning at  the  time  of
      the coup continue to operate. The proceedings instituted  against  the
      appellant are certainly not government instigated proceedings but  are
      being brought at the behest of Railway Lahore and information laid  by
      the deputy director of that company. It is alleged  by  the  appellant
      that these are trumped up charges. We cannot  comment  upon  that  and
      would assume that the charges in some way relate  to  the  appellant's
      activities in relation to this rice mills. We observe that  despite  a
      certain  amount  of  government  interference  the  higher  level   of
      judiciary  is  considered  to  be  'competent  and  generally  honest'
      although  there  are  reports  of  corruption  at  a  lower  level  of
      magistrates courts and  minor  court  officials.   The  judiciary  has
      demonstrated its capacity to act independently, ordering amendments to
      the National Accountability Bureau  of  Ordinance  to  which  we  have
      referred above, and further in March 2001 ordering  the  acquittal  of
      ten political activists charged with murder and arson,  including  the
      murder of a policeman, and again in  May  2001  the  former  Inspector
      General of Police was acquitted of corruption charges and when a  full
      bench of the Sind High Court dismissed the government's appeal against
      that acquittal.

18.   We remind ourselves of the fact that the appellant is certainly a  man
      of considerable business experience  who  would  have  connections  in
      Pakistan and probably the necessary resources in order to ensure  that
      he would be properly represented by a competent lawyer if this  charge
      against him is pursued.   We therefore take the view that there  is  a
      reasonable likelihood that  he  will  receive  a  fair  trial  and  be
      properly represented and in the event that these  charges  are  false,
      have every opportunity to make a plea to that effect to the judiciary.
       Nothing  in  the  objective  evidence  indicates  that  he  would  be
      precluded from so claiming or that his offence, if that is what it is,
      would be considered on political grounds. We therefore take  the  view
      that were the prosecution to be sustained, the appellant would receive
      a fair trial and be properly represented.

19.   Turning to the question of maltreatment  he  might  suffer  whilst  in
      prison pending trial, there is always the possibility that he could be
      released on bail pending  trial  in  any  event.   But  were  such  an
      application to fail, and this is after all not a  capital  charge,  we
      take the view that there is no reasonable  likelihood  that  he  would
      suffer maltreatment in  prison  either  by  reason  of  his  political
      affiliations or for any other Convention reason, nor are we  satisfied
      on the basis of the objective evidence that the prison conditions  are
      such as to enable the appellant to claim that persecution would  arise
      by reason of those  conditions.  We  observe  that  prison  conditions
      generally are poor. We observe, however, that there are three  classes
      of cells in prisons, the first class being class C which house  common
      criminals. The other two classes, A and B, are described in  paragraph
      470 of the CIPU Report as markedly  better  and  class  A  cells  'are
      reserved  for  prominent  prisoners  who  are  permitted   television,
      servants  and  special  food'.   Although  the  question   of   prison
      conditions which arises largely out of the  Article  3  claim  is  not
      before us, we are satisfied that the appellant would not be persecuted
      in prison for any of the Convention reasons,  in  particular  his  own
      political beliefs, and that there is no evidence that members  of  his
      political party are selected for ill-treatment at  the  hands  of  the
      police and prison warders by reason of their political affiliations.

20.   For these reasons, therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


