
                                                                   Appeal
                                                     No:   HX-87236-1998 | |
                                        CB (Detailed Appraisal) Sri Lanka CG
                                                       [2002] UKIAT 01547...


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                               Date of Hearing: 1st May 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                      16-05-2002............................


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                              Mr C A N Edinboro
                                Mr N Kumar JP


Between:





                            CAIUS FELDON BRINSTON


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals,  with  leave,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  P  D  King,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 8th June 1998 to give
     directions for his removal as an  illegal  entrant  after  refusal  of
     asylum.  Before us today he has  been  represented  by  Ms  P  Gandhi,
     instructed by Ratna & Co, and the Respondent has been  represented  by
     Mr Sheikh.

  2. As will have been observed from the date of the decision, this  appeal
     has a considerable history.  There was a hearing before an Adjudicator
     soon after the decision.  Following an appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  the
     appeal was remitted to be heard by another Adjudicator and it was thus
     that it came before Mr  King  as  long  ago  as  November  1999.   His
     determination was sent to the parties on 7th February 2000.  There was
     an application for leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal  and  leave  was
     granted in a determination notified to the parties  on  29th  February
     2000.  We observe that, despite the fact that it is argued  eloquently
     before us today by Ms Gandhi that the Appellant is indeed  a  refugee,
     nothing very much appears to have been done by those  who  purport  to
     represent him in this matter, Ratna & Co, in the succeeding two years.
      Indeed, Ratna & Co's preparation for the hearing today was, so far as
     we can see, extremely limited.  A bundle of documents, many  of  which
     are old, was submitted late:  and Ms Gandhi has told us that  she  was
     not provided with a copy either of the Adjudicator's determination  or
     of the grounds of appeal and had to seek  them  elsewhere  hastily  in
     order to make the representations which she has made.   The  Appellant
     owes everything to her in terms of what has been said on his behalf in
     this appeal and, it seems to us, nothing at all to his solicitors.

  3. So far as the merits of this appeal are concerned, there are extensive
     grounds which raise a number of issues.  We may say at once we  regard
     the grounds as soundly based on two issues in particular.  First, that
     the Adjudicator erred in relying on the decision of the House of Lords
     in Adan, in applying the dicta relating to the existence  of  a  civil
     war and the total breakdown of the governmental control in Somalia  in
     that case to the situation in Sri Lanka in this case.  As has now,  we
     think, been satisfactorily established and demonstrated in a number of
     decisions, the dicta in Adan are intended  to  apply  to  cases  where
     there is no operative government in control, not to cases where  there
     is, if we may so put it, merely a civil war.

  4. Secondly, the Adjudicator appears, to an extent,  to  have  based  his
     determination partly on the Appellant's evidence that his  father  was
     and indeed is a judge in Sri Lanka.  The Adjudicator appears  to  have
     thought that the father's position would enable  him  to  protect  the
     Appellant.  It may be that there was some  material  upon  which  some
     conclusion of the sort could have been based, but we agree  with  what
     has been said in the grounds that the Adjudicator relied  too  heavily
     on the possibility of the Appellant's father  being  able  to  protect
     him.

  5. We turn then to the  situation  of  the  Appellant  himself.   He  has
     claimed that he was arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities on the 10th
     June 1997 and that he was subsequently released.   There  was  then  a
     warrant, or letter, or summons, issued against him  in  the  following
     terms:

           "An inquiry is underway against  you  under  the  Prevention  of
           Terrorism Act.


           By virtue of Section 109(6) Part 16 1979, an order to attend for
           an inquiry at the Investigation Division on 15-07-1997 at  10.00
           hrs, is hereby made by the Controller of the Mannar CID branch.


           We hereby inform you that failure to comply with this will  give
           rise to a right to arrest and punish you."

      That was dated the 8th July 1997 and there is  a  signature  which  is
      identified as that of the Controller of the CID branch.  Subsequently,
      it appears, there was a second letter which is dated 19th  April  1998
      and is in these terms:


           "It is being observed that you have failed  to  appear  at  this
           station in spite of earlier notices.


           Your failure to appear at this station on or  before  03-05-1998
           would entail  warrant  being  taken  out  for  your  arrest  and
           detention  till  completion  of  inquiries  and  thereafter   if
           necessary."


      That has a signature which is identified as the Headquarters Inspector
      at the Police Station in Mannar.


      One particular point which arises on the first of those  documents  is
      this.  As we have said, the Appellant's father is a judge and  it  is,
      to say the least, surprising  that  it  is  said  that  the  Appellant
      misunderstood the effect of the first document to such an extent  that
      he thought that  he  was  wanted  as  a  terrorist.   The  Appellant's
      evidence on this issue was that the document arrived by  post  to  the
      Appellant's home and that it had come through the proper channels.  We
      say no more than that, given his father's status (not as a provider of
      protection but as a provider of information) it is surprising that the
      Appellant should have been so readily mistaken as  to  the  effect  of
      that document.  That is not, however, a matter which motivates  us  to
      any decision we make about the document.


  6. On the documents, the Adjudicator wrote as follows:

           "Given the late service of the documents themselves, it has  not
           been possible for the Home Office to verify those documents.  It
           is left for me to  evaluate  them  within  the  context  of  the
           Appellant's evidence as a whole.


           I remind myself that I have to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
           Appellant  within  the  context  of  life  in   Sri   Lanka   as
           demonstrated by the country reports.  In that connection I  have
           been handed a great number of such reports and do not repeat all
           that is set out therein.  I  indicate  that  I  have  considered
           those passages to which my attention was specifically invited."


      The Adjudicator then goes on to consider the evidence  before  him  in
      some  detail.   He  concludes  that  that  he  does  not  believe  the
      Appellant's account of what happened to him before he left  Sri  Lanka
      and he gives reasons for his conclusion, extending over two pages of a
      closely typed determination.  So far as the documents  are  concerned,
      he records that he has some reservations about their  genuineness  and
      he records also some reasons for his final  conclusion  on  them.   He
      notes that they bore no stamps of authentication  and  that  they  are
      hand-written on forms.  As Ms Gandhi pointed out,  there  is  evidence
      before us that the normal form of such documents would be hand-written
      on a typed or written form.   It  does  not  appear  to  us  that  the
      Adjudicator  was  requiring  any  stamp  or  authentication   of   the
      documents.  Reading the determination as a whole,  it  appears  to  us
      that the position is that the Adjudicator was taking into account  all
      the evidence, including all his reservations about all of it, and  was
      noting that the hand-written forms did not  assist  the  Appellant  in
      satisfying him because they were documents of  a  type  which  had  no
      authentication.   The  position  is  that  they  did  not  assist  the
      Appellant one way or another, in the Adjudicator's view.


  7. Despite the grant of leave, which was in terms which have  essentially
     superseded by the determination of the Tribunal in Tanveer  Ahmed  and
     the judgements of the Court of Appeal in Davila-Puga and  Zarandy,  we
     have concluded that the Adjudicator dealt  with  the  documents  in  a
     manner which cannot be criticised.  He looked at them as part  of  the
     evidence as a whole.  He noted their contents, and  the  features  and
     their physical features, and the conclusion that they did  not  assist
     the Appellant was, in our view, amply open to him.

  8. The Adjudicator's conclusion as a whole was that the Appellant's story
     was not true, but we are content to proceed for the sake  of  argument
     to consider what the position would be if the Appellant's  story  were
     taken to be the truth.  In that case, he is a  person  who  some  five
     years ago was arrested, was released, was the  subject  of  a  warrant
     under the Prevention of Terrorism Act for a purpose as yet unknown and
     was the subject also of the letter of the 19th April 1998.

  9. For these purposes, we also accept, as we  must,  that  the  Appellant
     bears some scars.  There  is  medical  evidence  which  describes  the
     scars.  There are scars on the Appellant's arms which  are  consistent
     with scratching.  They are described in the report  as  numerous.   On
     his  legs  there  are  also  numerous  de-pigmented  scars  which  are
     approximately circular and there is another scar which is said to have
     been the result of a metal-tipped boot being ground into the leg.  The
     author of the medical report indicates that those scars are consistent
     with the Appellant's account of the treatment that he says he received
     from the authorities.  The Adjudicator's conclusion on the  scars  was
     as follows (we remind ourselves that this was  in  the  context  of  a
     determination made some years ago and as  a  result,  the  Adjudicator
     cannot be criticised for  failing  to  refer  to  subsequent  judicial
     authorities on scars):

           "There is clear evidence  emerging  from  the  findings  of  the
           Tribunal that security  forces  noticing  scarring  will  detain
           young Tamils for longer  periods  and  subject  them  to  severe
           treatment.  There is nothing,  however,  to  indicate  that  the
           scarring on the body of the Appellant as described would  be  so
           significant as to cause the authorities to believe that  he  had
           been involved in violence or conflict."


      Again, it appears to us that that conclusion was  amply  open  to  the
      Adjudicator.  He took account of the medical evidence before him:   we
      do not accept any allegation that he did not bear it  fully  in  mind.
      His conclusion was that whatever be the  cause  of  the  scars,  their
      effect would not be such as to raise suspicion as to their origin.


 10. The Appellant then might be returned and we assume, for  the  purposes
     of this determination, that he might  be  returned  today  to  Colombo
     Airport as a rejected asylum seeker, a person with a history  that  he
     claims to have, and one detention, the subsequent documents, a  person
     who bears on his body the scars that we have described.  He  left  Sri
     Lanka on his own passport, or at any rate a passport issued in his own
     name.  Mr Sheikh has submitted that if  the  Appellant  had  genuinely
     been  wanted  for  anything  very  serious  under  the  Prevention  of
     Terrorism Act he would not  have  been  able  to  go  through  Colombo
     Airport in leaving Sri Lanka by using  normal  channels  and  his  own
     passport.  Ms Gandhi has pointed out that there do appear to have been
     some changes in the system of emigration through Colombo in  2000  and
     that before that time, indeed at the  time  when  the  Appellant  left
     Colombo, it would have been much less difficult to do  so.  We  accept
     her submissions.  We also note, however, that the Appellant's passport
     is said to have been issued in his own name at the time  when  he  was
     instructing the agent, and that was of course after the time  when  he
     thought that he was at risk as a result of the  warrant.   It  follows
     that although Mr Sheikh's submissions have  no  operative  force  with
     relation to leaving  Colombo,  it  seems  to  us  that  an  equivalent
     argument has force in relation to the obtaining of the  passport.   It
     is not disputed that the Appellant had a passport of his own,  and  it
     seems to us that the fact that he was able to obtain it at the time he
     did, or rather that a passport in that name  was  issued  by  the  Sri
     Lankan authorities at that  time,  adds  some  force  to  Mr  Sheikh's
     submission that the Appellant was never of any real  interest  to  the
     authorities.

 11. If the Appellant is returned today, he is  returned  to  a  Sri  Lanka
     which is very different from the country he left.  Ms  Gandhi  reminds
     us that there have been many cease-fires which have broken  down.   It
     does appear to us that the present peace process  is  operating  at  a
     more substantial level than any of which we have heard previously.  We
     accept Mr Sheikh's submission that it would be wrong not to  take  any
     account at all in the improvements in the security  situation  and  in
     the situation for many citizens of Sri Lanka trying to  live  ordinary
     lives in their own country.  Nevertheless, of course, we bear in  mind
     that there may still be  difficulties,  the  process  may  break  down
     entirely and we do not embrace the evidence  of  improvements  without
     reservation as to the future.

 12. There is before us evidence from three sources relating to the  return
     of individuals such as the Appellant to Sri Lanka at the present time.
      There is a report of a fact-finding mission conducted  on  behalf  of
     the Respondent in Sri Lanka from 14th to 23rd March  2002.   There  is
     also  a  report  of  a  meeting  of  that  delegation   with   Michael
     Lindenbauer, the Senior Protection Officer of  UNHCR,  in  Sri  Lanka.
     There are two letters, of which we think we only need to refer to  the
     more  recent  from  Michael  Kingsley-Nyinah,  who   is   the   Deputy
     Representative of the UNHCR in London.

 13. Beginning with the report of the fact-finding  mission,  we  think  it
     would be helpful to set out at length part  of  paragraph  6  of  that
     report which records statements made by the Senior  Superintendent  of
     the Criminal Investigation Department in Sri Lanka on 21st March 2002.

           "6.1  The Director explained that if a returnee were not  wanted
                 they would not be stopped at the  airport.   However,  when
                 the CID are certain that the individual  has  committed  or
                 been convicted of an offence then they would be stopped.  A
                 computer holds the  name,  address  and  age  of  a  wanted
                 person.  The police purely go on records - scars would  not
                 make a difference and the  authorities  would  not  make  a
                 decision on this basis.


           6.2   We were told that there had been no round-ups of Tamils on
                 Colombo in the last six months.


              3. The Director thought that the Human Rights Commission (HRC)
                 was very effective.  The HRC are able  to  visit  and  make
                 enquiries.   Therefore  the   procedures   are   open   and
                 investigated and the police are not  able  to  do  anything
                 untoward.


              4. The Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) is  still  in  force.
                 The government are seriously considering repealing the Act,
                 and there has been an order not to make any  arrests  under
                 the PTA, only under common law.  [This is part of the  text
                 of the cease-fire agreement].  The CID is now  allied  with
                 the Ministry of the Interior and  the  Director  felt  that
                 this was a positive  move  as  the  police  were  now  more
                 closely linked to the public.

              5. Failure to comply with  reporting  restrictions  would  not
                 warrant reporting or recording."

     We do not need to set out any more of that document.


 14. The record of the meeting of the delegation with  Michael  Lindenbauer
     is specifically stated to have been approved  by  Mr  Lindenbauer  and
     that he is content for the contents of it to be disclosed.   Paragraph
     2 of the note reads as follows:

           "Checks on returnees at the Colombo Airport have been eased with
           many returned rejected asylum seekers simply being waived  [sic]
           through since December 2001.  This is in sharp contrast to  what
           happened previously where basically every returnee was  referred
           to CID and thereafter referred to the magistrate in  Negombo  in
           order to carry out relevant checks, where they  were  necessary.
           Most returnee cases that underwent this process were released on
           the same day.  Scarring is not seen to be a  significant  issue,
           although obvious scarring could draw  attention  and  result  in
           further enquiries and detention by the authorities."


 15. The letter from the Deputy Representative of the UNHCR  in  London  is
     dated 15th April 2002.  It specifically indicates  that  it  does  not
     seek to be inconsistent with the position taken by Mr  Lindenbauer  in
     the note to which we have referred.  The letter continues as follows:

           "Although steps towards peace  have  been  taken  in  Sri  Lanka
           recently, it is still premature to advocate that  the  situation
           has reached a satisfactory level of safety to warrant the return
           of all unsuccessful asylum applicants to  Sri  Lanka.   In  this
           regard,  UNHCR  has  been  aware  that  returning   Tamils   are
           potentially open to  risk  of  serious  harm  similar  to  those
           generally  encountered  by  young   male   Tamils   in   certain
           circumstances.  This risk may be triggered by suspicions (on the
           part of the security forces) founded on various factual elements
           relating to the individual  concerned,  including  the  lack  of
           identity  documents,  the  lack  of  proper  authorisation   for
           residence and travel, the fact that the individual concerned  is
           a young Tamil male from an 'uncleared' area or the fact that the
           person has close family members who are or  have  been  involved
           with the LTTE.


           In UNHCR's view, the presence of torture related  scars  on  the
           body of  a  returnee  should  be  a  relevant  consideration  in
           assessing likelihood of danger upon the  return  of  Sri  Lankan
           Tamil asylum seekers.  Where such scars  are  related  to  human
           rights abuses, they would likely be  seen  as  evidence  of  the
           security forces previous interest in the particular  individual.
           This could in turn serve to trigger further adverse attention to
           that individual.  While every case should be assessed on its own
           merits, UNHCR would reiterate its view that special care  should
           be taken in relation to the return of failed asylum  seekers  to
           Sri Lanka."


 16. We add two further comments.  One is that Ms Gandhi has  asked  us  to
     say that the statement by Mr Lindenbauer that "many returned  rejected
     asylum seekers have  been  waived  through  since  December  2001"  is
     inconsistent with a passage in a report of a fact-finding  mission  to
     Sri Lanka made in July 2001, but avowedly updated to March  2002.   At
     paragraph 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of that document there  is  a  reference  to
     some returning Sri Lankans being  questioned  in  order  to  ascertain
     their identity.  However, the report indicates that the CID's view  on
     that was that the system in place was very fast and very  transparent.
     It does not appear to us  that  there  is  any  conflict  between  the
     statement that many returned  rejected  asylum  seekers  pass  through
     without difficulty and a statement that some are subject to a pause in
     order to establish their identity.  We do not anticipate that, in  the
     present case, there would or could be any doubt about the identity  of
     the Appellant.  The fact-finding mission of 2001  indicates  that  one
     method of ascertaining the identity  of  returnees  is  by  contacting
     their relatives and  the  evidence  is  that  the  Appellant's  father
     remains in Sri Lanka and remains a judge.  If there were  any  further
     difficulty there could, of course, be reference to the records of  the
     issuing of the Appellant's passport.

 17. The second factor to which we should refer is Mr  Sheikh's  submission
     that we should prefer material deriving from Michael Lindenbauer,  who
     is the Protection Officer on the ground, as it were, in Sri Lanka,  to
     that deriving from the office in London.  We see  the  force  of  that
     submission, but it does appear  to  us  that  the  two  documents  are
     specifically said to be compatible and we think that  they  are.   One
     sets out facts:  the other advises caution.  We accept the  facts  and
     we act with caution.

 18. Looking at the evidence  as  a  whole,  it  appears  to  us  that  the
     Appellant, if returned, would be treated in the way that is  indicated
     by the documents deriving from the United Kingdom delegation in  March
     2002.  His identity is not uncertain.  He is likely to be able to pass
     directly through Colombo Airport.  The allegation that he  was  needed
     or wanted in connection with some  enquiry  under  the  Prevention  of
     Terrorism Act could not now be followed up because  of  the  effective
     suspension of that Act pending its repeal.  There is, in any event, no
     reason to suppose that since 19th April 1998 the security forces  have
     been interested in him at all (that is, of course,  if  the  documents
     are taken as  genuine  and  effective).   So  far  as  his  scars  are
     concerned, we note what the UNHCR continues to say  about  scars  but,
     from the point of view of this Appellant, the  position  is  that  the
     question of scarring was properly dealt with by  the  Adjudicator  and
     his conclusion, which we see no reason for  displacing,  is  that  the
     Appellant's scarring is  not  such  as  would  cause  anyone  to  have
     particular interest in him as a  person  who  was  worthy  of  further
     investigation.

 19. For those reasons, it appears to us that the Appellant, if returned to
     Colombo, is not at risk of  persecution.   This  appeal  is  therefore
     dismissed.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


-----------------------
      1


