
                                                                   Appeal
                                                     No:   HX/55044/2001 | |

        FC (Article3- Medical Facilities-Psychiatric) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT
                                                                       04608


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 21st August 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                ......3 October 2002........

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Mr A R Mackey
                               Mr R Baines JP

Between:




                                 FERIZ CELA


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia  from
     Kosovo.  He appeals, with  leave,  against  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator, Mr J R L G Varcoe CMG, dismissing his appeal against  the
     decision of the Respondent on 19th April 2001 to give  directions  for
     his removal as an illegal entrant.  Before us today he is  represented
     by Miss Fielden instructed by S Osman Solicitors  and  the  Respondent
     has been represented by Mr Blundell.  We have heard  submissions  from
     Miss Fielden and have not needed to call on Mr Blundell.

  2. The Appellant's claim depends, to an extent, on his  history  and,  in
     particular, his history of ill-treatment by the Serbs in Kosovo.   The
     Adjudicator decided that the Appellant was not entitled to status as a
     refugee and also decided that the Appellant's removal would breach  no
     Article of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The Appeal to  us
     is primarily based on Article 8, with reference also to Article 3.

  3. The basis of Miss Fielden's submissions is largely  a  medical  report
     prepared by Dr Cohen and  dated  20th  December  2001,  following  the
     doctor's examination of the Appellant  on  11th  December.   It  is  a
     comprehensive report, which appears (with one reservation to which  we
     shall need to refer) to be entirely fair and balanced, and,  like  the
     Adjudicator, we regard it as reliable.  It records that the  Appellant
     had, at the time of the doctor's examination, psychiatric problems  of
     some severity.  The diagnosis is that the Appellant was suffering from
     a severe depressive episode (ICD 10 classification F32.2).  The doctor
     states in his report as follows:

           "The seriousness of the Appellant's disorder  is  such  that  he
           requires immediate treatment.   In  addition  to  antidepressant
           medication, he would also benefit from  a  period  of  inpatient
           treatment in a  psychiatric  hospital,  as  he  is  experiencing
           thoughts of self harm, and there is a risk that he  may  act  on
           them.  In addition, he has been using alcohol as a form of self-
           medication and I  am  concerned  about  the  adverse  effects  -
           physical, psychological and social  -  that  excessive  drinking
           might have on his health and well-being.


           The consequences of him failing to receive treatment is that his
           depressive  symptoms  are  likely  to  intensify.    This   will
           undoubtedly  impact  negatively  on   his   marriage   and   his
           relationship with his children and may lead to  him  taking  his
           life.


           As far as I could ascertain, such treatment is not available  in
           Kosovo.


           If he is deported, this is also likely to have a negative impact
           on his mental state with further deterioration of his mood."


      That last sentence is the only one about which we  have  reservations.
      It may be right, but the doctor does not give any indication  that  in
      reaching that judgement, he has weighed up matters such as the  return
      of the Appellant to his own country surrounded by his  own  countrymen
      and, of course, people who speak his own language and are used to  his
      culture.  Be that as it may, the account given by the  doctor  of  the
      Appellant's condition at the time of that  report  is  clearly  not  a
      happy one.


  4. Ms Fielden points out that the Adjudicator found as  a  fact  that  it
     would be impossible for the Appellant to receive inpatient psychiatric
     treatment in Kosovo.  The question then is whether that fact of itself
     would mean that the Appellant's removal to Kosovo would be a breach of
     Article 8.  It might be so, if the report was such as to indicate that
     the Appellant needed inpatient treatment.   As  we  read  the  report,
     however,  it  does  not  make  that  suggestion.   It  indicates  that
     treatment is needed.  It clearly indicates that medication is  needed,
     although the type of medication is not specified.  Inpatient treatment
     is described as only an additional benefit.  We do not read the report
     as indicating that,  at  its  date,  the  Appellant  needed  inpatient
     psychiatric treatment.  What is incidentally clear is that there is no
     evidence that, in the  period  following  the  report,  the  Appellant
     received inpatient psychiatric treatment.

  5. As Miss Fielden has very frankly conceded, she has a difficulty in the
     date of the report.  Because of the terms of s77(3)  and  (4)  of  the
     1999 Act, in considering  claims  under  Article  8  of  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights, we are concerned with the  facts  as  they
     were at the date of the decision.  That, as we have said, was in April
     2001, some eight months before the  doctor  saw  the  Appellant.   The
     doctor sets out the Appellant's history in the course of  his  report.
     There does not appear  to  be  any  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's
     medical state had begun at the  time  of  the  difficulties  which  he
     suffered at the hands of the Serbs.  On the contrary, the only  matter
     of history relating to the Appellant's condition which is recorded  in
     the report is that the Appellant himself had noticed  a  deterioration
     in his  mental  state  in  the  past  18  months:   that  is  to  say,
     approximately in the period from June 2000 until  December  2001.   In
     our view, there is simply nothing in this report which would enable us
     to say that the Appellant's medical condition was  of  any  particular
     nature at the date of the decision.  There is simply  no  evidence  of
     what the Appellant needed in terms of any condition that he  may  have
     had at the date of the decision.  It follows that  a  claim  based  on
     Article 8 as a result of his mental state at that date  is  doomed  to
     failure.

  6. That is not the end of the matter because, so  far  as  Article  8  is
     concerned, the Appellant also relies on  his  family  links.   He  has
     brothers and sisters who are here, and who, we are told (it is fair to
     say in a rather vague fashion) have some status here.  We do not  know
     what their status is  and  we  do  not  know  whether  they  have  any
     indefinite right to remain here rather than being returned  themselves
     to Kosovo when some period of leave expires.  The Appellant  also  has
     close family here including his wife and his two children, one of whom
     was born here.  The family, that is to say, the husband, wife and  the
     children, ought, no doubt, to be  staying  or  moving  together.   The
     siblings have been relied on by the Appellant's wife in helping her to
     look after the Appellant.  That was the position at the  date  of  the
     hearing before the Adjudicator in March 2002, but again  there  is  no
     basis for saying  that  there  was,  between  the  Appellant  and  his
     siblings, in April 2001, a relationship which was  so  close  that  it
     ought not to be infringed by the Appellant's removal.

  7. Nothing  that  has  been  put  before  us  suggests  that  either  the
     Appellant's wife or his children are themselves not liable to  removal
     and it follows that, so far as Article 8 is concerned as a whole,  the
     Appellant's family ties here are not such as to prevent  his  removal.
     That is to say that, although removing him without them would infringe
     his family life, the removal of the family would  not  interfere  with
     either the private or family life of any of them.   Insofar  as  there
     were any interference, we think that the Appellant's medical condition
     (if there could be any hypothesis about what it was at the date of the
     decision) would not amount to any reason  counteracting  the  need  to
     maintain immigration control.

  8. That leaves only Article 3.  There is a suggestion in the grounds that
     the Appellant's inability to obtain  medical  treatment  would  amount
     itself to a breach of Article 3 if he were returned to Kosovo.  In our
     view, there is nothing in that argument and it is  fair  to  say  that
     Miss Fielden has not pressed it.  For completeness, however, we should
     refer to Bensaid.  That was a case of a claimant who was, it is  right
     to  say,  very  much  more  severely  mentally  disturbed  than   this
     Appellant,  and  the  Court  appears  to  have  taken  the  view  that
     nevertheless his removal to his own country would not infringe Article
     3.  So far as we are concerned in this appeal, the Appellant  will  no
     doubt be in Kosovo in a situation which is not as advantageous to  his
     health as the United Kingdom has been over the last  few  months,  but
     his removal to his own country does not thereby amount to a breach  of
     Article 3.

  9. For those reasons, his appeal is dismissed.

 10. Before parting from this case, we would like to say this.  This is  an
     appeal where the evidence has not enabled the Appellant  to  establish
     his case because, as we have said, the medical evidence does not go to
     the date of the decision.  We offer no criticism for that.   It  is  a
     feature of the legislation that requires us to look at the date of the
     decision and we suspect that, in a case such  as  this,  it  would  be
     impossible  or  nearly  impossible  for  a  doctor  to  look  back   a
     considerable  period  and  say  with  any  degree  of  reliability  or
     responsibility what the individual's medical condition would have been
     on that date.  We are not entitled to look at the medical condition of
     the Appellant at the date of the hearing before the Adjudicator or  at
     the date of the hearing before us, except in so far as that  condition
     was predictable at the date of the decision  and,  as  we  have  said,
     there is no basis for any conclusion in that area.

 11. However, we are told by Dr Cohen that in December the Appellant needed
     treatment.  We do not know what treatment he has had, and  we  do  not
     know whether it has  enabled  the  Appellant's  medical  condition  to
     improve.  As a result of our decision today,  the  Appellant  and  his
     family can, we apprehend,  properly  be  removed  to  Kosovo,  but  we
     strongly urge the Secretary of  State  not  to  remove  the  Appellant
     unless he is entirely satisfied that the medical emergency  which  was
     referred to in Dr Cohen's report is now firmly a thing of the past.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
