
ar                                                         Appeal No.
HX41856-2001                      RS (Relocation-Maoists) Nepal CG [2002]
UKIAT 05407


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 3 October 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                ........25 November 2002....................

                                   Before:


                          Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
                          Mr J A O'Brien Quinn, QC
                                Mrs E Morton




                               RISHAL  SHYARM


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Miss C. Ganning, counsel, Halliday Reeves solicitors
For the respondent :  Mr J. Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  who  appeals  by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D.G.  Zucker,
      dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to
      grant asylum or leave to remain under the Human Rights Act and refusal
      to grant leave to enter. The grounds  of  appeal  are  in  the  bundle
      before us.

   2. The appellant arrived in this country in December  1999  on  a  forged
      passport and claimed asylum.  The basis of the  appellant's  claim  is
      set out in paragraphs 5 to 11 of the determination.   The  Adjudicator
      has accepted the basis as being credible but finds that the appellant,
      whose claim is based on persecution at the hands  of  the  Maoists  in
      Nepal, did not seek state protection and that  the  Maoists  were  not
      agents of persecution because the state  provided  protection  to  the
      necessary Horvath standard. We would refer  to  paragraph  23  of  the
      determination which make such a finding.  We also refer  to  paragraph
      25.

   3. The basis of the appeal is that the Adjudicator's findings that  there
      was protection to the Horvath standard are flawed.

4.    Miss Ganning in her submissions  maintained  that  the  appellant  had
      been persecuted by the Maoists prior to his  abduction  and  detention
      for  a period of two years. She submitted that on  the  basis  of  the
      objective evidence in her bundle and which was before the  Adjudicator
      it was impossible for  the  police  to  provide  protection  for  this
      appellant.  She points out that in paragraph 22 the Adjudicator  finds
      that  it  'is  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  objective  evidence   a
      willingness on the part of the authorities to tackle the Maoists there
      would also seem to be in  ability  to  deal  with  the  problem.'  She
      submits that it is  because  of  this  inability  that  there  is  not
      adequate protection to the Horvath standard.  She drew  our  attention
      to a number of documents  in  the  bundle  before  us,  being  largely
      Amnesty International reports and newspapers reports and  other  press
      reports indicating that the strength and power of the Maoists in Nepal
      is of such a nature  as  to  render  the  police  and  army  virtually
      ineffective in providing protection for the citizens of that  country.
      She points to the enormous number of people  who  are  killed  by  the
      Maoists, the manner in which certain parts  of  the  state  have  been
      reduced to paralysis by the activities  of  the  Maoists  and  to  the
      failure of the police and the army to prevent such a situation arising
      or developing and worsening.  She points out that the country  is  one
      of extreme poverty and that the government lacks either the  funds  or
      the human resources to deal with the situation.  We asked her  whether
      in her view the country had reached a state of anarchy  comparable  to
      that, for example, pertaining in Colombia where whole stretches of the
      country are under the control of various bandits and the writ  of  the
      government does not run. Miss Ganning submitted   that  this  was  the
      situation.

5.    We drew Miss Ganning's attention  to  a  report  which  has  been  put
      before us by the Home Office in a number of Nepalese  cases  which  we
      have heard very recently.  This a report from the Ministry of Interior
      Affairs of Belgium who sent a mission to Nepal to establish  precisely
      what the position in  that  country  was,  bearing  in  mind  the  not
      inconsiderable number of asylum seekers who appear  to  be  descending
      upon Belgium.   The  Home  Office  had  not  in  fact  submitted  this
      document in this case.  We indicated sections  of  that  report  which
      would show that there are certain areas  of  that  country  which  are
      particularly stricken by Maoists  terrorists  attacks  and  there  are
      areas which are  deemed  to  be  safe,  notably  Kathmandu  where  the
      appellant's family now seems  to  be  living.   As  Miss  Ganning  was
      unaware of this document, we arranged for her to have a  copy  at  the
      conclusion of the hearing and gave her a  further  seven  days  within
      which to make written submissions to us relative to that document.  Mr
      Morris was informed that if there were any matters in the  submissions
      that Miss Ganning may  make  we  considered  to  be  relative  to  our
      determination we would submit her submissions to him and invite him to
      make further written submissions to us.

6.    We indicated to Miss Ganning  that in our view, based partly upon  the
      Belgium report, if the appellant feared for his safety in his own home
      area, it would appear that there is no reason why he should  not  seek
      internal flight in Kathmandu where his family appears  to  be  living.
      We invited Miss Ganning to make submissions as to whether  or  not  it
      would be unduly harsh for the appellant to move to that area.

7.    She informed us that the appellant had been in this country  for  some
      time, is now in the process of divorcing his Nepalese wife and intends
      to marry a UK resident. We expressed the view that  this  was  not  an
      indication that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to move
      to Kathmandu although the  circumstances   might    give  rise  to  an
      Article 8 claim, though there  is  none  before  us  at  present.   We
      pointed out to Miss Ganning that the appellant is  a  young  man  i.e.
      thirty three years of age, a jeweller by trade and there seems  to  us
      no reason why he should not carry  on  his  trade  as  a  jeweller  in
      Kathmandu where in fact there might well be more demand for his skills
      than in the rural area from whence he comes.  Miss Ganning did not  in
      fact make any serious submissions  with  regard  to  the  question  of
      whether or not it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to  move  to
      that area.

   8. Mr Morris in his submissions maintained that  the  appellant  had  not
      tested the ability of the state to give him protection. When his house
      had been burned down by the Maoists and  he  had  been  abducted,  his
      family made no attempt whatsoever to draw the matter to the  attention
      of the police or the army. Mr Morris submitted that the  Adjudicator's
      findings with regard to the  adequacy  of  protection  were  perfectly
      valid and that in any event  an  alternative  of  internal  flight  to
      Kathmandu was available.

9.    In paragraph 23 of the  determination, and  also  to  some  extent  in
      paragraph 25, the Adjudicator  carefully  considers  the  question  of
      sufficiency of protection in the context of the guidelines set out  in
      Horvath.  He expresses some doubt as to whether there is an ability on
      the part of the state to provide the necessary  protection,  but  then
      points out that a considerable number of suspected Maoists  have  been
      arrested by the police and that in his  view  the  objective  evidence
      clearly indicates not only a willingness on the part of the government
      to protect its citizens but the ability to do so as is manifest by the
      military exercises and arrests and incarceration of  terrorists  shown
      in the objective evidence.  We agree with the Adjudicator's  findings.
      We have carefully considered the documents to which Miss  Ganning  has
      drawn our attention in her bundle. These quite clearly show  that  the
      Maoist terrorists are a  ruthless  force  that  has  met  with  a  not
      inconsiderable degree of success  in disrupting areas of the   country
      and terrorising the local population,  and  has  also  met  with  some
      degree  of  military  success   in   overrunning   police   and   army
      establishments.  As a result of these activities the constitution  has
      been suspended and the  country  is  now  in  a  state  of  emergency,
      governed by the monarch and nominated cabinet.   However,  we  do  not
      share Miss Ganning's view that the state has degenerated into a  state
      of anarchy where the government has lost control over large  areas  of
      the country to the terrorist. Terrorists are certainly more active  in
      some areas than in others and have a greater degree of success in some
      areas than others but the conflict  between  the  government  and  the
      terrorists continues  throughout  the  country,  and  nothing  in  the
      objective evidence indicates that there are areas of the country which
      are  out  of  government  control  and  totally  controlled   by   the
      terrorists.  As the Adjudicator points out,  the  willingness  of  the
      state  to  protect  its  citizens  is  indiacted  by  not   only   the
      considerable number of terrorists who have been incarcerated in prison
      (in respect of which there appears to be scant  regard  to  the  human
      rights of these people) but a very considerable number of people  have
      been killed during the  course of the conflict. It may  well  be  that
      because of lack of funding the staffing of either the police force  or
      the army is not at a level that can provide anything approaching total
      protection although we would emphasises that Horvath does not  require
      one hundred percent protection.  We remind ourselves that in this case
      neither the appellant nor his family at any time during the course  of
      the incidents which are referred to in  paragraphs  5  to  10  of  the
      determination sought the protection of the state against the activists
      of harassment to which he and his family were subjected.

10.   We turn now to the Belgian report and the introduction on pages 12  ad
      13 of that report.  A sentence on page 13  states  'We  however  state
      that the  Nepalese people who declare that they are  afraid  of  being
      persecuted by the Maoists do have the possibility of internal flight.'
       Reference is then made to a report of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
      of the Netherlands dated November 2000.  The report then  goes  on  to
      indicate that there are a number of districts, which are  particularly
      susceptible to Maoist terrorist activities. These are termed 'stricken
      districts'.  They are enumerated in paragraph (a)  on  page  17.    We
      observe that the appellant comes from none of these districts. On  the
      same page it is stated 'Due to  a  shortage  of  men,  and  of  modern
      weaponry  means  of  communication,  and  also  because  of  the  very
      difficult war against the guerrilla army - which carries out  targeted
      attacks very unexpectedly, and then disappears without a trace  -  the
      police is said to be contending with  frustration  and  demotivation.'
      The report does not indicate, however, that the  police  or  the  army
      have lost control over the country or any part of it.

11.   On page 27 is a section headed 'Internal flight  alternative'.   These
      second of the report does tend to deal with claims on the  basis  that
      persecution  emanates  from  the  Nepalese  authorities  rather   than
      Maoists. The section (e) on page 29 states: 'Until further notice, all
      the contacts still consider the  Nepalese  capital  Kathmandu  a  safe
      city. Amnesty International declare  that  there  have  not  been  the
      question of killings in the capital until today.'   Even,  apparently,
      low profile Maoists have been able to seek shelter in the  big  cities
      of Nepal including Kathmandu. The report throughout stresses the  work
      of the Nepalese police and army in  dealing  with  the  protection  of
      Nepalese citizens and, whilst the report is principally concerned with
      the question of human rights breaches at the  hands  of  the  Nepalese
      government who may at times be over-zealous in  dealing  with  Maoists
      and Maoist suspects, there is no indication of either an inability  or
      unwillingness on the  part of the state to protect citizens  who  have
      no association with the  Maoist movement as  is  the  case  with  this
      appellant.

12.   In our view, if the appellant does not  consider  that  the  state  is
      able  to  offer  him  adequate  protection  in  his  own  area,   such
      protection can certainly be provided in Kathmandu as  is  quite  clear
      and is emphasised in the Belgium report several times.   He is thirty-
      three years of age, he has a trade of jeweller and there is no  reason
      why he should not carry out that trade in  Kathmandu.   His  wife,  or
      possibly his former wife, his children and family would appear  to  be
      in Kathmandu.  Nothing in the objective evidence nor in  any  of  Miss
      Ganning's submissions would indicate to us that  it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for him to move to that area.

13.    We  have   received   submissions   from   Miss   Ganning   following
      consideration  by  her  of  the  Belgian  report.  Attached  to  those
      submissions is a Tribunal determination promulgated  on  23  September
      this year in the case of Ghale [2002] UKIAT04334. We  have  considered
      Miss Ganning's further  submissions and, so far as they relate to  our
      consideration of the question of adequacy of protection,  we  are  not
      persuaded by them.

14.   In any event, as we have indicated earlier, the question  of  internal
      flight is one which should be considered.  Miss Ganning emphasises the
      findings of the Tribunal In the case of Ghale to show, not  only  that
      there is no adequacy of protection but that internal flight is not  an
      option.  She points out that Kathmandu  is  an  area  from  which  the
      appellant's family does come.  This is not correct.  In his  statement
      in support of the application the appellant makes it  perfectly  clear
      that he comes from Bilwari but  that  his  family  is  now  living  in
      Kathmandu.

15.   In our view, the Ghale case can be distinguished both with  regard  to
      the question of adequacy of protection and, in particular with  regard
      to the question of internal flight,  because  in  the  Gale  case  the
      appellant had been a member of the armed forces of Nepal and had  been
      threatened by the Maoists who wanted  him  to  join  their  forces  to
      assist in training.  This is not the case of Mr Shyarm.

16.   We therefore uphold the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator.   We  do  not
      consider that an Article 3 claim arises as in our view there is  a  no
      reasonable likelihood of the appellant being persecuted  by  non-state
      agents upon return, in particular if he relocates in an area  such  as
      Kathmandu.




                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE PRESIDENT



                           -----------------------
      1


