
ar                                                 Appeal No. CC10559-02
                       MR (Chechen-Return) Russia CG [2002] UKIAT 07562


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 7 February 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                        ......02/04/03......................

                                   Before:


                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby




                               MICHAEL  RAVEN
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1.    The appellant, a citizen of Russia, appeals the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr T.R. Jones) against the decision of the  Secretary  of
      State to refuse his application for asylum.

2.    The appellant  represented  himself  before  us  while  Mr  L.  Parker
      appeared for the respondent.

3.    The appellant left Russia on 7  November  2000  and  arrived  in  this
      country on 13 November, applying for asylum two  days later.

4.    The appellant's home town is Gudermes in  Chechnya.   The  Adjudicator
      summarised his claim in paragraph 12 of his determination and made the
      following findings in paragraph 22 of his determination:

             (a)  I  find  that  any  fear  that  the  appellant   has   of
                 persecution  in  Russia  in  general  or  in  Chechnya   or
                 Krasnodar in particular is not persecution  for  a  Refugee
                 Convention reason. Essentially, the appellant  claims  that
                 he is being persecuted because he cannot prove  who  he  is
                 rather  than  because  he   has   any   particular   racial
                 characteristics. He did not claim to belong to a particular
                 social group, but I considered whether  it  was  reasonably
                 likely that he was persecuted as a Russian  displaced  from
                 Chechnya. I find not. He claims that he was persecuted as a
                 vagrant, if anything, it appeared to me.


             (b) I had difficulty in accepting the appellant's basic story.
                 On the one hand his knowledge of Chechen political  affairs
                 was insufficient to enable him  to  answer  some  questions
                 that ought to have been simple for a person  who  had  been
                 brought up there. On the  other,  his  description  (latest
                 statement, paragraph 7) of having found that he had escaped
                 from Chechnya unwittingly on  foot  and  being  told  by  a
                 driver 'to go straight ahead to Krasnodar'  just  does  not
                 ring true. Krasnodar is more than four hundred  miles  from
                 Chechnya at the  East-north-eastern  end  of  the  Caucasus
                 mountains and into an  immediately  neighbouring  province.
                 Even giving him the benefit of the doubt on that matter, as
                 I am bound to do, I have difficulty  with  the  appellant's
                 claim to vagrancy,  having  regard  to  his  obvious  basic
                 intelligence and his resourcefulness. I have taken it  that
                 he was telling me that he had lost his  identity  card,  as
                 well as his passport, and  it  is  that  which  would  have
                 caused him most difficulty in Russia. I do not accept  that
                 the obtaining of  a  replacement  for  one  that  had  been
                 destroyed in the circumstances that the appellant describes
                 would present the problems that he claims.


             (c) I do not find  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
                 appellant's alleged fear of persecution  in  Russia  for  a
                 Refugee Convention reason on  his  return  there  is  well-
                 founded.


             (d) I do not accept that the fear ascribed to the appellant by
                 implication that he would be required to undertake military
                 service constitutes persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention
                 reason. I do not  find that he would be treated differently
                 from any other draft-dodger, if he is one in fact. I do not
                 find that any persecution that  the  appellant  fears  from
                 Chechen   rebels,   for   whatever   reason,    constitutes
                 persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.


             (e) Except where they are  not  consistent  with  my  findings
                 expressed herein, or I have commented upon them separately,
                 I support the comments made on behalf of the respondent  in
                 the reasons for refusal letter.'

5.    The Adjudicator  accordingly  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  and
      human rights appeals.

6.    The appellant in the grounds of appeal stated he  had  a  well-founded
      fear of persecution as a  Chechnen  refugee.   His  parents  had  been
      killed together with seventy other innocent people by Russian bombing.
       He had a well-founded fear of persecution owing to his German origins
      and a clear political opinion about Chechnen refugees.  The  appellant
      stated in paragraph 4 of the grounds of appeal that he did  not  speak
      much at the hearing as he assumed  his  hearing  would  be  successful
      because of what a representative had said.  He denied that  there  was
      any claim to be in fear because of not being in the army. He had never
      claimed to be a vagrant. He had post-traumatic stress  disorder.  This
      had been adversely affected by the determination.

7.    In a letter sent to the Tribunal the appellant stated  that  his  name
      was Michael von Raven 'because von is not only a noble addition to our
      German surname, von means from, von means that we are proud to be from
      family Raven, which are from our  ethnic  homeland  -  Germany.'   The
      appellant said that his family had tried to keep on German  traditions
      although it had been very difficult.  He maintained the  determination
      was completely wrong and relied on a UN report dated 21 November  2002
      which stated that Chechnen refugees needed protection.

8.    Mr Raven in his  submissions  stated  that  his  parents  were  ethnic
      Germans and it was a requirement that one should speak German in order
      to obtain German citizenship.  He spoke German  fluently.  The  family
      had had troubles under Stalin in 1937. His grandmother had been killed
      in a concentration  camp.  He  came  from  Chechnya.   Ethnic  Germans
      suffered badly in the Russian Federation. His parents had been  killed
      by Russian bombing.  Seventy others had been  killed.  Half  of  their
      house  had  been  destroyed.   Things  had  been  very  hard  for  the
      appellant. It was chaos and nothing worked.

9.    The appellant was concerned that on his return he would be killed  and
      sent to a concentration camp. There was no doubt about this.

10.   Mr Parker submitted that the Adjudicator had  made  clear  credibility
      findings and the grounds of appeal had not challenged them.  The  case
      concerned risks on return.  The Home Office  relied  on  the  Chechnyn
      bulletin dated January 2002.  Thousands of Chechnens were returning to
      their  homes despite the problems. The UNHCR were  examining  ways  to
      supplement government efforts towards return and reported  in  January
      2002  of  several  improvements  including  government  assistance  to
      displaced persons. It was accordingly safe for the appellant to return
      and there would be support.  Mr Parker also referred to paragraph 6.60
      of the Country Assessment.  At least a quarter  of  a  million  people
      migrated from Chechnya and the  UNHCR  continued  to  help  government
      agencies increase  technical  capacities  to  provide  protection  and
      assistance for the displaced.  Mr Raven submitted the UN report  dated
      29 November  2002  was  dated  after  the  points  relied  on  by  the
      respondent. Chechnens who had escaped from Chechnya must be  permitted
      to arrive in Kazakhstan in the view of the UNHCR.  There  were  twelve
      thousand Chechnen refugees in Kazakhstan, 80% of whom were  women  and
      children who had fled Russia between 1999 and 2001.

11.   There were no freedoms in Chechnya  and  Putin  was  in  charge  of  a
      brutal regime. The appellant had a good case as a member of  a  social
      group and because of his origins, and because of  the  experiences  he
      had  suffered.   He  had  his  political  opinion  and   he   required
      protection.  He had a well-founded fear and it would be a violation of
      his rights to return him. He had post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
      had been severely persecuted. He had sent medical documents.

12.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We have carefully considered the points made on  both  sides  and  the
      documents submitted.  We should first of all say  that  the  appellant
      had no difficulty representing himself and was fluent in  English  and
      put his points articulately.

13.   The Adjudicator heard from the appellant and  concluded  that  he  had
      difficulty in accepting the account given. It does not appear  to  us,
      despite the points made by the appellant that he was arguably wrong to
      find as he did.  The points made by the Adjudicator are not lacking in
      cogency and we do not  feel  that  despite  the  points  made  by  the
      appellant it would be right to reverse them.
14.   Mr Parker submitted that the question was whether the appellant  could
      properly  be  returned   notwithstanding   the   adverse   credibility
      assessment.

15.   There is before us a letter dated 4  February  2003  from  a  Mr  D.R.
      Jones who has been counselling the appellant for over two years.    He
      suffered from post traumatic stress disorder and any  illogicality  in
      the presentation of his case, in  the  view  of  Mr  Jones,  could  be
      attributed to his apprehension about the outcome and  his  insecurity.
      We take this carefully into account when reaching our decision.

16.   The Country Assessment states  that  by  February  2000  some  120,000
      displaced  people  had  returned  to  Chechnya  although  there   were
      difficulties with the economy and normal  civil  life.   The  Chechnya
      administration, part of which remained in Gudermes, had not been able,
      for security reasons,  to  establish  itself  fully  in  the  capital.
      160,000 people are displaced within Chechnya.  The United Nations High
      Commissioner for Refugees in October 2000  stated  that  she  believed
      that the Russian authorities were taking steps to bring back  civilian
      rule to  the  regime  and  that  the  UNHCR  were  examining  ways  to
      supplement  government  efforts  towards  return,  rehabilitation  and
      reconstruction.  As mentioned above, in January 2002, the UNHCR  noted
      several improvements including:

             'government assistance to  displaced  persons,  returnees  and
             socially  vulnerable  persons  in  Chechnya,  including   food
             supplies,  had  increased,  while  payment  of  pensions   and
             salaries  had  resumed;  the  judiciary  was   gradually   re-
             established in Chechnya, with some thirty  judges  working  in
             twelve out of fifteen  District  Courts  as  well  as  in  the
             Supreme Court of the Republic;  local bodies of  the  Ministry
             of Interior  in  Chechnya  had  resumed  their  administrative
             functions,  and  identity  documents  were  being  issued   to
             undocumented  displayed  persons  and   local   residents   in
             Chechnya.  Meanwhile freedom of movement between Chechnya  and
             Ingushetia  had  improved,  with  several  thousand  displaced
             persons travelling between the two republics every  month,  to
             visit relatives, to check on  property,  or  to  trade,  among
             other reasons.  However, while the situation of the  displaced
             in Chechnya is now relatively stable, the  security  situation
             prevents international relief organisation  from  establishing
             offices there, and hinders any substantial improvement in  the
             return process.'

17.   We have carefully taken into account the document  relied  on  by  the
      appellant where the UN called on Kazakhstan to settle  the  status  of
      Chechnen  refugees,  where  there  are  apparently   twelve   thousand
      Chechnens. We do not, however read the document as  contradicting  the
      material relied on by  the  Home  Office.   Despite  the  difficulties
      portrayed in the country assessment, we are  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant's fears about being put into a concentration camp are  well-
      founded. Life will undoubtedly be  hard  for  him  and  we  take  into
      account the evidence that he is agitated about the  outcome  of  these
      proceedings and the prospect of returning. We do  not  feel,  however,
      that the Adjudicator's determination of  the  issues  before  him  was
      wrong, nor that the procedures at the hearing were in any  way  unfair
      as apparently suggested in the grounds of  appeal.  We  are  confident
      that the appellant had the opportunity to say what he  wanted  to  say
      and indeed, as we have observed, he was an  articulate  representative
      in his own right. The Adjudicator did not accept  that  the  appellant
      had been persecuted for  the  reasons  he  claimed.   The  Adjudicator
      explored the issues, properly in our view, and  came  to  satisfactory
      conclusions on the evidence before him. Nothing that we have heard nor
      the material that has been put before us  causes  us  to  have  doubts
      about the soundness of the Adjudicator's conclusions.

18.   The appellant will face a difficult time on return  to  Chechnya   but
      the evidence suggests that there is some limited support in the region
      and relative stability there despite the obvious difficulties with the
      security situation. It would not  in  our  view  arguably  breach  the
      appellant's human rights for him to be required to  return.  It  would
      not expose him to inhuman or degrading treatment, having regard to the
      high threshold required to establish a claim under  Article  3.    Any
      interference with his private or family life  would  be  proportionate
      and in pursuit of a legitimate  aim  (immigration  control).   Despite
      giving careful and sympathetic attention to the  points  made  by  the
      appellant, we are unable to assist  him.

19.   Appeal dismissed.



                                   G. WARR
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      6


