

                                                      APPEAL No.  HX43205-01

                                           RB (Personal-Disability) Zimbabwe
                            CG [2002] UKIAT 04144

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of hearing: 2 August 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                      ............03/09/2002................


                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)
                             HH Judge D. Holden



Between



                               RITA BLACKBURN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She has been  given  leave
        to appeal the determination of an  Adjudicator  (Mr  M.  Shrimpton)
        dismissing her appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  give
        directions for her removal from the United Kingdom  and  to  refuse
        asylum.


     2. Ms M. Canavan of RLC appeared for the Appellant.  Mr M. Davidson, a
        Home Office Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.


     3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 November 2001 and
        was given six months leave to enter.  She claimed asylum on 12 June
        2001.  Following the Respondent's decision on 17  August  2001  the
        Adjudicator heard the appeal on 4 March 2002 and  leave  to  appeal
        was granted on 13 June 2002


     4. We have Appellant's bundle containing 162 pages,  RLC's  letter  to
        the Home Office of 19 April 2002 and their reply of 19  July  2002.
        The Respondent  submitted  copies  of  the  tribunal  determination
        Nhundu and Chiwera (01/TH/0613), the Country Assessment  for  April
        2002 and the US State Department Report of February 2001.


     5. The Adjudicator found the Appellant to be a credible witness.   Her
        claim was argued before the Adjudicator and  is  argued  before  us
        under Articles 3 and 8.  The Refugee Convention claim is no  longer
        pursued. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant was, in the words
        of the medical report, "mildly educationally  sub  normal"  with  a
        "moderate learning disability" and below average intelligence.  The
        medical report described her as  "suffering  from  dwarfism".   The
        Adjudicator preferred the phrase "suffering from restricted growth.
         The Appellant appeared before the Adjudicator and before us.   She
        is of a distinctively small stature.  Her passport gives her height
        as 1.3 m.


     6. The medical report records that the Appellant was raped  when  four
        years of age.  The Adjudicator found that  in  Zimbabwe  there  was
        particularly harsh customary  discrimination  against  people  with
        disabilities.  He concluded that to remove her  to  Zimbabwe  would
        not breach her human rights under Articles 3 or 8.   Removal  would
        not be disproportionate.  He  went  on,  in  paragraph  19  of  the
        determination to say, "that being said, I  accept  the  facts  that
        this lady has to some extent been abandoned by her family, she  has
        no doubt been called names and treated harshly whilst  in  Zimbabwe
        and  I  accept  that,  sadly,  in  Zimbabwean  society  those  with
        disabilities, having  regard  to  the  evidence  in  front  of  me,
        undisputed, are not treated with  the  respect  and  humanity  they
        deserve.  None of this however comes  anywhere  near  engaging  the
        international obligation of this country and the appeal has  to  be
        dismissed".  The Adjudicator did not make a recommendation but came
        close to it by suggesting that  no  "right  thinking  person  would
        criticise the Secretary of State for not sending this lady back and
        taking a compassionate view".


     7. We take a different view.  We find that on the facts of  this  case
        and the further country information before us,  it  would  infringe
        the Appellant's Article 3 and 8 rights to return her  to  Zimbabwe.
        The conclusion turns on the very particular facts of the case which
        include the following.


     8. The Appellant lived with her family for the whole of her life until
        she left Zimbabwe. The family consistes of her  parents  and  three
        siblings.   She  left  school  at  17  without  having  passed  any
        examinations, was unable to  find  work  and  stayed  at  home  for
        approximately two years.  She then found work as a  teacher's  aide
        or childminder at a nursery.  The parents of a child at the nursery
        drove her from home to school and back each day.   The  nursery  is
        now closed. She is the only member of the family who  suffers  from
        dwarfism.  She was bullied and  insulted  at  school.   She  has  a
        moderate learning disability and an IQ of 85.   She  was  raped  at
        four years of age, although the psychologist whose report is before
        us was not sure to what extent  her  present  mental  health  might
        relate to this.  The Appellant has travelled abroad on a number  of
        occasions and the psychologist  concluded  that  this  was  at  the
        instigation of her family and, more than anything, to have her work
        as a domestic servant.  He found that she had  suffered  continuous
        emotional and social deprivation.  He said, "my contention is  that
        Miss  Blackburn  is  of  limited  intelligence,  is  confused   and
        vulnerable, and may find the judicial  process  beyond  her  normal
        experience and therefore her ability to cope".


     9. Amongst the evidence contained in the Appellant bundle is a  report
        from Alexander Phiri who is the General Secretary of  the  Southern
        African Federation of the Disabled. From the Danish report to which
        we will refer he appears to be held in high regard. In an e-mail to
        the Appellant's representatives dated 18 July 2002, he  states,  "I
        think it is now public  knowledge  that  things  are  not  well  in
        Zimbabwe.  The economic situation is at its lowest ebb.  Currently,
        there is a shortage of food and medicine, and  the  social  service
        and health  system  is  almost  collapsing  due  to  the  country's
        political problem.  Due to a shortage  of  foreign  currency,  most
        industries are closing, hence the employment sector  is  shrinking,
        and more and more people are getting out of employment.  In view of
        all these numerous problems many disabled people find themselves on
        the street to beg for survival.  Disabled people who used  to  rely
        on government's social services,  are  no  longer  receiving  their
        support they need.  Charitable institutions and NGOs  who  used  to
        render assistance to vulnerable groups and the poor are  no  longer
        doing so, and at the most working  at  very  low  capacity  due  to
        dwindling donor support.  You may already be aware that some "smart
        sanctions" are being  applied  on  Zimbabwe  by  the  international
        community and disabled people are being caught in the entangle".


    10. The US Department of  State  report  for  2001  states,  under  the
        heading "Persons with disabilities", "President Mugabe appointed  a
        disability activist to Parliament in 1995 to represent the needs of
        persons  with  disabilities.   The   law   specifically   prohibits
        discrimination against  person  with  disabilities  in  employment,
        admission to public places, or provision of services and is  viewed
        by advocates of persons with  disabilities  as  model  legislation.
        However, in  practice  the  lack  of  resources  for  training  and
        education severely hampers the ability of persons with disabilities
        to compete for scarce jobs.  The  law  stipulates  that  government
        buildings  should  be  accessible  to  persons  with  disabilities:
        however, implementation of this policy has been slow" and  "Persons
        with disabilities face particularly harsh customary discrimination.
         According to traditional belief,  persons  with  disabilities  are
        considered bewitched and  reports  of  children  with  disabilities
        being hidden when visitors arrive are common."


    11. The Danish Council of  Organisations  of  Disabled  People  Country
        Strategy  report  on  Zimbabwe  for  2001  includes  the  following
        passages, "In the  National  HIV/AIDS  policy  from  December  1999
        people with disability is a totally  neglected  group  despite  the
        fact that other particularly vulnerable groups are  mentioned,  for
        example children,  sex  workers,  prisoners  etc.   Yet  women  and
        children   with    disability,    in    particular    mental    and
        communicationally challenged, are at high risk of sexual abuse  and
        thus to contract HIV."  Also, "People with learning disabilities in
        Zimbabwe are often confused with the mentally ill and carry  strong
        negative labels....... The problems of employment  and  independent
        living are huge for this particular group".


    12. The Respondent's letter of 10  June  2002  (p  79  and  80  of  the
        Appellant's bundle) confirms that the Respondent has suspended  all
        removals to Zimbabwe.


    13. Mr Davidson submitted that the Adjudicator was fully aware  of  the
        objective situation  in  Zimbabwe.   However,  on  questioning  the
        assertion, he accepted that the hearing was in  March,  before  the
        full effect of the March 2002  elections  in  Zimbabwe  had  become
        known.  What happened to the Appellant when she was  four  was  not
        likely to be an  indication  of  current  vulnerability.   She  had
        managed to work in a nursery.  She was able to  care  for  herself.
        He accepted that before she left Zimbabwe she was always living  in
        a family environment, which no longer obtained.  On the  facts  the
        Adjudicator's conclusion was reasonable. The  article  8  reasoning
        was perhaps not as detailed as it might have  been  but  was  still
        safe.  Article 14 was not engaged and was not freestanding.

    14. In order to engage Article 3  the  Appellant  has  to  establish  a
        reasonable likelihood that, at the date of the hearing, if she were
        returned to Zimbabwe she  would  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to
        inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment.   The  level  of
        severity is set at a high threshold.  We find that what  is  likely
        to happen to the Appellant crosses this threshold.  If she  returns
        to Zimbabwe she would not  have  the  family  support  she  enjoyed
        whilst living there.  Her family appear to have deserted her.  They
        are now in Canada or the USA.  She suffers from a moderate learning
        disability and is of below average intelligence.  Her appearance is
        immediately distinctive because of her  very  small  stature.   The
        country information shows that those whose appearance marks them as
        disabled suffer particularly harsh customary discrimination and are
        often regarded as bewitched. The Appellant was raped when  she  was
        four years of age.  This is likely to make her more  vulnerable  to
        the consequences of further sexual abuse.  The Danish report  shows
        that women and children with  disabilities  are  at  high  risk  of
        sexual abuse and thus HIV. The Appellant has no  job.   The  report
        from Alexander Phiri, which we regard as reliable, states that  she
        is likely to find herself on  the  streets  begging  for  survival.
        This is supported by recent  reports  of  conditions  in  Zimbabwe,
        particularly  massive  unemployment  and   food   shortages.    The
        Respondent's current policy  not  to  return  anyone  to  Zimbabwe,
        disabled or otherwise, is a material factor.


    15. We find  that  we  should  take  Article  14  into  account.   This
        provides, "The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms  set  forth  in
        this Convention shall be  secured  without  discrimination  on  any
        ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political  or
        other opinion,  national  or  social  origin,  association  with  a
        national minority, property, birth or other status.  We know of  no
        authority on the point but find that discrimination on the  grounds
        of disability would be  discrimination  on  the  ground  of  "other
        status".  It is not of course a freestanding Article.  It  must  be
        taken in conjunction with another Article, in this case Articles  3
        and 8.  On the country  information  it  is  clear  that  there  is
        disability discrimination in Zimbabwe and, what is more, disability
        discrimination against which  the  authorities  do  not  provide  a
        sufficiency  of  protection.    The   tribunal   in   the   starred
        determination, Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 considered Article  14
        both generally and in conjunction with Article 3.  We do  not  need
        to consider whether this is a case where the application of Article
        14 discrimination might make the treatment the Appellant is  likely
        to suffer cross the Article 3 threshold in circumstances  where  it
        would not have done so had Article 14 not been  applied.   We  find
        that this is a case where the Article 3 threshold is  crossed  even
        if  Article  14  is  not  applied.   However,   the   evidence   of
        discrimination has assisted the Appellant in making her  case  (see
        paragraph 120 of Devaseelan).


    16. The Appellant succeeds under Article 3.  She  also  succeeds  under
        Article 8: to return her would  infringe  her  physical  and  moral
        integrity, at a lower level of severity than a breach of Article 3.
         It would not be proportionate to the Respondent's legitimate aim.

    17. We allow the appeal.











........................................
P. R. Moulden
Vice-President.

