
H-TH08/LW-V1
                                                     Appeal No :HX46891-2001
               MS (Risk-Homosexuality-Military Service) Macedonia CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT 03308



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  30 May 2002                             |                             |
|Dictated : 10 June 2002                       |.....30.7.2002...............|
|                                              |.......................      |


                                  Before:-


                     J A O'Brien Quinn Q C - (Chairman)
                                Mr M L James


between
                            MIROSLAV STOJANOVSKI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Macedonia, appeals  against  the  decision
       of an Adjudicator (Mrs  C  M  Kennedy)  following  a  hearing  on  13
       February 2002, when she dismissed his appeal against the decision  of
       the Secretary of State, taken on 18 June 2001, to refuse to vary  his
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom after  refusal  of  his  asylum
       application.

2.    The Appellant was represented Mr E Waheed, of Counsel,  instructed  by
      Sutovic and Hartigan, Solicitors,  while  Mr  J  Morris,  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, represented the Secretary of State.

3.    The Grounds of Appeal submitted dealt mainly with the claim  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to take account of the imprisonment  which  the
      Appellant would face on account of his draft evasion, that she did not
      take full account of the situation generally in Macedonia, that on the
      facts there would be a breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR,  that,  with
      regard to the  Appellant's  living  with  a  homosexual  partner,  the
      Adjudicator had failed to make suitable factual findings,  and  failed
      to take account of the position of the Appellant's partner  under  the
      terms of Article 8 of the ECHR, and that she had erred in the basis of
      her credibility findings.

4.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted  by  the  Tribunal  (Mr  J
    Barnes, Vice President).  In granting leave  to  appeal,  the  Tribunal
    stated as follows:-

      "3.   I have considered the grounds of appeal  in  the  light  of  the
         determination of the evidence before the adjudicator.  The  grounds
         of appeal are just arguable and for this reason I grant leave.  The
         Applicant should  be  aware,  however,  that  the  claim  that  the
         penalties for draft evasion are excessive  and  punitive  and  that
         prison conditions breach Article 3 of the European Convention  were
         extensively considered by the Tribunal in  a  recently  promulgated
         determination whose name  and  citation  number  is  not  presently
         available to me but which is highly germane to the issues on  these
         aspects.  My recollection is that the  Applicant's  representatives
         were also instructed in that recent appeal before me, and they will
         no doubt ensure that a copy of that determination is submitted  for
         the consideration of the  Tribunal  in  the  present  appeal.   The
         translation of the provisions of  the  criminal  code  relating  to
         draft evasion in the Applicant's bundle before the adjudicator  was
         not a full translation and I have reason to believe that  the  full
         translation  will  show  a  far  wider  discretion  in   sentencing
         available to the Macedonian Courts both under the  former  and  the
         current law than appears from the partial translation.  This matter
         is also touched on in the decision to which I refer  above.   Leave
         to appeal is granted."

5.    When the appeal opened before the  Tribunal,  Mr  Waheed  submitted  a
      skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant, and a  decision  of  the
      Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board (Refugee  Division)  A99-00560,
      and referred to the bundle which had been put  in  earlier  and  which
      contained recent decisions of the Tribunal and witness  statements  of
      both the Appellant and his homosexual partner.

6.    He, first of all,  addressed  us  on  paragraph  13  of  his  skeleton
      argument and submitted that we should look at it in the round  in  the
      light of both breaches of Article 3 and Article 8.

7.    He drew our attention to the position in  which  the  Appellant  would
      find himself  were  he  to  have  to  undergo  military  service.   He
      submitted  that  there  were  aggravating  circumstances   where   the
      Appellant was concerned, in view of the  fact  of  his  homosexuality,
      which would make life much more  difficult  for  him  if  he  were  to
      undergo military service.  On the question  of  military  service,  he
      drew our attention to the recent  determination  of  the  Tribunal  in
      Dimitrijevski [2002] UK IAT 00731, and to  Stojkovski  [2002]  UK  IAT
      01106, and drew our attention to the Canadian Refugee Board Case  A99-
      00560.  He submitted that the Tribunal should take note  of  what  was
      found in the Canadian Refugee Board case, namely:-

      "If the claimant returns to Macedonia he would face a  possibility  of
         being found to have remained outside the country to avoid  military
         service  and  thus  face  imprisonment  for  one   -   ten   years.
         Documentary evidence indicates that prison conditions in  Macedonia
         are 'inhuman and degrading'.

8.    He submitted that  whereas  Dimitrijevski  had  come  to  a  different
      conclusion, nevertheless the Canadian case should be followed  and  it
      should be noted that, in Stojkovski, at paragraph 12, it was  held  by
      the Tribunal as follows:-

      "12.  I would seem to us that a term of imprisonment of  one  to  five
             years would be disproportionate to the offence  committed  but
             we appreciate the fact that it is probably unlikely  that  the
             Appellant would receive  the  maximum  term  of  imprisonment.
             Having said that, the recent international Helsinki Report  of
             2001 gives us some concern as  to  the  likely  conditions  of
             prisons."

9.    With regard to the question of whether or not homosexuality  had  been
      legalised in Macedonia, it was  accepted  that  homosexuality  was  no
      longer a criminal offence,  but  that  in  south  eastern  Europe  the
      general population was much less tolerant of homosexuality than in the
      United Kingdom.

10.   He submitted that, homosexuality, of itself, is not imprisonable,  but
      it is an aggravating feature, particularly where military  service  is
      concerned.

11.   He then drew attention to paragraph 5 of the  determination,  and  the
      letter of  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  which  stated  that
      homosexuality was no longer a criminal offence in Macedonia.

12.   He submitted that what the Adjudicator had found at  paragraph  12  of
      the determination, namely that the shortest period which the Appellant
      would serve for failure to undergo military service, would be a period
      of one month, which she did not consider  to  be  punitive,  and  that
      there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Appellant   would   be
      incarcerated in the prison previously described.   He  submitted  that
      that ran contrary to the evidence, generally, which was to the  effect
      that the sentence for draft evaders or  absconders  in  Macedonia  was
      imprisonment of between one and ten years and that,  while  that  term
      would, in itself, be considered to be harsh, it would be  more  so  in
      view of the sexual orientation  of  the  Appellant,  and  the  general
      prison conditions in Macedonia; and  for  the  Appellant  to  have  to
      undergo such imprisonment, in such bad conditions, would amount  to  a
      breach of Article 3 irrespective of the length of  imprisonment  which
      would be imposed on him.

13.   With regard to the state  of  the  prisons  in  Macedonia,  which  the
      Appellant would face, if returned, it  would  amount  to  inhuman  and
      degrading treatment.  He submitted that having to serve in  the  army,
      which was a male dominated institution, just as the police,  it  would
      be doubly more difficult for  the  Appellant  due  to  his  homosexual
      orientation.

14.   He submitted that the finding of the  Adjudicator,  at  paragraph  12,
      that the shortest period which the Appellant would have to undergo was
      a period of "one month", was not in accordance with the evidence.   He
      submitted that he was unable to trace where the Adjudicator had  found
      the figure of one month, as that would not appear to  be  the  general
      evidence, which was that the sanction was imprisonment of from one  to
      ten years which would indicate that  the  lowest  term  the  Appellant
      would have to serve would be one of one year and not one month.

15.   With regard to  the  prison  conditions  in  Macedonia,  he  drew  our
      attention to the annual report on Human Rights Practices in  Macedonia
      for 2001, at page 26F of his bundle, where  it  was  stated  that  the
      Helsinki Committee had assessed the conditions in the prisons as  bad,
      and that, when  visiting  the  penitentiary  at  Idrizovo,  the  worst
      impression one could get, is in the solitary cells.   It  also  stated
      that prisoners who had been given disciplinary sanctions stay in those
      solitary cells and that those cells are about ten to twelve metres  in
      area, without heating, while the only window open is permanently open.
       He submitted that  it  is  also  stated  that  food  is  prepared  in
      extremely  unhygienic  conditions,  that  the  dispensary  is  located
      immediately next to the  closed  section  of  the  penitentiary,  that
      conditions where also humiliating and that the conduct  of  the  newly
      engaged physician was especially disrespectful and arrogant.  He  drew
      our attention to the report that requests  of  prisoners  for  medical
      examination  were  simply  ignored  and  where  contacts  between  the
      prisoners and the structures almost did not exist.

16.   He drew attention to the Helsinki Report at page  22  of  his  bundle,
      again dealing with prison conditions  in  Macedonia,  which  confirmed
      what he had already submitted.

17.   He drew  our  attention  to  what  was  stated,  at  paragraph  21  of
      Dimitrijevski,  where  the  question  of  the  prison  conditions   in
      Macedonia were considered and where it was held that the  question  of
      whether or not imprisonment  in  Macedonia  would  lead  to  treatment
      contrary  to  Article  3  of  the  ECHR,  would  depend  on  its   own
      circumstances, and  that  claims,  at  large,  as  to  whether  prison
      conditions in a specific country are likely to  lead  generally  to  a
      breach of Article 3 rights, for any one imprisoned, required clear and
      cogent evidence of general international acceptance  that  the  prison
      conditions are so regarded.

18.   He submitted that on the objective evidence to which he had  referred,
      and in view of the findings by the Canadian Refugee  Board,  it  would
      appear  that  there  is  clear  and   cogent   evidence   of   general
      international acceptance that the prison conditions in  Macedonia  are
      regarded as being inhumane and degrading.

19.   He submitted, relying on paragraph 11 of his skeleton  argument,  that
      Dimitrijevski, was wrong in suggesting that there must  be  Article  3
      suffering to demonstrate a real risk or  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
      Article 3 being breached.

20.   He submitted that it was not  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  have
      undergone imprisonment in the past to support his claim that it  would
      be inhumane and  degrading  for  him  to  be  imprisoned  if  he  were
      returned,  and  that,  to  that  extent,  what  had   been   held   in
      Dimitrijevski, did not properly represent the legal position.

21.   He submitted that what the Adjudicator found at paragraph  10  of  her
      determination, namely that the overwhelming inference which  she  drew
      was that the Appellant's fear of ill-treatment by fellow soldiers  due
      to his homosexuality was the real reason for his aversion to  military
      service and that, having regard to what was stated in  paragraphs  168
      and 169 of the UNHCR Handbook, the fact of his homosexuality would not
      bring him within these terms and that in order to show that  he  would
      suffer  disproportionately  severe  punishment  on  account   of   his
      sexuality, he would have to produce a stronger case.

22.   He submitted that the position would be, for the  Appellant,  that  if
      he were to have to  undergo  military  service,  in  a  male  oriented
      institution, which would be traditionally hostile to  homosexuals,  it
      was certain that his fate would be a lot  worse  than  others  of  his
      fellow countrymen.  He submitted that it was not being unrealistic  to
      take note that the Appellant would  suffer  disproportionately  severe
      punishment on account of his homosexuality if he  were  forced  to  do
      military service.

23.   He also submitted that, having regard to the fact that  the  Appellant
      and  his  partner  had  been  living  together  in   a   family   type
      relationship, would be sufficient to establish that he  had  a  family
      life which would be breached if he were returned to  Macedonia  taking
      account of Article 8(1) of the ECHR.

24.   He submitted that the appeal should be allowed.

25.   We then heard Mr Morris, in reply, and he drew our attention  to  what
      had been held in  paragraph  20  of  Dimitrijevski,  which  stated  as
      follows:-

      "To summarise what we have said above, bearing mind what  is  said  in
         the US State Department Report and the fact  that  no  other  penal
         institution is specifically criticised in the Macedonian  Committee
         Report to the Helsinki Foundation application, we are not satisfied
         that the evidence shows that it is reasonably  likely  that  prison
         conditions generally  in  Macedonia  are  such  as  would  lead  to
         treatment contrary to Article 3.  In effect Mr Nathan  is  claiming
         that anybody in prison in Macedonia is at a real risk of inhuman or
         degrading treatment.  That is not a proposition  supported  by  the
         evidence  either  generally  or  in  respect   of   this   specific
         Appellant."

26.   He  submitted  that  all  the  reports  on  the  prison  situation  in
      Macedonia have not yet been compiled and that  we  may  have  to  wait
      until October 2002 to get a fuller report on them.   Nevertheless,  he
      submitted that the objective evidence which was before the Tribunal in
      Dimitrijevski, was pretty clear and  that,  to  a  large  extent,  the
      situation in the  prisons  in  Macedonia  was  serious.   However,  he
      considered that he would  have  to  disagree  with  the  Adjudicator's
      findings with regard to the minimum term  which  the  Appellant  would
      have to serve being one month, as there was nothing to  indicate  that
      that was so.  He submitted that the least the Appellant would have  to
      serve would be one year to five years, as was held in Stojkovski.   He
      submitted that the human rights aspect of the appeal were  dealt  with
      at paragraph 13, where the only Articles dealt with  were  Articles  3
      and 8.

27.   He  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  carefully  considered  the
      situation in respect of both of these Articles,  had  dealt  with  the
      question of disproportionality and had come  to  the  conclusion  that
      Article 8 should not be used to circumvent the Immigration Rules,  and
      that  in  her  opinion  the  same   applied   to   the   concessionary
      arrangements, under which the  relationship between the Appellant  and
      his homosexual friend, must have subsisted for  four  or  more  years,
      which was not the case in this appeal.

28.   Mr Morris submitted, that if the Appellant  were  returned,  he  would
      have to serve at least one year's imprisonment for draft evasion,  and
      the question to be considered is whether or not the situation  in  the
      Macedonian prisons was such that his having  to  go  to  prison  would
      amount to inhumane  or  degrading  treatment,  in  the  light  of  the
      objective evidence which had been cited by Mr Waheed to the Tribunal.

29.   We then heard Mr Waheed, in reply, and he again drew our attention  to
      the prison situation in Macedonia set out in page 26D of  his  bundle,
      and drew our attention to what was held in  Stojkovski,  at  paragraph
      13, where it was stated as follows:-

      "We have no evidence to give  us  any  indication  as  to  where  this
         Appellant is likely to be imprisoned in Macedonia  but  we  do  not
         consider it would be appropriate to assume, without any evidence at
         all, that any other prison would be  less  inhuman  and  degrading,
         when referring to Idrizovo prison."

30.   He submitted  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  likelihood  of  the
      Appellant's receiving  degrading  treatment,  not  alone  due  to  the
      physical  conditions  in  the  prisons,  but  in  the  light  of   his
      homosexuality, and that, taking account of  these  matters  which  the
      Adjudicator had not, they would clearly be a breach of  Article  3  as
      well as of Article 8 of the ECHR.

31.   We then reserved  our  determination,  carefully  considered  all  the
      evidence and the submissions made to  us,  as  well  as  the  judicial
      authorities cited, and directed ourselves that the burden of proof lay
      upon the Appellant but that the standard of proof  is  the  lower  one
      laid down by the House  of  Lords  in  Sivakumaran  as  explained  and
      expanded by the Tribunal and the Courts in more recent decisions.

32.   In this appeal, the Appellant, a citizen  of  Macedonia,  born  on  19
      December 1978, arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 November 2000, using
      his own passport endorsed with a UK "au pair" visa,  was  granted  six
      months leave to enter on the usual conditions, but did not seek asylum
      until 22 March 2001.  The basis of his claim for asylum  was  that  he
      was a homosexual and had been called up for military service, that  he
      was a pacifist and that as Macedonia was becoming unstable  he  feared
      that he would be forced  into  service  in  the  army,  and  that,  in
      addition, as a pacifist and  a  homosexual  he  would  be  persecuted,
      particularly as homosexuality was unlawful in Macedonia.

33.   His application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of  State,  in
      his letter of refusal, dated 18 June 2001, as follows:-

      "5.   The UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and Criterion  for  Determining
             Refugee Status states that fear of prosecution  or  punishment
             for desertion of draft evasion does not in itself constitute a
             well-founded fear of persecution.  The  Handbook  also  states
             that a person is clearly not a refugee if his only reason  for
             desertion or draft evasion is his dislike of military  service
             or fear of combat.

      6.    However, the Secretary of State  is  aware  that  in  accordance
             with the terms of Article 120  section  2  of  the  Macedonian
             Constitution, the Macedonian Assembly on May 30, 2001 passed a
             law which granted the right for all citizens who were eligible
             for military service to opt to serve in non military agencies.
              The law stated that every person, who  due  to  religious  or
             moral beliefs does not want to  use  weapons  during  military
             service in  the  Macedonian  Army,  can  serve  without  using
             weapons or can serve in the health, social,  and  humanitarian
             organisations   or   in   the   fire   brigades.    In   these
             circumstances, therefore, military service will last 14 months
             instead of 9 months.  Accordingly, the Secretary of State does
             not accept that you have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             because of your objections to military service.

      7.    With regards your homosexuality, and contrary  to  the  contents
             of your Statement of Evidence Form, the Secretary of State  is
             aware that homosexuality  is  no  longer  a  criminal  offence
             listed in the Macedonian penal  code.   He  does  not  accept,
             therefore,  that  your  declaration  to  being  homosexual  is
             evidence that you have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
             Furthermore, your claim that your homosexuality would have  an
             adverse effect if you were forced to serve in the military is,
             in the opinion of the Secretary  of  State,  negated  for  the
             reasons outlined in paragraph 6 above."

34.   On appeal against that decision, the Appellant  gave  evidence  before
      and Adjudicator  and  was  cross-examined.   The  Adjudicator,  having
      considered the whole situation, found as follows:-

      "10.  The Appellant also claims to be a conscientious  objector.   The
             only reason given is that he is a pacifist and if there were a
             war given the history of the Balkans  'it  is  almost  certain
             that such a conflict would be  internationally  condemned.   I
             accept that the Appellant became eligible for 'call  up'  when
             he was  18.   However  he  has  successfully  evaded  military
             service allegedly through the intervention of his  cousin  for
             three years during which time  he  has  twice  left  Macedonia
             without any problems.  The overwhelming inference that I  draw
             is that his fears of ill-treatment by fellow soldiers  due  to
             his homosexuality that is the real reason for his aversion  to
             military service.  The question then arises whether that  fear
             brings the Appellant within paragraphs 168 &  169  of  the  UN
             Handbook.  To  do  so  he  must  show  that  he  would  suffer
             disproportionately  severe  punishment  on  account   of   his
             homosexuality.

       11.    Mr  Nathan  referred  me  to  two  serious  sections  in   the
             International Helsinki Federation (IHF) Report on Macedonia in
             his  Bundle  on  the  sanctions  for  draft  evasion  and  the
             conditions in prison.  A new draft defence law was debated  in
             Parliament at the end of 2000  providing  for  an  alternative
             civilian service for conscientious objectors but the draft did
             not entirely satisfy the IHF because amongst other  criticisms
             it prescribed 'a punitive lenth of  14  months  civil  service
             against  the  normal  military  service   of   nine   months."
             Otherwise the penalty for draft  evasion  is  'a  fine  and/or
             imprisonment for up to a year or from one to  five  years  for
             anyone found to have left the country and remained  abroad  in
             order  to  avoid  military  service'.    Conditions   in   the
             largest/oldest prison in the country are said to be 'extremely
             poor  amounting  to  inhuman   or   degrading   treatment   or
             punishment.

      12.   I have given  much  anxious  thought  to  all  aspects  of  this
             appeal.  On the evidence before me I accept that life may well
             be difficult for the Appellant because he is a homosexual  but
             that attitudes are changing.  I do not accept on the basis  of
             Sepet and Bulbul  and that  he  has  shown  he  is  a  genuine
             conscientious objector.
            He has successfully evaded military service in the  past  and  I
             find his explanation that his cousin  managed  to  cancel  his
             'call up' papers for over three years  implausible  especially
             as the Appellant although not a student twice managed to leave
             Macedonia during that period.  I consider  he  has  been  less
             than truthful about his ability to avoid military service.   I
             do not therefore accept  that  he  would  be  liable  for  the
             longest periods of imprisonment meted out  to  draft  evaders.
             The shortest period is one  month  which  I  do  not  consider
             punitive and there is no reason to suppose that  he  would  be
             incarcerated in the prison previously described.
            I consider the delay in claiming  asylum  after  he  had  become
             aware that he could do so is adverse.
            In my opinion he had not been persecuted when he left  Macedonia
             I do not consider that the difficulties he may face on  return
             amount to persecution.
             He  has  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  and  the  appeal  is
             dismissed."

35.   On appeal against that decision, it  was  argued  on  the  Appellant's
      behalf that the Adjudicator had misconstrued the terms of imprisonment
      which the Appellant would have to  undergo  for  evasion  of  military
      service if returned to Macedonia, that the Appellant,  if  he  had  to
      undergo military service would, as a homosexual, find it  considerably
      worse than any ordinary heterosexual person and that it  would  amount
      to inhumane and degrading treatment.  Further, it was argued that  the
      Appellant, being a military service  evader,  would  have  to  undergo
      imprisonment from one to ten years, which, in view of  the  deplorable
      conditions of the prisons in Macedonia coupled  with  the  Appellant's
      homosexual orientation would amount to inhuman and degrading treatment
      under the terms of Article 3 of the ECHR, which would make it a breach
      of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 of the ECHR.

36.   In arguing the appeal, Mr Waheed placed reliance on  the  decision  of
      the Immigration and Refugee Board of  Canada,  in  A99-00560,  on  the
      point that, contrary to the findings of the Adjudicator, the Appellant
      would face imprisonment for from one  to  ten  years  for  his  having
      remained outside Macedonia to avoid  military  service,  and  for  the
      point that the documentary evidence indicated that  prison  conditions
      in Macedonia are "inhuman and degrading" and would amount to a  breach
      of the Appellant's Article 3 rights.

37.   However, the Tribunal, in two appeals recently  dealt  with,  came  to
      opposing views of the question  of  imprisonment  in  Macedonia  being
      inhuman and degrading; it having  been  held  in  Dimitrijevski,  that
      claims at large as to whether or not prison conditions in a particular
      country are likely to lead generally to a breach of Article  3  rights
      for anyone imprisoned, would require  clear  and  cogent  evidence  of
      general international acceptance that the  prison  conditions  are  so
      regarded; and it being held in Stojkovski that, while the Appellant in
      that appeal had not established his case for Refugee Status under  the
      Refugee Convention, it took the view that there was a substantial risk
      that the Appellant's human  rights  would  be  infringed  if  he  were
      returned to Macedonia, as, having regard to the circumstances of  that
      particular case, in its judgment,  having  taken  the  view  that  the
      Appellant required protection because if he were to  be  removed,  his
      rights under Article 3 would be very likely to be infringed.

38.   The  Tribunal,  in  Stojkovski  in  coming  to  that  conclusion,  had
      considered Soering v UK, and the latest  International  Helsinki  2001
      Report, on Macedonia, in concluding that, while it could not  be  said
      that every Macedonian suffered the sort  of  treatment  reported,  the
      report indicated that it is likely that any  Macedonian  could  be  so
      treated.

39.   We have taken full consideration of the reports on the  state  of  the
      prisons in Macedonia, as accepted by the Home  Office  representative,
      and that the Appellant would not serve a minimum term  of  one  month,
      but would, in all probability, serve, at least, one year, and  we  are
      of the opinion that the proviso in paragraph 21 of Dimitrijevski where
      it states that,`` if there were clear and cogent evidence  of  general
      international acceptance that the prison conditions  in  any  specific
      country, were likely to lead generally to a breach of Article 3,  such
      a breach could be established, would  be  met,  in  the  case  of  the
      prisons in Macedonia, to where the Appellant would be sent on return.

40.   We so find, as, having considered the  International  Helsinki  Report
      on Human Rights in Macedonia for 2001, were  it  assessed  the  prison
      conditions as being bad, where prisoners who have  been  exceptionally
      sanctioned stay in solitary cells of about ten to twelve square meters
      in  area,  without  heating,  with  the  only  window  openings   kept
      permanently open, with just one bucket for  toilet  needs,  with  food
      prepared in extremely unhygienic  conditions,  where  requirements  of
      prisoners for  medical  examination  are  simply  ignored,  where  the
      penitentiary premises are dirty, full of bad smells,  with  the  walls
      ruined and the floor seeming never to have existed, we  are  satisfied
      that, to put prisoners into such conditions, would clearly  amount  to
      inhuman or degrading treatment.

41.   In our considered opinion, the Appellant has not established  that  he
      is a genuine conscientious objector to military service, as  found  by
      the Adjudicator, nor has he established that the fact of his  being  a
      practising homosexual is in breach  of  the  law  in  Macedonia,  nor,
      again, has he established that his  being  a  homosexual,  by  itself,
      would lead to his being treated in such a way if he  were  to  do  his
      military service, as to amount to a breach of Article 3.  However,  we
      accept that the Adjudicator  was  not  correct  in  finding  that  the
      Appellant would have  to  serve  only  one  month's  imprisonment  for
      failure to perform his military service, and find,  on  the  objective
      evidence, that the imprisonment which the Appellant would  face  would
      be of at least one year's duration or probably more, and that, for him
      to  have  to  serve  that  term,  however  long  or  short,   in   the
      internationally accepted bad conditions  in  the  Macedonian  prisons,
      would amount to a breach of his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

42.   We have considered the  Appellant's  claim  that  the  United  Kingdom
      would be in breach of his rights under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  by
      requiring him to return to Macedonia and leave his homosexual  partner
      behind, and the question of his  homosexual  relationships  generally,
      and we find that the concession of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  a
      homosexual relationship such as that between  the  Appellant  and  his
      partner should have subsisted for four or  more  years,  before  being
      considered, is a highly reasonable approach, in all the circumstances,
      and would not, in our view be in breach  of  the  Appellant's  rights,
      particularly in view of the fact that  the  present  relationship  has
      lasted for, at most,  just  over  one  year,  in  addition  to  which,
      weighing up the state of the relationship, we do not consider it to be
      disproportionate, in all the circumstances of the  case,  even  taking
      into account that the relationship  has  been  "registered"  since  21
      November 2001.

43.   Accordingly, while  we  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  Refugee
      Convention grounds, as we are not  satisfied  that  he  is  a  genuine
      conscientious objector, we are satisfied that, for him to be  returned
      to serve a prison sentence, for failure to  report  for  his  military
      service, in the atrocious prison conditions in Macedonia, would amount
      to a breach of his Article 3 rights, but we are not satisfied that his
      being returned to Macedonia, without his partner, would be  in  breach
      of his rights under Article 8.

44.   To that extent, therefore, this appeal is allowed.






                                                       J A O'BRIEN QUINN Q C
                                                                    CHAIRMAN

