
              ar         HO-Y (Risk-Terrorism) Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT 01973
                                                                  CC17408-01

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                     Date of Hearing:  18 February 2002
                                             Date of Determination notified:
                                  14 06 02

                                   Before:


                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe
                              Ms S S Ramsumair




                             HOCINE  OULD-YAHIA

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Ms R. Baruah of counsel, instructed by Tuckers
For the respondent : Mr R. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Algeria, arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
      on 31 May 1999 and claimed asylum  four  lays  later.   His  claim  to
      asylum was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in   a  letter  from   the
      respondent dated 2 February 2001.  The appellant appealed  on  grounds
      that his removal would be in breach of the  UK  government  objectives
      under the UN  Convention  and it would also infringe  his  fundamental
      human rights as granted by the by the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights 1950.  An Adjudicator (Mr M. Neuberger) heard the appeal on  10
      September 2001 and for reasons  given  in  his  written  determination
      promulgated on 10 October 2001, his dismissed  the  appeal.  Leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal was granted (Mr A.R. Mackey, Vice President).

2.    The appellant is a qualified accountant.   He  lived  and  studied  in
      France until 1994 when he returned to Algeria to join  his  father  in
      his business of trading in electrical materials.   The  problems  that
      led him to leave ultimately to leave Algeria to seek refuge  elsewhere
      started in 1997.  In January 1997 one of the shops  belonging  to  the
      family was burgled at a time when a curfew was in place.   The  family
      suspected the authorities of the  burglary  but  reported  it  to  the
      police anyway.  The police showed no interest and two months asked the
      appellant to sign some papers in agreement of closing the  case.   The
      appellant complied as he did not feel he had any choice. Three  months
      later while he and his brother were driving the  police  follow  them,
      ordered them out of their car and assaulted his brother,  abused  them
      and called them terrorists. The brother needed hospital treatment  for
      the  assault.  After this episode  the  house  of  the  appellant  was
      raided on a number  of  occasions  and  the  appellant  was  harassed,
      intimidated, arrested and detained on two separate  occasions  -  once
      for three days and once for fifteen days. He was accused  of  being  a
      terrorist.  In December 1999 the family home was raided again and  the
      appellant was taken to the police station when he was  questioned  and
      accused of being a terrorist. He was badly beaten and  kept in custody
      for two weeks.  He  was  then  released  only  on  condition  that  he
      reported daily to the police station.  The appellant left the area  to
      stay with relatives in as place 300  Km  from  his  home  in  Algiers.
      Whilst he was there he was informed that the police had called at  his
      house and had been looking for him. The appellant felt  that  is  life
      was not safe in Algeria and he travelled as  a  stowaway  on  board  a
      cargo ship to France from where he came to the United  Kingdom.  Since
      his arrival in the UK  he has been informed that the  authorities  had
      closed down the family shop without giving any reasons.  In  his  oral
      evidence before the Adjudicator the appellant confirmed  that  he  had
      not engaged in any political activity in Algeria and that he had never
      been a member of a  terrorist or any armed group. he said that he  was
      a Berber by ethnicity and it was common knowledge that the authorities
      did not like the Berbers. He told the Adjudicator  that  he  had  only
      stayed in France for two days on his way to the UK and had not applied
      for asylum  there as he believed he did not stand a chance of making a
      successful claim there.  He said  that  in  Algeria  the  police  were
      looking for him and had been to his family home twice and had  left  a
      warrant for his arrest.   He  said  that  he  had  been  listed  as  a
      terrorist and he fears that his name would be on  a  central  computer
      and circularised throughout  the country.

3.    The Adjudicator in his determination said that he accepted  that   the
      appellant 'has in the main told a credible  story.'   Despite  hearing
      argument from  the appellant's  representatives  that  the  Convention
      reason in this case was political opinion which they  had  imputed  to
      the appellant, the Adjudicator held that the claims did not engage any
      of the reasons set out in the Convention.  He gave no reasons for this
       conclusion.  He also considered  that  the  appellant  had  been  the
      victim of local police and his problems  do  not  form  part  of   the
      deliberate policy of persecution by the  authorities but a consequence
      of lack of discipline on the part of the police.  He  concluded   that
      the appellant could  relocate within Algeria  and  'rebuild  his  life
      without any difficulty from the authorities'. The Adjudicator was  not
      impressed by the documents which showed that the appellant  was  being
      sought by  the authorities.  He disregarded these saying they 'do  not
      appear to be valid  documents'.

4.    By the time the matter came up before us, the appellant  had  obtained
      a detailed report from  Dr  E.G.H.  Joffe.   The  report  is  dated  5
      November 2001.  It states that he has never  met  the  appellant   and
      that he has  made  comments   on  the  general  background  which  the
      appellant claims and made with  regard  to  the  appellant's  claiming
      about police harassment, intimidation , arrests,  detention  and  ill-
      treatment, Dr Joffe says they  'corresponds to an  objective  reality'
      on the  issue  of  internal  relocating.   Dr  Joffe  says  'There  is
      absolutely no way   in  which  Mr  Ould-Yahia  could  relocate  inside
      Algeria without this being known by the police service and  its  local
      operatives, wherever he might reside.   If  he  has  been  accused  of
      ......  with terrorists - rightly  or wrongly  - he  will  immediately
      be treated by local police  units as suspect. Thus the  treatment   he
      fled to avoid  will be recommenced.  If he fled  an  order  to  report
      regularly to the  public, he  faces  arrest  and   imprisonment  as  a
      terrorists suspect.'

             'Mr Ould Yahia originally fled from Algeria illegally and has,
             I understand, no passport. This means  that  travel  documents
             will have to be obtained  from him from the  Algerian  embassy
             in London. It is now standard  practice  for  the  embassy  to
             refer  such  requests  back  to  Algiers  where  the  security
             services, upon vetting the request for Mr Ould Yahia, will  be
             able to establish  his  past  record.  He  will  therefore  be
             detained upon return at Algiers airport.  Furthermore,  if  he
             is now  returned  to  Algeria,  he  is  also  likely  to  face
             interrogation upon arrival because of  his  prolonged  absence
             from the country, quite apart from any specific offence he may
             have committed that might have been identified by the security
             authorities before his return.  This  may  well  also  involve
             detention by the security authorities at the airport  who  are
             always concerned   that  persons  who  have  been  abroad  for
             prolonged periods without appropriate  permission or visas may
             be connected with the Algerian Islamist movements aboard.   He
             can be held on remand (garde a vue or mandat de depot) for  up
             to ten days before he would see a  magistrate.   However,  the
             security forces often arbitrarily extend  this period and  the
             close links between them and  the  judiciary  mean  that  such
             extensions  will not be questioned by a magistrate.

             Whilst being interrogated on remand he will face the  distinct
             possibility  of  severe  ill-treatment,  partly  because,   as
             explained above, such behaviour is typical of the  police  and
             security forces in Algeria and  because  of  official  anxiety
             about the external dimension  of  the  political  crisis  that
             Algeria has faced for the past decade. His  interrogators  may
             well  assume  that  he  has  been  in  contact  with  Islamist
             opponents of  the regime abroad and will seek to  obtain  such
             information about him.  In the current circumstances,  in  the
             wake of  the  incidents  in  New  York,  they  may  also  seek
             information over wider terrorist connections - which  he  will
             not have - but which the Algerian authorities now argue, quite
             spuriously, lie behind their own  difficulties.  On  September
             20, 2001, the Algerian government passed to the United  States
             authorities a list of 350  Algerians  they  claimed  had  such
             links  and  a  further  set  of  lists  of  known  anti-regime
             activists in an attempt to  tie  Algeria's  domestic  problems
             into the wider terrorist picture that is emerging.  If Mr Ould
             Yahia survives this initial set of interrogations -  there  is
             evidence  of  maltreatment  during  those  interrogations,  as
             admitted by the German government - and he must then face  the
             very real danger that, upon  release,  the  local  police  may
             decide to complete the task that had been left undone  by  his
             departure.  Given the modern systems of communication  enjoyed
             currently by the police and gendarmerie services, he will  not
             be safe from vengeance, even if he  does  not  return  to  his
             original place of residence.  Mr Ould Yahia's outlook,  if  he
             is returned to Algeria, will not be  good.   He  will  face  a
             prison sentence in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
             Algerian penal code because of his illegal  absence  from  the
             country and because of his failure to maintain  his  reporting
             requirements to the  police.   Given  past  practice,  such  a
             sentence could  range  from  between  one  to  five  years  in
             prison.'

5.    When we convened to hear the appeal we asked Mr  Holmes,  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, to address us first.  He asked that the appeal  be
      allowed but only to the extent that it  will  be  reheard  by  another
      Adjudicator. We asked him why. He said that there   were  'fundamental
      flaws' in the determination  of Mr Neuberger. According to  Mr  Holmes
      the Adjudicator had made a bland association of  positive  credibility
      but had given no reasons for accepting  the appellant's story. He also
      said that  on the issue of Convention reason or the lack of it as  the
      Adjudicator had  found in the case the Adjudicator had failed to  make
      relevant findings of fact.

      We asked the Home Office Presenting Officer what he had to  say  about
      the contents of the report from Dr Joffe.  He said that the report had
      not reached him until 5 February.  He conceded that  Dr Joffe is  very
      knowledgeable and his reports have received  favourable  comment  from
      the Tribunal in Said.  He said what weight we gave  to the report  was
      a matter for us but in his view the appeal merited dismissal.

   6. We do not intend to set out the arguments of Ms Baruah at length.   We
      found them persuasive  and  announced  our  intention  to  allow  this
      appeal.  We now give our reasons for doing so.

7.    The  appellant  is  a  single  young  man  who  received  professional
      education in France and returned  to  Algeria  to  go  in  the  family
      business. His difficulties with the authorities started  in  1997  and
      with time became worse. His version of  events  was  accepted  by  the
      Adjudicator before whom he gave oral evidence. As  Miss  Baruah  said,
      the only reservation that the Adjudicator appear to  have  about   the
      claim of the appellant was about the "validity" of the  two  documents
      he had produced.  We see no merit or  justification  in  the  argument
      advanced by Mr Holmes that as the basis of the Adjudicator's  positive
      credibility findings have not  been  explained,  we  should  find  the
      determination "fundamentally flawed" and  direct a fresh hearing.   In
      our view the positive  credibility findings in  this  case  were  well
      justified. The claims  of  the  appellant  have  been  consistent  and
      coherent and   wholly  plausible  in  the  context  of  the  objective
      evidence.  In our opinion, where  the Adjudicator went wrong  is  that
      he failed to address the issue of   political  opinion.   He  accepted
      that the appellant was accused of being a terrorist  by the police and
      yet  concluded that there was no Convention reason in   the  case.  In
      the decision to grant leave in this  case  the  Tribunal   said  "this
      conclusion seems  somewhat  perverse  given  the  apparently  accepted
      evidence  that the appellant had been accused of  being a terrorist by
      the police  (clearly  a  political  opinion)".   In  our  opinion  the
      conclusion was clearly wrong in law and on facts.  We give due  weight
      to  the opinions of  Dr  Joffe  who  the  Tribunal  describes  in  its
      decision  in  Saidi  (00/TH/02757)  as  an  acknowledge  authority  in
      relation to North African affairs with  particular  specialisation  on
      Algeria.   In this case, unlike that of Saidi, there  is  no  conflict
      between the objective evidence that is relevant to the  fact  of  this
      case with that of the opinions given by Dr Joffe in his report.  There
      was no challenge to the report of Dr Joffe by  Mr  Holmes.  He,  quite
      properly  accepted that the opinions  expressed  by  the  report  were
      opinions of the acknowledged expert which should be given  due weight.
       And we have.   In so doing we have noted that his opinions  were  not
      accepted in the case of Saidi but in our view the facts of  Saidi were
      entirely  different  and  there  was  clear  conflict   in  the  views
      expressed in other evidence. Putting Dr Joffe's report in balance with
      the evidence  of  the  appellant  which  was  found  credible  by  the
      Adjudicator, the conclusion that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood
      that the appellant will face persecution for a  Convention  reason  on
      return is meritable.  The appellant is at serious  risk  of  detention
      for an indefinite period  and  torture   on  return  because  he  left
      Algeria in breach  of  the   reporting  conditions  imposed  upon  him
      following detention or  allegation   of  being  a  terrorist.  He  was
      persecuted and  tortured  while  he  was  in  Algeria.   Applying  the
      Demirkaya principle and noting that the relevant objective  conditions
      as  per  all  the  objective  evidence  including  that  of  Dr  Joffe
      establishes that remain of grave concern, we find that  the  appellant
      is in need of international protection. Internal  relocation  is  just
      not possible on the facts of this case.  In our judgment  the  removal
      of the appellant  to Algeria would be in breach of the UK government's
      obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention.  In  the  circumstances
      we do not see any need to consider the  appellant's  claim  under  the
      human rights aspect.  Indeed we were not asked to.

8.    For the above reasons the appeal is allowed.




K. Drabu
Vice President

                                                     -----------------------
      2


