
H-LP-V2
                                                 Appeal Number :HX04468-2002
                              EB (Risk -Return- Ethiopian- Eritrea) Eritrea
                            CG [2002] UKIAT 06317

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  2nd October 2002                        |                             |
|Dictated : 3rd October 2002                   |29/01/2003.                  |


                                   Before:


                         Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)
                                Mr N Kumar JP
                                 Mrs M L Roe


between
                                 Eden BERHE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Appearances

For the Appellant:                Ms M Kalsi of Counsel, instructed by S
Osman Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr I Graham, Home Office Presenting Officer



1.    This is an appeal by Eden Berhe, a citizen of Ethiopia,  born  on  3rd
    November 1975, against the determination of  an  Adjudicator  (Ms  M  J
    Pirotta) who dismissed her appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    giving directions for her removal following the refusal  of  her  claim
    for asylum.

2.     The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a  citizen  of
    Ethiopia.  Her father was of Eritrean  ethnic  origin  and  her  mother
    Ethiopian.  She was born and raised in Ethiopia and had no  connections
    with Eritrea.  She was not able to tell the Adjudicator anything  about
    her father's history such as his date of  birth,  place  of  origin  or
    about any other family members living in Eritrea.  She was educated  to
    secondary school level and then assisted her  father  in  his  business
    from July 1995 until 2000.  She says that her family were  detained  in
    April 2000 on suspicion of EPLF sympathies.  She was beaten and  raped.
    In October 2000 her mother died from the injuries sustained during  the
    detention.  The Appellant had become pregnant following the  rapes  and
    gave birth to a baby boy in February 2001 but  he  died  within  a  few
    weeks.  The Appellant left Ethiopia having been forced to  have  sexual
    intercourse with a man who helped her leave.  She remained in Kenya for
    a few weeks before coming to the United Kingdom.

3.    She had become pregnant again and wished for a termination  but  after
    counselling chose to keep the  child.   She  was  afraid  that  if  she
    returned to Ethiopia she would be arrested and tortured  again  because
    of her mixed ethnicity.  She feared that  her  human  rights  would  be
    violated as she had not kept to the conditions of her release and would
    be suspected by the authorities.  She told  the  Adjudicator  that  she
    could not prove her Eritrean ethnicity  as  she  had  no  documents  or
    knowledge of her family's history so she would be stateless and  unable
    to support her  claim  for  Eritrean  residence.   She  had  no  direct
    connection with Eritrea and had never lived or visited there.  She  had
    no knowledge of the whereabouts of any relations.

4.    The Adjudicator has set out her findings in paragraphs  28-35  of  her
    determination.  She found the Appellant to be a credible witness and in
    the light of her evidence of the way she had been treated in  Ethiopia,
    the Adjudicator was satisfied to the low threshold  of  proof  required
    that she had a well-founded fear of persecution there.  She noted  that
    the Appellant had  throughout  her  application  for  asylum  described
    herself as Eritrean.  This explains why on the appeal papers  from  the
    Home Office the Appellant's nationality is given as Eritrean.   In  the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 23rd  August  2001  the  Secretary  of
    State noted that the Appellant's problems in Ethiopia were all based on
    the fact that she was considered  to  be  Eritrean.   He  commented  in
    paragraph 5 that he was aware that people are considered to be Eritrean
    by birth if they are born in Eritrea  or  abroad  if  their  father  or
    mother is of Eritrean origin.  In the light of this he considered  that
    it would be possible to return the Appellant to Eritrea rather than  to
    Ethiopia.

5.    The Adjudicator  went  on  in  her  determination  to  find  that  the
    Appellant thinks of herself as Eritrean and this indicates  she  has  a
    greater connection with Eritrea than she was prepared to acknowledge at
    the  hearing.   Although  the  Adjudicator  was  satisfied   that   the
    Appellant's removal to Ethiopia would cause the United Kingdom to be in
    breach of its obligations under the  Refugee  Convention,  the  removal
    directions were to Eritrea and the Appellant would not be  at  risk  of
    persecution there nor would there be a risk of  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3.  In these circumstances she dismissed the appeal.

6.    In substance the grounds of appeal argue that  there  is  no  adequate
    evidence to show that the Appellant is a citizen  of  Eritrea.   It  is
    unlikely that she would be able to acquire  Eritrean  citizenship.   It
    would be wrong to remove her to Eritrea  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    would have no power to do so.  If she were removed there,  she  was  at
    risk of being deported to Ethiopia.

7.    Ms Kalsi adopted these  grounds  in  her  submissions.   The  evidence
    showed that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  Eritrean
    citizenship: see paragraph 5.69 of the CIPU Eritrea Country  Assessment
    April 2002.  The  Appellant's  father  had  disappeared.   It  was  the
    Appellant's understanding that her father was born in 1950  in  Asmara.
    She  would not be able to verify her claim for Eritrean citizenship.

8.    Mr Graham submitted that there was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to acquire Eritrean citizenship even if she
    were not presently entitled to it.  There was no reason to believe that
    if returned to Eritrea that she would be  deported  to  Ethiopia.   The
    evidence showed that forcible deportations had ceased and in any  event
    the Eritrean authorities would not deport someone who was  of  Eritrean
    ethnic origin.

9.    The Secretary of State has made the  removal  directions  for  Eritrea
    because he considers the Appellant to be Eritrean: see paragraphs 5 and
    9 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  If the Appellant is a citizen  or
    national of Eritrea the Secretary of State is entitled  to  return  her
    there: paragraph 8(1)(c)(i) of Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act.  So  far  as
    the Appellant's claim for refugee status  is  concerned  the  Appellant
    will only be entitled to asylum if she is unable to look to her country
    or countries of nationality for protection.  It is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia and is at risk of persecution there.
     If she is a citizen of Eritrea, she would have to show that she had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea before she is  entitled  to
    be recognised as a refugee.

10.   The initial issue therefore is whether the Appellant is a  citizen  of
    Eritrea.   The  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  relating  to  Eritrean
    citizenship  is  set  out  at  paragraph  5.69  of  the  CIPU   Country
    Assessment.  This provides that people are Eritrean by  birth  if  they
    are born in Eritrea or if born abroad their  father  or  mother  is  of
    Eritrean origin which is defined as  meaning  any  person  resident  in
    Eritrea in 1933.  Through her Counsel the Appellant told  the  Tribunal
    that her father was born in 1950 in Asmara.  The  Appellant's  date  of
    birth is 1975 and therefore it is not unlikely that her father was born
    in 1950.  It is certainly unlikely that he was  born  before  1933  and
    would be able to comply with the requirement to show residence in 1933.
     On the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal, we are not satisfied
    that the Appellant is an Eritrean citizen.   It  may  be  that  she  is
    entitled to apply for citizenship but that  is  an  entirely  different
    matter.  In his submissions Mr Graham raised the issue  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the Appellant to apply for citizenship of
    Eritrea.  In the Convention of the Status of Stateless  Persons  (1954)
    it is provided that a stateless  person  means  a  person  who  is  not
    considered as a national by any state under the operation of  its  law.
    In these circumstances an  individual  can  be  regarded  as  under  an
    obligation to make an application to a state which might  consider  him
    to be its national.  However, the Appellant is not asserting  that  she
    is stateless.  It is accepted that she is a  citizen  of  Ethiopia  but
    removal to Eritrea is proposed on the basis that the  Appellant  is  in
    fact a citizen of Eritrea.  The evidence does not satisfy the  Tribunal
    that this is the case.

11.   It follows that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum  within  the
    provisions of Article 1(A)(2).  The Tribunal agree with the Adjudicator
    that there is no reason to believe that if the  Appellant  were  to  be
    admitted to Eritrea that she would either be  at  risk  of  persecution
    there  or  at  risk  of  being  returned  to  Ethiopia.   However,  the
    Respondent fails to satisfy the Tribunal that there  is  any  power  to
    return the Appellant to Eritrea in the absence of clear  evidence  that
    she would be accepted by the Eritrean authorities.   The  Tribunal  are
    not satisfied that Eritrea is a country of which  the  Appellant  is  a
    national or citizen.  She did not embark from Eritrea  for  the  United
    Kingdom.  She does  not  hold  an  Eritrean  passport  or  document  of
    identity.  On the evidence before us there is no reason to believe that
    she would be admitted to Eritrea.

12.   For these reasons, this appeal is allowed.








                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

