
ar                                                             Appeal No.
CC00879-01
                         FV (Article 8 FAQs ) Kosovo  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
06562

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 5 December 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  17/02/2003

                                   Before:


                           Mr J Barnes (Chairman)
                               Mr M W Rapinet




                                FARUK  VESELI


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Miss M. Samimi, counsel,  instructed  by  Aaronson  &
Co.
For the respondent : Miss A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia  from
      Kosovo  and  is  of  Albanian  ethnicity.   He  appeals  against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr S. Kaler,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision   to  refuse  him  asylum  and  give
      directions for removal as an illegal entrant. An application for leave
      to appeal had originally been refused by the Tribunal.   That  refusal
      was quashed by the Administrative Court on 13  March  this  year.  The
      basis for such a decision was that it is arguable that the  Tribunal's
      reasoning in relation to the claimant's  Article 8 ECHR submissions is
      flawed.'  The Tribunal therefore granted leave to appeal on  29  April
      this year.

2.    The appellant arrived in this country on 31  December  1993  with  his
      father who sought asylum, naming the appellant as his  dependant.  The
      appellant was at that time a minor, born  on  15  December  1976.  The
      father returned to Kosovo in 1997 and the appellant then  applied  for
      asylum on his own account on 4 October of that year. That  application
      was refused on 3 October 2002 and removal directions  to  Kosovo  were
      issued on 28 November.

3.    The basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  and  his  family
      encountered considerable difficulties at the hands of  the  Serbs  and
      that his father was fearful that his  two  sons  would  be  called  to
      enlist in the Serb army and therefore took the decision to travel with
      them to the United Kingdom in December 1993.  His father  returned  to
      Kosovo in 1997 in the hope that the situation had  improved  but  left
      for the United Kingdom in 1998 after being ill-treated by  the  Serbs.
      He returned to Kosovo in June 1999 because his wife and other children
      were still there. The father had informed him that call up papers  had
      been served by the KLA pressing for information as to why he  and  his
      brother were not fighting for the  KLA.   He  has  an  uncle  in  this
      country who is prominent and active in the LDK party,  his  activities
      being carried out mainly from this country.

4.    Following Dyli the Adjudicator dismissed the appeal under the  Refugee
      Convention on the  basis  of  the  current  position  in  Kosovo.  The
      appellant raised other issues during the course  of  the  hearing,  in
      particular he claims that the family in Kosovo was being  harassed  by
      reason of his uncle's involvement with the  LDK.  He  further  claimed
      that he was at risk at the hands of the KLA because he had  failed  to
      respond to call up papers.  The Adjudicator deals with these issues in
      paragraphs 45 to 47 of the determination. We record what he states:

            '45. I have assessed the appellant's claim in the light of  the
                 case law and the objective material. I bear  in  mind  that
                 the appellant has to prove  his  account  credible  on  the
                 lower standard of proof. The  appellant's  credibility  has
                 been  challenged.  It  has  not  been   explained   to   my
                 satisfaction why the  appellant  did  not  mention  in  his
                 interview that his family had encountered difficulties that
                 caused them to move around, nor did he mention his  uncle's
                 involvement with the LDK.  He was not interviewed as a  new
                 arrival, which in many cases causes an asylum seeker  great
                 anxiety owing to his new surroundings and fear of  numerous
                 unexpected questions. This appellant had submitted  a  full
                 statement and was represented.  It was not  until  February
                 2001 that he mentioned his uncle's political position,  and
                 it was not until the hearing that he mentioned the  he  was
                 no longer in contact with his parents.


             46. The appellant first sought asylum because of fear  of  the
                 Serbs. He then changed the basis  of  his  application  and
                 said he feared the  KLA.   He  said  that  his  father  had
                 received call up papers, but when pressed about  these,  he
                 said that the papers had been shown to his father and taken
                 away, which is why he could not produce any documents. None
                 of this appears to be plausible, and I did not believe  the
                 appellant. Then he added another aspect  to  his  claim  by
                 saying that  he  was  in  danger  because  of  his  uncle's
                 activities. He did  not  explain  why  he  did  not  submit
                 earlier that these would put him at risk.


            47.  The respondent conceded,  and  I  accept,  that  Mr  Fehmi
                 Veseli holds a prominent position in the  LDK  in  the  UK.
                 However,  I do  not  accept  that  a  would  be  placed  in
                 jeopardy on return because of the prominent position of the
                 uncle.  Furthermore, I do not  accept  that  the  appellant
                 would be placed  in  jeopardy  on  return  because  of  the
                 prominent position of the uncle.  Furthermore,  the  up-to-
                 date UNHCR categories do  not  mention  LDK  activities  as
                 being at risk, and in  this  case,  the  appellant  is  not
                 actively  involved.  There  are  few  reports  of  violence
                 against families of prominent LDK members.  His father  has
                 returned, and I do not accept that he has been  pursued  or
                 driven from his home for the reasons already stated above.'

5.    The Adjudicator dealt with the Article 8 claim somewhat  summarily  in
      paragraph 54 of the determination which reads as follows:

             'The appellant has an extended family in the UK. He  does  not
             live with them, but no doubt relies on them  for  support  and
             guidance. The mere fact that he has relatives  here  does  not
             establish that he has forged a family life. He has  family  in
             Kosovo.  My analysis of Article 8 does not lead me to conclude
             there would be a derogation of  the appellant's  rights  under
             Article  8  if  this  appellant's  asylum   application   were
             refused.'

6.    We agreed with Miss Samimi and Miss Holmes that the only issue  to  be
      determined by the Tribunal was the claim under Article 8.  Miss Samimi
       sought leave to call the appellant and an uncle of his, both in court
      (not the uncle who was active in the LDK) and  we  agreed  to  receive
      that evidence, notwithstanding the fact that no  application  to  call
      witness evidence had been made prior to the hearing. Miss Samimi,  who
      appears to have been most inadequately instructed by  her  instructing
      solicitors, sought a short adjournment so that she could  confer  with
      the appellant and his uncle.  We agreed to this and put the case  back
      in our list. On the resumption of the  hearing Miss Samimi informed us
      that, following consultation with the appellant, it would appear  that
      he has recently sought hospital treatment for a pain in his  head  and
      neck  and  there  is  a  possibility  that  he   might   be   affected
      psychologically, though in what way she was not able to tell  us.  She
      asked that the case be adjourned in order that medical evidence  could
      be produced. We refused this on the basis that if  the  appellant  was
      seeking to adduce medical evidence in support of his Article  8  claim
      he has had ample  opportunity  to  do  so  since  the   Administration
      Court's decision in March of this year.  We agreed, however, to  defer
      the promulgation of our determination until Miss  Samimi  had  had  an
      opportunity to submit any medical evidence that she might consider  to
      be relevant and agreed that if  we  considered  such  evidence  to  be
      relevant we would reconvene to  raise  with  the  representatives  any
      issues arising from that evidence.  We gave Miss Samimi fourteen  days
      from 5th  December to produce such evidence.

7.    We received evidence from the appellant. When asked what his  position
      would be were he to be  compelled to return to Kosovo, he informed  us
      that he had a much better life here  with  his  family  and  a  higher
      standard of living. He informed us  that  he  lives  with  his  uncle,
      Hxelal Veseli, and that there  is  a  close  knit  family  here.    He
      informed us that this uncle maintained him financially as  he  is  not
      able to work. He had embarked upon a course relating to tourism  at  a
      college in this country but had been compelled to give it  up  because
      he did not receive any state support. He informed us that he  had  not
      heard from his parents for the last two years and has lost touch  with
      them. He has a brother in Kosovo and has not been in  touch  with  him
      either. He has not developed any trade or skills in this country.   He
      confirmed that his uncle, Hemeli Veseli, had been  involved  with  the
      LDK and has been making efforts  to  trace  his  parents  but  without
      success.  His other uncle, Hxelal, had made similar attempts. He  also
      has a brother and sister in Kosovo. He was asked about his health  and
      told us that he was in a state of distress which made it difficult for
      him to concentrate because of his anxieties in relation to his appeal.
      He was asked when he had last been in touch with his  solicitors,  his
      solicitors having previously applied for an adjournment of the hearing
      on the basis that they had not been able to obtain  instructions  from
      him and such application having been refused, he informed us  that  he
      had not been in touch with them since last year. It was pointed out to
      him that he had had a case pending  in  the  Administrative  Court  in
      March of this year and he appeared to be somewhat vague as to when  he
      had last contacted his solicitors. He informed us  that  he  had  been
      detained some six months ago by the Home  Office  and  had  to  report
      regularly. The detention had been for five days in a detention  centre
      and he then confirmed that he had been in touch  with  his  solicitors
      then and had also been in touch with them about six weeks prior to the
      hearing.  He informed us that they were unable to find  the  file  and
      they had not been terribly helpful in informing  him  of  the  current
      position in regard to his appeal. He informed us  that  he  was  given
      tablets for the pains in his head and back. He informed  us  that  the
      family come from Pristina.

8.    We received evidence from Mr Hxelal Veseli who confirmed that  he  and
      his family supported the appellant. He  expressed  the  view  that  on
      return the appellant would find it difficult to obtain employment  and
      that there would be no future for him in Kosovo.  We  were  told  that
      there  is  a  considerable  extended  family  of  approximately  sixty
      persons, of whom some thirty remain in  Kosovo,  the  remainder  being
      here. The family is  mainly  from  Pristina  though  various  extended
      members of the family come from other parts of Kosovo. When questioned
      about the attempts made to track  down  the  appellant's  parents  and
      siblings, he confirmed that  his  brother,  Fehmi,  and  he  had  made
      attempts so to do but without  success.   The  brother  is  no  longer
      active in the LDK and he  informed  us  that  there  was  considerable
      animosity towards the LDK in Kosovo and that because of his  brother's
      connection with that party the appellant's father  had  been  harassed
      and the family had been compelled to move from  place  to  place.   He
      confirmed that he had spoken to neighbours who informed him that  they
      were aware of the fact that the family were safe but were not able  to
      give him an address.  The appellant's father had been in the LDK for a
      brief period. He confirmed that there has been  no  contact  with  the
      parents of the appellant for two years or so.   When questioned as  to
      how the appellant spends his time as he  appears  to  be  without  any
      occupation  in  this  country,  he  told  us  that  the  appellant  is
      conversant with computers and spends a considerable amount of time  on
      a computer at home.

9.    Miss  Samimi  in  her  submissions  emphasised  the  strength  of  the
      relationship between the appellant and his uncle, Fehmi  and his uncle
      Hxelal with whom he is currently living.  She stressed the  fact  that
      the appellant has been here for nearly ten years,  having  arrived  in
      1993 and that there are twenty-nine members  of  his  family  in  this
      country,  all of whom appear to have indefinite leave to remain.   She
      stressed the fact  that  the  appellant  had  lost  contact  with  his
      immediate family and as  a  result  of  this  had  built  up  a  close
      relationship with his family in this country, in particular his uncle,
      Fehmi, who regards him as his son, and the uncle with  whom  he  lives
      and his numerous cousins and other more remote members of his  family.
      In her view, it would be disproportionate to return the  appellant  to
      Kosovo now.  She stressed the dangers arising from depleted uranium in
      Kosovo but, when questioned by us as to whether there was any evidence
      of depleted uranium in the area from when his family  comes,  she  was
      unable to draw our attention to such evidence.

10.   Miss Holmes in her submissions accepts that there  is  a  family  life
      here  and  that  to  return  the  appellant  to  Kosovo  would  be  an
      interference with that family life.  However, she submitted  it  would
      not be disproportionate. The appellant would not lose touch  with  his
      family in this country.  He is a young adult in a position to adapt to
      a change of life. He will be returning to the area  in  which  he  was
      brought up and, she submitted, to his parents and two  siblings.   She
      questioned the evidence before the Adjudicator and the evidence  which
      has now been put before us by the appellant and his uncle that it  had
      been impossible to make any contact with  the  appellant's  family  in
      Kosovo.  She stressed that there are thirty relatives  in  Kosovo  and
      that it would be most unlikely that,  through  this  network,  contact
      with the family could not have been made. She similarly stressed that,
      although  the  uncle  Fehmi  is  no  longer   a  member  of  the  LDK,
      nevertheless he had been a prominent member in this country  and  must
      have extensive LDK connections in Kosovo who would be able to  assist,
      if they had not already done, so in tracing  the  appellant's  family.
      The appellant is better qualified than most  returnees  as  he  has  a
      sound command of English and, according to his  uncle's  evidence,  is
      able to operate computers.  He should be  able  to  obtain  employment
      with an NGO or  similar  organisation.   She  drew  our  attention  to
      paragraph 56 of the Tribunal's determination in the case of Nhundu and
      Chiwera (01/TH/00613).  This reads:

             'This proposition would seem to  hold  good  whether  what  is
             involved  is  extradition  or  removal.  Article  8  being   a
             qualified right, assessments of the  risks  posed  by  removal
             must be balanced against the interests of the  state  and  the
             wider community in the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
             control.   It is legitimate therefore for the state to  remove
             an appellant unless the threat posed to his Article  8  rights
             would have the effect of nullifying those  rights  completely.
             We  note that even in respect  of  Article  6,  a  right  less
             qualified in time than Article  8, Strasbourg  has  only  been
             prepared to consider a decision to remove a person contrary to
             this right if in  the  country  of  origin  he  would  face  a
             "flagrant denial" of the right to a fair trial.  See MAR v  UK
             (28038-95) (Dec January 16, 1997).'

11.   In considering this appeal, we have regard to the evidence  before  us
      as at the date of the  hearing  rather  than  the  evidence  that  was
      available at the date of decision.  In so doing, we follow the  recent
      starred decision of the Tribunal (presided over by the  President)  in
      the case of S and K [2002] UKIAT05613.  We drew the attention of  both
      parties to this case and neither party requested a  short  adjournment
      in order to consider it. Both parties were content that we should deal
      with the evidence on the basis we have indicated.

12.   We will deal first with the witness evidence which we  have  received.
      Insofar as both witnesses  indicated  their  inability  to  trace  the
      appellant's family in Kosovo, we find such evidence to be  lacking  in
      credibility.  In paragraph 47 of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator
      finds 'His father has returned, and I do not accept that he  has  been
      pursued or driven from  his   home  for  the  reasons  already  stated
      above.'  We entirely endorse that  finding  and  further  endorse  the
      reasons given by the Adjudicator for that finding. To those reasons we
      would add that we do not accept that by reason of the  uncle,  Fehmi's
      involvement with the LDK in this country, the father would  have  been
      harassed and driven from his home and from pillar to post.  The father
      ceased his membership of the LDK upon his return to  the  country,  we
      are informed by the witness,  Hxelal.   The  uncle  Fehmi  is  now  no
      longer involved. The objective evidence would indicate that there  was
      considerable tension between the LDK and PDK parties in the run up  to
      the 2000 elections.  These elections were won by the LDK but  the  PDK
      is a participant in the government, the LDK not having won an  overall
      majority. The PDK controls the post of the Deputy Prime Minister.  The
      working relationship between the  various  ethnic  groups  within  the
      recently elected assembly appears to  be  reasonably  good,  the  only
      friction being with Serbs.  We would therefore reject  the  contention
      of the appellant and the other witness, his  uncle  Hxelal,  that  the
      father has been harassed to a degree which necessitates him abandoning
      the family home by reason of his association with the LDK.

13.   Furthermore, we find the evidence  with  regard  to  the  attempts  to
      trace the appellant's parents and siblings incredible  because  it  is
      apparent from the evidence of Mr Hxelal that this is a very  extensive
      family, comprising, he tells us, some sixty members of whom thirty  or
      so remain in Kosovo.  We accept Mr Hxelal's evidence that they do  not
      all live in the Pristina area from whence the appellant's family come.
      But it is apparent from Mr Hxelal's evidence that  this  is  a  fairly
      close knit family.  There are twenty-nine members in this country,  we
      are informed by Miss Samimi and by Mr Hxelal, and they  are  obviously
      in close contact with each  other,  the  thirty  others  remaining  in
      Kosovo. We find it inconceivable that through  this  extensive  family
      network the whereabouts of the appellant's parents  and  siblings  are
      unknown. Mr Hxelal informed us that he has spoken to neighbours of the
      family in the Pristina area and has been assured that  they  are  safe
      but for some reason, which he was not able to give us, the  neighbours
      were either unable or unwilling to provide information as  to  exactly
      where the family was living. We find this  to  be  quite  implausible.
      The family have been well established in the  Pristina  area,  clearly
      for a number of years, and is clearly well known in that  area.   They
      would appear to  have  a  fairly  extensive  network  of  friends  and
      neighbours and we just cannot believe that if Mr Hxelal  has  been  in
      contact with these  friends  and  neighbours  and  has  expressed  the
      concern of the family in this country to trace the family in Pristina,
      such information would have been withheld by the neighbours.

14.   Furthermore, there  is  the  source  of  information  that  can  arise
      through the LDK. It is not disputed that the  uncle  in  this  country
      appears to have played a  fairly  prominent  part  in  that  movement,
      largely when based in the United Kingdom.  However, he  claims  to  be
      well known to Mr Rugova, who is the leader of the party in Kosovo  and
      currently the Prime Minister.  It may well be that he has  ceased  his
      activities for the LDK now but he has been  working  with  the  party,
      according to the evidence he gave the  Adjudicator,  since  1990.   We
      just cannot accept that during the intervening twelve years he has not
      created such a network of political  friends  in  Kosovo  that  he  is
      unable to call upon those friends to attempt to trace his brother  and
      family. The contention with regard to the  position  of  the  LDK  and
      animosity towards it, we reject for the reasons we have already given.
      We are of the view that through this network, assuming the network  of
      the family and the family  and  the  neighbours  and  friends  do  not
      produce any information as to the whereabouts of this  branch  of  the
      family, that the LDK would be able to  trace  the  family.  For  these
      reasons, therefore,  we  totally  reject  the  evidence  of  both  the
      appellant and his uncle, Hxelal, that it has been impossible to  trace
      the appellant's parents and siblings in Kosovo. The remaining parts of
      the evidence we are prepared to accept as credible.

15.   It follows from this, therefore, that we are  of  the  view  that  the
      whereabouts of the appellant's parents and siblings is known  both  to
      the appellant and to his uncles in this country or if  not  known  can
      easily be ascertained.

16.    We  accept  that  the  appellant  has  established  a  close   family
      relationship in this country with  his two uncles  and  in  particular
      with the uncle, Fehmi. We accept that the uncle, Hxelal, and  possibly
      the other relations were all responsible for supporting the  appellant
      financially and with his other material needs  in  this  country.   It
      would follow from  this that to return the appellant to  Kosovo  would
      be an interference with that family life.  The question is whether  or
      not such interference would be proportionate, bearing in mind,  as  we
      must, the Secretary of State's obligation to maintain  an  immigration
      policy. On the one hand there  is  the  undoubted  argument  that  the
      appellant has now been here for a considerable period of time. He  has
      undoubtedly benefited from this country and what it has to  offer  and
      certainly he would no doubt create a good future for himself  in  this
      country and, we have no doubt whatsoever,  that  he  feels  much  more
      secure and very much happier here than he would be in Kosovo.  On  the
      other hand he does have his immediate family in Kosovo.   He  has  his
      parents and two siblings and an extensive network of some  twenty-five
      other members of his extended family in Pristina  and  throughout  the
      province of Kosovo.  He is a young man in apparent  good  health.   He
      has no wife or family or commitments. He has a command of the  English
      language, he gave his evidence in English and he speaks extremely good
      English.  He is  obviously  able  to  operate  computers,  as  we  are
      informed by  his uncle. His computer skills,  combined  with  a  sound
      knowledge of  the  English  language,  would,  in  our  view,  in  the
      circumstances currently prevailing in  Kosovo  which  is  in  need  of
      building up an infrastructure, including a proper bureaucracy and  the
      necessary support for the various institutions which are in  existence
      and need to be created, be in demand, were he working for  an  NGO  or
      otherwise. We have little  doubt  that  he  will  be  able  to  obtain
      employment readily with these skills at his command. That being so, we
      therefore do not consider that it would be  disproportionate  for  the
      Secretary of State to return this appellant to Kosovo.

17.   For these reasons the appeal is dismissed.



                                 M W RAPINET
                               VICE  PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


