

                                                    APPEAL No.  CC55466-2001
   KB (Article3- Health, Medical Facilities) Democratic Republic of Congo CG
                                                          [2002] UKIAT 03571

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                               Date of hearing: 18 July 2002
                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                    08/08/02


                                   Before:

                        Mr. P. R. Moulden (Chairman)
                             Mr A. G. Jeevanjee


                                   Between


                                 KAMBU BATIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo.   He
      has been given leave to appeal the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
      M. E. J. Rush) dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision
      to refuse to grant him leave to enter the United Kingdom and to refuse
      asylum.

   2. Mr C. Williams of Counsel, instructed by Edwards  Duthie,  Solicitors,
      appeared for the Appellant.  Mr I. Graham, a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the Respondent.


   3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 May 1999 and  claimed
      asylum.  The notice containing the decision against which  he  appeals
      is dated 7 April 2001.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal  on  8  March
      2002 and leave to appeal was granted on 29 May 2002.


   4.  The  appeal  was  certified  but  the  Adjudicator   discharged   the
      certificate.


   5. The Appellant claimed to fear persecution from the authorities in  the
      DRC because his wife is Rwandan and his brother-in-law fought for  the
      Rwandan rebels. He said he was a supporter of the UDPS. He  also  said
      that he was epileptic and  was  receiving  medical  treatment  in  the
      United Kingdom which would not be available to him in the DRC.


   6. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness.
      He did not believe his account of events.  He found that the Appellant
      had  not  established  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for   a
      Convention reason or that his human rights  would  be  infringed.   In
      relation to the Article  8  claim,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      Appellant had established a family life with his sister in the  United
      Kingdom, if he returned to the DRC there would  be  interference  with
      this, but the interference was in accordance with the law, and  had  a
      legitimate public aim.   Such  interference  would  be  necessary  and
      proportionate.


   7. The first and main thrust of the grounds of appeal was  an  attack  on
      the adverse credibility finding and in particular that the Adjudicator
      erred in his conclusions that the Appellant's wife  was  not  Rwandan.
      At the hearing Mr Williams informed us that the  Appellant  no  longer
      intended to pursue his claim based  on  the  risks  arising  from  his
      wife's Rwandan nationality and ethnicity. Mr Williams declined to  say
      why the Appellant had done this. Specifically, the  following  grounds
      of appeal were  abandoned,  paragraph  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  (except
      subparagraphs 3 and 4) and 10. These are  the  paragraphs  which  also
      attack the adverse credibility finding.


   8. There are three remaining grounds.  The first is that the Adjudicator
      failed to consider the full implications of the expert report from Mr
      Kennes, insofar as it supports the Appellant's claim to be at risk of
      having his Article 3 rights infringed because political opinions would
      be attributed to him.  The second is that the detention of the
      Appellant in a Migratory Detention Centre upon return to the DRC would
      breach Article 5.  The third is that the Adjudicator erred in his
      assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

   9. Mr Williams sought leave to amend and add to the grounds of appeal in
      the terms of paragraph 3 of his skeleton argument.  Mr Graham did not
      object and we granted leave.  This ground relates to the Appellant's
      epilepsy and its effect on his Article 3 and 8 claims.

  10. We have the Appellant's bundle containing 295 pages, Mr Williams
      skeleton argument, a note from the Appellant's caseworker and a letter
      to the Appellant's GP and, from the Respondent, the April 2002 Country
      Assessment.

  11. Mr Williams informed as that his submissions would cover matters which
      were not dependent on the Appellant's credibility so that the adverse
      credibility finding would not have an adverse effect on them.  He also
      said that, in the light of his instructions to withdraw many of the
      grounds of appeal, we would not need to consider the whole of the
      bundle, but only the information between pp 10 and 44.

  12. Mr Kennes' report states, at page 32 of the Appellant's bundle,

        "During a telephone conversation with the author of this report, Mr
        Leyka make it clear that the "migratory detention centres" are not
        centres for imprisonment.  The aim of the centres is the screening
        and identification of returned asylum seekers, with the view of
        their reintegration into society.  Information is gathered about
        the individuals behind the underground networks, to be able to put
        them before justice.  According to the assistant to the director-
        general, some of these centres are already operational.  According
        to this official version, the "migratory detention centres" are
        just a screening agency.  There is no problem with it as long as
        the returned asylum seekers are effectively members of an
        underground migration network.  When the centres house returned
        asylum seekers who were entitled to political asylum that were
        unjustly refused, then the authorities immediately have their
        "rebels and affiliated" at hand to interrogate them and put them
        into jail.  The real function of the detention centres is thus
        linked to the overall government policy towards real or imagined
        opponents.  The government policy towards opponents cannot be
        considered without taking into account the workings of the judicial
        system, and more specifically the workings of the Military Court".

  13. On pages 32 and 33 of his report Mr Kennes set out his conclusions in
      relation to the Appellant's case.  The report is not just a generic
      report.  It deals with the particular facts of the Appellant's case.
      However, it is clear that some of his conclusions can no longer apply,
      as a result of the withdrawal of the central plank of the Appellant's
      claim and the decision not to attempt to overturn the adverse
      credibility finding.  Mr Williams relied on paragraph 3 of the summary
      as a freestanding argument.  This states, "the fact that he is
      returning from the UK is an element that may be added to a charge
      against him, as the UK is considered by the Kinshasa government as a
      supporter for the Rwandan and Ugandan invaders".

  14. Mr Williams submitted that if the Appellant were to be returned to the
      DRC he would be detained in a migratory detention centre for some
      time.  He would be at risk of infringement of his Article 3 human
      rights.  Even if he were not a real opponent the authorities might
      still regard him as one.  Such detention would violate his Article 5
      human rights.  Mr Williams submitted that we should consider exception
      (f) which provided, "the lawful arrest or detention of a person to
      prevent his effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a
      person against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation
      or extradition".  The government line was that the migratory detention
      centres were for screening migrants.  However, the reality was that
      they were to weed out political opponents.  Mr Williams conceded that
      the Appellant would be an ordinary failed asylum seeker.  However, he
      submitted that to detain anyone in the DRC would be any infringement
      of his Article 5 Human Rights.

  15. As to the Appellant's Article 3 claim Mr Williams submitted that he
      suffered from epilepsy and it would infringe his rights to return him
      to a place where he would not be able to obtain the necessary
      medication and treatment, which he was receiving in the United
      Kingdom.  He had been receiving medicine since December 2001.  We were
      referred to the letters from his GP.  He had not yet seen a consultant
      neurologist.  The non-availability of necessary medication could
      amount to a breach of Article 3.  Mr Williams accepted there was no
      evidence to show that the Appellant's condition was life-threatening
      or that the lack of medication would be life-threatening.  According
      to Mr Kennes' supplementary report (pp 40 and 41) the only medication
      he was likely to obtain in detention would be aspirin.  Mr Williams
      conceded that there was no evidence to show how long the Appellant
      might spend in detention.

  16. Mr Williams informed us that the Appellant was not pursuing his
      Article 8 claim in relation to his family life with his sister.  He
      was doing so in relation to his epilepsy and the threat to his moral
      and physical integrity.  Mr Williams relied on the same facts and
      arguments as those put forward in relation to Article 3.  We were
      asked to allow the appeal but if not to remit for hearing afresh.

  17. Mr Graham emphasised that there was no longer any attack on the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility finding.  The Appellant did not
      claim to have suffered any serious problems with his epilepsy whilst
      he lived in the DRC.  He had epilepsy since childhood and was treated
      with traditional medicines.  There was no evidence to show that these
      were inferior to Western medicines.  There was no evidence to show
      that if he had to revert to this type of medication his Article 3 or 8
      rights would be breached.

  18. Even if the Appellant was held in a migratory detention centre and
      even if the government had a hidden agenda, on the facts they would
      have no interest in the Appellant.  We were asked to give no weight to
      what Mr Graham submitted was pure speculation that the government had
      a hidden agenda.  Under exception (f) to Article 5 the authorities
      were entitled to hold the Appellant in detention until they had
      checked and cleared him.  Paragraph 5.29 of the Country Assessment
      stated, "no human rights organisations in the DRC had reported any
      difficulties for returning failed asylum seekers and, more
      importantly, the report made the point that it is not official
      government policy to harass or persecute returning failed asylum
      seekers.  In individual cases, however, some returning failed asylum
      seekers to the DRC may encounter ill-treatment or harassment by
      members of the security forces.  These incidents, however, would be
      due to the actions of undisciplined or corrupt individual officers and
      not as a result of official government policy".

  19. Mr Graham submitted that there was no evidence that the Appellant
      would come to harm if he were detained in a migratory detention
      centre.  There was no reasonable likelihood of any breach of his
      rights under Articles 3,5, or 8.  The Adjudicator's findings were
      supported by the evidence and he had not erred.  We were asked to
      dismiss the appeal

  20. In reply to our question Mr Williams submitted that the Appellant's GP
      would be experienced in identifying the extent of the Appellant's
      symptoms of epilepsy.  He had said that the Appellant's health would
      deteriorate.  Mr Williams was not aware of any expert evidence
      referring to migratory detention centres, apart from that in the
      report from Mr Kennes.

  21. We have to bear in mind that the Adjudicator found that the Appellant
      was not a credible witness.  There are compelling reasons for this
      conclusion and all the grounds of appeal which go to credibility have
      been withdrawn.  The Appellant fabricated a detailed account of events
      and we must view his evidence with suspicion, except to the extent
      that it is corroborated by more reliable evidence.  Fortunately for
      the Appellant most of his outstanding claims can be determined by
      reference to independent objective evidence, although we must have
      some regard to his evidence in relation to his medical symptoms and
      the severity of his condition.

  22. Mr Kennes' qualifications are impressive.  We give considerable weight
      to his opinions, particularly where these are truly objective, relying
      on his assessment of the situation in the DRC, rather than his
      assessment of the risks facing the Appellant.  Mr Kennes has made his
      assessment of the risks facing the Appellant on the basis of the
      Appellant's claims, which are thoroughly discredited and, in most
      respects, no longer relied on.  Notwithstanding that none of the other
      reports refer to migratory detention centres we accept, until better
      evidence becomes available, that one or more of them is likely to
      exist.  The only evidence cited by Mr Kennes is a speech by the new
      director-general of the Congolese immigration services in which he
      indicates that centres would be set up and an assistant who said that
      some were already in operation.

  23. We have no evidence as to conditions in such centres or how long
      individuals are likely to be detained.  There is no suggestion that
      they are contained within Congolese prisons.  As a result we cannot
      assess conditions as if they were a Congolese prison.  What is clear
      is that the authorities have no adverse interest in the Appellant.
      They are not likely to attribute any political opinion to him. It is
      conceded that we must assess the risks purely as a returning failed
      asylum seeker from the United Kingdom.  Even after taking into account
      the point at Page 33 of Mr Kennes' report that the Kinshasa government
      looks on the UK as a supporter of the Rwandan and the Ugandan
      invaders, this would not put him at risk.  Mr Kennes considered this
      as an additional element, together with far more serious reasons for
      hostility, which no longer apply.  We find that, even if the Appellant
      were held in a migratory detention centre, there is no evidence that
      he would be held for an unreasonable period or ill treated.  The
      authorities are entitled to detain him for so long as is needed to
      identify him and check his background.  This would come within
      exception (f)  to Article 5.

  24. The Appellant claims that he suffered epilepsy from childhood.  If
      this is true, and it is supported by the diagnosis of the GP that he
      does suffered from epilepsy, he has not explained the extent to which
      it had an adverse effect on him.  He said that he was a law graduate
      and a successful businessman.  It is clear that he has been treated
      with traditional medicine, some of which was provided for him by his
      sister.  We do not have any further information as to the nature of
      the medicine, the period of the treatment, or how effective this was.
      The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in May 1999 but does not
      appear to have sought medical treatment until December 2001.  He told
      his GP that he had about ten fits in 2001.  The doctor herself
      comments, in her report of 14 February 2002, "this fit was not
      witnessed by another person".  There is no evidence from anyone who
      has witnessed the Appellant having a fit.  However, we accept the GP's
      diagnosis that he does suffer from epilepsy.  She remarks that,
      because of the side-effects, nobody would take the medication which is
      being prescribed for him unless they were to prevent epileptic fits.
      We accept her expert opinion as to the side-effects of the medication.
       It does not require medical expertise to assess whether the Appellant
      would be prepared to undergo this if he thought that it would benefit
      his asylum claim.  However, we do not consider that we have sufficient
      information to reach a conclusion about this.


  25. The Appellant has been waiting for some time for an appointment with a
      consultant neurologist.  At the date of the hearing no appointment had
      been given.  We have no medical expertise, only a perception that the
      seriousness of the effects of epilepsy can vary enormously.  Unless
      and until the Appellant is assessed by a consultant neurologist we do
      not know whether his current medication is the best or only medication
      required.  We do not know what treatment the consultant neurologist
      may recommend, whether this will include medication and if so whether
      that medication is available in the DRC.  We have no comparative
      assessment of the efficacy of traditional medicines, which appear to
      have controlled the Appellant's epilepsy for much of his life.  Apart
      from our acceptance of the GP's diagnosis that the Appellant does
      suffer from epilepsy, we do not accept the Appellant's unsupported
      statements as to the regularity of the fits which he claims to have
      suffered, or the relative severity of his symptoms in the UK compared
      with his symptoms whilst he was living in the DRC.  We place little
      weight on the Appellant's claims to be agitated and distressed because
      of the likelihood of his being murdered should he return to the DRC.
      He has withdrawn most of his claims upon which such fears were based
      and we have found that his outstanding fears are groundless.

  26. Further consideration may need to be given to the Appellant's claims
      in relation to his epilepsy as and when there is specialist medical
      evidence, which may include authoritative tests showing the severity
      of his epilepsy, any requirement for long-term treatment, the nature
      of this treatment, its availability in the DRC, the consequences of
      not having the treatment and, if possible, the efficacy of traditional
      medicines. On the evidence before us the Appellant has not established
      that to return him to the DRC would infringe his human rights and
      specifically not under Articles 3, 5 or 8.

  27. We dismiss the appeal.








........................................
P. R. Moulden
Vice-President.

