
KH

|Heard at Field House       |        |MG (Desertion- Punishment)  |
|                           |        |Angola CG [2002] UKIAT 07360|
|on  19 December 2003       |        |HX/65386/2000               |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......21 March 2003......                                         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Professor D B Casson (Chairman)                                   |
|Mrs E Morton                                                      |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mateus Gonzaga Da Rocha Guimaraes                                 |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr A A Wilson)  allowing,
      on asylum and human rights grounds, an appeal  by  the  respondent,  a
      citizen of Angola, whom we shall refer to as "the  claimant",  against
      the decision by the Secretary of State on 3 November 2000 to refuse to
      grant leave to enter the United Kingdom.  Before us the  Secretary  of
      State was represented by  Miss  D  Prentice,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer. The claimant was represented by  Mr  P  Walse  instructed  by
      Henry Hyams & Co., solicitors.

2.    The claimant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  at  Gatwick  Airport  on
      11 February 2000.  He claimed asylum and said he had travelled to this
      country by air from Luanda via Rio de Janeiro.   He had travelled from
      Angola  on  what  was  described  as  a  "service  passport"  used  by
      government employees, the name on which had been slightly amended.  At
      an asylum interview held on 23 May 2001, he said (B10) that  his  wife
      and child had arrived in the United  Kingdom  six  months  previously,
      that he was unaware of  their  arrival  details,  and  that  his  wife
      intended to claim asylum.

3.    The claimant gave evidence at the hearing of  his  appeal  before  the
      Adjudicator, but the Secretary of State chose not to  be  represented.
      In his determination the  Adjudicator  summarised  the  claim  in  the
      words: "He was targeted for conscription within the  Angolan  Army  by
      reason of his political activities.  He refused the call  up  and  was
      detained by military police and was able to  escape  during  a  battle
      with  UNITA  forces."   In  the  refusal  letter  the  respondent  had
      specifically challenged the claimant's allegation  that  he  had  been
      targeted for conscription because of his  political  activities.   The
      claimant told the Adjudicator  that,  having  completed  a  university
      career,  he  would  normally  be  exempt   from   conscription.    The
      Adjudicator  expressed  his  conclusions  in  paragraph  15   of   his
      determination as follows:

           "The appellant claims he fears persecution by the state  insofar
           as he has been targeted for conscription in war time against  an
           internal enemy that he is sympathetic to ideologically  and  has
           relatives involved in that part of the country.  Insofar as  the
           state is engaged in that war and has the right therefore to call
           available citizens to its  defence  that  in  itself  would  not
           normally amount to a fear of persecution.  I do  accept  however
           that he has been targeted for that  conscription  for  political
           activities due to his earlier political position and indications
           that he was not willing to be  a  servant  of  the  state.   The
           position of the appellant as  a  deserter  is  potentially  dire
           having regard to the nature of detention and the fact that civil
           liberties are not respected in  any  systematic  manner  in  the
           state."


4.    The Adjudicator found  that  the  claimant  had  established  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution for "political  activity";  that  internal
      flight "raises particular problems  within  that  country";  that  his
      removal would expose him to a real risk of breach  of  Article  3  and
      Article 8 of the European Convention.  The appeal under Article 8  was
      allowed  because  the  Adjudicator  found:  "that  it  would  not   be
      necessarily detrimental to the state by the allowing of the  appellant
      and his immediate family into the UK.  It therefore follows  that  the
      removal from the UK would involve a real risk of a breach  of  Article
      8."   The  Adjudicator  considered  it  appropriate  to  conclude  his
      determination with the words: "I would  therefore  have  directed  the
      appellant be granted exceptional  leave  to  remain  had  I  not  also
      determined the appeal in his favour under the 1951 Convention."

5.    In  his  submissions  to  us  Mr  Walse  for  the  claimant  raised  a
      preliminary point inviting us to find that the  Secretary  of  State's
      application for leave to appeal to the Tribunal was out of  time.   We
      rejected that submission.  In our judgment, the decision by  the  Vice
      President to grant leave to  appeal  clearly  indicated  that  he  had
      decided to exercise his discretion under rule 18(3) of  the  Procedure
      Rules to extend  the  time  limit.   We  are  aware  that  differently
      constituted panels of the Tribunal have so decided in other cases.

6.    On the substantive issues, Mr Walse  conceded  paragraph  2.5  of  the
      grounds of  appeal,  and  accepted  that  he  could  not  support  the
      Adjudicator's decision to allow the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention.  In  our  judgment  Mr  Walse  is  right  in  his
      concession.  The Adjudicator's decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 is unsustainable.  It is inconsistent with the evidence  and
      with relevant authorities, and is simply wrong.

7.     Miss  Prentice  for  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that   the
      background evidence before us did not support the claimant's assertion
      that he would normally be exempt  from  conscription  because  he  had
      completed his university course.  Paragraphs  4.26  and  4.27  of  the
      April 2002 CIPU Report made it clear that Angola had conscription  for
      all males between 20 and 45 years of  age  and  that  service  can  be
      postponed if the person was still in full time education.  There is no
      suggestion of exemption for  students.   We  accept  that  submission.
      Insofar as the Adjudicator appears to  have  accepted  the  claimant's
      allegation that he was exempt from military service, that  finding  is
      unsustainable.

8.    Mr Walse submitted that the claimant would be regarded as  a  deserter
      in Angola and as such would face treatment which  would  constitute  a
      breach of Article 3 of the European Convention.   Mr  Walse  submitted
      that the claimant was known to the authorities in Angola; that he  was
      known to have deserted; that, as a deserter, he faced a long  term  of
      imprisonment; that prison conditions  imposed  a  credible  threat  to
      health and life; that the right to receive family visits for prisoners
      was denied; and that in practice there were long pre-trial delays.  By
      agreement, we considered both the  April  2002  CIPU  Report  and  the
      October 2002 Report in support of  the  submissions.   Mr  Walse  also
      referred us to a summary of the decision  of  the  European  Court  of
      Human Rights in Kalashnikov v Russia, which we  have  considered,  but
      which we do not find  of  assistance  in  the  determination  of  this
      appeal.

9.     The  reports  to  which  we  have  been  referred  described   prison
      conditions in Angola as constituting a serious threat  to  the  health
      and lives of prisoners.  The reports must, however,  be  read  in  the
      light of the Adjudicator's observation, which we set out below  as  it
      is typed at paragraph 12 of the determination:

      "Although the Appellant did not claim any direct torture  or  violence
      or threats of violence against him he  indicated  that  he  only  been
      arrested (sic) he was able to  shortly  afterwards  escape  during  an
      attack by Unita and he escaped in the confusion.  I broadly accept his
      evidence  as  credible  and  falling  in  line  with  the   background
      information supplied.  It therefore forms  the  factual  basis  of  my
      decision."


10.   The Adjudicator described the claimant's position  as  a  deserter  as
      "potentially dire having regard to the nature of the detention and the
      fact that civil liberties are not respected in any  systematic  manner
      in the state".  The Adjudicator  found  "on  the  facts  as  described
      above" that the  claimant  had  established  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution and of treatment in breach of Article 3.  The  Adjudicator
      does not appear to have been referred to the decision of the  Tribunal
      in Fazilat [2002] UKIAT 00973.  The Tribunal was there concerned  with
      prison conditions in Iran.   The  background  documentation  described
      prison conditions in that country as  harsh  and  reported  that  some
      prisoners are held in solitary confinement or denied adequate food  or
      medical  care  in  order  to  force  confessions.   Female  prisoners,
      reportedly, have been raped or otherwise tortured while in  detention.
      Prison guards reportedly intimidate family members  of  detainees  and
      torture detainees in the  presence  of  family  members.   There  were
      numerous reports of prisoner overcrowding and unrest.  The judgment of
      the Tribunal was given by the President.  At paragraph 15 he said:

           "We do not doubt that prison conditions in  Iran  are  far  from
           ideal.  We do not doubt that they may not measure up to what  is
           expected in this country, or perhaps in any country which  is  a
           signatory to the European Convention on Human  Rights.   As  the
           Court at Strasbourg has recognised, it is not for signatories to
           the Convention to impose the standards of the Convention on  all
           the world.  Recognition has  to  be  had  to  the  situation  in
           individual countries and to the standards that are accepted, and
           expected, in those countries.  Of course in relation to  Article
           3, there is a line below which the treatment cannot sink, if  we
           may put it that way.  That is to say that it is always  possible
           that the sort of treatment that may  be  routinely  expected  in
           prison in a particular country falls so far below the  standards
           that would be expected in a civilised  country,  that  it  could
           properly be said to amount to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.
           But, as  again  the  Court  in  Strasbourg  has  indicated,  the
           threshold has to be a high one because, otherwise, it would  be,
           as one recognises, quite impossible for any country to return to
           a non-signatory an individual who faces prosecution, rather than
           any sort of persecution.  The conditions may well be regarded as
           harsh.  That is a value judgment  and  there  is  no  sufficient
           indication from the material  before  us  that  this  respondent
           would run the risk of  facing  treatment  which  amounted  to  a
           breach of article 3."

11.   That is the approach  we  follow  in  this  case.   We  are  far  from
      persuaded  that  this  claimant  has  shown  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that he would be treated as a deserter on return to  Angola
      at the present time.  Even, however, if he would be so treated, we are
      not satisfied that the punishment to which he would be subjected would
      be such as to constitute a breach of his rights under Article 3 of the
      European Convention. The Adjudicator's conclusion  that  the  claimant
      had been targeted for political reasons is, as we  have  indicated  at
      paragraph 7 above, based upon  a  misapprehension  of  the  background
      evidence.  That conclusion cannot stand.  Similarly, we are clearly of
      the opinion that the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the  claimant  has
      established a  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  is
      unsustainable and  is  based  upon  an  incorrect  legal  and  factual
      analysis.  The claimant's appeal should have been dismissed under both
      Conventions.   It  remains  to  be  observed  that  the  Adjudicator's
      statement that he "would have directed" that the claimant  be  granted
      exceptional leave to remain is nullified.

12.   The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                                                D  B  Casson
                                                       Acting Vice President

