
KH

|Heard at: Field House      |        |APPEAL NO  HX/11538/2002    |
| On  12 December 2002      |        |FB (Risk- Class- Midgan)    |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |06753                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|21st February 2003                                                |
|..........................................                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Chairman)                                         |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|Ferdowsa  Ismail  Beldeq                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  She has been  given  leave  to
      appeal the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs C A James)  dismissing
      her appeal against the respondent's decision to  give  directions  for
      her removal from the United Kingdom and to refuse asylum.  Ms K Cronin
      of Counsel instructed by Southwest Law appeared for the appellant.  Ms
      M  Banwait,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,   represented   the
      respondent.

2.    The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  about  10  November
      2001.  She claimed asylum on 15 November 2001.  The notice  containing
      the decision against which she appeals is dated 31 January 2002.   The
      Adjudicator heard the appeal on 23 July 2002 and leave to  appeal  was
      granted on 29 October 2002.

3.    The appellant claimed to fear persecution in Ethiopia, where  she  had
      lived in a refugee camp for a number of years, and  in  Somalia.   She
      comes from a part of Somalia which is now Somaliland.  She  said  that
      she suffered because of her membership of a minority  group  known  as
      the Midgen.  We use the word "group" although  the  words  "caste"  or
      "underclass" would also be appropriate.  We have not  used  the  words
      "clan" or "sub-clan" because the evidence before us indicates that the
      Midgen are, significantly, outside and beneath the normal Somali  clan
      and sub-clan structure.  It is said, and on the Country Information we
      agree, that there are similarities between the Midgen  and  those  who
      belong to the lowest caste in India.

4.    Whilst the Adjudicator did not specifically find  that  the  appellant
      was a credible witness she  accepted  all  material  elements  of  her
      claim.  Having done so she summarised the facts in paragraph 38 of the
      determination in the following terms:

      "38.  I find that the core of the appellant's claim is that, following
      the outbreak of  war  in  1998  when  her  family  was  harassed,  she
      travelled with her parents, sister and brother from  Hargesia  to  the
      Dulcat Refugee Camp.  I find, against the background information, that
      it is more likely than not that, in 1991, she was raped but  that  she
      did not mention this by reason of her  cultural  background.   I  find
      that five years later her husband returned to their home  in  Hargesia
      where he was killed.  Te appellant remarried three years later.  There
      is no account of any further trouble until an incident  in  July  2000
      when I find that she and her brother were  attacked,  they  were  both
      beaten, she was raped and in the attack her arm was  broken.   In  the
      course of the hearing the appellant showed  me  the  scarring  on  her
      right elbow and also the scars on her knees, which Dr Nelki  found  to
      be compatible with her account."


      "39.  I find on her oral evidence that the money, which the  appellant
      subsequently used to pay for an operation to her arm,  in  June  2001,
      came from the money she earned in the camp.  I do not  find  that  she
      ever claimed otherwise.  I find, at the time, she stayed  with  Midgen
      business people in the Makanisa area of  Addis  Ababa.   In  her  oral
      evidence she confirmed that she stayed there  for  about  four  months
      with no problems."


5.    The medical evidence shows that the second  attack  on  the  appellant
      was particularly severe.  She has a  number  of  scars  on  her  head,
      forehead, elbow, forearm, wrist, knuckles, knees  and  on  one  thigh.
      Dr Nelki concludes that she suffered considerable trauma,  her  elbow
      was severely broken and the wrist was broken.  "The  multiple  shapes,
      sizes, depths of the surrounding scars confirm the degree of  trauma".
      She was raped by two men  and  probably  by  four.   There  were  four
      assailants but she was not sure because she lost  consciousness.   Her
      younger brother was attacked at the same time.

6.    The appellant said that she came to the refugee camp  in  Ethiopia  in
      1988 after civil war broke out.   Men  came  to  the  family  home  in
      Hargesia, broke down the door, beat the appellant's father and  sister
      and took money, bags and suitcases.  The family moved to  a  different
      part of town and lived in a deserted house before fleeing the area  on
      foot and crossing the border into Ethiopia to the  refugee  camp.   In
      the camp they were treated badly because they were regarded as  coming
      from an inferior class.  The appellant married in the  camp  in  1990.
      Her father died in 1993.  She had daughters in 1992 and 1996.  In 1996
      her husband  returned  to  Hargesia  to  assess  the  situation.   The
      appellant had heard through her mother that houses had been destroyed.
       There was a fight between her husband and some squatters and  he  was
      killed with a knife.

7.    In paragraph 40 of the determination the  Adjudicator  concludes  that
      the totality of what happened to  the  appellant  did  not  amount  to
      persecution.  We do not agree. Ms Banwait conceded that it did  amount
      to persecution.  We  do  not  agree  with  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      appellant's delay in leaving the camp after  the  second  occasion  on
      which she was raped "weighs against her claim  of  persecution".   The
      appellant gave a perfectly credible explanation for  the  delay.   She
      had little money.  What little money she had was earned by selling tea
      and chapattis.  There appears to have been some sort  of  mutual  fund
      within the camp from which the appellant was eventually able to obtain
      some of the money which she used to travel  to  Ethiopia  for  medical
      treatment and then to fly to the United Kingdom.

8.    In paragraph 40 of the determination the  Adjudicator  concluded  that
      the appellant had not established a Convention reason.  We  find  that
      she has established a Convention reason, namely  a  particular  social
      group.  The particular social group is Midgen  women.   We  also  find
      that,  within  the  context  of  the  complicated  clan  and  sub-clan
      structure in Somalia and the exclusion of the Midgen as an  underclass
      from that structure, the persecution suffered by the appellant was  by
      reason of her ethnicity and race.  Midgen in Somalia are perceived  as
      a race apart and there are substantial racial as  well  as  historical
      and familial elements which establish whether an individual is  or  is
      not Midgen.

9.    The conclusion that the appellant  suffered  past  persecution  for  a
      Convention  reason,  whilst  not  definitive  of  a  current  risk  of
      persecution, is relevant and persuasive, particularly where there  has
      not been a material improvement in country conditions.

10.   The best that Ms Banwait was able to put forward  by  way  of  country
      information in support of her submission that the appellant would  not
      be at risk  on  return  is  contained  in  the  October  2002  Country
      Assessment at paragraphs 4.4, 5.44 and 5.45.  Paragraph 4.4 shows that
      the Isaaq dominate the appellant's  former  home  area  which  is  now
      "Somaliland" although this has not  been  internationally  recognised.
      There is no reference to the position of the Midgen.   Paragraph  5.44
      states:

      "The minority Gaboye/Midgen (usually referred to as  Midgen  but  also
      known as the Madhiban) traditionally settle in areas where they obtain
      protection from a clan and build up an  economic  activity.   Although
      minorities have  usually  been  able  to  avoid  involvement  in  clan
      disputes they have sometimes come under  pressure  to  participate  in
      fighting in areas  of  conflict.   This  happened  to  the  Midgen  in
      Mogadishu following the collapse of the Barra administration, although
      Midgen and other minority groups who may  risk  harassment  by  Somali
      clans in  rural  areas  do  not  necessarily  find  themselves  facing
      difficulties in Mogadishu now.  Midgen have also been able  to  settle
      in Puntland."


11.   Paragraph 5.45 states:

      "The Midgen, or Madhiban, have always been placed at the lower end  of
      Somali society, but their position improves at times of stability  and
      recovery.  In some areas their position can even  be  slightly  better
      than that of the so-called "noble" Somali  clans.   Midgen  can  trade
      freely,  although  they  are  usually  unable  to  own  property   and
      livestock.  Although Midgen may have been easy prey for clan  militias
      during the civil war, their situation improved and Midgen do not  face
      deprivation at the  hands  of  militias  or  face  persecution  merely
      because of their ethnic origin."


12.   These passages, which do not contain clear statements that the  Midgen
      are not at risk (for example "not necessarily find  themselves  facing
      difficulties" and "do not face  deprivation  etc.  merely  because  of
      their ethnic origin") must be contrasted with the  evidence  submitted
      by the appellant.  At page 30 of the appellant's bundle, which is part
      of the joint  British,  Danish  and  Dutch  Fact  Finding  Mission  of
      September 2000  relating  to  minority  groups  in  Somalia   relevant
      passages state:

      "According to Lewis (1994) the Sab (indicating the Midgen,  Tumal  and
      Yabir) are attached to "noble Somalia  tribes  through  patronage  and
      perform specific duties, in return for which they are paid and allowed
      to remain in the territory  of  the  tribe  of  attachment.   The  Sab
      attached to a "noble" tribe identify themselves with it in relation to
      other tribes.  They have no recognised genealogy of their  own.   They
      are not land owning  groups.   Conventional  paths  to  upward  social
      mobility are not open to them.  They are excluded from the Council  of
      Elders.  They have no right to  claim  compensation  for  murder  from
      "noble" Somali except through the patron to whom  they  are  attached,
      and the "lower" compensation is  paid  to  the  patron.   They  cannot
      contract legitimate marriages with Somalis."


      "Although the position of the Sab  had  many  points  in  common  with
      slaves in Somali society, their position  was  nevertheless  distinct.
      The Sab were a ritually impure group of  people  segregated  from  the
      Somalis by general prohibitions, e.g. to eat  together  or  to  marry.
      Although  they  owned  no  land,  they   were   nonetheless   distinct
      communities with their own customs.  Their adoption by 'noble' Somalis
      implied a voluntary  contract,  while  ownership  of  slaves  entailed
      absolute rights of possession.  The Sab have the right  to  move  from
      'noble' family to family at will."


      "In Somaliland their role in the conflict between Barra and the Isaaq-
       based Somali National Movement (SNM) earned them the hostility of the
      SNM rebels, and of the Isaaq as a group.  Also, whereas  other  former
      adversaries in the area have reconciled, the Midgen, Tumal  and  Yabir
      have not been party to any peace agreement.  They have found  recovery
      after the war especially difficult and consider  themselves  as  being
      discriminated against, in spite of the one seat they obtained  in  the
      Somaliland Parliament."


13.   Both Counsel rely on the following passage from the same report:

      "In recent years they (the Midgen) have  started  to  come  back,  and
      returnees have been able to reclaim some  of  the  land  and  property
      taken from them in the civil war.  In 1998, for  example,  some  2,000
      Midgen, Tumal and Yabir returned to Somalia from Ethiopia,  mostly  to
      Hargesia."


      "Midgen, Tumal and Yabir today live scattered all  over  Somalia,  but
      mostly in  northern  areas.   There  is  little  specific  information
      available on their human rights and security situations.  There are no
      indications that the security of Midgen, Tumal and Yabir  is  at  risk
      from targeted action by the clans.  At the same time, indications  are
      that their relationship with the major Somali clans have not  improved
      much from traditional times, and that  they  are  still  discriminated
      against in the social and economic spheres."

14.   Whilst there is no reference to Midgen in Somaliland  in  the  Country
      Assessment, the Fact Finding Mission states,  "In  Somaliland,  Midgen
      Tumal and Yabir find recovery from the civil war especially difficult.
       They feel that they are under-represented politically, with one  seat
      in the Somaliland Parliament.  Economically they still find themselves
      mostly in menial jobs, and do not feel sufficiently secure to  conduct
      any business as other clans could confiscate their possessions.  A  UN
      Report on the conditions of returnees and internally displaced  person
      (IDPs) in north west and north east Somalia  found  that  in  Puntland
      approximately 10,000  Madhiban  from  Mogadishu  and  Bay  and  Bakool
      regions live in camps for IDPs.  The report also found that IDPs  from
      the south are generally worse off than town residents,  but  that  the
      problems of the returnees were  also  quite  severe.   Both  IDPs  and
      returnees face severe problems in  terms  of  integration  within  the
      depressed local economy.  The IDPs around Bosasso face great risks  in
      terms of sanitation and  health.   The  meagre  shelter  available  is
      vulnerable to fires.  The Madhiban IDP  is  especially  vulnerable  to
      spontaneous and forced relocations, and IDPs cited the  insecurity  of
      land tenure and ownership as their primary concern".

15.   The following passages from the Oxford House Report are material:

      "The inhabitants from Somaliland divide themselves socially  into  GOB
      (gentry) and Sab (low born or outcast), of these two social groups the
      Midgen,  Yabir  and  Tumal  fall  into  the  category  of   Sab.   The
      intelligence department in the pr�cis on Somaliland ranks these tribes
      as 'not only outcast but as outside the pale of classification.  These
      groups make up less than one per cent of the Somali  population.'  And
      'these three groups perform tasks that Somali would not carry  out....
      This is also one of the reasons that they  cannot  go  to  Mosques  to
      practice religion even thought they are Muslims.  In  Somaliland  each
      tribe or sub-tribe has recognised territories.  It  may  be  wrong  to
      think of the Midgen, Tumal and Yabir as a sub-division of one tribe as
      their origins are quite unknown and as such are a scattered people  of
      no fixed home.  These three groups are not a tribe or a sub-tribe  but
      a caste. The three castes have suffered greatly in the current  crisis
      as they are not allied with the major clan families and  they  do  not
      have any power base that this affords.  This also has the effect  that
      they can be attacked without impunity in the current crisis  as  there
      is no retaliation or revenge taken by other clans.  They often  attach
      themselves to another tribe as servants all over the  country.   Other
      tribes will not recognise them as of Somali birth and  nor  will  they
      eat or intermarry with them.  Their testimony also is  not  applicable
      in a Court of Law because they are 'not Somali'.  Because of them  not
      being able to marry other Tribes they marry between three  tribes  and
      also intermarry, which is  looked  on  with  great  disdain  by  other
      Somalis.  If these three tribes do marry outside  their  "caste"  then
      the  consequences  can  be  catastrophic  and  range  from   acts   of
      persecution to the murder of one or both parties by members  of  their
      families or the Somalian society.' And 'It is  possible  to  see  from
      this brief account of these caste that they are a very persecuted  and
      oppressed group in Somalian society.  Their ultimate fate depends  not
      on their own strength as they are so small and powerless but  that  of
      their neighbouring tribes.  They are periodically killed and abused by
      other clans with no recourse  to  justice  or  retaliation,  which  in
      Somalia puts them in a very disadvantaged position'."


16.   The tenor of these reports is confirmed  by  the  expert  report  from
      Mr Gilkes from whose report dated 9 October 2001 we draw the following
      information relating to the refugee camps occupied by Somalis  and  in
      particular Dulad, which is where the appellant lived.   He  says,  "As
      usual, the women in these camps are particularly vulnerable, and those
      from minority clans more than most.  The majority of the  refugees  in
      these camps are from Somaliland, and while they certainly  do  include
      some members of minority clans, most are  from  major  clan  families,
      Isaaq and Dir, with relative few Daroods and Hawiye  from  the  south.
      With the  political  situation  and  the  clan  alliances  of  Somalia
      replicated in the camps, members  of  minority  clans  and  low  caste
      groups take second place.  They are treated as badly in the  camps  as
      outside, and the low caste groups and  minority  clans,  without  clan
      networks for support, are particularly  vulnerable  to  exploitation."
      He goes on to say, "however, within the  parameters  imposed  by  this
      general state of  lawlessness,  there  is  also  clear  evidence  that
      members of minority clans and low caste groups like the  Midgen,  have
      been, and still are, singled out for specific attention, identified on
      the basis of their membership of a particular social  group,  together
      with a possible element of ethnicity".  We have been referred  to  and
      are assisted by the  Tribunal  determination  in  Mohamud  Osman  Amin
      [2002] UKIAT04084.  In which the Tribunal considered the position of a
      "Jaajii" which, in paragraph 16, is said to be included  in  the  term
      "Midgen"  The Tribunal found, in  paragraph  17,  that  the  appellant
      belonged to a defined and recognised sub-group in Somali  society  who
      could not in general terms  place  any  reliance  on  the  traditional
      infrastructure of clan  support.  Their  vulnerability  needed  to  be
      approached on a case-by-case basis depending on  the  specific  facts,
      although that appellant was found to be at risk in Mogadishu.

17.   We accept  Ms  Cronin's  submission  that  the  situation  which  this
      appellant encountered in the refugee camp is likely to be a  microcosm
      of the situation which she is likely to face in  her  home  area  (now
      Somaliland) and throughout  Somalia.   She  belongs  to  a  vulnerable
      underclass.  It is likely that she was persecuted because she belonged
      to such a vulnerable underclass. It is likely that those who  attacked
      her family and attacked and raped her on two occasions would have been
      well aware that she belonged to the underclass and, as a  result,  she
      was vulnerable, without protection from the normal clan  and  sub-clan
      structure and with nobody of any influence who could take up her cause
      or retaliate.  It is not suggested that she should be  returned  to  a
      refugee camp in Ethiopia.

18.   If  the  appellant  is  returned  to  her  home  area,  which  is  now
      Somaliland, we find that on the  totality  of  her  evidence  and  the
      Country Information she is at risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason and infringement of her Article 3 human rights.

19.   Ms Banwait submits that the appellant could avail herself of  internal
      relocation to Mogadishu  or  Puntland.   We  find  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect her to do so.  If  her  second
      husband and her children are still alive it is likely  that  they  are
      still in the refugee camp where they  were  last  heard  of.   If  the
      appellant is returned to Puntland or Mogadishu she  will  be  a  woman
      without a husband or family support in an area where  she  will  be  a
      stranger, with no means of support or  accommodation.   Moreover,  she
      will be doubly vulnerable, as a member of the Midgen underclass.   The
      Country Information shows that the Midgen in Somalia are spread across
      the country without any recognisable Midgen communities from which she
      might otherwise be able to gain support.

20.   We allow the appellant's appeal on both Refugee Convention  and  human
      rights grounds.






                                                               P  R  Moulden
                                                              Vice President
