

|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX51935-2001      |
|On  3 February 2003        |        |SL (Medical Facilities-PTSD)|
|                           |        |Serbia CG [2002] UKIAT 07178|
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|12 March 2003                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr R Chalkley (Chairman)                                          |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Mrs S I Hewitt                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Sokol Luli                                                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Ms R Dassa, Counsel  instructed  by  Fitzgrahams,  Solicitors,  appeared  on
behalf of the appellant.  Mr I Graham, a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
appeared on behalf of the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant,  a  citizen  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia
      (Serbia) appeals with leave of the Tribunal against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator,  Mr  T  Holder,  promulgated  on  21  August  2002,
      dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  on  16
      March 2001, to direct his removal after refusing asylum.

2.    The grounds of appeal refer to the fact  that  the  Adjudicator  found
      the appellant to be credible and accepted that he was  suffering  from
      post traumatic stress disorder.  They  alleged  that  the  Adjudicator
      erred when dismissing the appellant's Article 3 and Article 8 claim in
      that as a person suffering from  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  he
      would probably not be able to be treated for the same in Serbia due to
      his ethnicity and that the actual return of the  appellant  to  Serbia
      would exacerbate the condition.  It was also claimed that it is highly
      likely that he would have to be  treated  by  a  Serbian  psychiatrist
      which, it  was  alleged,  would  breach  the  appellant's  "moral  and
      physical integrity" and subject him to further degrading and  inhumane
      treatment.  In granting leave, the Vice President said that the  issue
      of the appellant suffering adverse reaction when treated by a  Serbian
      therapist, which  was  dismissed  as  being  too  speculative  by  the
      Adjudicator, may be arguable.

3.    We advised Counsel that we had received  a  fresh  bundle,  which  had
      been delivered late accompanied by a letter of 30 September  from  her
      instructing solicitors.  We handed the bundle to her and told her that
      we would  not  accept  late  submitted  documentation.   The  Tribunal
      pointed out that in any event the essential documents  comprising  the
      medical reports referred to by the Adjudicator  in  his  determination
      appeared to be in a bundle which had been submitted to the Adjudicator
      and which we had read.

4.    Ms Dassa submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have  allowed  the
      appellant's claims under Articles 3 and 8.  The  adverse  effect  that
      return would have on the appellant should have been taken into account
      along with the fact that in  all  likelihood  the  appellant  will  be
      treated by a Serbian doctor and the fact that treatment  was  unlikely
      to be available for him in Serbia.  She referred us in  particular  to
      paragraph 5.27 of the Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit  report,
      which spoke of the  state  of  the  health  service  in  Serbia  being
      paralleled by the deterioration in the health of its population.   The
      mental health of the population was  said  to  have  deteriorated  and
      "massive consumption of bensadine, bromazepam and  diazepam,  suggests
      that one in every two people in Serbia are  reliant  upon  sedatives".
      The Country Information Policy Unit reports did not  suggest  anything
      but a low level of service available to people.  Two  medical  reports
      submitted on behalf of the appellant indicate that he  should  not  be
      returned to Serbia.

5.    Counsel referred us to the report of Dr K K Zakrzewski and the  report
      of Dr Nigel Higson.  In his report, Dr Zakrzewski indicated  that  the
      appellant would initially suffer an elevation of his anxiety on return
      to Serbia and overall distress, which, the doctor felt, should be  met
      with a fairly immediate therapeutic response.  He  indicated  that  it
      was possible that the appellant would  be  able  to  received  similar
      treatment to that recommended in larger cities, for example  Belgrade.
      He suggested also that there  remains  a  strong  possibility  of  the
      appellant reactivating the strong cultural obligation of avenging  the
      death of his family.  In his report, Dr Higson was of the opinion that
      the appellant had suffered long term psychological damage secondary to
      post traumatic stress disorder and would suffer such for  many  years.
      He was of the opinion that the appellant would be at increased risk of
      personal psychological distress and of  committing  injury  to  others
      should he be returned  to  his  native  country.   In  response  to  a
      question from  the  Tribunal,  Counsel  told  us  that  the  treatment
      recommended by Dr Zakrzewski in his report of 28 May last, namely some
      24 to 30 sessions of specialist psychological therapies  and  possibly
      anti-depressant medication had not been commenced.  Counsel  suggested
      that the  appellant  was  deeply  disturbed  and  at  the  moment  was
      unwilling to commence  treatment  given  his  fears  about  return  to
      Serbia.  She told us that he was not in receipt of medication and that
      there were not up-to-date medical reports  available.   The  appellant
      was simply reluctant to attend for any therapy at the moment.

6.    For the respondent Mr Graham pointed out that the  medical  report  of
      last May suggested that the appellant should  receive  medication  and
      treatment.  However, it is clear that the appellant has  not  received
      any medication and has not sought any treatment.

7.    In Mr Graham's view, the appellant was in no worse position than  many
      others in Kosovo.  He has been in the United Kingdom since  2000,  but
      sought no treatment for his severe illness, which has  been  diagnosed
      by two doctors, despite its availability.  The appellant had sought no
      treatment for his illness following his arrival in the United  Kingdom
      in 2000 until he was sent for a medical report in connection with  his
      appeal.  There is no evidence before the Tribunal now that he has  not
      been well enough to receive treatment in the United Kingdom.

8.    As to the appellant's fear of being treated  by  a  Serbian,  this  is
      pure speculation on his part. There must be some doubt as  to  whether
      or not he is in need of any treatment.  He is in employment and  there
      is no evidence to suggest that he has been so ill that  he  could  not
      carry on with his employment.  Mr Graham accepted that the standard of
      medical care available for Serbs might not be as efficient as it is in
      the United Kingdom, but despite this there would clearly be no  breach
      of his human rights.  Finally, he submitted that if the appellant  had
      been as ill as is suggested by the medical reports, he would not  have
      been able to undertake work and yet, according to paragraph 4  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination, he is working.

9.    In her closing submissions to  us,  Ms  Dassa  reminded  us  that  the
      Adjudicator had made positive findings of credibility.  She  asked  us
      to bear in mind that the author of  the  medical  report  recommending
      treatment had spent some three hours with him and it  was  clear  from
      his notes accompanying the report that the examination  was  thorough.
      She confirmed that there was no additional medical evidence  available
      in respect of  the  appellant.   It  was,  however,  likely  that  the
      appellant would have to be treated by a Serb on his return and this in
      itself would cause  him  to  suffer  further  degrading  and  inhumane
      treatment.

10.   We reserved our determination.

11.   The Tribunal have very carefully read the very  detailed  and  careful
      determination of the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator had before him  the
      two medical reports; that prepared by Dr Zakrzewski followed  a  three
      hour consultation  with  the  appellant.   The  author  diagnosed  the
      appellant as suffering from post traumatic stress disorder.  It said,

           "The degree of this disorder is severe and consistent  with  the
           description of traumatic events as above.   Mr  Luli's  PTSD  is
           approximately two and a half years duration  and  has  not  been
           reported and treated so far."

      He suggested treatment, comprising 24 to  30  sessions  of  specialist
      psychological therapies and possibly  treatment  with  anti-depressant
      medication.  He suggested that the prognosis  with  the  treatment  is
      normally good and resolution of most of the symptoms should take place
      within a year.  Some level of distress related to  this  disorder  was
      likely to remain for several years to come.  The report of Dr  Higson,
      which is dated 8 March 2002, expresses the opinion that the  appellant
      is suffering from long term psychological  damage  secondary  to  post
      traumatic stress disorder.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate  how  Dr
      Higson is qualified to make this diagnosis.  However, it has of course
      been confirmed by the psychiatric report prepared  by  Dr  Zakrzewski.
      Dr Higson recommended counselling from a specialist in post  traumatic
      stress disorder.

12.   We have carefully considered the objective material before  us.   This
      included  the  Amnesty  International  2001  report,  the   US   State
      Department report of 2001 (which were both in the appellant's  bundle)
      as well as the more recent Country Information and Policy Unit report.
       The Tribunal noted that a recent UNICEF  report  concluded  that  the
      public health system in Serbia does not meet the minimum needs of  the
      population.  When the new government took  over  in  October  2000  it
      found widespread abuses and misappropriation of  funds  and  described
      the situation  in  the  health  service  as  "critical".   The  report
      suggests that one in every two  people  in  Serbia  are  reliant  upon
      sedatives.  The state of the health service in Serbia is  clearly  not
      as good as it was and not as good as it  is  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      However,  there  clearly  are  health  services  available   for   the
      appellant.

13.   The Tribunal were concerned to note that despite Dr  Higson's  report,
      prepared as long ago as March last  year  that  the  appellant  should
      receive counselling, he has done nothing about seeking treatment.   He
      has subsequently seen a psychiatrist who has confirmed  the  diagnosis
      made by Dr Higson and recommended 24  to  30  sessions  of  specialist
      psychological therapies and possibly also anti-depressant  medication.



14.   It was suggested to us  by  Counsel,  that  the  appellant  is  deeply
      disturbed and unwilling to commence treatment, until  the  uncertainty
      about his immigration status is resolved.  However, she did not adduce
      any  additional  medical  evidence  before  us.   We  note  from   the
      Adjudicator's determination that the appellant is working.   While  it
      might be the case that keeping  himself  occupied  with  work  has  no
      adverse effect on his condition and might well be beneficial, it seems
      to the Tribunal that it  would  have  been  in  the  appellant's  best
      interests to at  least  have  embarked  on  the  course  of  treatment
      prescribed by the psychiatrist.

15.   So far as the appellant receiving therapeutic treatment in  Serbia  is
      concerned, the Adjudicator noted that the psychiatrist was of the view
      that such treatment would probably be available in the  larger  cities
      in Serbia.  We agree with the findings of the Adjudicator in paragraph
      52 of his determination.  We consider the possibility  of  an  adverse
      reaction by the appellant to a possible Serbian therapist treating him
      to be too speculative.  In any event, the appellant has  done  nothing
      to receive treatment in the  United  Kingdom  during  the  past  eight
      months.

16.   Looking at the evidence in the round, we  find  that  the  Adjudicator
      did not err in law in dismissing the appellant's claims under Articles
      3 and 8.  This appeal is dismissed.




                                                                  R Chalkley
                                                              Vice President


