
H-TH07-AB-V1
                                                   Appeal Number: CC33679-01
                                  ES (MDC) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 01807

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on:  26 April 2002                            |                             |
|Dictated: 26 April 2002                       |......31.05.02......         |


                                   Before:


                          Mr P R Moulden - Chairman
                                Mr N Kumar JP
                             Ms S S Ramsumair JP


between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                              Everjoyce SITHOLE



                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.   The
    Respondent is a citizen of Zimbabwe. The Appellant has been given leave
    to appeal the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr A A Wilson)  allowing
    the Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Appellant's  decision  to  give
    directions for her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse
    asylum.

   2. Mr C Trent a Home Office Presenting Officer represented the  Appellant
      Ms A Swaniker of IAS appeared for the Respondent.


   3. The Respondent claimed to fear persecution from the authorities, ZANU-
      PF and the War Veterans because of her husband's involvement with  the
      MDC and her
   4. perceived political opinions by association with  him.   Her  husband,
      who was politically active in Zimbabwe as a member  of  the  MDC,  was
      assaulted and abducted in January 2001.  He has not been  seen  since.
      The Respondent fears that he is dead.  When  her  husband  disappeared
      the Respondent was not in Zimbabwe.  She had  been  working  in  South
      Africa for some time.  She did not have residence rights there.  After
      her husband disappeared she returned to Zimbabwe  where  her  son  had
      been at school.  She found that he was affected by  the  disappearance
      of his father and that individuals had visited his school and  behaved
      in a way which gave rise to fears for his safety.  The boy  recognised
      the individuals who were involved in the abduction of his father.

4.    The Respondent was represented at  the  hearing.   The  Appellant  was
    not.  Inevitably there was no cross-examination of the Respondent.  The
    Adjudicator found that the  Respondent  was  a  credible  witness.   He
    believed her account of events and found that she had  established  not
    only a well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  but
    that her Article 3 human rights would be infringed.

5.    It is common-ground that the Adjudicator erred in his  application  of
    Horvath.  The question of sufficiency of protection does not arise when
    those whose actions are complained of are the authorities themselves or
    those acting with the approval of the authorities.  It  is  clear  that
    the War Veterans in ZANU-PF come within this category.

6.    It is equally  clear  that  the  Adjudicator  wrongly  identified  the
    Respondent and her husband as belonging to a particular  social  group.
    The Respondent does not need to rely on  this  Convention  reason.   If
    there is a Convention reason it is her perceived political opinions.

7.    Both the representatives agreed that this appeal turns on whether  the
    Respondent and her son are at risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason, namely the Respondent's perceived  political  opinions,  or  at
    risk that their  human  rights  will  be  infringed  under  Article  3.
    Paragraph 2(A) of the grounds of appeal raises the issue of whether the
    Respondent, who had lived in South Africa for a number of years,  would
    be perceived as an opposition supporter.  It is submitted that there is
    no reason to suppose that anyone would wish  to  abduct  and  harm  her
    child.  The objective evidence did not  support  the  proposition  that
    ZANU-PF would target the family members of opposition supporters.

8.    It is unfortunate, but all too often the case that the  Appellant  was
    not represented before the Adjudicator.   An  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
    should not be a substitute for proper representation at the first  tier
    of the appeal process.  On the evidence the Adjudicator was entitled to
    conclude that the Respondent was a credible witness and  to  reach  her
    final conclusions.  The  Respondent's  claims  are  in  line  with  the
    Country Information.

9.    Even though the Respondent had been out of the country for  some  time
    when she returned, following the death of her husband, there were clear
    indications of continuing interest in her family by ZANU-PF and the War
    Veterans.   Those who had abducted her husband had visited  the  school
    looking for her son, in circumstances which quite gave  rise  to  valid
    concerns for his safety and, through him, her safety as well.

10.   Ms Swaniker has produced an extract from the Independent newspaper  of
    24 April 2002 which reports that a 53 year old woman  was  beheaded  in
    front of two of her daughters aged 10 and 17 by  supporters  of  Robert
    Mugabe, Zimbabwe's President, because of her suspected backing for  the
    opposition.  The woman, who had  eight  children,  was  decapitated  by
    twenty ruling party militants inside her hut.  She was  killed  because
    she was the mother of an MDC youth activist.  He was killed by  ZANU-PF
    militants days before the June 2000 parliamentary election in Zimbabwe.
     The family discovered his body in a mortuary six months later.

11.   This report indicates that  relatives  are  targeted  because  of  the
    activities of members of the family.  Mr Trent  has  not  produced  any
    Country Information to support the contrary view.

12.   Mr Trent did not seek to argue that the Respondent would  be  safe  in
    any other part of Zimbabwe.  There is no question of internal flight to
    South Africa.  The  evidence  is  that  the  Respondent  would  not  be
    entitled to live there.

13.   We agree with the Adjudicator's main conclusion.  The  Respondent  has
    established both a well-founded fear of persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason and that her human rights  are  likely  to  be  infringed  under
    Article 3.

14.   For these reasons we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.






                                                                 P R MOULDEN
                                                                    CHAIRMAN













