

                                                     Appeal No. HX09799-2002
                                      DG (Journalist-Healthcare) Nepal CG
                             [2002] UKIAT 04284


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                 Date heard:  14 August 2002
                                    Date notified: 18-9-2002................
                                   Before:-

                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                              MRS L H S VERITY
                                MR M L JAMES




                                                               Between


                                      MR DHAN BAHADUR GURUNG


                                                       Appellant

                                                                  and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of  Nepal,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Miss S I Bayne,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision by the respondent to refuse to grant  asylum
notwithstanding a grant  of  exceptional  leave  to  remain  for  a  limited
period. This is a s. 69(3) appeal. Mr D Ideh of Counsel instructed  by  E  J
Winter & Son Solicitors represented the appellant. Mr J Morris appeared  for
the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The appellant had appealed on asylum and human  rights  grounds.  However
at the hearing Mr Ideh conceded that the appeal could not succeed on  asylum
grounds.  We  think  that  was  a  very  sensible  step  on  his  part.  The
adjudicator  gave  sound  reasons  based  squarely  on  the   evidence   for
concluding that the appellant had failed  to  show  that  Maoists  had  ever
seriously threatened him  in  the  course  of  his  work  as  a  journalist.
However, leave had also  been  granted  in  relation  to  the  human  rights
element of his claim and the particular issue of whether  the  drug  Warfrin
was available in Nepal.

4. Certain facts  are  not  in  dispute:  that  the  appellant  had  been  a
journalist by profession, that with financial assistance from his  employers
and his brother he had gone to a hospital in Vellore, India and had a  heart
operation on 4 August 1999. Upon return to  Nepal  he  continued  to  attend
Western Regional Hospital at Pokhara as an outpatient until  May  2000  when
he resumed work, receiving regular blood tests and medication. He  was  then
advised by his medical team at Kathmandu to seek further specialist  medical
advice from abroad and he applied to the British Embassy in Kathmandu for  a
visitor's visa to enable him to obtain the same in the UK. At that  time  he
was employed in a hotel. On arrival in the UK the appellant registered  with
a GP on 18 December 2001 and has been in receipt of medical treatment  since
this date. That treatment includes daily doses of Warfin.

5. There is no dispute either that this case turns on whether the  appellant
can show that return to Nepal would expose him to a real risk  of  treatment
contrary to Article 3 or 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.  We
were referred to the leading case of D v UK (1997) 24  EHRR  423  where  the
European Court of Human Rights accepted that a combination  of  medical  and
social problems in the country of refuge and in the country of origin  could
in certain circumstances give rise to a real risk of treatment  contrary  to
Article 3. Although we were not referred to it, it is also  clear  from  the
cases of Bensaid v UK  [2001]  INLR  325,  that  where  return  would  cause
significant detriment to an appellant's physical and moral integrity  as  an
aspect of his right to respect for private life,  that  could  amount  to  a
disproportionate interference with a claimant's Article 8 rights.

6. The adjudicator did not consider the  appellant  would  face  a  risk  of
treatment contrary to  Article  3.  She  noted  the  letter  from  Tribhuwan
University Teaching Hospital  in  Kathmandu  referred  to  the  need  for  a
possible further operation and concluded it showed that  it  was  access  to
this particular operation that was not possible in Nepal. She saw  a  letter
from the Nepal Ministry of Health dated 9 April  2002  as  confirming  this.
She said at paragraph 73:

      "Whilst I accept that there may be  difficulty  in  obtaining  certain
      drugs in Nepal the evidence shows that  the  appellant  was  receiving
      medication and appropriate monitoring by the Nepali authorities and  I
      do not find that to return  him  there  would  result  in  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment contrary to Article 3...".

7. Mr Ideh adduced with our permission a letter from the  Medical  Board  of
Bir Hospital Development  Committee  recommending  that  the  appellant  was
suffering from rheumatic heart disease and that his  specialist  Dr  Chandra
had recommended that [a] medical check-up cannot be done  inside  Nepal.  It
concluded: "...it is hereby recommended to go to an advanced medical  centre
in abroad for medical check-up and treatment of the said disease".

8. Mr Ideh submitted that it was clear from the Medical  Board  letter  that
doctors in Nepal considered that he needed  treatment  as  well  as  medical
check-up for his condition  abroad.  The  letter  from  his  GP  in  the  UK
established that for his condition it was essential that he receive  regular
does of Warfin. The respondent, he  contended,  had  failed  to  demonstrate
that that drug was available to the appellant in  Nepal.  He  accepted  that
the appellant in the past had been able to receive a substitute  at  private
cost in India, albeit only so  as  to  ensure  an  "erratic,  spasmodic  and
problematic supply". The  adjudicator  had  ignored,  he  argued,  that  the
appellant`s brother had now retired from the Indian  Army  and  returned  to
Nepal and that this source of both funds for treatment  and  medication  had
now come to an end. Too much reliance had been placed on the fact that  when
the appellant arrived in the UK he had with him 21 tablets  upon  which  his
life depended.

9. We find ourselves unable to accept Mr Ideh`s main submissions.

10. In the first place the evidence in this case  does  not  establish  that
the appellant's medical condition is unstable.  We  are  quite  prepared  to
accept that it would become serious if he were not to receive Warfin or  its
equivalent, but the fact remains that so long as he had such  medication  he
is able to live a relatively normal life.

10.  In  the  second  place  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that   the
appellant's doctors in Nepal considered that Warfin  or  an  equivalent  was
unavailable to him there. Whatever the  Medical  Board  meant  by  necessary
"treatment" abroad, they did not state that Warfin  or  its  equivalent  was
unavailable to this appellant in Nepal.  The  letter  from  the  appellant's
specialist at  Tribhuwan University Teaching Hospital  -  Dr  Sunil  Chandra
Jha -  also  made  no  mention  of  the  unavailability  of  Warfin  or  its
equivalent either.  Indeed  he  identified  the  problem  as  the  need  for
"thorough  check-up  in  a  higher  centre  and  possibly  tricuspid   valve
annuloplasty/replacement".  Given  that  Dr  Jha  was  the  appellant's  own
specialist, we find it very surprising, if Warfin  or  its  equivalent  were
indeed unavailable at his hospital, that he should fail to mention  this  as
a  problem.   The  same  could  be  said  of  the  recent  letter  from  the
Cardiologist at Western Regional Hospital who simply mentions the  need  for
his going to a higher centre "for further management and advice in  view  of
a possible need for tricuspid valve repair  and  annuloplasty".  We  observe
that, despite a letter of 15  February  2002  addressed  to  the  Cardiology
Department at Western  District  Hospital  asking  for  confirmation  as  to
whether Warfin was available in  Nepal  for  the  appropriate  treatment  of
cardiology patients and whether Mr Gurung`s cardiological condition  can  be
treated in Nepal, there was no evidence before us of  any  reply  confirming
that Warfin was unavailable.  Indeed,  although  in  the  absence  of  clear
evidence as to whether any correspondence was received in  reply  we  cannot
be certain, it may be that the 9 April 2002  letter  is  all  that  came  in
response to that 15 February letter.

11. In the third place there is no  satisfactory  evidence  from  any  other
independent medical source that Warfin or its equivalent is  unavailable  in
Nepal. We say "no satisfactory evidence" because  we  recognise  that  there
was evidence in the form  of  a  letter  dated  24  July  2002  from  Parbat
Pharmacy dated 24 July 2002 stating that Warfin is not  available  in  Nepal
and acitron cannot easily be brought over from  India  and  that  to  do  so
would in any case be against Nepalese law. There was also  a  letter  of  28
June 2002 from the appellant`s brother stating that he could no  longer  buy
medicine in India for the appellant and  "he cannot  be  helped  in  Nepal".
Neither of these documents was before the adjudicator. We  do  not  consider
that we can place reliance on either. We find it odd that, in  view  of  the
evident efforts to corroborate the claim to the unavailability of Warfin  or
its equivalent  in  Nepal,  no  letter  has  been  produced  from  either  a
medically  qualified  doctor  or  from  a  governing  body  responsible  for
pharmaceutical services in Nepal.  We were not given any explanation  as  to
why Mr Amar Singh of a pharmacy in Pokhara should have been approached.  His
letter does not state his  qualifications  nor  explain  on  what  basis  he
claimed to know what  the  situation  as  regards  Warfin  and  acitron  was
throughout  Nepal.  His  letter  does  not  append  any  official  lists  of
prescribable medicines nor does it discount that Warfin or  acitron  may  be
used within hospitals. As for the letter from the  appellant's  brother,  it
has plainly been written in response to a request by or  on  behalf  of  his
brother to help provide evidence in support of his appeal.

12. In assessing  these  two  items  of  evidence,  we  have  considered  it
relevant that on the appellant's own account his specialist must have  known
he was in receipt of acitron illegally and  that  without  it  his  physical
well being was in jeopardy. That makes doubly strange in our view  that  the
specialist should not specify the need for the appellant  to  go  abroad  in
terms of his need to gain legal access to this drug.

13. So far as other sources of evidence are concerned,  the  appellant's  GP
in the UK noted that she was unable to comment on availability of  treatment
in Nepal. Other sources submitted by Mr Morris  certainly  confirm  that  in
Nepal there is a perpetual shortage of  essential  drugs  and  supplies  and
that cardiac disease has shown a marked rise in Nepal.  These  take  matters
very little further. It remains that no reference  has  been  found  in  the
literature relating to healthcare in Nepal of the non-availability of  drugs
which are essential to the treatment of  a  significant  number  of  cardiac
patients. Given that the numbers of cardiac patients are  rising,  we  would
have expected, were vital drugs made illegal or non-prescribable  in  Nepal,
to have seen concerns expressed by WHO or other international  NGOs  in  the
health field to that effect.

 14. Even assuming we were wrong about the availability  of  Warfin  or  its
equivalent in Nepal, we would still not have allowed  this  appeal.  In  our
view if returned to  Nepal  he  would  have  the  wherewithal  to  ensure  a
continuous supply of Warfin  or  its  equivalent.  On  the  appellant's  own
account he had managed to continue working in Nepal, in the hotel  industry,
even after he developed a serious heart condition. There  is  absolutely  no
evidence before us to show that any doctor in the UK has  found  him  to  he
medically incapable of work. On his  return  to  Nepal,  there  is  no  good
reason to suppose, therefore, that he would not again find employment.  Thus
he would not be prevented by any financial reasons  from  purchasing  Warfin
or its equivalent.

15. Such purchase could be achieved in a number of ways. If he were able  to
get evidence from an authoritative medical  source  in  Nepal  or  elsewhere
that Warfin or its equivalent were not available in Nepal, it is  reasonably
likely his UK doctors would make arrangements for him to be  sent  the  drug
via  a  private  prescription  here.  If  for  some   reason   that   proved
impracticable, he could go himself to Southern India  (as  his  brother  had
done before) to purchase acitron there. We recognise his evidence  was  that
supply via India was spasmodic and uncertain. We also accept that there  has
recently been the declaration of a state of  emergency  in  Nepal,  to  deal
with the Maoist insurgency. However, there is no  evidence  that  Nepal  has
closed its borders with India as part of  this  declaration.  The  objective
country materials fall well short of establishing  that  the  situation  has
become such that any one travelling to India faces a real  risk  of  serious
harm on the way. We note in this regard the approach taken by  the  European
Court of Human Rights to arguments raised in the Bensaid v UK  case  to  the
effect  that  the  civil  war  there  made  receipt  of  adequate  treatment
unlikely. At paragraph 39 the Court said this:

      "The Court finds that the  risk  that  the  applicant  will  suffer  a
      deterioration in his condition if he is returned to Algeria and  that,
      if he did, he would not receive adequate support or care is to a large
      extent speculative. The  arguments  concerning  the  attitude  of  his
      family as devout Muslims, the difficulties of travel to Blida and  the
      effects on his health of  these  factors  are  also  speculative.  The
      information provided by the parties does not indicate that  travel  to
      the hospital is effectively prevented by the situation in the  region.
      The applicant is not himself a likely target  of  terrorist  activity.
      Even if his family does not have a car,  this  does  not  exclude  the
      possibility of other arrangements being made".

16. At paragraph 49, when dealing with the Article 8 issue, the Court said:

      "...the Court recalls that it has found above that the risk of  damage
      to the applicant's health from return to his  country  of  origin  was
      based  largely  on  hypothetical  factors  and   that   it   was   not
      substantiated   that   he   would   suffer   inhuman   and   degrading
      treatment....".

17. Although the facts we have to consider are very different,  we  consider
that the appellant's case  likewise  rested  far  too  much  on  speculative
argument.

18. Even if the appellant did not want to travel to India himself, he  would
have the financial means to employ someone to go and purchase the  necessary
drugs for him. Whether or not  his  brother  was  still  able  to  do  this,
despite retirement, it was not reasonably likely the  appellant  would  find
any shortage of persons willing to take employ as a courier in this way.  It
may be, as the appellant claimed, that to bring the drug acitron into  Nepal
via southern India would involve  an  unlawful  act.  However,  on  his  own
account his brother had been able to do this  without  any  difficulty  from
the Nepalese authorities. There was no evidence before us  that  there  were
any effective fines  or  sanctions  applied  against  those  who  unlawfully
imported drugs of this kind.

19. For the above reasons we do not consider that the appellant's return  to
Nepal would expose him to a real risk of treatment  contrary  to  his  human
rights under Article 3 or Article 8.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




