
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO HX15435-2002      |
|On 23 August 2002          |        |EN (Roma) Macedonia CG      |
|                           |        |[2002] UKIAT 04488          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.30 September 2002                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mrs S Hussain, JP                                                 |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|EFIM NIKOLOV                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr B Tattersall, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Lawson Adefope, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, is a citizen of Macedonia, who was born on  28  July
        1979.  He came to the United Kingdom on  31  May  2001  with  entry
        clearance to undertake seasonal agricultural work.  He was admitted
        for 6 months for that purpose.


     2. On 24 October 2001 he claimed asylum.  The basis of his  claim  was
        twofold.  First, that he had received in his absence from Macedonia
        his call-up papers for military service and  that  he  objected  to
        carrying out that  service  as  a  Christian  because  he  was  not
        prepared to kill people.  Secondly, that he was of  Roma  ethnicity
        and  that  the  Roma  in   Macedonia   were   subject   to   severe
        discrimination.  It is right to say that in his statements it is on
        the military service aspect that he appears  to  have  placed  less
        weight as will become apparent later.

     3. He was interviewed and for the reasons set out in a letter dated 27
        November 2001, his asylum application was refused.  It is important
        to refer to that refusal letter in relation to one matter  at  this
        point.  At paragraph 5 of the  refusal  letter,  the  Secretary  of
        State says as follows:

        "In addition he has also noted or claimed to be of  Roma  ethnicity
        and to have suffered discrimination and harassment because of this.
         The Secretary of State has no reason to doubt your ethnicity."


     4. On 28 November 2001 the Secretary of State issued to the  appellant
        notice of his decisions to refuse to vary leave to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom  after  refusal  of  his  asylum  application.   The
        appellant appealed against the decision on both  asylum  and  human
        rights grounds.  His appeal was heard on 20  May  2002,  by  Mrs  P
        Milligan-Baldwin, an Adjudicator, she dismissed  his  appeal.   The
        appellant now appeals to us with leave against that decision.

     5. There is no question in our minds that  the  determination  of  the
        Adjudicator is unsafe and cannot stand.  There  are  two  essential
        reasons for this.  The first, although she correctly sets  out  the
        standard and burden of  proof  in  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  her
        determination,  when  she  comes  to  deal  with  her  summary   at
        paragraphs 35-38  of  the  determination,  she  says  in  terms  at
        paragraph 37, "I do not believe that  the  appellant  has  met  the
        burden of proof required to satisfy me that there is  a  reasonable
        risk of persecution if he were to return to Macedonia.   I  do  not
        believe on a balance of probabilities that the appellant is at risk
        if returned to that country."  In that paragraph she has  expressed
        both the correct standard of a reasonable risk  and  the  incorrect
        standard  of  the  ordinary  civil  standard  of   a   balance   of
        probabilities.  That inevitably  leads  to  confusion  as  to  what
        standard of proof she has applied in arriving at her  decision  and
        is of itself sufficient for us to strike it  down.   We  hope  that
        this is an error which we shall not see again.

     6. The second reason why the Adjudicator's decision is unsafe, is that
        in the course of the  hearing  at  which  the  respondent  was  not
        represented, the Adjudicator took it upon herself to raise an issue
        as to whether or not the appellant was of Roma ethnicity and indeed
        to question him at some considerable length as to this.  It is well
        settled that where  there  has  been  a  clear  concession  by  the
        Secretary of State relating to status  or  ethnic  origin  that  is
        conclusive in the  proceedings  before  the  Immigration  Appellate
        Authority which are adversarial and not  inquisitorial  in  nature.
        The Adjudicator was undoubtedly in error in law in failing to  take
        into account the clear concession made by the Secretary of State at
        paragraph 5 in his refusal letter and the  passage  which  we  have
        quoted above.  For those two reasons as we say,  the  Adjudicator's
        determination is unsafe and cannot stand.

     7. That is not however, the end of the matter  before  us  because  it
        will avail the appellant little,  if  he  cannot  satisfy  us  that
        taking his account and its highest, he would  be  able  to  succeed
        either  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  under   the   European
        Convention on Human Rights.  To that  end  we  have  received  oral
        submissions from Mr Tattersall today in which he sought to persuade
        us that there is an arguable case on the basis that the appellant's
        claim is taken at its highest.   Taking  it  at  its  highest,  the
        appellant's claim may be summarised as follows.

     8. He was born in Macedonia and is an  ethnic  Roma  and  an  orthodox
        Christian  by  religion.   When  he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
        originally the situation in  Macedonia  was  peaceful  and  he  had
        decided that he would return on 29 November 2000 in conformity with
        his entry clearance.  He did so.  He then again came to the  United
        Kingdom on 31 May 2001 as we  have  already  recited.   He  decided
        thereafter to seek asylum because  of  the  conflict  in  Macedonia
        between the Macedonians of Serb origin and  the  Albanians  who  he
        says were fighting each other.  His upbringing  was  such  that  he
        respected  people  of  nations  and  had   friends   of   different
        nationalities.  He was not prepared  to  undertake  his  compulsory
        military service.  He was aware of the  wars  and  tragedies  which
        took place in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, and on that basis
        formed his views that he  would  not  participate  in  any  similar
        conflict in his own country.  Where he to return  he  would  be  at
        risk of being mobilised and sent to the front lines which would  be
        contrary to his moral  principles  as  he  did  not  wish  to  kill
        anybody.  He would also be liable  to  punishment  for  failing  to
        carry out military service in Macedonia and it was likely  that  he
        would be taken to Court and sent to prison.


     9. Additionally to that he complained that  he  had  been  subject  to
        discrimination by reason of his ethnic origin.   He  said  that  in
        July 1999 he had applied for a place of the University of Sculpture
        in the faculty of forestry which had been refused to him.  Although
        he had later been able to secure a course at the University in  the
        Faculty of Agriculture in the following year.  Having been  granted
        that course however, the authorities were not prepared to grant him
        accommodation at a student centre in Skopje and the result was that
        he had  to  attend  the  course  as  a  distance  learning  student
        travelling the University only when he had  to  take  examinations.
        He complained that he had been subject  to  discrimination  in  his
        secondary school as well as at University and that ethnic Roma were
        looked upon as a lower class who lived in a separate  part  of  the
        town which he came from.  He said there were a number  of  physical
        attacks against ethnic Roma in his town and  the  police  were  not
        ready to protect them because they were Roma, so that  many  people
        have had to declare  themselves  as  ethnic  Macedonians  to  avoid
        discrimination and maltreatment.


    10. He had in his interview record  complained  that  he  had  received
        abuse and some physical aggression from four particular  youths  in
        his home town and that this problem had  started  on  evening  when
        they were quite drunk.  He said his brother  had  similar  problems
        with the same four people and that they started some  three  months
        before he came to the United Kingdom.  He had asked the  police  to
        help on two occasions , but the police only spoke to the group  and
        told them not to make any more problems.  They had not taken  other
        action against them.  That is in summary of the basis on which  the
        appellant seeks to be recognised as a refugee  or  that  his  human
        rights would be breached if he were now returned.

    11. So far as the claim in relation to military service  is  concerned,
        we are quite satisfied that he cannot succeed in this respect.   It
        is a matter which was considered at some  length  by  the  Tribunal
        earlier this year in the case of Demi*** 2002 UKIAT 00731 which has
        been produced to both advocates prior to the hearing so  that  they
        could acquaint themselves with it.  It is clear that this appellant
        would be subject to the military law applicable in Macedonia  since
        1 June 2001 since he says that his call-up papers were not received
        until after he came to this country.   The  new  laws  provide  for
        alternatives to military service if that is a matter of  conscience
        which would prevent the bearing of  arms  and  there  is  therefore
        already within  the  Macedonian  law  provision  for  conscientious
        objectors even if the appellant could have brought himself  in  any
        way within the exception identified by Lord  Justice  Laws  in  his
        judgment in Sepet and Bulbul v SSHD 2001 EWCA Civ 681.  Although on
        the facts, there being no current state of conflict in Macedonia or
        any suggestion that he would be exposed to penalties which would be
        so severe as to be persecutory, it does not appear to us  that  the
        appellant could in any event bring  himself  within  any  of  those
        exceptions on the facts.  Even, were it the case however,  that  he
        had put himself in the position where he might be  sentenced  to  a
        term of  imprisonment.   Demit***  is  authority  for  the  general
        proposition that the provisions for  imprisonment  for  failure  to
        carry out national service in Macedonia are  not  such  as  can  be
        regarded as  persecutory  in  nature,  and  that  having  carefully
        reviewed all the evidence as to prison conditions in  that  country
        there was no evidential basis on which it could be said that  being
        sentenced  to  imprisonment  in  Macedonia  would  lead  to   being
        subjected to any treatment or conditions which would be  in  breach
        of Article 3 of  the  European  Convention.   The  matter  was  not
        pressed further  before  us  by  Mr  Tattersall  in  the  light  of
        Demit**** as he accepted that he had no evidence beyond that  which
        had already been considered fully by the Tribunal in that decision.

    12.  So  far  as  the  question  of  fear  of  treatment  amounting  to
        persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 for reasons of  his
        Roma ethnicity is concerned, it was in broad terms, Mr Tattersall's
        submission to us, that looked at in the  round,  the  situation  of
        Roma in Macedonia was such that they were subject to discrimination
        to such a degree that it tipped over the scales into persecution as
        understood for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention.   It  that
        were right of course, it would equally be that it would reviewed as
        treatment contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention.

    13. Mr Tattersall referred us to a number of country reports in support
        of this submission, but accepted that there was in fact very little
        evidence to support so broad a proposition as he put before  us  as
        to the situation of Roma generally.  It is perhaps  best  expressed
        in the neutral report before us from the US Department of State for
        the year 2001 at page 17 and 18 in the following terms:

        "According to the 1994 Census, Roma comprised 2% of the  population
        but Romany leaders claimed that the actual number of Roma  is  much
        higher.  There were credible reports of occasional police  violence
        and harassment against Roma.  Roma rights organisations accused the
        police of reinforcing patterns of  discrimination  by  consistently
        siding with ethnic Macedonian citizens in disputes  involving  Rom.
        Optional Romany language education  has  been  offered  at  several
        primary schools since 1996 but there has been limited demand and no
        pressure for more  extensive  curriculum.   There  is  some  Romani
        language broadcasting.  There were incidents of  societal  violence
        against Roma during the year.  In  1999  approximately  6,000  Roma
        fled Kosovo and took up residence in the  country  in  response  to
        both the Kosovo conflict  and  the  hostility  of  ethnic  Albanian
        Kosovars who widely considered the Roma to have supported the Serbs
        and to  have  committed  theft  and  other  crimes  against  ethnic
        Albanians during the crisis.  The presence of these Romany  refugee
        was not popular among  Macedonia's  ethnic  Albanians  who  largely
        shared the view of the Albanian Kosovars concerning both  Roma  and
        Serbs.  Ethnic Macedonians also expressed  irritation  of  the  new
        arrivals  many  of  whom,  settled  in  Skopje  and  some  of  them
        frequently frequented busy traffic into sections to beg, wash  cars
        windows or sell small items.  The Roma tend to  occupy  the  lowest
        economic position of society and the  new  arrivals  added  to  the
        number of Roma in the ranks of the very poor."


    14. We do not think that we are doing any injustice to Mr  Tattersall's
        submissions in saying that those passages probably put  it  at  its
        highest such evidence as there was before us  in  relation  to  the
        treatment of Roma in Macedonia.  We do not in that  stage  overlook
        the  fact  that  he  also  spoke  of  the  difficulty  of  Roma  in
        educational and work situations but, as he accepted, those  matters
        are level three rights according to the classification by Professor
        Hathaway in the law of refugee status and are of extremely  limited
        effect since educational rights internationally are  restricted  to
        those applying to primary education and it is accepted  that  there
        is no right to employment as such and that it would be necessary to
        show a clear discrimination on  the  part  of  the  authorities  in
        refusing support to the  Roma  in  Macedonia  who  are  unemployed.
        There has been no suggestion that there is any such  evidence  that
        can be brought before us.  Indeed, in the case of the appellant his
        father has his own land  which  he  deals  and  his  mother  is  in
        employment according to the evidence.  He, himself, of course,  has
        had the advantage of receiving an education to  higher  educational
        standards including University attendance.

    15. Turning to the question of the fear of non state actors upon  which
        Mr Tattersall placed greater reliance in  his  submissions  to  us,
        there is again really very little evidence to support this.  It  is
        interesting that in the passage from the  State  Department  Report
        which have quoted, the level of incidents of societal violence  are
        particularly associated with influx of Roma refugees  from  Kosovo.
        That was a temporary matter which had  now  largely  been  resolved
        but, it is hardly unusual to expect that a large influx of  refugee
        in a comparatively small country concentrated in one area may  lead
        to some societal disturbance.  What is clear from a general reading
        of all the material relating to Macedonia is that there is  general
        international praise for the way in which Macedonia coped with this
        particular problem and the even handed way in which  they  deal  in
        general terms with their ethnic minorities.  It  is  perhaps,  only
        fair  to  say,  that  this  particular  appellant's  treatment   in
        education might be regarded as a good example  of  such  a  general
        governmental attitude.

    16. So far as the question of their being protection against at  random
        attacks is concerned, there is first no evidence that  there  is  a
        general danger for the Roma of such attacks  in  the  same  way  as
        unfortunately  applies  in  many  other  European  countries   from
        skinheads.  That is a matter which does not figure anywhere in  any
        of the background evidence to which we have been  referred.   There
        is a functioning criminal system in Macedonia and a  Court  system.
        It may not function at the highest of  possible  levels,  but  that
        does not detract from the fact that there is  in  general  terms  a
        functioning criminal system.   There  is  some  evidence  that  the
        police on occasions do not do as much as they might to assist  Roma
        complainants.  But, that is, highly  anecdotal  and  almost  wholly
        derived from the very organisations which are  concerned  with  the
        promotion of Roma rights.  What seems to us to be more pertinent in
        relation to the situation of Roma in society is what is said by the
        Secretary of State in his refusal letter which was not in  any  way
        challenged before us.  He says this at paragraph 9 of  the  refusal
        letter:

        "In addition,  he is aware that the constitution  provides  freedom
        of association and that  the  government  generally  respects  this
        right  in  practice.   Political  parties  and  organisations   are
        required to register  with  the  Court.   More  than  40  political
        parties  are  registered  including  ethnically  based  parties  of
        Albanians, Turks, Serbs and Roma.  Moreover,  the  Roma  party  has
        members  in  the  parliament.   The  Ruling  government   coalition
        includes one of the two major ethnic Albanian parties  as  well  as
        the Romani party."


        He goes on at paragraph 10 as follows:


        "The Secretary of State accepts in common with other  countries  in
        the region popular feeling against Roma does exist in Macedonia and
        they do encounter discrimination from  elements  within  Macedonian
        society.  Although he is aware that  the  police  have  not  always
        intervened often or as effectively as they should, the Secretary of
        State satisfied that there is no evidence  that  this  attitude  is
        endemic or condoned by the authorities generally.  In the light  of
        this he remains of the opinion that it would not be established  or
        life would be at risk if he were now to return  to  Macedonia.   He
        does not accept you have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
        Macedonia for a Convention reason."


    17. That seems  to  us  to  be  a  fair  summary  taking  into  account
        particularly the extensive knowledge that this Tribunal has of  the
        practice in other countries in Europe and the high threshold  which
        it is necessary to reach before discrimination although  unpleasant
        for those who are the subject of it will be construed as  amounting
        to persecution.  With all respect to Mr Tattersall's  arguments  he
        does not get near persuading us that a  such  situation  exists  in
        Macedonia  either  in  general  terms  or  for  this  appellant  in
        particular.

    18. For the above reasons, we are satisfied that taking the evidence at
        its highest the appellant cannot succeed in his claims  before  us.
        For these reasons it is therefore appropriate that this  appeal  be
        now dismissed.





                                                   J Barnes
                                                   Vice President







