

                                                     Appeal No. HX19630-2002
                          AA (Risk-Geledi-Benadiri Clan) Somalia CG [2002]
                                 UKIAT05720


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                           Date heard:  12 November     2002
                                                    Date notified:11/12/2002
                                   Before:-

                           DR H H STOREY (Chair))
                                 MR K DRABU
                                MR A A LLOYD




                                                               Between


                                    MR ABDULLAHI MOHAMED ALI


                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Somalia, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,   Miss   J   Grimmett,
dismissing the appeal against the decision by  the  respondent  refusing  to
grant asylum albeit granting limited  leave  until  February  2003.  Miss  R
Chapman of Counsel instructed by Wilson  &  Co  Solicitors  represented  the
appellant. Mr P Deller appeared for the  respondent.  This  is  a  s.69  (3)
appeal.


2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal.

3. The adjudicator accepted that the appellant was a member  of  the  Geledi
clan. However  she  dismissed  the  appeal  firstly,  because  she  did  not
consider that the Geledi are considered to be a sub-group of  the  Benadiri;
and secondly, even if considered to be Benadiri,  the  latest  CIPU  reports
said that persecution solely on the basis of clan  membership  is  now  very
unlikely in most areas of Somalia.

4. Miss Chapman urged the Tribunal to find, particularly  in  the  light  of
the further letter from Dr Lulling, an expert on southern Somalia,  that  it
was clear the appellant would be perceived as a member of  a  minority  clan
whose position was  extremely  vulnerable.  Mr  Deller  contended  that  the
adjudicator's finding - that the appellant as a member of  the  Geledi  clan
would not be perceived as belonging to the Benadiri -  was  sustainable.  He
did not seek to defend the adjudicator`s second principal finding.  He  said
that flaws in the determination otherwise would merit a remittal,  but  that
the appeal should not be allowed in full.

5. We would first of all state that we continue to take the view adopted  by
the Tribunal in previous cases (such as Sabriye [2002] UKIAT  02264,  Ebyain
[2002] UKIAT 02543,  Abdi  [2002]  UKIAT  02927  and  Hussain  [2002]  UKIAT
02545))  that  members  of  the  Benadiri  clan  remain  at  real  risk   of
persecution. Insofar as  the  adjudicator  took  into  account  Home  Office
policy on the matter, she appears to have wrongly  understood  the  previous
policy position on the Benadiri to have changed: as Mr Deller confirmed,  it
has not. Insofar as the adjudicator viewed  the  latest  CIPU  materials  to
negate the view that in parts of Somalia persecution on the  basis  of  clan
membership persists, we consider she  was  wrong.  It  is  true  that  these
materials do indicate that the position is different in  different  regions:
thus at paragraph 4.7 of the April 2002 Assessment it is stated  that  there
is no general clan-based persecution in Somaliland. However, in relation  to
certain other areas including those with which  we  are  concerned  in  this
case, these materials  are  more  cautious:  see  e.g.  4.17  and  4.25.  An
additional  Home  Office  document  still  in  use  states  that:   "It   is
acknowledged that the Benadiri suffered persecution on the  basis  of  their
ethnicity and that they cannot return to Somalia". The US  State  Department
profile of Somali  asylum  claims  describes  the  Benadiri  as  "especially
vulnerable to attack". Amnesty  International  takes  a  similar  view.   In
addition the adjudicator had before her the Joint British, Danish and  Dutch
fact-finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya of September 2000 which continued  to
see the Benadiri as at risk of serious human rights abuses.

6. Hence the appellant is entitled to succeed in his  asylum  appeal  if  he
can establish that he is part of or would be perceived by outsiders as  part
of the Benadiri clan.

7. The appellant says he would be perceived as part  of  the  Benadiri  clan
because he is a member of the Geledi clan who are allied with  the  Benadiri
and treated as Benadiri. As already noted, however, the adjudicator did  not
think the evidence on this  matter  was  conclusive:  she  described  it  as
"conflicting" and "contradictory".

8. Whilst as already intimated we would  agree  that  the  evidence  is  not
monolithic, we are satisfied that it does sufficiently  establish  that  the
Geledi would be treated as part of the Benadiri  clan.  In  this  regard  we
consider the following to be salient factors.

9. Firstly, membership of the Benadiri clan does not put as much  weight  on
genealogical descent  as  do  the  Somali  clans.  One  expert,  Perouse  de
Montclos, has commented that the name Benadiri does not  correspond  to  any
well defined sociological reality. Hence  it  designates  those  groups  not
from any of the Somali clans who  form  the  coastal  population  of  Somali
roughly between Mogadishu and Kismayo, who share an urban  culture  and  who
are of mixed origin separate from the major Somali clans.

10. Secondly, although it is true  that  in  some  sources  the  Geledi  are
grouped as members of the Benadiri  clan  and  in  other  sources  they  are
grouped with  the  Digil  clan,  that  difference  has  been  satisfactorily
explained by Dr Luling in the following terms:

      "The Geledi consist of a number  of  lineage  groups,  some  of  which
      descend from groups [groups emigrating from different regions  in  the
      Arabian peninsula, those settling  during  the  16th  century  in  the
      inland trading settlements such as Afgoye and the nearby  Awdhegle  on
      the Sheblee river, in particular] who  are  'light-skinned'  and  thus
      Benadiri, while others are 'dark-skinned'.  The  main  'light-skinned'
      lineages are the Odoweyne and the Qurabane. However outsiders such  as
      the Habar Gidir tend to lump all the Geledi together and consider them
      all to be Benadiri (and hence peculiar, contemptible  and  not  proper
      Somali)..."

11. We should further  note  at  this  point  that  in  a  subsequent  short
clarificatory letter of August 5, 2002, Dr Luling has written:

      "I  believe  that  the  Geledi  clan,  living  mainly  in  Afgoye  and
      Mogadishu, are still at risk of persecution at the present time....  I
      believe that the Geledi are particularly vulnerable".

12. Mr Deller appears to extract  from  Dr  Luling`s  observations  that  it
would be possible to distinguish between Geledi and Benadiri  on  the  basis
of their skin colour or perhaps or to  distinguish  between  some  different
types of Geledi. However, it seems to us plain that  Dr  Luling`s  principal
point is that those outside the Geledi`s own area consider them as  Benadiri
and react to them in the same way as they do to Benadiri. We have  not  been
made aware of any evidence which casts doubt on Dr Luling`s evaluation  and,
in the absence of such evidence, we are not disposed to reject  or  minimise
it.

13. Fourthly, insofar as the evidence concerning the Geledi`s  linkage  with
the Digil clan is concerned, we would observe, as Dr Luling points  out,  in
her July 2002 report that the Geledi appear, under  Afgoye  [a  region],  in
the list of clans accepted by the Home Office as belonging to  the  Benadiri
minority. Hence, insofar as region is a criterion of identity, the  evidence
points to  members  of  the  Geledi  as  being  primarily  linked  with  the
Benadiri.

14. Fifthly, even assuming that  certain  Geledi  from  regions  other  than
Afgoye would not for some reason be identified with the Benadiri, it is  not
in dispute that this appellant was from Afgoye.

15. Sixthly, we do not think that the adjudicator  was  right  to  place  as
much reliance as she did  on  an  extract  from  the  September  2001  joint
British, Danish and Dutch fact finding mission which does  not  mention  the
Geledi amongst the Benadiri sub groups although  it  is  accepted  that  the
elders it had spoken to might not know  the  subgroups.  Not  only  did  the
elders spoken to make clear they did not know all the sub groups,  but  that
mission's report was based on a meeting in Nairobi  with  elders  from  only
three groups of Benadiri. The report noted that it was satisfied that  there
were "many more  sub-groups  than  the  ones  mentioned  by  the  elders  in
Nairobi".

16. Given our satisfaction that  (i)  the  appellant  is  a  member  of  the
Geledi, (b) that the Geledi are  perceived  by  outsiders  as  part  of  the
Benadiri clan and (iii) members of the Benadari  clan  continue  to  face  a
real risk of persecution on account of their race,  we  consider  that  this
appeal should be allowed.

17. In view of our finding that the appellant would be viewed  as  a  member
of  the  Benadiri  we  do  not  consider  we  need  address  Miss  Chapman's
alternative submission which was that the Geledi, even  if  considered  only
as member of the Digil clan, would still face a real risk of persecution  on
the objective evidence.

18. For the above reasons this appeal is allowed.


                             DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




