

|Heard at Field House       |  |MS & others (Risk on Return-       |
|                           |  |Depleted Uranium) Kosovo CG [2003] |
|                           |  |UKIAT 00031                        |
|                           |  |                                   |
|                           |  |                                   |
|                           |  |                                   |
|                           |  |                                   |
|                           |  |                                   |
|On 11 October 2002         |  |                                   |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21/07/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                    |  |                                   |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)                              |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |  |Appellants                         |
|                           |  |                                   |
|And                                                               |
|                           |  |                                   |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |  |Respondent                         |


Appearances:
|For the Secretary of State  |Miss L Giovanetti, Counsel instructed|
|:                           |by the Treasury Solicitor.           |
|For the Appellants       :  |Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by   |
|                            |the appellants' solicitors.          |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decisions of
   Adjudicators who dismissed their appeals against refusal of asylum and
   the setting of removal directions.

2. In each case, the core issue now relied upon by the appellants is the
   purported risk on return from depleted uranium munitions used during the
   Kosovo conflict.  These cases have been identified for combined hearing
   with a view to providing guidance in relation to the depleted uranium
   risk in Kosovo for asylum claimants who are to be returned now.

3. The Tribunal has the benefit of a detailed combined skeleton argument by
   Mr Lewis, and a reply prepared by Miss Giovanetti.  We have been provided
   with a map prepared by UNEP (United Nations Environmental Programme)
   showing the sites identified as being targeted by ordnance containing
   depleted uranium during the 1999 Kosovo conflict.

4. We also had the benefit of an expert report by Mr Christopher Busby,
   from whom we heard oral evidence, and another from Professor Hooper, who
   was not called.  Dr Busby and Professor Hooper have worked on the
   gathering and analysis of samples from the UNEP-identified sites, to
   establish whether depleted uranium constitutes a risk factor, though
   their evidence naturally relates to a period closer to its use during the
   1999 conflict.

5. In addition, the Tribunal identified and supplied to the parties a copy
   of an Information Paper on Depleted Uranium Environmental and Medical
   Surveillance in the Balkans by Dr J Jarrett Clinton, Special Assistant to
   the Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness) for Gulf War
   Illnesses, Medical Readiness and Military Deployments for the Department
   of Defense (the Department of Defense report).  This document is
   mentioned both in the Secretary of State's reply to directions, and in Mr
   Busby's report, but had not been provided to us by the parties.

6. With the exception of a marriage issue, which arises in the appeal of Mr
   FZ, all of the appeals raise similar issues and they were listed together
   with the intention of giving guidance on the specific issue of the risk
   on return from depleted uranium munitions in different areas of Kosovo.
   Mr MS comes from Mitrovice;   Mr FZ from a village in the west of Kosovo;
    Mr EH and Mr S D from towns near Gjakova, and  Mr MM from Prizren.

7. None of these appellants relied upon depleted uranium risk when claiming
   asylum initially.  They do not rely on a threatened breach of Article 3
   of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950.
    They do however, claim that return threatens to breach their Article 8
   rights (family and private life, including physical and moral integrity),
   and they put that claim in three ways -

           i) in the case of FZ, that since his British wife has suffered a
              miscarriage previously, it would breach her family and
              private life rights to expect her to return to an area where
              depleted uranium ordnance raised the risk of spontaneous
              abortion; and generally

          ii) that the Secretary of State is under a duty of continuing
              disclosure of all and any evidence available to him to
              establish where in Kosovo there is a risk from depleted
              uranium, and that absent such disclosure, the anxiety and
              fear which the lack of knowledge generates would breach
              Article 8 if the appellants were to be returned; and

         iii) that the risk in the appellants' home areas from depleted
              uranium residue is sufficient to engage Article 8.

8. The scientific evidence is in its early stages, as the use of depleted
   uranium to improve the penetrative capacity of military ordnance is a
   recent innovation.  The following is a summary of matters set out in the
   Department of Defense report.  We all breathe in and consume in food and
   water small quantities of natural uranium on a daily basis.  Natural
   uranium is more radioactive than depleted uranium.  Depleted uranium is
   1.7 times denser than lead and is a by-product of the process by which
   natural uranium is enriched to produce reactor fuel and nuclear weapons
   components.  It is 40% less radioactive than natural uranium, and a
   depleted uranium round becomes sharper as it penetrates armour.

9. Exposure to depleted uranium, as to natural uranium, occurs primarily
   through inhalation, ingestion, and to a lesser degree, external
   irradiation.  The depleted uranium rounds leave depleted uranium oxides
   in the form of a very fine dust, and this mostly settles close to the
   impact site.  The rest is rapidly diluted and dispersed by the effect of
   wind and weather.

10. In 1999, US A-10 aircraft fired depleted uranium munitions (about
   31,000 rounds) containing 10.2 tons of depleted uranium, at 85 locations
   in Kosovo.  Since then, many nations who deployed military personnel to
   the Balkans have tested the areas their troops occupied for depleted
   uranium contamination to assess the health risks.  In addition, several
   international organisations have researched depleted uranium and tested
   the Balkans environment to determine levels of contamination and evaluate
   all routes of exposure (ways for depleted uranium to get into the body
   from the environment).  Depleted uranium oxide dust is very fine, and can
   be inhaled by anyone nearby at the time of impact, or resuspended and
   inhaled later.

11. While breathing or ingesting very large doses of either natural or
   depleted uranium could cause kidney problems or damage lung tissue, these
   problems have not been found in medical follow-up of Gulf War veterans
   with the highest depleted uranium exposure (those whose armoured vehicles
   were struck by depleted uranium rounds).

12. At least 13 countries have monitored soil, air water, vegetation and
   food samples in the Balkans, including Belgium, Bulgaria, France,
   Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland,
   the United Kingdom, and the United States.  All the programmes were to
   monitor combatants or military personnel involved in peacekeeping.  The
   researchers found small amounts of depleted uranium within one metre of
   the impact sites, and mostly only in the impact hole.  UNEP found no
   contamination of the water, milk, or buildings in Kosovo in autumn 2000.



13. WHO in their March 12 2001 report concluded that there was no
   convincing evidence of depleted uranium affecting the health of the
   Kosovo population, who had been in Kosovo throughout the war.  They
   concluded that 'for the general population, neither civilian or military
   use of depleted uranium is likely to produce exposures to depleted
   uranium much above normal background levels' for natural uranium.  A
   report issued by the European Commission found that radiological exposure
   to depleted uranium did not result in a detectable effect on human
   health, and that a cumulative dose from contaminated drinking water,
   soil, or the food chain, would still produce very low resulting doses,
   which would be observed first in renal toxicity before any other damage,
   including cancer.

14. The overall conclusion is that only under the most extreme
   circumstances, such as presence in a vehicle struck by a depleted uranium
   penetrator, could adverse medical consequences be possible.  There was no
   widespread depleted uranium contamination and no detectable impact on the
   health of the general population or deployed military personnel.  None of
   this evidence assists with the risk to those who were absent from Kosovo
   during the conflict and would be returning four years after the event,
   but we considered that it was likely that risk would be even lower.

15. The appellants rely on evidence prepared in respect of Italian
   peacekeeping forces who went to the areas where the ordnance had been
   used, about ten months after the end of the war, and on research by Dr
   Christopher Busby (working with Professor Hooper) which seeks to
   establish a continuing risk.  Professor Hooper was not called.  We have
   heard oral evidence from Dr Busby.

Preliminary issue

16. Mr Lewis raised a preliminary issue as to whether the Secretary of
   State had complied with a direction by Mr O'Brien Quinn that he should
   produce for the Tribunal and the appellants all documents in his
   possession relating to the risks to the civilian population of Kosovo
   arising from the use of depleted uranium.

17. In January 2002, in response to that direction, the Secretary of State
   served a paper by a Mr Nick Swift, country officer for Kosovo, dated 19
   November 2001.  That document relies upon and summarises an information
   paper by the U S Department of Defense published on 25 October 2001,
   containing 'a summary of reports from countries and international
   organisations performing environmental assessments in the Balkans and
   medical surveillance on Balkan veterans'.  It quotes from the UN
   Secretary-General's report on UNMIK, presented to the Security Council on
   13 March 2001, and indicates that the Secretary of State is seeking to
   obtain further details of the measures taken by UNMIK in relation to
   depleted uranium since March 2001.

18. Between January 2002 and just before the hearing on 11 October 2002,
   none of the appellants' representatives suggested that the Secretary of
   State's discovery was inadequate or non-compliant.  Mr Lewis' application
   was that these appeals should be allowed because of breach of direction.



19. The Tribunal considered that the Secretary of State had complied with
   Mr O'Brien Quinn's direction, to the extent already set out, as long ago
   as January 2002.  It would not permit Mr Lewis now, as late as October
   2002, to embark upon a fishing expedition, which was not supported by
   relevant authority, nor to allege that the disclosure given was non-
   compliant when there had been no earlier suggestion that there was any
   defect in the Secretary of State's discovery in response to Mr O'Brien
   Quinn's direction.  There was no general duty on the Secretary of State
   to assist the appellant to prove his case; to the lower standard
   applicable for this Convention, the burden of proof remained with the
   appellants.

Proposed duty on Secretary of State to investigate and disclose material
not in the public domain and not relied upon by him

20. Mr Lewis confirmed that in none of the present appeals had depleted
   uranium been a basis of claim for any individual appellant before removal
   directions were set.  There was no material regarding depleted uranium
   before the Secretary of State when he made the decisions to remove these
   appellants.  The appellants relied upon the very short time limits on the
   accelerated procedure at the material time on manifestly unfounded cases
   (two days for notice of application, hearing within three days, appeal
   hearing within seven days) as reasons for not arguing depleted uranium at
   that stage.

21. The Tribunal pointed out that in the case of Mr MS, due to Home Office
   delays, the appellant had actually had years, not days, to prepare his
   arguments.  Further, in a House of Lords decision based specifically on
   the accelerated procedure Abdi and Gawe v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department and Special Adjudicators (1996) Imm A R 288 at p305, Lord
   Justice Mustill in the lead decision said this -

      "So I am not persuaded that justice requires that the Secretary of
      State should give discovery in asylum appeals, even if it were
      possible (which it is not) to reconcile such an obligation with the
      express provisions of the 1993 rules.  Indeed I find much force in Mr
      Pannick's argument that if the Courts were to supplement the rules by
      imposing some such obligation on the Secretary of State, there would
      be a risk of frustrating the evident legislative purpose that 'without
      foundation' appeals should be considered with all due speed.  This was
      the view expressed by Neill LJ and Peter Gibson LJ in their carefully
      reasoned judgments in the Court of Appeal.  It is sufficient to say
      that I agree with their reasoning."

22. That decision binds this Tribunal.  Accordingly, there was no duty on
   the Secretary of State to embark upon an investigation to identify
   evidence not in his hands for the preparation of his country reports, in
   order to assist these appellants in making their cases.

23. The present application goes further and posits a duty to search for
   additional information not in the public domain but available to
   Governments and which had not formed part of the Secretary of State's
   decision to refuse leave to remain.  Mr Lewis could not identify any
   particular documents which should have been disclosed, or references in
   the disclosed material to documents which should have been disclosed.
   The duty imposed on the Secretary of State would be unacceptably wide and
   extremely onerous.

24. Mr Lewis' final argument on the investigation point was that the
   Tribunal should have regard to paragraph 196 of the UNHCR Handbook on the
   Determination of Refugee Status, which sets out the shared duty in asylum
   appeals between the examiner and the appellant to try to establish the
   facts.  That argument also cannot succeed, for two reasons.  First, as
   already explained, since these appellants did not put the depleted
   uranium argument at first instance, the Secretary of State had no
   opportunity to examine the depleted uranium question before reaching his
   decision on the appellants' appeals.  The appellants, in seeking to rely
   on the paragraph 196 shared duty, have not discharged their part of the
   duty.

25. Second, the Handbook constitutes guidance for the determination of
   refugee status, and is not strictly relevant to questions of human rights
   arising under the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
   Freedoms 1950.  That convention predates the Geneva Convention relating
   to the Status of Refugees 1951 and its protocols by one year.  The
   Tribunal is satisfied that had the Handbook intended to deal with both
   Conventions, it would have said so.

26. We are not prepared to find that the Secretary of State is obliged to
   seek out and disclose material upon which he has not relied, and which is
   not in his knowledge.

Proposed duty of disclosure of physical risks within the knowledge of
Secretary of State and Article 8

27. We then turned to the argument that return to Kosovo without full
   disclosure of physical risks known to the Secretary of State would breach
   the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950.
   Mr Lewis accepted that he would be in difficulty if he had to rely on
   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
   Freedoms 1950; this argument turned on Article 8 in the sense of physical
   and moral integrity.

28. Mr Lewis argued that there was an overriding requirement of fairness.
   The report of the Secretary of State was biased and incomplete.  He took
   the Tribunal to the decision of the Court of Appeal on appeal from the
   Divisional Court, in Thirukumar (1989) Imm A R 402, at 414.

29. Thirukumar deals with the general requirement for fairness in asylum
   cases as between the Secretary of State and the appellant, in that the
   mind of the appellant must be directed to any consideration which would,
   as matters stood, defeat his application.  He must be reminded of, or
   preferably shown, his answers in earlier interviews if the Court or
   Counsel will rely on them.  Lord Donaldson, MR specifically indicated
   that -

      "I am not intending to make any general statement about natural
      justice or procedural propriety but simply to indicate what, in the
      peculiar circumstances of cases such as these, fairness seems to me to
      require.'

30. The Thirukumar decision is specific to its own particular circumstances
   and will not bear the interpretation which Mr Lewis sought to put upon
   it.  It is authority only for appellants being reminded of their answers
   at earlier interviews.  Mr Lewis further argued that the Secretary of
   State for the Home Department was in an unique position as he had access
   to sources not available to appellants such as other Government
   Departments, diplomatic sources, and other Governments.

31. Mr Lewis also relied on the minority judgment of Steyn LJ in Secretary
   of State for the Home Department v Abdi and Gawe (1994) Imm A R 402.
   Dealing with a duty of disclosure posited by Sedley J in the decision
   under appeal, Steyn LJ held that the proposed duty did not frustrate the
   aim of the legislation or impose an impossible burden on the Secretary of
   State.  Although the argument in this respect is potentially relevant to
   the argument now put forward, we bear in mind that the observations of
   Steyn LJ are not the view of the majority of the Court.  The majority
   view was that there was no obligation on the Secretary of State to
   provide to the parties and the Adjudicator all the information on which
   he had relied.  Accordingly, this element of the appellants' claim also
   fails.

The risk from depleted uranium in Kosovo today

32. We then turn to the actual risk to these appellants from depleted
   uranium on return to Kosovo today.  It is to this part of the claims that
   Professor Hooper's and Dr Busby's evidence was relevant.  In all cases in
   this combined appeal, the return would be to Pristina, not elsewhere in
   Kosovo.  The question then is whether in Pristina, or perhaps in the
   appellants' home areas (this is a matter to which we will return later)
   there is any present risk from spent depleted uranium munitions at a
   level which would engage Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
   Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950.

33. Mr Lewis argued, following Lopez Ostra v Spain (1994) 20 EHRR 277, that
   significant environmental damage can engage Article 8.  In that case,
   Spain, which was a party to the Convention, exposed the individual to
   severe environmental pollution.  The decision turns on the fear induced
   in individuals by not knowing the extent of the risk; the potential
   damage to young children; and the absence of information for individuals
   regarding the risks which they were to undertake.

34. The town of Lorca in Spain has a heavy concentration of leather
   industries and several tanneries there, owned by the same company, which
   built a plant for the treatment of liquid and solid waste.  The plant
   operated without a licence for noxious, dangerous, or nuisance
   activities, despite having been built with a State subsidy on municipal
   land.  It was just 12 metres away from the Applicant's home.  Owing to a
   malfunction, the plant's start up in 1988 released gas fumes,
   pestilential smells and contamination, which immediately caused health
   problems and nuisance to many residents of Lorca.  The Town Council
   evacuated local residents for several months, and then the Applicant
   returned and lived in Lorca until 1992.  The plant continued to emit
   noxious fumes and cause health problems for the Applicant and her
   daughter.

35. The European Court of Human Rights found that Article 3 was not
   engaged, but that in the particular circumstances of the case, the
   respondent State had not struck a fair balance between the competing
   interests of the economic wellbeing of the town and the Applicant's
   effective enjoyment of her right to respect for her home and her private
   and family life.  The factual matrix in Lopez Ostra is dissimilar to that
   in the present appeals, since the Applicant was not returned by a third
   state to live in an at risk area, but was directly put at risk by the
   negligence of a contracting State in its control of emissions in her home
   town.  Even then, the Court considered that its decision was finely
   balanced as between Article 8(1) and 8(2), having regard to the margin of
   appreciation and the economic interests of Spain as a national authority.



36. Mr Lewis also relied upon the decision of the European Court of Human
   Rights in Guerra and others v Italy (1998) 26 EHRR 357 in which the Court
   found that there could be a positive obligation in environmental cases to
   respect the family and private life of an individual as guaranteed by
   Article 8.  Again, that obligation is on the State where the pollution is
   occurring, and again there was neglect by the State in question to inform
   individuals of a risk of toxicity, of which they were aware for a period
   of at least six years.

37. Mr Lewis sought to draw an analogy from these two cases and to extend
   it to an obligation on the United Kingdom not to return persons to a
   country of origin where it was aware of a possible depleted uranium risk.
    The United Kingdom, he argued, was aware of the location of areas of
   depleted uranium pollution in Kosovo and the appellants were entitled to
   information from the United Kingdom as to areas in Kosovo where there
   might be a risk to physical integrity sufficient to breach Article 8 of
   the Convention.

38. The Tribunal asked Mr Lewis why that entitled the appellants to claim
   that they should not be returned to any part of Kosovo; Mr Lewis argued
   that despite the map which had been filed, it was not possible to be
   certain of every site where depleted uranium ordnance had been used and
   as radiation was windborne, one would also need to know the prevailing
   winds.  It was therefore difficult to make an assessment as to whether
   the appellants' home areas should be regarded as safe, or not.

39. He contended that if the Secretary of State happened to be aware of
   information regarding a person's home area, he was under a duty to
   provide it to that individual.  He asked that the Secretary of State
   undertake to give that information before removal.  He accepted that
   there must be an element of trust that the Secretary of State would not
   deceive the appellants.

40. Mr Lewis argued that if the documents existed, the Secretary of State
   was under a duty to disclose them, and that was a continuing duty.  He
   relied on a decision of the European Court of Human Rights in  McGinley
   and Egan v United Kingdom (10/1997/794/995-996) and sought to revisit the
   argument that some unspecified documents existed which the Secretary of
   State ought to have disclosed.

41. At page 29 of that decision, in paragraphs 96-99, the Court reminded
   itself that the Applicant was serving as a plant operator on Christmas
   Island when the United Kingdom's nuclear test programme took place.  He
   was 25 miles from one of the detonations on the day on which it occurred.
    He was ordered to line up in the open, but no individual monitoring took
   place to establish whether or not he had been exposed to radiation at a
   dangerous level.  The Court accepted on those facts that Article 8 was
   engaged, and that the radiation levels records for the areas in which
   they were stationed should have been made available.  It accepted that
   the applicants had an interest under Article 8 in obtaining those
   records.

42. However, the Court distinguished Guerra and others v Italy (1998) 26
   EHRR 357 in relation to any other relevant documents as their
   "existence...has not been substantiated and is thus no more than a matter
   of speculation."  At paragraph 101, the Court said this -

      "100. The Court recalls that the Government have asserted that there
      was no pressing national security reason for retaining information
      relating to radiation levels on Christmas Island following the tests
      (see paragraph 81 above).
      101.  In these circumstances, given the Applicants' interest in
      obtaining access to the material in question and the apparent absence
      of any countervailing public interest in retaining it, the Court
      considers that a positive obligation under Article 8 arose.  Where a
      Government engages in hazardous activities, such as those in issue in
      the present case, which might have hidden adverse consequences on the
      health of those involved in such activities, respect for private and
      family life under Article 8 requires that an effective and accessible
      procedure be established which enables such persons to seek all
      relevant and proper information."

43. It is clear from the McGinley decision that the obligation is on the
   national Government which has engaged in a potentially hazardous activity
   to disclose the information it has, not to go on a fishing expedition for
   information which the applicants cannot specify and which may not exist.
   The Secretary of State has disclosed a map of areas where depleted
   uranium ordnance was used in Kosovo in 1999.  He says that there is no
   other evidence or material, and there must be an element of trust in this
   respect.  Mr Lewis did not seek to argue, when it was put to him, that a
   continuing duty extended after the appellants' return to Kosovo to notify
   them of further scientific information which might come into the hands of
   the Secretary of State. Once returned to Kosovo, their Article 8 rights
   were the responsibility of the national authorities (or international
   surrogates) in Kosovo.

44. Mr Lewis contended that a scientific debate existed, as to the risk
   from depleted uranium, which could not be ignored.  The United Kingdom
   had set up a panel to investigate it.  Mr Lewis renewed his application
   for an undertaking or at least a 'declared attitude of good faith' that
   the appellants would be told of any actual or seriously debatable risk,
   in relation to information which was not otherwise in the public domain
   and could be made easily accessible to the individuals.  He was prepared
   to assume that the Secretary of State would not knowingly or willingly
   breach the appellants' human rights.

45. For the Secretary of State, Miss Giovanetti said that she was
   astonished that the appellants would now be content to return merely on
   the basis that they would be given information as to where the military
   strikes took place.  All previous requests for disclosure had related to
   the level of risk to the general population and there had been no request
   to disclose the sites where depleted uranium had been used.  The national
   authorities in Kosovo, as the Secretary of State's report indicated, were
   addressing the matter.

46. In relation to the posited general obligation of disclosure reviewed by
   the House of Lords in Abdi and Gawe, Miss Giovanetti said that the
   Tribunal had no jurisdiction to impose a duty of freestanding disclosure
   by the United Kingdom Government.  The appellants' claim must succeed as
   a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
   Freedoms 1950, or fail.

47. Miss Giovanetti was not aware of any authority requiring Convention
   States to notify individuals of hazards outside their own territory, and
   the proposed overarching duty of general disclosure set too high a
   standard.  If any duty existed, the short report already provided was
   more than ample to meet it.  The European Court of Human Rights decision
   in McGinley and Egan v United Kingdom (10/1997/794/995-996) turned on its
   own particular facts, involving deliberate exposure by the national
   authority to high levels of radiation.  There was no indication in this
   or any of the other decisions on which the appellants relied that the
   European Court would approach an expulsion case in the same way.
   Further, there had been a total lack of any request to the Secretary of
   State for specific information and the Secretary of State had never been
   given the opportunity to make a decision based on the depleted uranium
   risk.

48. At best, the duty amounted to a positive duty to take reasonable and
   appropriate measures to safeguard physical integrity.  The Secretary of
   State did not accept that there was any real substantial risk or hazard,
   and it had always been open to the appellants to conduct their own
   research.  There was no material on the appellants' side to support the
   claimed risk, and absent such a risk, this was a bad faith argument.  If
   there were a real risk, the Kosovan population would know of it by now
   and evidence would exist.  It would be very surprising if there were a
   real radiation risk without the local population being aware of it, three
   years after the war.

49. In reply, Mr Lewis insisted that the duty was not so onerous as to
   frustrate the procedure.  The CIPU Country Report for Kosovo should be
   reviewed and updated to include information which might suggest the areas
   of risk.  The Court of Appeal in  Abdi and Gawe indicated that the
   information which should be disclosed was that relevant to a decision
   maker.  The Secretary of State was not claiming privilege here (Thorpe LJ
   in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex p Besnik Gashi
   (1999) EWCA Civ 1099).

50. The Tribunal observed that before the question of privilege arose, it
   would be necessary to establish a general rule.  Mr Lewis accepted that
   the Secretary of State's letter of 20 July 2001 gave an extensive review,
   but argued that it failed to provide all the relevant information for the
   appellants to assess the risk to them.  He argued again that the
   Secretary of State was under a duty to disclose relevant information,
   which the individual could not obtain for himself, such as inter-
   Governmental correspondence and advice, received from diplomatic posts.
   He accepted that some discretion must be afforded to the Secretary of
   State.

51. When the Tribunal asked what the specific breach was on which he
   relied, Mr Lewis indicated that his claim was based on the Secretary of
   State's failure to provide a map or locations with all the information
   which he had of areas where depleted uranium ordnance was used, or in the
   alternative, a certificate that he did not have any such information.
   The documents opposed to those summarised in the Secretary of State's
   letter were a tiny minority, but should be summarised as though of equal
   weight.

52. The Tribunal ruled that, as the appellants had already had two years to
   research their case, and the Article 8 duty if any on the Secretary of
   State was clearly very light, the disclosure point was bad and could not
   found a successful appeal before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  We
   invited Mr Lewis to proceed with the substantive issues.

53. There were two remaining live issues, first, whether there was in fact
   any risk from depleted uranium in Kosovo, and second, whether even if
   such a risk existed, removal of these appellants would breach Article 8
   of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950.



54. Mr Lewis conceded that Professor Hooper's evidence showed that there
   were areas of Kosovo where there was no or very little likelihood of a
   breach of Article 3 or 8 if the appellants were returned there.  He would
   not be calling Professor Hooper, as the argument had concentrated on
   disclosure.  Mr Lewis accepted that any danger was likely to be
   localised.

55. The Tribunal then heard the oral evidence of Dr Christopher Busby,
   based upon his expert report.  That report, and that of Professor Hooper,
   represents a different scientific conclusion to that of the thirteen or
   more national investigations and three international investigations
   summarised earlier in this determination, a point which Dr Busby very
   fairly makes himself at page 4 of his report.  Dr Busby criticises the
   Department of Defense report at some length and details conversations
   which he had with its author.  He describes himself as an epidemiologist,
   but is somewhat vague about the tests he actually performed and their
   scientific results.  He relies upon anecdotal evidence of ill health in
   the Italian and Portuguese veterans exposed to depleted uranium.  Indeed,
   Dr Busby's investigations (accompanied by a television cameraman)
   collected samples which were not always analysed.

56. More significantly, nothing in this report deals with the risk to those
   who were not present during the conflict at all and only return after
   four years.  That was an important gap in the evidence before us, which
   would need to be dealt with in oral evidence.  Dr Busby adopted his
   expert report.  He explained that he had collected and tested samples
   from areas on the NATO map of depleted uranium use, following a list of
   coordinates, which were supplied with that map.  The expedition had also
   made opportunistic surveys of areas where they simply happened to be, and
   where the signals were strong, they brought back samples.

57. They discovered some areas of increased radioactivity, which were
   probably caused by depleted uranium, although not all of his samples had
   actually been analysed.  Dust in the streets where children were playing
   was radioactive in 46% of sites, at levels which could cause harm.  He
   considered that there might be a risk near Pristina, where there had been
   heavy cruise missile damage, possibly from depleted uranium warheads.
   Significant levels of depleted uranium could cause genetic mutation, an
   increased risk of cancer and general malformation.

58. Mr Lewis asked whether in his expert knowledge, Dr Busby was aware of
   any relevant unpublished reports,  Dr Busby said that he was aware of a
   couple of pieces of work on Gulf Veterans with chromosomal damage at the
   same level as for victims of the Chernobyl nuclear accident.  Four years
   earlier, he and Professor Hooper had been the dissenters, but that was
   changing.  He had recently lectured to an international conference on low
   dose radiation effects, to the European Committee on Radiation Waste,
   which would be published in the next month, dealing with the difference
   between internal and external radiation.  Dr Busby was the Secretary of
   that organisation.

59. Mr Lewis asked Dr Busby what would be the radius of contamination.
   That was very difficult, the witness said, as it was not a radial problem
   and would depend on the topology.  If depleted uranium ordnance was used
   in a valley it could potentially contaminate the entire valley, but one
   might be safer on the mountain.  If returned, he personally would make
   the decision to live on high land upwind of where depleted uranium
   ordnance had been used.

60. In cross-examination, Dr Busby confirmed that the only in-depth health
   study was an Italian study of peacekeepers who had been in the depleted
   uranium areas ten months after the war.  There was no more recent
   epidemiology, nor, as far as Dr Busby was aware, was there any in-depth
   study of people returning today or very recently.  The Italian
   Peacekeepers study showed 17 cancers, 2 lymphomas and 2 leukaemias in
   40,000 peacekeepers.

61. Dr Busby accepted that this was a low rate of cancer, but said that it
   would be lower as soldiers were healthier, and people who were going to
   get cancer did not join the army.  It was a tiny proportion, but the rate
   of cancer was normally even smaller.  Over 20 years, in 40,000 people, an
   additional 20 people would get cancer, and the Tribunal should understand
   that real people would actually die.  There would be increases in infant
   mortality and congenital malformation, but it was impossible to
   generalise.

62. In response to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Busby said that he had a
   number of different areas of interest in this matter.  He had trained as
   a chemical physicist and physical chemist and had fourteen years'
   experience of radiation and health matters.  Dr Busby told the Tribunal
   that depleted uranium had a half-life of 4.7 billion years.

63. However, in the area for which his expert report had been commissioned,
   Dr Busby described himself as an amateur.  He was director of an
   independent research organisation called Green Audit, which published its
   own material so that the papers would exist.  There was no peer review.
   Dr Busby was also a member of the International Society for Environmental
   Review, with five years' experience of epidemiology calculation.

64. His evidence was that even where there was a significant increase in
   lymphomas, such an increase would not necessarily be caused by depleted
   uranium.  Dr Busby was concerned about the concentration of radiation in
   the air.  Sunlight and rainfall pumped the uranium around, and it would
   be re-suspended in the air in sunny weather without rain.  As time went
   on, it might work its way below the surface soil and not become re-
   suspended.  A significant level of uranium had been found over ten months
   after its use in 1999.  It was untrue to say that depleted uranium could
   not be found in water.  The problem was that water always contained
   ordinary uranium, and it was difficult to measure levels of depleted
   uranium.

65. The UNEP report did not distinguish between particles and solids.
   Samples had been split and sent to two different laboratories for
   analysis and showed that the 0.2-micron filter was removing particles.
   This, Dr Busby said, suggested that the uranium was in rainwater at the
   rate of 30,000 particles per litre.  The ten tons of depleted uranium
   munitions known to have been used amounted to 300 million particles for
   every person in the European Union.  An ordinary sample of rainwater
   would contain particles, but spring water would not.

66. Epidemiology would not answer the question, as it was not possible to
   know if the rate of cancers was higher than before, because Kosovo did
   not keep information as to the incidence of any specific cancer.  There
   was some anecdotal evidence of an increase in Sarajevo where depleted
   uranium had been used.

67. Dr Busby was then asked about exposure to radiation at the levels in
   Kosovo today, as opposed to that experienced by soldiers on the
   battlefield.  He confirmed that there was already a significant decrease
   between the levels for combatants and the levels found in Italian
   peacekeepers, who came to the region after the fighting.  Dr Busby
   accepted that levels would have continued to fall; exposure to the
   quantities of radiation in Kosovo today would not be as dangerous as that
   to soldiers on the battlefield.

68. Ms Giovanetti did not wish to cross-examine further at the end of the
   Tribunal's questions.  Mr Lewis re-examined.  He established that Dr
   Busby was also a member of the Green Group of the European Union
   Parliament, that he was on the Ministry of Defence Oversight Board and
   had advised the Irish State.  He was a member of the European Committee
   on Radiation Risk and the National Speaker on radiation for the Green
   Party.

69. Dr Busby said that during the collection of soil samples in Gjakova, he
   and all his staff wore nuclear and biological protection suits.  The
   radiation would not pass through snow.  Their opportunistic sampling in
   Pristina had not been under the same level of precautions, because he had
   then believed that there was no problem in Pristina, but had afterwards
   felt that there was an element of risk.  In each case, he and his team
   took an informed decision on whether to wear bio protection suits, based
   on the available evidence, but it was difficult to draw a line around
   'safe' areas.

70. In his final submission, Mr Lewis argued that the evidence before the
   Tribunal amounted to evidence of severe environmental damage.  On the
   evidence before us, which it was our duty to hear and weigh, there was a
   significant risk.  Even if the Tribunal were to find that the risk was
   not significant, the very real concern and doubts expressed by Dr Busby
   went to the reasonableness of return to the depleted uranium areas.

71. The Tribunal pointed out that on the Secretary of State's evidence, the
   levels of depleted uranium in Pristina were not high.  If an individual
   chose to go from there to an area where they were higher, that surely was
   not a breach by the Secretary of State engaging the human rights
   Convention?  Mr Lewis accepted that the evidence which the Tribunal had
   seen and heard did not necessarily rule out the whole of Kosovo.  If the
   Secretary of State provided such information as he had, on an ongoing
   basis, there would be no breach.  However, if he failed to do so, Mr
   Lewis continued to argue that would constitute a potential breach of the
   Convention.

72. Busby and Hooper had criticised the Secretary of State's report and
   that of the United States Department of Defense.  The UNEP report came
   out in April or May 2002, but had not been provided.  The Secretary of
   State's summary of the World Health Organisation report was selective and
   had been justifiably criticised.  He contended that the appellants had
   demonstrated a risk on return to Kosovo.

73. In relation to the marriage element of Mr EH's claim, the evidence was
   that his British wife had previously lost a child.  Mr Lewis contended
   that the evidence of potential spontaneous abortions in depleted uranium
   contaminated areas was relevant to the proportionality of requiring Mr FZ
   to return to Kosovo to make his application for entry as a spouse.  The
   decision was in February 2001 and the parties had married in March 2002.
   Mr Lewis asked the Tribunal to allow all of the appellants' appeals.

74. For the respondent, Miss Giovanetti reminded the Tribunal that the
   appellants had accepted that the circumstances in Kosovo did not engage
   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
   Freedoms 1950.  Full disclosure had been made, including the UNEP map of
   areas where depleted uranium ordnance had been used.  The Secretary of
   State's short report of 19 November 2001 indicated that K-FOR had briefed
   UNMIK on the depleted uranium strike areas which were being marked.

75. It was not appropriate to expect the Tribunal to resolve the scientific
   debate, though it was relevant to note the views of such bodies as WHO,
   UNEP, and others.  As regards Dr Busby's evidence, and the Italian
   report, the troops whose health had been analysed had been at the sites
   either when the depleted uranium was used, or not long after.  There was
   no authoritative evidence whatsoever on recent returns, and the evidence
   before the Tribunal showed an admittedly tiny increase in quite rare
   conditions.  The risk was confined to specific, marked areas and was not
   over the entire area of Kosovo.

76. Further, Miss Giovanetti contended that such interference with the
   appellants' Article 8 rights as was proposed was limited to return to
   Pristina.  Where the appellants went after that was a matter for them,
   and if they chose to return to home areas, where there might be increased
   risks from depleted uranium ordnance, that would not be because of any
   lack of respect for their family and private life by the United Kingdom
   Government.  Further, the European Court of Human Rights was quite clear
   that Article 8(2) was applicable and the level of risk in the evidence
   before the Tribunal was plainly outweighed by the United Kingdom's
   legitimate interest in controlling immigration.

77. Miss Giovanetti argued that even if the scientific evidence were
   accepted in full, it would be an extraordinary suggestion to say that
   asylum claimants could not be returned to Kosovo as a whole because of a
   slightly increased risk of a very rare disease in their home areas.  She
   asked the Tribunal to dismiss the appellants' appeals.  Mr Lewis did not
   exercise his right of reply.

Conclusions and findings

78. We reserved our decision for postal delivery, which we now give.  For
   the reasons already set out, we were not prepared to allow these appeals
   based upon alleged breaches of directions.  There was no breach of
   directions.

79. Nor are we satisfied that we should impose on the Secretary of State a
   duty of investigation of materials available to Government Departments
   which is not in the public domain.  The present jurisprudence simply does
   not support such a duty, the burden on the Secretary of State would be
   unacceptably onerous, and the authorities set out above bind the
   Tribunal.

80. As regards the postulated duty of disclosure of the materials upon
   which the Secretary of State bases his CIPU Country Report or other
   background reports, we are satisfied that the sourcing of the Country
   Report discharges any duty which exists, and we do not find that the
   Secretary of State is obliged to provide full copies of all the materials
   which support his conclusions.  The suggestion that there is a continuing
   duty after the individuals have returned to Kosovo, to the extent to
   which Mr Lewis still relied upon it, is unsustainable.  If the United
   Kingdom were at risk of breaching Article 8, that breach would occur at
   the latest when the individuals were returned to Pristina.

81. We now turn to the scientific and other evidence in relation to the
   actual risk on return.  The Secretary of State's paper in response to
   discovery adopts in its entirety the US Department of Defense paper,
   Depleted Uranium Environmental and Medical Surveillance in the Balkans,
   published on 25 October 2001 which -

      "...provides "a summary of reports from countries and international
      organisations performing environmental assessments in the Balkans and
      medical surveillance on Balkan veterans".  Although the Department of
      Defense naturally has a military perspective, the reports considered
      by the Paper specifically address the effect of depleted uranium upon
      the civilian population as well as military personnel."

82. The Information Paper annexes summaries of the main conclusions and
   recommendations from several research projects specifically addressing
   the risk to the civilian population in Kosovo.  We note that the
   appellants did not rely upon, nor include as part of their documentation,
   full copies of any of these materials, but we have made available and
   summarised the Department of Defense paper, which is itself a summary of
   a broad international consensus as to the risk to military personnel
   exposed to depleted uranium during or shortly after the war, and to the
   civilian population present during the delivery of depleted uranium
   ordnance in the 1999 conflict.  None of the international monitors
   detected any significant levels of depleted uranium contamination, nor
   any significant risk to the health of the population from the presence of
   depleted uranium.

83. Precautionary measures suggested, mainly for UNMIK to carry out,
   included:  cleaning of contamination points; depleted uranium sites to be
   marked as appropriate until cleared; children to be prevented from
   playing in the immediate area of contamination; information to be given
   to the local population on precautions to be taken on finding depleted
   uranium material; groundwater used for drinking to be monitored for
   contamination (none had been found to be contaminated thus far) and
   improved recording of medical data.

84. UNMIK took the matter very seriously.  On 13 March 2001, the Secretary-
   General reported to the Security Council that a review of hospital
   records had found no increase at all in the past four years in the
   incidence of adult leukaemia in Kosovo.  UNMIK cooperated closely with
   UNEP, K-FOR, and WHO, as well as national public health and environmental
   institutions.

85. Significantly, the WHO assessment team found a minimal risk to public
   health from depleted uranium, and recommended an information campaign,
   which was in place at 13 March 2001, to encourage the public to report
   depleted uranium findings.  It also recommended improved medical health
   data and a comprehensive health information system.

86. K-FOR had briefed UNMIK on depleted uranium strike areas and they were
   being marked.  That is over two years ago now.  There is no suggestion
   that they are not now properly marked and fenced off so that children
   cannot play on the depleted uranium sites.

87. In effect, the Tribunal is asked to prefer Dr Busby's rather
   unsatisfactory and admittedly amateur report to the expertise of the
   World Health Organisation and the United Nations Environment Programme,
   all of which is more detailed and probably more current.  There are flaws
   in his research, which is vague and lacking in objectivity;  it does not
   appear to have been particularly methodical, some samples have not been
   analysed and his explanation of the supporting statistical evidence was
   unclear and at times contradictory.  The research has not been subjected
   to peer review.

88. On careful consideration of this research, this Tribunal is not
   satisfied to any standard that Dr Busby's evidence is so persuasive that
   it ousts the more rigorous work of the international organisations
   summarised in the Department of Defense report.  Therefore, the Tribunal
   prefers the evidence of the WHO, UNMIK, K-FOR and UNEP that even as early
   as 2000/1 there was no significant depleted uranium contamination or risk
   to the general population of Kosovo.

89. We also have regard to the lack of any evidence from Kosovo itself that
   there has been any adverse health effect.  In the three years between the
   hearing of this appeal and the Kosovo conflict, there has been ample time
   for a pattern of significant or severe environmental pollution to be
   identified, and it has not been found.  Further, the evidence which is
   before us does not relate to people who may return after the depleted
   uranium has dispersed, but to those who were in Kosovo when it was used,
   or shortly after.  In effect, the scientific evidence on which the
   appellants rely is not evidence as to the risk on return at all, and thus
   cannot possibly oust the more recent and comprehensive international
   materials.

90. Further, Dr Busby's research plainly predates the UNMIK marking of
   sites and prevention of children playing in depleted uranium contaminated
   areas.  Dr Busby and Professor Hooper both accept that some areas of
   Kosovo are safe, as is evidenced in particular by the approach of Dr
   Busby and his team to the donning of bio protection suits in some areas
   but not others.  The scientific evidence put forward by Dr Busby
   establishes, at best, a slightly increased risk of a very rare disorder
   in some areas.

91. Accordingly, we find that even in areas where depleted uranium was
   used, the risk to these appellants if they were to be returned now is
   minimal or non-existent.  In the present appeals, the risk is simply not
   proven.  Even taking the appellants' case at its highest, on Dr Busby's
   evidence, the risk is not at a level which would engage Article 8.

92. The present appeals also seek to impose on the United Kingdom as a
   third party State a duty to give these appellants a right of residence in
   the United Kingdom based not just upon environmental pollution risks in
   Kosovo, but upon a fear of risk of alleged pollution, in this case on
   return to an area of former conflict where this new weapon was used.  Mr
   Lewis did not suggest that the fact that the weapon was used by the
   United Kingdom during that conflict made any difference to the argument,
   and he was right not to do so:  the Article 8 test is an objective one.

93. The Tribunal considers that a high and demanding threshold should be
   set before imposing such a novel duty on a sovereign State in relation to
   an area outside its national boundaries, and that at the very least, such
   a duty would require a severe and proven environmental risk.  There is no
   such risk here.

94. If we are wrong, and Article 8(1) is engaged, the risk is so low that
   the United Kingdom's right to regulate immigration in the national
   interest under Article 8(2) easily outweighs it.  We have considered Miss
   Giovanetti's argument that return would be to Pristina, and any onward
   travel to the home area would be the appellants' choice.  That is in
   effect an internal flight argument, but given the lack of evidence of any
   significant or substantial risk even in the home area, it is not an
   argument on which it is necessary to rule.

95. Finally, in relation to the circumstances of Mr FZ and his wife, we
   find that there is no evidence before us which meets the appropriate
   lower standard that Mrs Z would be at increased risk of spontaneous
   abortion in Mr FZ's home area were the couple to return together.  It was
   not alleged that she was pregnant at the date of hearing.  Nor is there
   any obligation on the couple to return together;  it remains open to Mr
   FZ to return alone and apply for readmission as a spouse.  Following the
   Mahmood principle, and in view of the brevity of the marriage at the date
   of hearing, it is not disproportionate to expect the appellant to do
   that.  The marriage issue, despite Mrs Z's gynaecological history,
   therefore does not alter the Tribunal's determination in Mr FZ's appeal.



96.   For all of the above reasons, the appellants' appeals are dismissed.




                                                         Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                                              Vice-President
                                                                26 June 2003

