

  ME (Male Adulterer - Convention Reason? - Risk) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00166

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing : 22 September 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                   ...09/12/03....

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey  (Chairman)
                                 Mrs R Faux





                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed with leave of  the
      Tribunal against a determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  D  G  Shimmin,
      allowing the appeal of the respondent, a national of Iran, against the
      decision to give directions for removal having refused asylum.   Ms  N
      Hough  appeared for the appellant.  Ms F McCrae of Counsel  instructed
      by Brar & Co appeared for  the  respondent.  To  avoid  confusion  the
      respondent is hereafter referred to as "the claimant".

   2. The Tribunal has decided to allow this appeal.

   3. The Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant   had  given  a  credible
      account of having formed an adulterous relationship with a woman as  a
      result of which several men including her husband  had  assaulted  him
      causing injuries requiring surgery.  He had complained to  the  police
      but they said the matter was in the hands of the Sepah  (Revolutionary
      Guard Corps). The latter had come to his house with a summons and  had
      questioned his wife and threatened that  if  they  did  not  find  her
      husband they would take revenge on her children.  They had pushed  her
      around and detained her for two days.  After the  claimant  then  fled
      the country, his wife and children followed two   months  later.   the
      Adjudicator  found in the light of these adverse experiences that  the
      claimant and his wife would, if returned to Iran, face a  well-founded
      fear of persecution on account  of  his  membership  of  a  particular
      social group,  "the  group  being  men  in  Iran  who  have  committed
      adultery which has been witnessed by  at  least  three  others".   She
      allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

   4. The grounds of appeal were extremely brief and were  confined  to  the
      issue of whether the Adjudicator  was correct to  identify  a  Refugee
      Convention ground of membership of a particular social group.


   5. Had we heard this case  at first  instance  we  doubt  we  would  have
      found it  as  easy  as  did  the  Adjudicator  to  reconcile  material
      inconsistencies in the claimant's account. But no challenge  has  been
      raised to the positive credibility findings and therefore, whatever we
      make of the issue of a Refugee Convention ground, it is plain that the
      claimant must succeed on Article 3 grounds.   He  established  to  the
      satisfaction of the Adjudicator that he faces a real risk  of  serious
      harm.  Such harm  reaches  the  threshold  of  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3.

   6. Miss McCrae sought to defend the Adjudicator's findings  in respect of
      a  Refugee  Convention  ground    by   reference   to   the   Tribunal
      determination in the case of Ameen [2002] UKIAT 07246 in which it  had
      been found that a person  facing reprisals from strict fundamentalists
      in the Islamic Party (IM) in respect of an illicit affair faced a real
      risk of persecution partly on account of his religion.   The  Tribunal
      in that case  considered  that  the  fundamentalists  would  impute  a
      religious   opinion  to  the  claimant.  She  submitted  that  on  the
      evidence the Adjudicator should also have found that  the  persecution
      was on account of the claimant's political opinion:  the  adulteress's
      husband, she pointed out, was a member of Sepah and so the authorities
      would have imputed a political opinion to him.

   7. Miss McCrae sought further to argue that the Adjudicator  was right to
      identify a particular social group in this case.  Male  adulterers  in
      Iran were, she maintained, a group having an immutable  characteristic
      setting them apart  from  society as a whole, having acted contrary to
      Islamic Code.  The judgement of the House of Lords in Shah  and  Islam
      [1999] 2 AC 629  clarified  that  cohesiveness  was  not  a  necessary
      condition of a particular social group. The group  in  this  case  has
      four elements:  the claimant was  Iranian,  male,  he   had  committed
      adultery and had been prosecuted for  it  and  his  offence  had  been
      witnessed  by three others.

8.    We consider that Ms  McCrae's  attempt  to  raise  Refugee  Convention
      grounds based on religion and political opinion amounts to  a  request
      that we allow  the appeal on grounds different from or  additional  to
      those given by the Adjudicator for allowing the  appeal.  Plainly  the
      Adjudicator based his decision solely on the Refugee Convention ground
      of membership of a particular social group. However, we note first  of
      all that the claimant's representatives did not  submit a Respondent's
      Notice in accordance with  Rule  19  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.   Secondly, by analogy with  the  test
      set out in Rule 20, which governs variation of the grounds of  appeal,
      we consider that we should only accede to a request  from a respondent
      to uphold the Adjudicator's determination for reasons  different  from
      or additional to those given by the  Adjudicator  where  it  would  be
      unjust not to allow the variation. We do not consider that there would
      be injustice in this case,  since opportunity to put in a respondent's
      notice was not taken and the additional reasons advanced by Ms  McCrae
      were not obvious.

9.    However, even had we  acceded  to  Ms  McCrae's  request,  we  do  not
      consider on the evidence in this case  that  there  was  a  basis  for
      considering that there was a  Refugee  Convention  ground,  singly  or
      cumulatively. On the evidence before the Adjudicator  the  reason  why
      the claimant  had  been attacked and the authorities had  subsequently
      prosecuted him for adultery  was simply  because  he  had  contravened
      Iranian law.  Whether or not the adulteress's husband was a member  of
      Sepah, the claimant had  not  described  him  as  acting  against  the
      claimant out of political motives. On the evidence his Sepah  identity
      only affected the zeal with which he pursued  the  claimant,  not  the
      fact  of pursuit.  On his own account neither the authorities nor  the
      individuals who had attacked him perceived their actions in  religious
      or political  terms.  The position  in the  case  of  Ameen  was  very
      different. In that case the brothers  of  the  appellant's  girlfriend
      were fundamentalist Islamic believers who had  referred details of his
      transgression to the  IM  Party:  both  the  brothers  and  the  Party
      perceived the transgression in partly religious terms.

10.   As regards membership of a particular social group,  we  take  as  our
      starting point the Court of Appeal judgment in Montoya [2002] INLR 399
      which endorsed the Tribunal's summary of the basic  principles  to  be
      applied.  These principles included:

            '55(vii) applying the  euisdem generic principle  to  the  other
           four  grounds,  the   PSG  category  must  be   concerned   with
           discrimination directed against members of the group because  of
           a common immutable characteristic;
            ...
                (x) in order to avoid tautology, to  qualify  as  a  PSG  it
           must be possible to identify  the  group  independently  of  the
           persecution;
            ...
            (xii) a PSG cannot normally consist in  a  disparate  collection
           of individuals;

            (xiii) for a  PSG to exist it is a necessary condition that  its
           members  share  a  common  immutable  characteristic.   Such   a
           characteristic may be innate or non-innate. However,  if  it  is
           the latter, then the non-innate characteristic will only qualify
           if it is one which is beyond the  power  of  the  individual  to
           change except at the cost of renunciation of core  human  rights
           entitlements;

            (xiv) it is not necessary, on the one hand, for such a group  to
           possess  the  attributes   of   cohesiveness,   interdependence,
           organisation or homogeneity;

            (xv) there is nothing in principle to prevent the  size  of  PSG
           being large (e.g. women),  but  if  the  claim  relies  on  some
           refinement or subcategory of a larger group, care must be  taken
           over  whether   the   resultant   group   is   still   definable
           independently of their persecution ..."

11.   Applying these principles to the facts of the case,  it  may  well  be
      that a woman in the same position as the claimant  would  be  able  to
      raise an argument that she was a member of a particular  social  group
      since her position as a woman in Iran subjects her  to  discriminatory
      laws, e.g. those governing the number of witnesses required  to  prove
      adultery, setting her apart from society.  However, in the case of the
      claimant, neither his nationality nor his sex  was  a  basis  for  any
      discriminatory  treatment  that  he  received.   Thus,  the  principal
      factors relied upon to identify him as   a  particular  social   group
      amounted to no more than those which defined his persecution.  He  was
      persecuted because he was an adulterer who had  transgressed   Iranian
      law.  The argument for a particular  social  group  in  this  case  is
      wholly circular.

12.   Accordingly we consider that the grounds of appeal are made out.   The
      Adjudicator was wrong to allow the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  since
      there was in fact no Refugee Convention reason.

13.   Thus the appeal is allowed on  this  ground.   As  already  explained,
      however, the decision  of the Adjudicator to allow the appeal on human
      rights  grounds remains unchallenged and we must therefore confirm it.


                                                             DR. H.H. STOREY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


-----------------------
      1


