
Heard at Field House on:
24 October 2003
 | |DF (Article 8 - Proportionality: consideration of relevant factors)
Jamaica [2003] UKIAT 00152

 | |
|Prepared on:               |        |                            |
|24 October 2003            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (CHAIRMAN)                                        |
|MRS E MORTON                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


JD
Representation

For the Appellant:            Mr  D  Saville,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr A N Ikie, Solicitor.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr S W Frankish, who allowed the Respondent's appeal
      on Article 8 grounds against a decision made on 16 December  2002
      giving directions for his removal following the  refusal  of  his
      claim for asylum. In this determination the Tribunal  will  refer
      to the Respondent to this appeal as the Applicant.


   2. The Applicant is a citizen of Jamaica born in July 1967.  On  his
      own account his mother abandoned the family when  he  was  twelve
      and went to live in Canada. His father blamed him for this and he
      left home when he was thirteen to live with a cousin in Kingston.
      When he was eighteen he went to the central area of town and  was
      injured when he was  shot  in  the  hip.  He  believes  that  his
      assailants were from the PNP and the inference  is  that  he  was
      shot because of his associations with the JLP. In any event,  the
      Appellant was detained in hospital for three months  but  had  to
      leave for his own safety before he had completed his treatment.

   3. He came to the United Kingdom in 1993. He met  his  future  wife,
      Debbie Williams, in 1994. They lived together  until  1997,  when
      the Applicant was detained  as  an  over-stayer  and  removed  to
      Jamaica. Subsequently Mrs Fullwood joined him,  and  stayed  with
      her grand-mother. They married  in  Jamaica  in  July  1997.  The
      Applicant applied at the High Commission for entry clearance.  He
      was offered an interview after six months and the  interview  was
      later rescheduled to 30 April 1999. The Applicant said that  when
      police and gunmen found out that he was in Jamaica  they  tracked
      him down and attacked him. He escaped one particular  attack  and
      then went into hiding, living rough. He obtained a false passport
      and entered the United Kingdom before his  rescheduled  interview
      for entry clearance on the grounds of his marriage.

   4. After he was returned to the United Kingdom,  the  Appellant  was
      arrested  on  drugs  charges  and   sentenced   to   four   years
      imprisonment, serving two. At this stage he gave the  false  name
      of Curtis Palmer and served  the  sentence  under  that  name.  A
      recommendation for deportation was made  and  the  Appellant  was
      removed in 1999. He says  that  the  situation  in  Jamaica  with
      gunmen, political activists and corrupt police was more dangerous
      than before. He had not been forgotten by  the  various  factions
      and once again had to go into hiding. A month later  he  returned
      to the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  returned  to  the  United
      Kingdom in December 2001 in breach of the deportation order using
      a friend's  passport.  He  was  arrested  in  September  2002  on
      suspicion of possessing cannabis. He gave the  name  of  Jeremiah
      McIntosh but checks revealed his  true  identity.  The  Appellant
      claimed asylum on 18 October 2002. His claim was refused and  the
      Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 21 February
      and 23 April 2003.

   5. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant did not face persecution
      for a Convention reason because of his connections with the  JLP.
      For the same reasons he was not satisfied that there would  be  a
      breach of Article 3 on return. However, the Adjudicator  went  on
      to consider Article 8. The Applicant had said in evidence that on
      return to Jamaica he would  continue  with  his  application  for
      entry clearance on the grounds of marriage. If  that  application
      had lapsed, he would make a fresh  application.  The  Adjudicator
      accepted that the Appellant had married Mrs Williams  on  19  May
      1997 and they now had a child, Dominic, born on 8 November  2002.
      Mrs Williams gave evidence and she accepted  that  she  had  been
      aware of the Applicant's lack of  immigration  status  when  they
      married. There had been a period of separation in 2001  but  they
      had reconciled.

   6. The Adjudicator considered the Secretary  of  State's  policy  in
      DP3/96 and the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Mahmood  (2001)
      Imm AR 229. The  Applicant  had  been  in  custody  since  before
      Dominic's birth. Subsequently, he was released from  custody.  He
      said that he returned to the United Kingdom from Jamaica in  1997
      because gunmen were on his tail. The  Adjudicator  accepted  that
      removal would be an interference with the  Applicant's  right  to
      family life and went on to consider whether that removal would be
      proportionate to a legitimate aim within Article 8 (2). He  noted
      the Applicant's poor  immigration  record.  He  also  had  a  bad
      criminal record, having been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of
      the supply of a Class A drug and of possessing a Class B drug. He
      also had five convictions in Jamaica.

   7.  The Adjudicator commented that he found the Applicant's wife  to
      be impressive as to her probity, hard work and commitment to  her
      child and husband. It was not realistic to expect her  to  return
      to Jamaica with the Applicant and her child. She had  obtained  a
      qualification which she continued to  use  as  a  legal  cashier,
      despite her responsibilities as a mother. The  Applicant,  whilst
      in custody,  had  obtained  a  qualification  as  a  painter  and
      decorator and also as a driver. Having regard to the duration  of
      the relationship and the impracticability of the Applicant's wife
      supporting the family in the event of a removal to  Jamaica,  the
      Adjudicator found that the Applicant had made out his case  under
      Article 8 and allowed the appeal on this basis.

   8. The grounds of  appeal  argue  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to
      indicate what, if any, insurmountable problems there were to  the
      Applicant, his wife and child relocating  to  Jamaica,  and  why,
      given the Applicant's appalling immigration and criminal  record,
      the decision to remove him was not proportionate to the  need  to
      maintain effective immigration  control,  nor  why  it  would  be
      unduly harsh to expect him  to  return  to  Jamaica  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance. The Adjudicator had not properly
      considered the case law or the fact that the Applicant's wife had
      known  of  his  immigration  status.  The  family  had  not  been
      established  for  long  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It   was   not
      unreasonable to expect them to follow him to Jamaica. The grounds
      also argue  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  not  taking  final
      submissions on Article 8 from the presenting officer. This ground
      was not pursued at the hearing before the  Tribunal  and  in  any
      event, the Tribunal heard full submissions on this issue.


   9. Mr Saville argued that the Adjudicator had erred in  law  in  his
      approach to Article 8. He had not fully considered  all  relevant
      factors. He had focussed only on  whether  it  was  realistic  to
      expect the Applicant's wife to return to Jamaica  and  had  given
      undue weight to the fact that, if she did, she would have to give
      up her employment. There would be no good reason  why  she  could
      not return, bearing in mind that she had returned to Jamaica with
      the Applicant in 1997. They had married there. She had been  able
      to live with relatives. The Adjudicator had failed to give proper
      weight to the factors set out in paragraph 55 of the judgment  of
      Laws LJ in Mahmood.  The decision on proportionality was perverse
      and was not properly open to the Adjudicator.

  10. Mr Ikie argued  that  the  Adjudicator  had  taken  all  relevant
      factors into account. The real issue was whether the decision  to
      remove was proportionate in the  circumstances.  The  Adjudicator
      had correctly  identified  all  relevant  factors  including  the
      Applicant's immigration and criminal record. He had balanced this
      against the fact of ten years cohabitation. It  was  for  him  to
      decide whether it was reasonable  for  the  Applicant's  wife  to
      follow him to Jamaica. The  Adjudicator  had  accepted  that  the
      Applicant had been the victim of severe attacks  in  Jamaica.  In
      these circumstances it would not be reasonable to expect  him  to
      return to make an application for entry clearance. In  substance,
      the Secretary of State was seeking to reargue issues of fact  and
      issues relating  to  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  various
      different factors in the evidence.

  11. The Court of Appeal in Oleed (2002) EWCA Civ 1906 had  emphasised
      that an Adjudicator's findings of fact should only be  overturned
      if plainly wrong or  unsustainable  on  the  evidence.  This  was
      confirmed by the approach of the Tribunal in  Omar  (2002)  UKIAT
      06844. It would be  wrong  to  read  the  phrase  'insurmountable
      obstacle' in the judgement in Mahmood  as  imposing  too  high  a
      test. Mr Ikie referred to K(Pakistan)  (2003)  UKIAT  00037.  The
      issue was whether it would be reasonable in the circumstances  to
      require the family members to leave  the  country.  The  Tribunal
      asked Mr Ikie to  make  submissions  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      judgement in Blessing Edore (2003) EWCA Civ 716 and Razgar (2003)
      EWCA 840. He submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
      considered  the  issue  of  proportionality.  The  reference   in
      paragraph 20 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  related  to  an
      assertion that there had been a breach of the Applicant's  rights
      when he was detained in prison in the United Kingdom pending this
      application.


  12. In reply Mr Saville argued that the Applicant could not  rely  on
      the risk of violence in Jamaica were he  to  return  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance: his claim had  been  refused  on
      both asylum and Article 3 grounds. There was no  reason  why  the
      Applicant should not return and make an application in accordance
      with the Rules for the reasons identified by the Court of  Appeal
      in paragraphs 22-26 of the judgment of Laws LJ in Mahmood.

  13. The issue in this appeal is whether the Adjudicator was  entitled
      to conclude on the evidence before  him  that  removal  would  be
      disproportionate to a legitimate aim. There is  no  dispute  that
      the Applicant enjoys family life in the United Kingdom  with  his
      wife and child. There would be an interference  with  that  right
      were he to be  removed  to  Jamaica,  but  removal  would  be  in
      accordance with the law and pursuant to a legitimate aim.

  14. The Tribunal accept that an Adjudicator's findings of fact should
      not be set aside unless they are plainly wrong  or  not  properly
      sustainable on the evidence. The rationale for this rule is found
      in Borissov v the Secretary of State 1996 Imm AR524 at  page  535
      (cited in paragraph 26 of the judgement in Oleed).  The  Tribunal
      will be reluctant to interfere with a finding of primary fact  by
      an Adjudicator, which was dependent upon his  assessment  of  the
      reliability or credibility of a witness who appeared before  him.
      The determination to which we were referred in  Omar  illustrates
      the point that a finding of primary fact should not be overturned
      when it was properly open to the Adjudicator on the evidence  and
      was not perverse. However, in the  present  appeal  there  is  no
      substantial dispute as to the primary facts. The issue is whether
      on those facts it can properly be  said  that  removal  would  be
      disproportionate.

  15. In Mahmood, the Court of Appeal, in paragraph 55, identified  and
      summarised the approach  taken  by  the  European  Court  on  the
      potential conflict between the respect for family  life  and  the
      importance of immigration controls. A  state  has  the  right  to
      control the entry of non nationals into its territory subject  to
      its treaty obligations. Article 8 does not impose on a state  any
      general obligation to  respect  the  choice  of  residence  of  a
      married couple. Removal of one family member where  other  family
      members are  lawfully  resident  will  not  necessarily  infringe
      Article 8 provided that there are no insurmountable obstacles  to
      the family living together in the country of origin of the family
      member excluded, even where this involves a  degree  of  hardship
      for some or all members of the family.

  16. The Tribunal accept that  the  phrase  'insurmountable  obstacle'
      should not be  interpreted  too  stringently.  The  obstacles  to
      settling abroad are obviously relevant and must be looked  at  in
      the context of  all  the  evidence  and  balanced  against  other
      factors such as knowledge on the part  of  one  spouse  that  the
      other spouse did not have  rights  of  residence.  The  Court  of
      Appeal emphasised that whether interference  with  family  rights
      was justified in the interests  of  the  control  of  immigration
      would depend on  the  facts  of  each  particular  case  and  the
      circumstances prevailing in the state whose action was impugned.


  17. The  reasons  which  the  Adjudicator  relied  on,  primarily  in
      paragraph 55 of his determination, related to the fact  that  the
      Applicant's wife  would  have  to  give  up  her  employment.  He
      commented on the fact that the lion's share of income  generation
      for the family largely fell upon her.  In  our  view  this  is  a
      relatively insignificant factor. Inevitably it must  follow  that
      if the Applicant's wife is expected  to  return  to  Jamaica  she
      would have to give  up  her  employment.  In  many  respects  the
      Applicant's  position  is  better  than  many  others.  She   has
      relatives in Jamaica. She returned to Jamaica in 1997 and married
      the Applicant there. The Tribunal must also take into account the
      letter from the Appellant dated 24 July 2003 that  his  wife  has
      started a new job as a practice manager for a firm of solicitors.
      We take into account the evidence  that  their  son  has  a  bone
      missing in his back and is being monitored by specialist doctors.
      However, the Tribunal have no further information on that issue.

  18. Even leaving aside the issue of employment,  the  Tribunal  would
      accept that the Applicant's wife with a very young child may well
      not wish to relocate to Jamaica. However, that is  not  the  only
      factor to be taken into account. The Applicant  accepts  that  he
      has a bad criminal record. He has five convictions in Jamaica. He
      says that he had to return to the United Kingdom in 1997 to avoid
      violence in Jamaica but, not long after he returned to the United
      Kingdom, he was convicted in October 1998  of  supplying  cocaine
      and received a sentence of four years  and  was  recommended  for
      deportation. In May 2000 he was removed, but he returned and  was
      removed again on 18 January 2001 as he had entered  illegally  in
      breach of the order. Undaunted, the Appellant returned  again  in
      December 2001 using a friend's passport.  It  was  after  he  was
      detained by the police and his identity came  to  light  that  he
      claimed asylum.


  19. The Adjudicator did not have the benefit which the Tribunal  have
      of recent judgments in the  Court  of  Appeal  dealing  with  the
      approach  to  be  adopted   when   considering   the   issue   of
      proportionality in appeals on  Article  8  grounds.  In  Blessing
      Edore [2003] EWCA  Civ  716  the  court  held  that  the  correct
      approach  was  to  consider  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision was within the range of reasonable responses open to him
      on the facts. In Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ  840  this  approach  was
      confirmed, subject only to situations where the findings of  fact
      were so different from those before the Secretary of  State  that
      it  undermined  the  factual  basis  of  the  balancing  exercise
      performed  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  In  such   cases   the
      Adjudicator, or the Tribunal,  should  carry  out  the  balancing
      exercise  itself,  but  paying  considerable  deference  to   the
      Secretary of State's view of the  importance  of  maintaining  an
      immigration policy.

  20. In the light of the facts of this appeal, on the basis  that  the
      proper approach is to consider whether the  decision  was  within
      the range of reasonable responses open to the Secretary of State,
      the Tribunal are satisfied that there can only be one answer.  In
      the light of the Applicant's criminal and immigration history, it
      was clearly open to the Secretary of State to decide that removal
      would be proportionate despite the compassionate circumstances of
      a  separation  from  his  wife  and  child.  The  Applicant   has
      demonstrated a blatant disregard both for the  criminal  law  and
      for the immigration rules and has  not  hesitated  to  resort  to
      deception where necessary.

  21. If the Tribunal have to assess the issue of  proportionality,  we
      have no doubt in the light of the guidelines in Razgar and giving
      due  deference  to  the  importance  of   maintaining   effective
      immigration   control,   that   the   decision   to   remove   is
      proportionate. The Tribunal can see no reason why  the  Appellant
      should  not  be  expected  to  return  to  Jamaica  and  make  an
      application for entry clearance in accordance with the Rules.  It
      is argued by Mr Ikie  that  one  consequence  will  be  that  the
      Applicant might not be granted entry  clearance  because  of  his
      criminal convictions and the fact of  his  deportation.  However,
      that flows from the Applicant's own behaviour and the  importance
      of protecting the public from such behaviour.


  22. The only substantial reason put forward as to why  the  Applicant
      should not return to Jamaica and make an  application  for  entry
      clearance is that there is a  continued  fear  of  violence  from
      criminal gangs. His appeal was refused, rightly, on  both  asylum
      and Article 3 grounds. Insofar as the Applicant  is  at  risk  of
      violence in Jamaica there is no reason why he should not look  to
      the Jamaican authorities for protection.

  23. In summary, in our view, the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  on  the
      issue of proportionality were not sustainable on the evidence. He
      has failed to take all relevant factors into  account  and  given
      undue weight to a relatively  minor  issue,  the  effect  on  the
      family income of the loss of employment by the Applicant's  wife.
      He has failed to consider whether  or  not  the  Applicant  could
      reasonably  be  expected  to  return  to  Jamaica  to   make   an
      application for entry clearance.

  24. This is not  a  case  without  compassionate  circumstances.  The
      Adjudicator found that the Applicant's  wife  was  an  impressive
      witness both as to her probity, hard work and commitment  to  her
      husband and child. The Applicant has said  in  a  letter  to  the
      Tribunal that he really does regret his immigration record. He is
      ashamed of his convictions and has no wish to be in  trouble  for
      the rest of his life. We hope that this is the case, but the fact
      remains that the issue for the Tribunal is whether  removing  the
      Applicant to Jamaica would be a breach of  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations  under  the  Human   Rights   Convention   with   the
      consequence that the Secretary of  State  would  be  required  to
      permit the Applicant to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
      having  made  a  proper  application  for  entry   clearance   in
      accordance with the Rules. For  the  reasons  the  Tribunal  have
      given, we are not satisfied that any such conclusion is justified
      on the facts of this appeal.  We are satisfied that removal would
      be proportionate to a legitimate aim.

  25. In these circumstances, the appeal by the Secretary of  State  is
      allowed.




                                                             Mr H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
