
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |              |                    |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision      |_A (Christian -     |
|                  |                      |number:       |Persecution -       |
|                  |                      |              |Protection) Egypt   |
|                  |                      |              |[2003] UKIAT 00056  |
|Heard on:         |29th July 2003        |Appeal number:|                    |
|Date typed:       |30th July 2003                                           |
|Date promulgated: | 29th August 2003                                        |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|Before:                                                                     |
|MS. D. K. GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                   |
|MR. R BAINES JP                                                             |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D J. Webb, of D J. Webb & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Mr. M. Davidson, Senior Home Office  Presenting
                        Officer.

1.    The Appellant is a national of Egypt, aged about 35 years. He  arrived
     in the United Kingdom on 20th June 1999 and claimed asylum about a week
     later. He has appealed, with leave, against the determination of Mr.  A
     R Williams, an Adjudicator, who (following a hearing on  24th  February
     2003 at Hatton Cross) dismissed his appeal on asylum and  human  rights
     grounds against the Respondent's decision of 15th November 2001 to give
     directions for his removal to Egypt as an illegal entrant.
1.2   The Appellant's asylum claim was  certified.  The  Adjudicator  upheld
     the certificate. Accordingly, the appeal before us relates only to  the
     Appellant's human rights appeal.

2.    The issue which is before  us  is  whether,  as  a  Muslim  covert  to
     Christianity, the Appellant faces a real risk of treatment sufficiently
     severe as to amount to persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3,
     at the hands of the Egyptian authorities as well as  at  the  hands  of
     Islamic groups and individuals.

3.    The Appellant made his claim on asylum and human  rights  grounds  and
     the Adjudicator dismissed it on both  grounds.  The  asylum  and  human
     rights grounds relate to risk of persecution or treatment  contrary  to
     Article 3 on  return  to  Egypt,  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the
     Appellant, who was born as a Muslim, converted to the  Christian  faith
     whilst he was still living in Egypt. He was  a  university  student  in
     Egypt between 1989 and 1994. During  this  period,  he  was  beaten  up
     several times by Islamic groups. On  one  occasion,  he  was  arrested,
     beaten and released after three months. He became a university lecturer
     in 1996. He claims he was followed by undercover police and fundamental
     Muslims due to his Christianity. He was appointed to teach  geopolitics
     at the university. He taught students about Christianity. He  was  told
     on one occasion that he would be killed if he did  not  stop  lecturing
     about freedom of religion. He says there were  Islamic  guards  in  his
     classroom. He was forbidden to talk to students about Christianity  and
     he was eventually sacked. He was told  that  he  was  manipulating  the
     students. He did, however, return to his job as  "they  were  short  of
     lecturers" but he promised not to teach  Christianity.  Later,  he  was
     suspended but told he could work in the university administration area.
     He refused. He then applied for several jobs, but his applications were
     refused without any reasons being given. When he told his mother  about
     his conversion to Christianity, she  was  not  pleased.  She  told  the
     neighbourhood and he was then abused by many in his neighbourhood.  His
     sister was viciously attacked in the  streets.  The  perpetrators  said
     that it was because of his religious activities. He  regularly  attends
     church in the United Kingdom, particularly the Orthodox Coptic  Church,
     near High Street, Kensington.

4.    The Adjudicator had no  doubt  that  the  Appellant  is,  and  was,  a
     Christian in a largely non-Christian  country.  He  did  not  make  any
     specific findings as the Appellant's alleged past experiences in Egypt.
     However, he found as a fact,  that  the  Appellant  had  suffered  some
     discrimination and harassment  which  fell  short  of  persecution.  He
     accepted in generality the submission  that  converts  to  Christianity
     from Islam face harder treatment than Christians who have  always  been
     Christians. However, he was unable to say, even on the  lower  standard
     of proof, that the Appellant had suffered persecution in  a  Convention
     sense whilst in Egypt or has a well-founded fear of persecution  should
     he return to Egypt. The Adjudicator also  found  as  a  fact  that  the
     Appellant had a viable internal flight alternative.

5.    The grounds of application assert that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
     find that  the  Appellant  had  not  suffered  persecution,  given  the
     Appellant's  accounts  of  physical  beatings,  detentions  and   other
     degrading treatment which  the  Adjudicator  had  apparently  accepted.
     Furthermore, it was asserted that the internal flight  option  was  not
     open to the Appellant

6.    Leave  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was  granted  because  the  Vice
     President granting leave considered that the grounds were arguable.

7.    Mr. Webb sought to adduce in evidence a  small  bundle  of  documents,
     which he informed us the Appellant had insisted should  be  before  the
     Tribunal. These were documents  which  he  had  received  from  persons
     connected with his church.  We  agreed  to  receive  the  documents  in
     evidence, although they were being served late.

8.1   In Mr. Webb's  submission,  the  crux  of  the  Appellant's  case  was
     correctly put by the Adjudicator - that is, that as a convert from  the
     Muslim faith to the Christian faith, the Appellant fears that he  would
     receive serious harm at the hands of members of the general  population
     and the Egyptian authorities. The harm that he would  face  is  greater
     than the harm a person who was born as a Christian faces. Page 5 of the
     Appellant's bundle shows that there were  serious  attempts  to  impose
     Shari'a law in Egypt. Although this was not passed and although Shari'a
     law is not imposed rigorously in  Egypt,  it  strongly  influences  the
     legal systems and  the  approach  of  the  government.  Various  Muslim
     clerics have repeatedly taken a stronger line than  the  official  line
     taken by the government. Page 13 of the Appellant's bundle  shows  that
     there were calls in the 1990s to impose the  death  penalty  on  Muslim
     converts. Page 40 of the Appellant's bundle, which is a  document  from
     Jubilee Campaign, shows that converts are in a most difficult position.
      The following few pages of the Appellant's bundle give examples of the
     difficulties experienced in the 1990s.  Pages 22 and  27  give  further
     examples.  All these are incidents which happened recently -  that  is,
     in the 1990s.  There are also incidents in 2000  and  2002.   The  most
     recent incident is shown on page 27, which mentions an ongoing campaign
     to secure the release of Christian converts.   The  USSD  report  dated
     March 2003 states:

            (page 14, fifth and sixth paragraphs)

            Several dozen Christians who were accused  of  proselytising  or
                 who had converted from Islam were  harassed  by  police  or
                 arrested on charges of violating  Article  98  (F)  of  the
                 Penal Code, which prohibits  citizens  from  ridiculing  or
                 insulting heavenly religions or inciting sectarian strife.

            In cases involving conversion from Islam  to  Christianity,  the
                 authorities have charged several  converts  with  violating
                 laws prohibiting the falsification of documents.   In  such
                 cases, converts, who fear  government  harassment  if  they
                 officially register the change from Islam to  Christianity,
                 have altered their identification cards and other  official
                 documents themselves to reflect their new religion.

            (our emphasis)

8.2   Mr. Webb submitted that the  words  which  we  have  emboldened  above
     shows that converts fear government harassment and that mere conversion
     was sufficient to trigger the reaction of the police referred to in the
     first paragraph quoted above. In Mr. Webb's submission,  converts  face
     not merely general discrimination but something more serious from  both
     officials and members of the population.  The  Appellant's  own  mother
     turned against him. Paragraph 12(a) of the Appellant's statement  shows
     that he was arrested on one occasion in 1992 and held for 3 months.  In
     1997, he was arrested again (page A3 of the appeal bundle refers).  The
     number of converts  in  Egypt  is  much  smaller  than  the  number  of
     Christians in Egypt.

9.1   Mr. Davidson  acknowledged  that  the  Adjudicator  appeared  to  have
     proceeded on the  basis of accepting  the  Appellant's  conversion.  It
     would appear that the Adjudicator  had  accepted  the  summary  of  the
     Appellant's account as contained at paragraph 12 of the  Determination.
     Unfortunately, the Adjudicator had not mentioned  the  1997  arrest  in
     paragraph 12 of the Determination. In any event, Mr. Davidson submitted
     that the Adjudicator had reviewed the objective evidence and found that
     the  treatment  the  Appellant  had  experienced  did  not  amount   to
     persecution or in breach of Article 3 and that his  fear  of  receiving
     such treatment was not well-founded.

9.2   Page 14 of the USSD Report states that proselytising or conversion  is
     not prohibited and that Shari'a law is not strictly enforced in  Egypt.
     The third paragraph on page 14 states that the practice of Christianity
     does not conflict with Shari'a law and, for the most part,  members  of
     the non-Muslim minority worshipped without  harassment  and  maintained
     links with co-religionists abroad. In Mr.  Davidson's  submission,  the
     fact that members of the non-Muslim  minority  were  able  to  maintain
     links with  co-religionists  abroad  shows  the  government's  tolerant
     attitude. This is evidenced further by the fact that Father Bushra, who
     had written in support of the Appellant's appeal, had himself travelled
     to and from Egypt. Page 15 of the USSD report  refers  to  improvements
     over the past two years, such as the introduction  of  the  Coptic  era
     into the history curriculum in all  government  schools  and  increased
     coverage of Christian subjects in the mass media. Page 18 of  the  USSD
     Report states that the total number of People's Assembly  members  from
     religious minorities (all Christians) was seven and that two Christians
     served among the  32  ministers  in  the  Cabinet.  In  Mr.  Davidson's
     submission, the government has a generally  tolerant  attitude  towards
     members of the Christian faith. The fact that  there  are  difficulties
     was acknowledged by the Adjudicator. Page 14 of the USSD Report  states
     that approximately 8 to 10 % of  the  population  are  Christians,  the
     majority of whom belong to the Coptic  Orthodox Church.

9.3   The documents at pages 14, 22 and 27 of the Appellant's  bundle  which
     were being relied upon relate to incidents which took place  some  time
     ago. Page 14 relates to an  incident  from  1993  and  page  22  to  an
     incident which appears to have taken place in 1992.  It  is  not  clear
     whether page 27 refers  to  an  incident  in  July  2003.  The  alleged
     incident relates to a person who had falsified his documents. There  is
     no indication of what would happen to a person who does not falsify his
     documents.

9.4   The letter from Father Bushra does not provide  any  sources  for  the
     general assertions made in the letter, nor does it provide any specific
     details. In his final paragraph, Father Bushra states, in referring  to
     the Appellant's fate: "If he miraculously manages to survive ...". This
     shows that Father Bushra  was  overstating  the  position,  given  that
     converts are not routinely killed. The letter from  Rev  Heinin  quotes
     from a Human Rights Watch World Report which is dated 1993 /  1994.  It
     is not relevant today.

9.5   The Appellant is someone who  had  managed  to  achieve  a  job  as  a
     lecturer, even after he converted.

9.6   Overall, Mr. Davidson submitted that the Adjudicator had assessed  the
     objective evidence correctly and he asked us to dismiss the appeal.

10.   Mr. Webb  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  had  not  claimed  to  have
     falsified any documents. Page 57 of the Appellant's bundle mentions two
     recent incidents. The fact that the USSD Report mentions that, over the
     past two decades,  several  dozen  Christians  have  been  harassed  or
     arrested shows that this is a topical subject and that the problems are
     ongoing. He asked us to allow the appeal.

11.   We reserved  our  determination.  We  have  decided  to  dismiss   the
     appeal. We now give our reasons.

12.1  The letters of support contained in the small bundle submitted on  the
     hearing day were not helpful. There was a letter (undated)  written  by
     Father Pishroy Bushra  of  the  St.  Mark's  Church  in  Allen  Street,
     Kensington, in response to a letter from Mr. Webb dated 21st July 2003.
     In his letter, Father Bushra makes various general assertions but  does
     not support his assertions by reference to any examples or sources. Nor
     does he give any specific details. There is also a one page letter from
     Father Zakaria Henein dated 24th July 2003 in which he  refers  to  the
     case of one Hany Sakr, whose application he says was allowed. Mr.  Webb
     informed us that that was an appeal which was  allowed  at  Adjudicator
     level. We have not been given any details relating to  that  case,  nor
     have we been told whether there was a successful application for  leave
     to appeal to the Tribunal. There is another  letter  from  Rev  Zakaria
     Henein (which we assume is the same person) but  this  quotes  from  an
     Human Rights Watch World Report of 1994. Rev Henein then refers to  his
     own experiences. From this, we see that  he  was  imprisoned  in  Egypt
     twice, the last time as long ago as in 1989.

12.2  Much of the objective material in the Appellant's  62-page  bundle  is
     now dated. This applies for example, to:

      (i)   The extract from "Fact File" at pages 1 to 5 of the  Appellant's
           bundle, which is dated Spring 1989 - that is, over 14 years ago.



      (ii)  The report of the fact-finding  trip undertaken by  David  Alton
           MP and the Jubilee Campaign (pages 6 to 18). The trip took place
           from September 1993 to October 1993 - that is,  about  10  years
           ago.

      (iii) The Press release of the Jubilee Campaign at pages  19  and  20.
           This is dated April 1994 (nine years ago).

12.3  The  incidents  which  Mr.  Webb  referred  to  us  mostly  relate  to
      incidents in the 1990s. For example:

      (i)   the incident at page 22 relates to an incident  in  1992.   This
           is the same incident mentioned at page  14  of  the  Appellant's
           bundle, on which Mr. Webb also relied.

      (ii)  Page 31 of the Appellant's bundle refers to the problems of  two
           Christian converts from Islam. However, one of these experienced
           problems from the police in 1995 and in 1996, the other in 1994.



      (iii) Page 42 refers to  a  human  rights  activist  who  was  granted
           asylum in the United Kingdom in the month before the report  was
           issued. It was issued in October  1998,  which  means  that  the
           incidents which this particular  person  experienced  must  have
           taken place in September 1998, or earlier.

12.4  Accordingly, all of the above documents, which are now  dated,  cannot
     be reliably accepted as a true  indication  of  the  current  position,
     although we accept that they provide useful background information. The
     current position is more accurately reflected in the USSD Report  dated
     March 2003, to which we refer below.

12.5  Other evidence to which we  have  been  referred  in  the  Appellant's
      bundle relate to persons  who  have  falsified  their  documents.  For
      example:

      (i)   the incident at page 27.

      (ii)  the incident on page 57 which is said to have  occurred  on  7th
           May 2002.

      The Appellant has not falsified his documents. There is  therefore  no
      real risk that he would be mistreated for that reason.

12.6  This therefore leaves us, in essence, with one fairly recent  incident
      which is recorded at page 57 of the Appellant's bundle.  The  incident
      relates to the kidnapping by Muslim fundamentalists of a  14-year  old
      Coptic Christian girl whose family were sheltering a  Muslim  convert.
      She was later rescued  but  it  is  said  that  she  continued  to  be
      threatened until the family were forced to send her abroad. It is said
      that other members of the family were interrogated by the  police  and
      were frequently harassed by threatening telephone calls.  We  are  not
      told about the nature of the interrogation by the police of the family
      members. It is not possible to  tell  from  this  report  whether  the
      police were doing anything other than carrying  out  their  legitimate
      duty of investigating a kidnapping. In any event, the police are  only
      said  to  have  interrogated  family  members.  No   mistreatment   is
      suggested. There is nothing in the USSD Report  to  suggest  that  the
      police were unable or unwilling to  provide  protection.  Indeed,  the
      fact that they were involved in interrogating family members and  that
      there was a rescue operation would tend to suggest the  contrary.   We
      acknowledge, however, that the article does not state who launched the
      rescue operation. At the  most, all that this incident shows  is  that
      persons who are Muslim converts to  the  Christian  faith,  and  born-
      Christians  who  help  them,  do  experience  problems   from   Muslim
      fundamentalists. The mere fact that the young  girl's  family  decided
      that she go abroad does not mean that,  if  she  and  her  family  had
      exercised an internal flight option, they would not have been safe.

12.7  We turn now to the USSD report, which  is  generally  accepted  as  an
      impartial document.  The report we have is the most recent one,  dated
      March 2003, which is the report for the year 2002. This  provides some
      helpful information. It states that approximately 8 to  10  %  of  the
      population are Christians, the majority of whom belong to  the  Coptic
      Orthodox Church. Neither the Constitution  nor  the  Civil  and  Penal
      Codes prohibits  proselytising  or  conversion.  Although  the  report
      states that several dozen Christians who were accused of proselytising
      or who had converted from Islam were harassed by police or arrested on
      charges of violating Article 98(F) of the Penal  Code,  we  note  that
      this refers to harassment and, further, that the number  of  incidents
      total  several  dozen  over  a  period  of  two  decades.  Whilst   we
      acknowledge that the fact that this is mentioned in  the  USSD  Report
      shows that the problem is still (in Mr. Webb's words) a "topical one",
      the fact is that the reference is to a very small number of  incidents
      over a very long period.  Where  the  authorities  have  taken  action
      against converts from Islam to Christianity, this appears to relate to
      persons who have falsified their identity  cards  and  other  official
      documents themselves  in  order  to  reflect  their  new  status.  The
      Appellant is not someone who has falsified  his  documents.  Mr.  Webb
      submitted that the fact that converts fear  government  harassment  if
      they officially register the change of their religion means that  they
      are harassed by the government. We are not prepared to  jump  to  this
      conclusion. This is not what the report states (see the quote from the
      USSD Report at our paragraph 8.1 above). In  any  event,  "harassment"
      does not equate to "persecution".

12.8  The USSD report states that President Mubarak took  several  steps  to
      facilitate church repairs. In 1999, he  issued  a  decree  making  the
      repair of all places of worship subject to a 1976  civil  construction
      code. The decree was significant symbolically because it made churches
      and mosques equal under the law.  However,  Christians  reported  that
      local permits still were subject to approval by security  authorities.
      In a well received step on 17th December 2002, the President  declared
      that 7th January, Coptic Christmas, would  henceforth  be  a  national
      holiday. The move was warmly welcomed by Christians and  also  by  the
      country's  principal  Islamic  leader.  The  USSD  report  refers   to
      improvements in the  past  2  years  in  some  areas  -  such  as  the
      introduction of the Coptic era into  the  history  curriculum  in  all
      government schools and increased coverage of Christian subjects in the
      mass  media.  We  acknowledge  that  the  report  makes  reference  to
      discriminatory practices which persisted such as suspected statistical
      under-representation of the size of the Christian  population  in  the
      1986 census. It also states that there were no Christians  serving  as
      governors, police commissioners, city mayors, university presidents or
      deans and that there were few Christians in the  upper  ranks  of  the
      security services and armed forces. Against that, we note  that  there
      are seven Christians who  serve  in  the  People's  Assembly  and  two
      Christians who serve in the 32-member Cabinet. The USSD Report  refers
      to discrimination  against  Christians  continuing  in  public  sector
      employment, in staff appointments to public universities etc.

12.9  Overall, we gain the impression that Christians  in  Egypt,  including
      converts from Islam, are not at real risk  of  treatment  sufficiently
      severe or systematic as to amount  to  persecution  or  in  breach  of
      Article 3  at  the  hand  of  the  Egyptian  authorities.  Whilst  the
      Appellant has claimed to have been arrested on  two  occasions,  these
      arrests took place in 1992 and  in  1997.   After  his  conversion  in
      Egypt, he was able to secure  employment  in  Egypt  as  a  university
      lecturer. The difficulties he experienced from  the  university  arose
      from the fact that he had taught students  Christianity,  rather  than
      the subject he was appointed to teach.  As  Mr.  Webb  confirmed,  the
      Appellant  is  not  someone  who  has  falsified  his   identification
      documents. He is therefore not at risk of action being  taken  against
      him by the Egyptian authorities on that account. We acknowledge  that,
      although Shari'a law is  not  strictly  enforced  in  Egypt,  it  does
      influence the legal system and society in general. We accept that  the
      Appellant  may  face  discrimination  at  the  hands   of   government
      officials, and that his position as a Muslim  convert  will  be  worse
      than that faced by a person born as a Christian. However,  it  is  not
      reasonably  likely  that  he  would   receive   treatment   which   is
      sufficiently severe as to  amount  to  persecution  or  in  breach  of
      Article 3 of the ECHR at the hands of the Egyptian authorities.

12.10  So  far  as  the  Appellant's  fear  of  Muslim   fundamentalist   or
      individuals is concerned, the  USSD  report  states  that  the  Coptic
      Christians in Egypt were the objects of occasional violent assaults by
      the Islamic groups and  other  terrorists  and  that  some  Christians
      alleged that the government was lax in protecting lives and  property,
      as several riots and  conflicts  with  injuries  and  property  damage
      occurred  during  the  year.  We  note  that  the  report  refers   to
      "occasional violent assaults" and, further,  goes  on  to  state  that
      there were no reports of terrorist attacks against  Christians  during
      the year. We have to decide this appeal on the low standard of a  real
      risk. Whilst we acknowledge that the Appellant is at greater risk,  as
      a Muslim convert, than a person who is born a Christian, the  evidence
      does not show that the  risk  that  he  will  face  difficulties  from
      Islamic groups is sufficient to reach the low standard of a real risk.



12.11 In any event, we are satisfied that, if he  does  experience  problems
      from any Islamic groups or individuals, he would be able  to  turn  to
      the Egyptian authorities for sufficient protection. The fact that  the
      USSD Report refers to some Christians alleging that the government was
      lax in protecting lives and property  does  not  mean  that  there  is
      insufficient protection. Furthermore, this particular sentence in  the
      USSD Report has to be seen within the  context  of  the  rest  of  the
      information contained in that report, to which we have referred above.
      Furthermore, we agree with the Adjudicator that the  Appellant  has  a
      viable internal flight option. He does  not  need  to  return  to  his
      former neighbourhood. He would be safe, if he were to  relocate.  This
      would not be  unduly  harsh.  Indeed,  we  note  that,  in  the  final
      paragraph of his statement at page A4 of the statutory appeal  bundle,
      he said that he had gone to live in Alexandria.  He  did  not  mention
      having experienced any  actual  problems  in  Alexandria,  apart  from
      saying that, as a stranger, people were interested in him and he  left
      Alexandria because he  did  not  want  to  create  further  suspicion.
      Although he said that he lived as a virtual recluse in Alexandria,  he
      was able to attend church.

12.12 For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that the  Adjudicator's
      finding that the Appellant does not face  a  real  risk  of  treatment
      sufficiently severe as to amount to persecution or treatment in breach
      of Article 3 is sound on the evidence which was  before  him,  and  we
      make the same finding on the evidence which is before us. We are  also
      of the view that the Adjudicator's finding that the  Appellant's  past
      experiences did not amount to persecution is one  which  was  open  to
      him, bearing in mind that (in relation to  his  problems  from  Muslim
      groups and individuals) he did not make any complaints to the police.

13.   For all of these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

      Decision
      The appeal of the Secretary of State is DISMISSED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 8th August 2003
