
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |JK (Risk-Kikuyu) Kenya CG   |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00044          |
|On  25  April 2003         |        |                            |
|Dictated 25 April 2003                                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19/08/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr D Bremmer                                                      |
|Mr P Rogers, JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances
For the appellant:     Mr A Durance of Counsel
      Instructed by AS Law, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms D Prentice, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by Joseph Kamau, a citizen  of  Kenya,  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs J Baker) who dismissed his appeal
      against the decision made on 22 November 2001 refusing  to  grant  him
      leave to enter under the provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998.

2.    The background to this appeal is that the  appellant  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom on 28 March 1998  claiming  asylum  on  arrival.   This
      application was refused on 22 May 1999.  An appeal was dismissed by an
      Adjudicator but remitted for a fresh hearing.  The  appeal  was  again
      dismissed and the subsequent  application  for  leave  to  appeal  was
      refused. The appellant then asserted  that  a  refusal  to  grant  him
      exceptional leave to remain would be a breach of his rights under  the
      Human Rights Convention. For the reasons which the Secretary of  State
      has set out in letter dated 2 November  2001  he  was  satisfied  that
      there would not be a breach of Article 3 if the appellant were  to  be
      removed to Kenya.

3.    The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on  24  October
      2002.  It is the appellant's assertion that he would face  harassment,
      discrimination and ethnic cleansing in the Rift Valley.   He  asserted
      that he had no home to return to and no means of livelihood or support
      there.  The Secretary of State noted that the appellant's  mother  and
      younger brothers had relocated to Kiambu in the  Central  Province  to
      live with his grandparents after the 1994 ethnic  clashes.   He  noted
      that there were Kikuyu communities all around Kenya  and  Kikuyus  who
      had been displaced by ethnic clashes in the Rift Valley were  able  to
      travel freely to other parts of Kenya where they could integrate  with
      other Kikuyu communities.

4.    Having reviewed the evidence the Adjudicator found that the  appellant
      was a healthy, single young man.  He  might  find  himself  living  in
      quite primitive conditions on his return but in that regard  he  would
      be in a no different situation to other  people  who  lived  in  rural
      areas in Kenya.  He may have difficulties with employment but  he  was
      in a better position than most people in rural communities as  he  had
      acquired  a  good  command  of  spoken  and  written   English.    The
      Adjudicator took into account the objective evidence on Kenya and  the
      fact that there were still occasional  sporadic  outbreaks  of  ethnic
      violence even outside the Rift Valley.  She was not satisfied  on  the
      evidence as a whole that the life of a Kikuyu in Kenya was  such  that
      it put the appellant at risk of being  subjected  to  a  regime  where
      racial  discrimination  was  part  of  everyday  life.   It  was   not
      reasonably likely that there would be an interference with his  rights
      under Article 3 if returned.

5.    The grounds of appeal argue that the  Adjudicator  applied  the  wrong
      standard of proof when she referred to what was reasonably  likely  in
      paragraphs 19, 22 and 24.  It is also alleged that  her  findings  are
      irrational as  she  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  ethnic
      persecution of Kikuyus was not as a result of acts  of  third  parties
      but was a policy orchestrated  by  the  government.   To  that  extent
      internal relocation was not an appropriate alternative.  The appellant
      had been the victim of targeted harm because of his ethnicity  outside
      the Rift Valley and in  the  area  where  his  family  had  relocated.
      Attacks on the Kikuyu were not limited to the  Rift  Valley.   It  was
      further argued that the Adjudicator failed  to  show  by  any  or  any
      adequate reasoning whether she had taken  account  of  these  factors.
      She was referred an Adjudicator's determination  in  Wanjiku  dated  6
      August 2002 where an appeal by an ethnic Kikuyu had  been  allowed  on
      both asylum and human rights grounds.

6.    When granting leave to appeal, the Vice President commented  that  the
      Adjudicator appeared to have confused the assessment  of  whether  the
      appellant had shown substantial reasons for concluding that  he  would
      be at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  in  his  home  district
      with the considerations required for  the  internal  flight/protection
      alternative.  She should have decided firstly whether there was a well-
      founded fear or real risk in his home district of the Rift Valley  and
      then gone on to consider the issue of internal flight.

7.    At the hearing before the  Tribunal  Mr  Durance  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator's findings were confused.  She had referred to the 11 risk
      factors in Sayandan but these were specific to Sri Lankan appeals.  It
      was not clear from her conclusions what her findings were.  Mr Durance
      referred the Tribunal to background evidence relating to  the  current
      situation in Kenya and in particular to  paras  5.45-52  of  the  CIPU
      report 2002.  He submitted that there would still be a  real  risk  to
      the appellant of treatment contrary to Article  3  because  he  was  a
      Kikuyu.  His experiences in the past would put him at risk.  There was
      no other particular characteristic in the appellant's background which
      would put him at risk.

8.    Ms Prentice submitted that  even  though  it  was  arguable  that  the
      Adjudicator had not made clear findings about the risk  of  Article  3
      treatment in the  Rift  Valley,  her  findings  were  clear  that  the
      appellant would be safe in other areas and that it would not be unduly
      harsh for him to return.  She was entitled to give  little  weight  to
      housing and employment problems.

9.    The Adjudicator has arguably  conflated  the  issues  of  whether  the
      appellant would be at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  in  his
      home area with factors relevant to the issue of whether  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for him to relocate elsewhere in Kenya.  The risk factors
      identified in Sayandan are helpful to illustrate the kind  of  factors
      which should be taken into account when assessing internal flight  but
      inevitably they  are  of  limited  application  when  considering  the
      situation in Kenya as opposed to Sri Lanka.

10.   As the Adjudicator has commented in paragraph 16 of her  determination
      the history of the ethnic clashes in Kenya is set  out  in  paragraphs
      5.42-51 of the CIPU report.  Two years of violence in the Rift  Valley
      had by 1993 forced 300,000 people to flee their  homes.   However,  by
      November 1999 President Moi made  a  statement  that  those  remaining
      displaced should return and that maximum  security  would  be  ensured
      although local human rights  observers  did  question  the  commitment
      behind  this  statement.   Ethnic  violence  is  also  dealt  with  in
      paragraph 5.52 but this relates to incidents in  1998.   The  Tribunal
      also  notes  that  in  January  2000  President  Moi  announced   that
      additional security forces would be deployed to  areas  including  the
      Rift Valley Province. There was an allegation from the then opposition
      leader Mwai Kibaki that the  government  had  failed  to  protect  its
      citizens and claiming that only Kikuyus had been  targeted.   In  this
      context the Tribunal notes that Mwai Kibaki is now  the  President  of
      Kenya following the elections in December 2002.

11.   In assessing the risk to the appellant the  Adjudicator  was  entitled
      to take into account the Adjudicator's  determination  in  March  2000
      dismissing the asylum appeal.  The Adjudicator had found the appellant
      to be an unreliable  and  inconsistent  witness.   He  had  relied  in
      support of his claim on episodes in 1992 and  1994.   The  Adjudicator
      considered that it was probable that  the  appellant  and  his  family
      might have been affected by the clashes in 1992 and 1994 resulting  in
      the family relocating to the Kiambu  area.   She  commented  that  the
      appellant had not given any reasons as to why he did not relocate from
      the Rift Valley at that time.  He had travelled to Mombassa  where  he
      had stayed for some months and managed to find to a  job.   There  had
      been no evidence that  he  had  suffered  any  harassment  there.  The
      Adjudicator rejected his assertion that there was no  place  where  he
      could live in safety in Kenya.  She was satisfied that it would not be
      unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to follow his family's example by
      relocating in Kiambu.

12.   The situation has continued to improve since then and  there  has  now
      been a change of government in Kenya.  In the light of the passage  of
      time since the appellant left Kenya and the current circumstances, the
      Tribunal are satisfied that there is now no  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 were the appellant to return to his  home  area.
      Even  if  this  is  not  the  case,  the  Tribunal  agree   with   the
      Adjudicator's conclusion that it would not be unduly harsh for him  to
      settle elsewhere than in the Rift  Valley  as  other  members  of  his
      family have done.  She commented that even if he did not know what had
      happened to other members of his family as he asserted and was  unable
      to be reunited with them, there were  Kikuyu  communities  in  various
      parts of the country outside the Rift Valley to which he could go.

13.   Mr Durance  accepted  that  there  were  no  factors  other  than  the
      appellant's account of what had happened to him in the past to support
      a contention that there was anything particular in his  background  or
      circumstances which would put him at risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3.  The Tribunal were referred to the Human Rights World Watch
      Report 2002 referring to sporadic clashes between  members  of  ethnic
      groups allied to the ruling party and those perceived to  support  the
      opposition in the run-up to the 2002 election.  However, the elections
      have now taken place.  There is no reason to believe that there is any
      particular risk to the appellant because  of  his  Kikuyu  background.
      The Tribunal were referred to the determination in  Wanjiku  but  this
      determination was clearly decided on its own particular facts  at  the
      date of hearing.  Accordingly, for these  reasons,  in  our  view  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions were correct.

14.   This appeal is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
