
JD
|Heard at Field House on    |        |TN (Assessment of Evidence) |
|                           |        |Zimbabwe [2003] UKIAT 00197 |
|9 December 2003            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           11.12.2003                                      |
|Issued:            16/12/2003                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. J. Freeman (chairman)                                         |
|Mrs. L. H. S. Verity (legal member)                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |

For the Secretary of State:  Mr. J. Wyatt
For the claimant:      Mr. G. Rodwell, solicitor, Southern & Co, Nelson

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is a Home Office appeal against decision of the adjudicator, Mr.  K.
   S. Levin, sitting at Manchester on 20 May, allowing a  asylum  and  human
   rights appeal by a citizen of Zimbabwe.  The  adjudicator  was  seriously
   hindered by the unexplained absence of a presenting officer, and whatever
   may have to be said about the merit  of  his  decision,  he  did  a  very
   conscientious job of work reaching it.


2. We shall turn straight to the history of this case. The  claimant  is  a
   member of the Ndebele tribe and the family has their own  farm  in  that
   part of Zimbabwe. The claimant mentions at paragraph 3  of  her  witness
   statement that, in the early 1980s when she was only a small child,  'my
   father was apparently fighting to protect his farm when he was  brutally
   murdered. Despite threats, my mother kept possession of  the  farm'.  In
   that statement, she blames the Shona tribe generally  for  that,  though
   the adjudicator found that the notorious Fifth Brigade of the Zimbabwean
   armed forces had been involved. At all events, this was clearly an early
   attempt by the other side, however defined, to gain  possession  of  the
   farm.

3. The next seventeen years passed without serious incident  until  7  June
   2000, when the  claimant  says  her  brother  Bekithemba  'was  brutally
   murdered by war veterans who were trying to take over our family  farm'.
   That incident was specifically accepted by the adjudicator at  paragraph
   16. He goes on,

   I further accept the credibility of the appellant's  claim  that  on  12
   August 2000, six war veterans visited the  family  farm  and  threatened
   they would kill the appellant if her mother did not hand over the  deeds
   to the family farm.


   and at paragraph 17,


   I further find that it was as a direct consequence of the incident which
   occurred on 12 August 2001 when the war veterans threatened to kill  the
   appellant if the deeds to the family farm were not handed over  to  them
   which led to the appellant fleeing Zimbabwe on 27 September 2000.


   It is quite clear from those dates that the adjudicator there  meant  to
   refer to the same incident on 12 August 2000, and not 2001.

4. It is agreed the claimant left Zimbabwe by air,  on  her  own  passport.
   Since that time she has occasionally heard  from  her  mother,  and  her
   cousin who is living with her. They have gone to Beitbridge on the South
   Africa  border  and,  in  the  absence  of  a  presenting  officer,  the
   adjudicator quite rightly took up the Q of whether  internal  flight  to
   there was possible. He goes on to say this at paragraph 18:

   Pertinently, the appellant in her evidence, told me that  the  only  way
   that her mother and cousin could buy food at Beitbridge was to join  the
   Zanu-PF as merchants had been instructed  only  to  sell  food  to  card
   carrying members of the Zanu-PF. The claimant's evidence in this  regard
   is  consistent  with  the  background  material  which   documents   the
   government   sanctioned   policy   of   food   distribution.   In   such
   circumstances, even if it was safe for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
   Beitbridge, I find that it would be unduly harsh to expect her to do so.

5. Mr. Wyatt argued that this family were only of any serious  interest  to
   Zanu-PF as  the  owners  of  the  farm,  of  which  they  had  now  been
   dispossessed. There  was  no  reason  why  they  should  not  return  to
   Beitbridge or elsewhere in Zimbabwe. We took up  with  Mr.  Rodwell  the
   adjudicator's view of the background evidence, in the  passage  we  have
   quoted from paragraph 18. We particularly  enquired  whether  there  was
   indeed any background material to confirm the  suggestion  that  through
   ordinary retail shops food was only  available  to  holders  of  Zanu-PF
   cards, either generally or at particular locations.

6. What Mr. Rodwell referred us to was an Associated Press  release  of  19
   March 2003. The relevant passages were these:

   Aid workers have accused the government of using  food  as  a  political
   tool against the members  of  the  opposition  Movement  For  Democratic
   Change, which narrowly lost  parliamentary  elections  of  2000,  and  a
   disputed Presidential poll of March.


   Some gas stations again ran dry in Harare on Monday with long  lines  of
   cars waiting for fuel, food lines were common outside  stores  promising
   deliveries, and selling corn meal, bread, sugar, cooking oil and milk.

7. There are  known  difficulties  with  aid  supplies  in  Zimbabwe  being
   distributed under Government auspices only, and presumably to those  who
   either were or pretended to be government supporters. This case does not
   involve supplies of that kind. Mr. Rodwell very  frankly  concedes  that
   there is  no  background  evidence  to  which  he  can  refer  us  about
   difficulties in buying food from ordinary shops without  a  party  card.
   There are of course shortages and queues, as we saw in the  second  part
   of that passage, but that is another matter.

8. Mr. Rodwell quite rightly referred us to the long  history  of  conflict
   between the government side and the Ndebele people, but he did not argue
   that all Ndebele were at risk in Zimbabwe. He suggested that  there  was
   some special risk to this claimant on account of  her  support  for  the
   Liberty Party of Zimbabwe (LPZ).  This  organisation,  and  the  Liberty
   Party tout court, which  is  a  fragment  of  it,  were  dealt  with  in
   paragraphs 5.12 to 5.15 of the CIPU report before the adjudicator (April
   2003, substantially unaltered in that for October). What is  said  there
   can reasonably be summarised on the basis that the LPZ/Liberty Party  is
   a negligible force in Zimbabwe  politics;  and  any  annoyance  that  it
   causes to the Government side is  a  matter  of  highly  localised  pin-
   pricks.


9. Nevertheless, we have been referred  to  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Deborah
   Potts, who is a "senior lecturer in geography with reference to Southern
   Africa" at King's College London. She gives no details of  any  personal
   experiences of Zimbabwe that she might have. She does consider it  worth
   pointing out that she has 'until recently been a supporter of Zimbabwe's
   Zanu-PF government which transformed people's lives in  terms  of  their
   general welfare in the 1980s'. How that might reflect on  her  political
   judgement we shall leave for others to consider.

10. The material passages of her report relied on by Mr. Rodwell are  these.
   At page 3:

   The events surrounding the  2000  parliamentary  elections  were  widely
   reported in the British media and the Home Office must be aware of them.
   Many MDC supporters, and in particular party workers  were  killed,  and
   many more suffered violent treatment. It is important to note it was not
   only MDC supporters who suffered - anyone who made  clear  they  opposed
   the government was in line for persecution.

   She gives an example of various groups to which this appellant does  not
   belong and goes on to say

   not supporting Zanu-PF enough is sufficient to attract  persecution  let
   alone actively and visibly supporting an opposition group.

   No details, however, are given to support that conclusion.


11. On the following page, Dr. Potts goes on in a passage, also  printed  in
   bold type and for good measure double-underlined by someone,


   I would argue most strongly that no known  opposition  (whether  MDC  or
   other party) was already experienced persecution should be sent back  to
   Zimbabwe unless it has become clear that the government  has  ended  its
   litany of persecution. So far  the  evidence  is  that  persecution  has
   continued unabated.


12. While nobody in their right mind would seek to  defend  the  actions  or
   character of the Zimbabwe government, and  the  misuse  of  'litany'  is
   irrelevant, Dr. Potts, in  our  view,  especially  in  the  last  quoted
   passage, has gone well beyond the proper sphere of the expert into  that
   of the advocate, in which  her  approach  contrasts  strongly  with  the
   moderate and attractive way in which Mr. Rodwell presented his own case.
   We do not consider that Dr. Potts has adequately  supported  the  strong
   views that she expresses, and we think that her evidence in this, and in
   any other similar cases where it is presented, needs to be treated  with
   considerable caution.


13. We have to approach this case on the basis of  the  individual  risk  to
   this claimant. The first question raised  by  Mr.  Wyatt's  argument  in
   support of the appeal is whether there  is  any  real  risk  of  Zanu-PF
   seeking her out in Beitbridge  or  anywhere  else  to  which  she  might
   return. Mr. Rodwell  has  referred  us  to  the  interest  of  the  'war
   veterans' in the title deeds to the farm. We take the  view  that  these
   would be of limited interest in any case in  the  current  situation  in
   Zimbabwe, where property rights for land are hardly  respected  at  all.
   There is, in any case, no evidence that the claimant's mother, who seems
   from the evidence we have already quoted to  have  been  the  registered
   proprietor, or the person named on the deeds,  has  been  approached  to
   hand over the deeds while in  Beitbridge.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the
   claimant says that the men had 'threatened to kill  her  if  her  mother
   [our emphasis] did not hand over the deeds to the family farm'.

14. Then there is the family history. But, as we have already  pointed  out,
   the murder of both the claimant's father and her brother took  place  in
   attempts at various times to seize the family farm, which has  now  been
   done. We take the view that there is clearly  no  basis  on  which  this
   claimant, who it must be remembered was allowed to leave the country  on
   her own passport, would be sought out in Beitbridge, or  anywhere  else,
   unless she tried to get the farm back. There are of course, no  removals
   to Zimbabwe being carried out, but we have to approach the  case  as  if
   there were. There is no suggestion that this claimant  would  be  unwise
   enough to make an attempt of that kind.

15. Then we come to the remaining features of the situation  in  Beitbridge.
   Here the adjudicator clearly misunderstood the background evidence as to
   food sales, which was a cardinal point in  his  decision  that  internal
   flight there would be unduly harsh. Zimbabwe is one  of  the  best-known
   countries with which the Tribunal has to deal. English is  the  official
   language, and there are many contacts with this country. If  there  were
   any published or other independent evidence that ordinary tradesmen  had
   been selling food only to party cardholders, we should have expected  to
   see it, especially in the context of a case  clearly  so  professionally
   and conscientiously prepared on behalf of the claimant as this one was.

16. This was a crucial point, in our view, on  which  the  adjudicator  went
   wrong. His decision  went  out  on  9  June.  The  legal  basis  of  our
   jurisdiction was not canvassed before us. We are inclined  to  take  the
   view that the requirement in the present legislation for an error of law
   is  a  threshold  one,  which  only  falls  for  consideration  on   the
   application for permission to appeal. Whether  we  are  right  or  wrong
   about that, we are satisfied that this adjudicator's misunderstanding of
   the background evidence can be characterised as a clear  error,  and  if
   necessary one of of law. It was entirely understandable, in the  absence
   of a presenting officer, which once again is a  regrettable  feature  of
   this case, but the adjudicator was clearly wrong. It  follows  that  the
   Home Office appeal is allowed.
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
                                                                  (chairman)
