
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |BG (Removal to Eritrea of   |
|                           |        |Ethiopia/Eritrean) Eritrea  |
|                           |        |CG [2003] UKIAT 00091       |
|On  9 June 2003            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28/08/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Chairman)                                         |
|Mr J Freeman                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is or may be a citizen of Ethiopia or Eritrea.  She  has
      been given leave to appeal the determination of an Adjudicator, Miss M
      N Lingard, dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  to
      give directions for her removal from the  United  Kingdom  to  Eritrea
      following the refusal of asylum.

2.    Mr R O'Ryan of Counsel instructed by Noden & Co  Solicitors,  appeared
      for the appellant.  Mr S Walker, a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
      represented the respondent.

3.    The appellant, whose date of birth is 2 August 1982,  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom on 24 November 1999 using a false passport provided  by
      an agent.  She  claimed  asylum  on  29  November  1999.   The  notice
      containing the decision against which she appeals is dated 4 September
      2001.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 14 June 2002 and  leave  to
      appeal was granted on 1 August 2002.
4.    The appellant's parents originally came  from  what  is  now  Eritrea.
      They moved to and lived in  what  was  and  still  is  Ethiopia.   The
      appellant was born in Addis Ababa and lived with her parents. She  had
      no problems until the border conflict of May 1998.  Because of the war
      her schooling was disrupted and, as  a  consequence  of  her  Eritrean
      origin, she was subjected to verbal and physical abuse and threats  by
      Ethiopian students.  While she was at school, in May 1999, she  and  a
      friend were attacked by other students.  The appellant was hit on  the
      head and had a hot iron applied to her leg whilst her friend had a hot
      iron placed on her chest.  The authorities started coming to the house
      and abusing the family.  In May or June  1999  soldiers  came  to  the
      house and attacked her father. The appellant  was  hidden  in  a  seed
      store container.  After this her parents sent her to stay with an aunt
      about 45 km outside Addis Ababa.  Approximately three days  later  the
      appellant learned that her parents had been taken away  by  government
      soldiers.  She said that she did not know what had happened  to  them.
      The appellant remained with her aunt for  approximately  five  months.
      However, neighbours informed the authorities and  government  soldiers
      came and searched the house in about November  1999.  The  appellant's
      aunt then made arrangements for her to leave the country.

5.    The Adjudicator examined the appellant's  account  of  events  against
      the country information and concluded that she was  broadly  credible.
      However, the Adjudicator found that the appellant  had  not  told  the
      truth about contact with her family after her arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  It was likely that her parents had been deported to  Eritrea
      by the Ethiopian authorities.  It was also likely that  the  appellant
      knew about her parent's Eritrean background, where they were born  and
      their family connections.

6.    The Adjudicator  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  likely  to  be
      persecuted or suffer infringement of her Article 3 human rights if she
      was sent to Eritrea.   On  the  limited  medical  evidence,  from  the
      appellant's general practitioner, it was   not  likely  that  she  was
      suffering from post traumatic stress disorder.

7.    The grounds of appeal submit that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  finding
      that the appellant was or  could  become  an  Eritrean  citizen.   She
      should have explained how this  entitlement  arose.   Submissions  are
      made as to the circumstances in  which  individuals  are  entitled  to
      Eritrean nationality, but it is common ground that at  least  some  of
      these have been overtaken by more up-to-date country information.   It
      is argued that the appellant cannot be expected to apply for  Eritrean
      nationality and that the Adjudicator failed to give any or  sufficient
      weight to the evidence of Professor Cliffe.

8.    This appeal  first  came  before  us  on  27  November  2002  but  was
      adjourned so that the appellant could approach  the  Eritrean  Embassy
      with a  view  to  obtaining  a  passport  or  some  form  of  official
      documentation.  There was a subsequent hearing for mention only on  28
      April 2003.

9.    We have  an  expert  report  from  Professor  Lionel  Cliffe  dated  7
      February 2002 with a supplemental report dated 21 April  2003,  copies
      of the Tribunal determinations in Berhe  [2002]  UKIAT  06317,  Gemany
      [2002] UKIAT 07099, a letter from the appellant's solicitors, Noden  &
      Co, dated 23 April 2003, relating to  the  appellant's  visit  to  the
      Eritrean Embassy,  correspondence  between  NATFAM,  the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officers Unit and the  Eritrean  Embassy,  the  appellant's
      bundle running to 129  pages  and  the  Home  Office  Eritrea  Country
      Assessment of April 2003.

10.    Professor  Cliffe  gave  evidence  and  adopted  his   original   and
      supplementary reports.  He is retired and  an  Emeritus  Professor  of
      Politics at the University of Leeds.  He has studied the situation  in
      Eritrea and Ethiopia since the late 1970s and has  written  books  and
      articles on that part of Africa.  He visited both countries, twice  in
      2001 and Ethiopia again in 2002.  He keeps up-to-date  with  pertinent
      publications and on the Internet.

11.   From his evidence and the other country information before us we  draw
      the following conclusions.  The appellant  was  an  Ethiopian  citizen
      until 1993 when Eritrea  became  a  separate  state.   Thereafter  she
      remained an Ethiopian citizen and there is no evidence that she or her
      parents took any steps to become Eritrean citizens.   The  Adjudicator
      found that the appellant's parents were deported to Eritrea and  there
      is no appeal against this conclusion.  Whilst it is  likely  that  her
      parents are in Eritrea we do not know their status in that country.

12.   The appellant was therefore an Ethiopian citizen when  she  left  that
      country  in  about  November  1999.   In  the  light  of  the  removal
      directions to Eritrea  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  reach  any
      conclusions as to whether the appellant has lost  or  might  lose  her
      Ethiopian citizenship or whether, if she chose to return to  Ethiopia,
      she might be deported to Eritrea.

13.   What was the Eritrean Consulate in London has now been upgraded to  an
      Embassy.   Professor  Cliffe's  evidence  is  that  whilst  it  was  a
      Consulate all applications for  passports  or  travel  documents  were
      referred to Asmara for checking and, in all likelihood, for a decision
      as well.  Now that the post has been upgraded it would appear that not
      all applications are referred to Asmara.  Decisions  can  be  made  in
      London.  We have been provided with  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the
      Eritrean Embassy in London dated 29 August 2002  which  sets  out  the
      requirements for establishing Eritrean nationality.  This is the  same
      as the information contained in paragraph  5.6  of  the  current  CIPU
      report.  It would appear that, at least in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
      appellant is not able to go to the Embassy with  the  three  witnesses
      required to prove her entitlement to Eritrean  nationality.  Professor
      Cliffe points out that, both in London and in Eritrea, there  are  two
      types of document which  may  be  issued  to  an  individual  claiming
      Eritrean nationality.  Both are a  type  of  identity  card.   A  blue
      identity card is issued if the authorities accept that the  individual
      is an Eritrean national.  A yellow identity  card  is  issued  if  the
      individual is thought to have connections with  Eritrea  but  to  have
      come from Ethiopia and is unable  to  establish  full  entitlement  to
      Eritrean citizenship.  It appears that passports  are  not  issued  in
      London.  On an application in London there  is  a  third  alternative,
      that the individual may be refused any  form  of  identity  or  travel
      document.

14.   Professor Cliffe said that there were a limited number  of  countries,
      including Ethiopia and Eritrea, which did not accept  standard  United
      Kingdom or EU temporary travel documents for those  who  do  not  have
      proper passports or travel documents of their own.  Eritrea requires a
      travel document issued by its' own authorities.  This is either a blue
      card or a yellow card.  In the absence of any such card  it  does  not
      appear that the Secretary of State will be in any position  to  return
      the appellant to Eritrea.

15.   If documentation can be obtained for the appellant to  go  to  Eritrea
      we accept Professor Cliffe's conclusion  that  she  is  likely  to  be
      identified as coming from Ethiopia, because  of  her  language,  other
      cultural signs and her  documentation.   However,  it  is  clear  from
      Professor Cliffe's evidence and the  other  country  information  that
      tens of thousands of Ethiopians  of  Eritrean  descent  have  gone  to
      Eritrea from Ethiopia, either compulsorily or voluntarily.

16.   Professor Cliffe's evidence indicates that there have  been  divisions
      within the ruling party in Eritrea and that  dissident  elements  have
      been detained without trial and the  independent  media  closed  down.
      Official rhetoric tends to link opponents to Ethiopia.   There  is  no
      suggestion that the appellant has been involved in politics in any way
      or that she would be in any difficulty because of parental involvement
      in politics.  Professor Cliffe speaks of the possibility of  suspicion
      and harassment, but not of action,  except  in  relation  to  possible
      military service, which would  amount  to  persecution  or  cross  the
      Article 3 threshold.

17.   If the appellant goes to Ethiopia  with  a  yellow  card  but  not  an
      Eritrean passport or a blue card she may be able to find  her  parents
      or others who can vouch for her identity and thus enable her to obtain
      a blue card.

18.   If she does obtain a blue card she  is  within  the  age  range  which
      makes her  liable  for  compulsory  military  service.   There  is  no
      evidence that she has any conscientious objection to military  service
      or would refuse to serve.   In  the   circumstances  Professor  Cliffe
      confirmed and we find that the Eritrean forces are not engaged in  any
      conflict and she would not have to fight.

19.   Professor Cliffe's evidence as to military service and those who  hold
      yellow cards is unclear and to some extent contradictory.  On the  one
      hand he thought that those holding yellow cards, which  identify  them
      as Ethiopian, might be liable to military service in Eritrea.  He  was
      not able to point us to any country information, Eritrean law or  part
      of the Eritrean Constitution which specifies the required  nationality
      for military service.  On the other hand he said  that  those  holding
      yellow cards were sometimes  arrested,  questioned  and  detained  for
      short periods on suspicion that they were not Ethiopians but  in  fact
      Eritreans dodging military service.  If  Ethiopians  who  hold  yellow
      cards are not exempt from military  service  then  no  useful  purpose
      would be served by an Eritrean obtaining such a card with  a  view  to
      avoiding military  service.   We  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
      established that, if she were to hold a  yellow  card,  she  would  be
      liable to military  service  or  that,  if  she  was  not  so  liable,
      potential arrest, questioning and  even  short  periods  of  detention
      would amount to persecution or infringement of  her  Article  3  human
      rights.

20.   In his supplementary report Professor  Cliffe  suggests  that  if  the
      appellant were to make an application at the Eritrean Embassy  in  the
      United Kingdom she might provide them  with  information  which,  when
      referred back to Eritrea, could cause her difficulties.  There  is  no
      detail as to how this might arise and nothing in the  evidence  before
      us to indicate that there  is  anything  in  the  appellant's  or  her
      parent's history likely to cause her any problems.

21.   Mr O'Ryan conceded that to send the appellant to Eritrea would  be  to
      send her to "a country or  territory  to  which  there  is  reason  to
      believe that she will be admitted" within the provisions of Schedule 2
      Section 8(1)(c)(iii) of the Immigration Act 1971 and that on Professor
      Cliffe's evidence she was likely  to  be  admitted  to  Eritrea.   The
      Adjudicator records that the appellant had not argued that  she  would
      suffer significant ill treatment in Eritrea.   The grounds  of  appeal
      have not questioned this  conclusion.   He  accepted  that,  in  these
      circumstances, there was no current  basis  for  suggesting  that  the
      appellant feared persecution or serious harm in Eritrea.

22.   We dismiss this appeal.




                                                                 P R Moulden
                                                              Vice President



