
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |RA (Article8 - Family Life -|
|                           |        |Proportionality - Contact)  |
|                           |        |Bangladesh [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00149                       |
|On  20 October 2003        |        |                            |
|Prepared 21 October 2003                                          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|18 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr B Banerjee of Counsel, instructed by Malik &
                       Michael, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh,  appeals  with  leave  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs S Brookfield,  who  dismissed
      his appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

2.    The appellant made  a  clandestine  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom.
      There  is  some  doubt  about  the  date  of  arrival.   When  he  was
      interviewed in 1998 he said that he had arrived less  than  two  years
      previously but in the  appeal  papers  there  are  references  to  the
      appellant arriving in 1994.  In any event, he  did  not  claim  asylum
      until  1998  after  he  was  apprehended  by  the  authorities.    His
      application was refused on 22 June 2000 and  an  appeal  against  that
      decision was dismissed on 5 January 2001.  Subsequently the  appellant
      made an application under the Human  Rights  Convention.   The  appeal
      before the Adjudicator was against the decision made on  17  May  2002
      maintaining the respondent's refusal to grant leave to remain.

3.    The Adjudicator was not satisfied that there was any real  risk  of  a
      breach of Article 3 if  the  appellant  returned  to  Bangladesh.  The
      appellant was refused permission to appeal against  the  Adjudicator's
      findings on this aspect of the claim but  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal against her decision on Article 8 grounds.

4.    The appellant married Nazma Begum on 25 March 1998  and  they  have  a
      son born on 14 December 1998.  The appellant and his wife do not  live
      together.  The appellant claimed in his statement  that  the  marriage
      was  subsisting  and  that  he  has  been  trying  to  bring  about  a
      reconciliation.  He has been granted  a  contact  order  made  in  the
      Oldham County Court on 19 March 2002 granting him contact with his son
      every Tuesday together with such other contact as may be  agreed.   He
      has a number of close family members settled in the United Kingdom who
      support him both emotionally and financially.

5.    The Adjudicator was not satisfied that there was existing family  life
      between the appellant and his wife,  nor  between  the  appellant  and
      other close family members, a brother, two sisters and  an  uncle  who
      live in the United Kingdom.  However, she was satisfied that there was
      family life between the appellant and his  son,  that  to  remove  the
      appellant would amount to an interference with  his  family  life  and
      that removal would be for a legitimate purpose.

6.     The  issue  for  the  Adjudicator  was  to   consider   whether   the
      interference would  be  proportionate  to  this  legitimate  aim.  She
      concluded that whilst the appellant would not be  able  to  enjoy  the
      regular physical contact he presently had with his son,  he  would  be
      able to keep in touch by telephone and letters.  He would be  able  to
      make an application under  paragraph  246  of  HC395.   His  wife  was
      cooperative about the appellant exercising contact and it was possible
      that she would allow her son to visit him in Bangladesh  when  he  was
      old enough and capable of travelling there.  The Adjudicator  was  not
      satisfied that the appellant would encounter insurmountable  obstacles
      in establishing family life with his son  from  Bangladesh.   She  was
      satisfied that removal would not be disproportionate to  a  legitimate
      aim.

7.    The grounds of appeal argue that there would be a  breach  of  Article
      8(1) and that removal would be disproportionate.  It is said that  the
      Adjudicator failed to recognise the  importance  of  the  family  life
      between the appellant and his son who  had  been  born  here  and  had
      adopted the culture of this country.  In his submissions  Mr  Banerjee
      adopted these grounds.  He confirmed that the appellant had  continued
      to see his son regularly.  Visits  now  took  place  on  Saturdays  or
      Sundays as his son had started school.  The new arrangements had  been
      agreed between the parents.  The appellant had  rented  somewhere  for
      himself and hoped that he would be able to take his son  to  his  home
      sometimes, subject of course to his wife's agreement.

8.    The appellant has continued to pay maintenance and has  now  contacted
      the Child Support Agency so that the amount can be properly  assessed.
      He is working and his employer is happy to retain him.  There has been
      no divorce and the appellant hopes that, given time, there is a chance
      of reconciliation.  Mr Banerjee submitted that  a  child  needed  both
      parents,  particularly  in  his  formative  years.   The   change   of
      circumstances arising from the appellant being removed  to  Bangladesh
      could have a serious detrimental effect on his son.  His presence  was
      needed for his son's well-being.  Family life  had  been  consolidated
      and was continuing.

9.    Mr Saunders submitted that the Adjudicator  had  dealt  properly  with
      the  issue  of  the  contact  between  the  appellant  and  his   son,
      particularly  in  paragraph  14(vii)  of   her   determination.    Her
      conclusion that removal would not be disproportionate to a  legitimate
      aim  was  properly  open  to  her.   The  appellant  could  return  to
      Bangladesh and apply for  entry  clearance  under  the  provisions  of
      paragraph 246.

10.   When  granting  leave,  the  Vice  President  commented  that  it  was
      arguable that the Adjudicator had not  taken  into  account  extensive
      Strasbourg jurisprudence in relation to the removal of a  parent  with
      meaningful contact with a child who could not be removed at  the  same
      time.  He added that the appellant would be expected to  provide  full
      evidence of the nature of the contact, relevant court  orders,  copies
      of welfare reports and similar material to the Tribunal.

11.   In fact no further additional  evidence  has  been  provided  although
      there is no dispute that  regular  contact  continues  to  take  place
      between the appellant and his son.  The issue before the  Tribunal  is
      whether the Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that removal would be
      proportionate to a legitimate aim  in  the  light  of  the  inevitable
      interference with his family life.  He  would  not  be  able  to  have
      direct contact with his son at least for  the  time  being.   However,
      there is no suggestion that all forms  of  contact  will  cease.   The
      appellant will be able to maintain contact by  letter  and  telephone.
      There is provision in the Immigration Rules  for  entry  clearance  to
      exercise rights of access to a child resident in the  United  Kingdom:
      paragraph 246.  Save in exceptional cases  this  provision  meets  the
      need for a balance to be struck between the  importance  of  a  parent
      maintaining contact with  his  child  and  the  need  for  proper  and
      effective immigration control.

12.    In  assessing  whether  removal  would  be  disproportionate   to   a
      legitimate aim, the Adjudicator has taken all  relevant  factors  into
      account. She has considered  the  effect  of  regular  direct  contact
      stopping but properly noted that indirect contact can continue.  There
      is a prospect of  future  direct  contact  within  the  provisions  of
      paragraph 246 and looking further into the future, the possibility  at
      least of the appellant's son travelling to Bangladesh. The Adjudicator
      has taken into account the fact that the appellant was  aware  of  his
      lack of immigration status when  he  married.   She  was  entitled  to
      comment that there was no reason why  his  wife  and  son  should  not
      return to live with him in Bangladesh although she  accepted  that  it
      was reasonably unlikely that his wife would  wish  to  do  so.   These
      factors must be considered and balanced against the fact that a  state
      has a right under international law  to  control  the  entry  of  non-
      nationals into its territory.

13.    In  summary  the  Tribunal  are  satisfied  that  the   Adjudicator's
      conclusions were properly open to her for the reasons she  gave.   She
      has taken all relevant  factors  into  account  and  given  clear  and
      intelligible reasons fully  justifying  her  decision.   There  is  no
      adequate basis on which the Tribunal could or  should  interfere  with
      her decision.

14.   It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

