

KH
|Heard at Field House       |      |AS (Christian Apostates -     |
|                           |      |Evidence) Iran [2003] UKIAT   |
|                           |      |00182                         |
|On 16 July 2003            |      |                              |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|19.9.2003                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|                         |        |                              |
|                         |Before: |                              |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Richard Chalkley (Chairman)                                    |
|Mr A F Sherward                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |      |APPELLANT                     |
|                           |      |                              |
|                           |And   |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |      |RESPONDENT                    |


Mr G Parsons of Counsel instructed by Taylor Bracewell, Solicitors  appeared
on behalf of the Appellant and Ms J Webb, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1     The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals with leave of  the  Tribunal
      against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  I  F  MacDonald,
      promulgated on 11 December 2002, following a hearing  at  Leeds  on  6
      November 2002, in which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
      the decision of the Respondent, taken on 19 June 2002, to direct  his
      removal after refusing asylum.

2     The Appellant had claimed to convert from Islam to Christianity  while
      he was in Iran and also claims that he was  baptised  in  Iran  on  10
      September 2001.  Following his conversion to Christianity, whilst at a
      graduation party, he spoke out against Islam and  suggested  that  the
      Prophet Mohammed was a paedophile.  He went on to make other insulting
      comments about Islam.   Unbeknown  to  the  Appellant,  there  was  an
      officer of the Basij at the party who, on hearing the  Appellant  make
      offensive remarks about Islam, arrested him.  The appellant was  taken
      away by members of the Basij  and  locked  in  a  container  with  the
      intention that he would be sent  to  Ettelat  the  following  day  for
      further investigation and trial.  During  the  night  the  Appellant's
      friend arrived at the container and assisted the Appellant to  escape.
      The Appellant first went to a town called Karay where went into hiding
      for fifteen days before leaving Iran for Turkey on 1 October 2001.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 October 2001 and claimed asylum on
      23 October.

3.    Since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant  has  been
      regularly attending at Tinsley Methodist Church in Sheffield and on 16
      February 2002, he was baptised at that Church by the Reverend Eileen A
      Sanderson.

4.    The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from both the Appellant  and  from
      the Reverend Eileen Sanderson.  The Adjudicator did  not  believe  the
      Appellant's account of his conversion to  Christianity  in  Iran,  his
      arrest and subsequent escape and found it to be a fabrication.

5.    In paragraph 21 of the determination, Mr MacDonald said:-

           "In response to questions put by me, Reverend Sanderson affirmed
           her belief that the [Appellant's] conversion was  genuine.   She
           was asked why a second baptism was needed if the  Appellant  had
           already been baptised in Iran.  She said she understood that the
           ceremony in Iran was a blessing, involving the Holy  Spirit  and
           baptism was to be by water and the Holy Spirit.  I asked her  if
           the  Tinsley  Methodist  Church  would   be   regarded   as   an
           evangelising church.  She said that there were some  discussions
           with her colleagues as to whether  the  church  would  seek  out
           Muslim  asylum  seekers  with  a  view  to  converting  them  to
           Christianity. The idea was rejected.  She personally was not  in
           favour of any kind of evangelism and that  evangelism  does  not
           form part of a Methodist ministry."


6     In paragraphs 23 and 24, Mr MacDonald said:-

           "23.  After listening to the evidence of Reverend Sanderson, who
                 I perceived to be a sincere and honest person, I find  that
                 the Appellant has, since his arrival in the United Kingdom,
                 become a genuine convert to  Christianity.   I  acknowledge
                 that I maintain some reservations about the genuineness  of
                 his conversion, which perhaps only time will resolve.   For
                 the present, Reverend Sanderson has a far better  knowledge
                 of these matters than I have and that is why I  accept  her
                 evidence  that  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  to
                 Christianity.


           24.   I find that the Methodist Church  in  England  is  not  an
                 evangelising church and that  in  particular,  the  Tinsley
                 Methodist Church does not evangelise."


7.    The grounds of application to appeal challenged the  determination  on
      the basis that Mr MacDonald had erred in finding that the Appellant is
      not a member of a church that is involved in evangelism  and  also  in
      finding that the Appellant is not involved in evangelism.

8.    Following promulgation of the determination, a copy was  sent  to  the
      Reverend Sanderson who, in  a letter dated 15 December 2002, expressed
      her surprise and disappointment in it.  She said:-

           "I am also very disturbed at what the Adjudicator says about the
           position of the Methodist Church with regard to  evangelisation.
           It would appear to me that she, at best  misunderstood  and,  at
           worst, misinterpreted  what  I  told  her,  with  regard  to  my
           attitude to evangelism and the unfounded  extrapolation  of  the
           comments I made to be the position of the whole of the Methodist
           Church.


           It is right to say that I chose not to be  actively  seeking  to
           convert Muslims to  Christianity.  I  respect  people  of  other
           faiths, preferring to offer the opportunity of discovering faith
           to those who have no faith.  The Methodist Church,  in  general,
           may well take the  same  position  (depending  on  to  whom  you
           speak). But that is a far cry from  saying  that  the  Methodist
           Church is not an evangelical or evangelising, church.  I know of
           very  few  Christian  denominations   who   would   deny   their
           evangelical role and responsibilities. It is a matter of how and
           where it is exercised.


           I resent the uninformed and clearly misguided inference from  my
           comments  that  the  Methodist  Church  'does  not  believe   in
           evangelism'.  That would be to deny our calling  as  Christians.
           The Christian Church is committed to sharing the  Good  News  of
           God's love for all, irrespective of their background.  I  merely
           meant  to  assure  the  Adjudicator  that,  in   my   particular
           circumstances, in Tinsley, it  was  my  view  that  to  seek  to
           evangelise among the Muslim community was not what I believed to
           be the right thing  to  do  -  hence  my  surprise  and  initial
           reservation when the three, then one more, Iranian Muslims  came
           to seek Christian baptism.  I had not sought  their  conversion,
           they sought me.  The consultation was to be sure of  making  the
           right explorations, not to get permission to do what I did.


           That element of the rejection of the appeal  is  founded  on  an
           altogether false premise.  The Methodist Church is a  mainstream
           Christian denomination with as much commitment to evangelism  as
           any other denomination.  Any Christian  cannot  help  but  share
           their experience with others.   If  there  is  a  danger  in  to
           returning to Iran because of a conversion to Christianity,  then
           the faith of the '[the Appellant], as a  new  Christian,  leaves
           him open to the challenge of being an evangelical Christian.


           It may or may not, be worth mentioning that, at the  moment,  he
           is not - and neither are any of the other Iranian  Christians  -
           members of the Methodist Church.  They  have  been  baptised  as
           Christians - part of the whole Christian church -  but  not  yet
           gone through the membership and confirmation process which would
           align them with any particular denomination.   That  takes  more
           learning and understanding, a  process  of  discovery  which  is
           ongoing at this moment. It  is  also  something  which,  as  new
           Christians, makes little sense  in  the  light  of  the  earlier
           experience  and  familiarity  with  English  and  when  all  the
           denominational differences pale into insignificance when  moving
           into Christianity from another world faith.


           It seems to me as if there is a profound lack  of  understanding
           of the whole area of faith issues and the facts  in  Iran  among
           the staff of the Secretary of State, and it would be helpful  if
           they could become much better informed  before  making  sweeping
           statements  which  may  have  a  potentially   devastating   and
           destructive  affect   on   the   life   of   individuals   whose
           circumstances must seem like numbers on a paper,  but  represent
           real people with real struggles who have appealed to  a  country
           which considers itself just and free."


9.    In paragraph 25 of the Adjudicator's  determination,  the  Adjudicator
      found that,  just because the  Appellant  attended  church  with  some
      Iranian friends, this was not evidence that he was proselytising other
      Muslims. He was simply attending church with his  friends.   He  found
      that there was no evidence to  suggest  that  he  had  any  desire  to
      proselytise.

10.   Mr Parsons emphasised that the Appellant was  undertaking  preparatory
      work before joining the church.   He is not a member  of  the  church,
      although he was baptised in February last year.  He drew our attention
      to what the Reverend Sanderson had said  about  the  Methodist  Church
      being  evangelical.   She  has  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  is  a
      Christian who has not yet been confirmed into  the  Methodist  Church.
      He does, however, regularly attend church.

11.   Mr Parsons submitted that there was a risk to the appellant on  return
      to Iran, because if he wishes to evangelise, he must be able to do so.
       If he were to return to Iran he would not be able to talk  to  others
      about his conversion.  He has done this in the United Kingdom.  He has
      spoken to Iranian friends in the United Kingdom and taken  them  along
      with him to  his  church.   Ms Webb  submitted  that  the  Tribunal's
      decision in Morteza Abbasian [2002] UKIAT 08277  was  relevant.   That
      case in turn referred to Nasiri  [2002]  UKIAT  06180,  in  which  the
      Tribunal were referred to  a  report  by  the  Swedish  Asylum  Board,
      following a fact finding mission to Iran in 1996.  The Board said:-

            "Conversion from Islam to Christianity is, according to  Iranian
           authorities, not possible; a conversion abroad is considered  by
           the authorities as a technical act for the purpose of  obtaining
           asylum, which  therefore  does  not  mean  that  the  person  in
           question risks any serious harassment upon return.  The  concept
           of 'Taqieh', which is widely accepted in Iran, makes  legitimate
           to lie in order to achieve certain purposes.   This  means  that
           there is a high level of acceptance in Iran  of  the  lie  as  a
           means of obtaining a purpose, such  as  seeking  asylum  in  the
           west.  Iranian nationals who have converted to Islam to  another
           religion and who keep the conversion a personal matter,  do  not
           attract the attention of the authorities...


           An Iranian national who converts from Islam to another  religion
           normally does not risk the kind of persecution prescribed in the
           Sharia'a law, whether the conversion takes  place  in  the  home
           country or abroad.  There is also no significant chance that  he
           or she would be a target of any actions from the authorities  or
           of any serious harassment.  This  assessment  is  based  on  the
           assumption that the conversion has come to the knowledge of  the
           Iranian authorities."


12.   Ms Webb submitted it is not likely that the Appellant's conversion  to
      Christianity would come to the attention of the authorities, but  that
      if it did, it would be seen as a self-seeking act.  She suggested that
      even if the Methodist Church did have an evangelical approach, in  the
      sense that the Christian church generally does, they cannot be said to
      be an evangelical church of the type envisaged in,  or  described  by,
      the  objective  material.   It  has  never  been  suggested  that  the
      Appellant would evangelise in the way in which the objective  material
      suggests would put him at any risk.  The  Methodist  Church  does  not
      require its members to evangelise.  She  invited  us  to  dismiss  the
      appeal.  Mr Parsons confirmed that it was not suggested  that  it  was
      necessary for the Appellant, as a member of the Methodist  Church,  to
      go out on to the street corners and preach the  Good  news  of   God's
      love but, he submitted, he had evangelised in the United  Kingdom  and
      would do so on return.

13.   We are grateful to Mr Parsons  for  the  assistance  he  gave  to  us.
      Despite the eloquence of his submissions, we have  concluded  that  we
      must dismiss this appeal.

14.   It appears to the Tribunal  that,  with  great  respect  to  her,  the
      Reverend Sanderson did not fully understand the context in  which  the
      Adjudicator  was  suggesting  that  the  Methodist  Church  does   not
      evangelise.  That is certainly no fault of the Reverend Sanders; there
      is no reason  why  she  should  have  familiarised  herself  with  the
      objective background Country Information on Iran.

15.   Within the appellant's bundle of documents was enclosed a copy of  the
      US State Department Report dated  4  March  2002.  We  have  carefully
      considered  it,  particularly  Section  C  dealing  with  freedom   of
      religion.  The government of Iran restricts freedom  of  religion  and
      the constitution declares that the:-

           "official religion of Iran is Islam and  the  sect  followed  is
           that of Ja'fari (Twelver) Shi'ism" and that  this  principle  is
           ''eternally immutable'.   It  also  states  that  other  Islamic
           denominations are to be afforded full respect and it  recognises
           Zoroastrians,  Christians,  and  Jews  as  the  only  'protected
           religious minorities.'  Religions  which  are  not  specifically
           protected  under  the  constitution  do  not  enjoy  freedom  of
           religion.  Religious activities are  closely  monitored  by  the
           Ministry  of  Intelligence  and  Security.   'Evangelicals  have
           resisted this demand'.  'Members  of  religious  minorities  are
           allowed to vote, but  they  may  not  run  for  president.   All
           religious  minorities  suffer  varying  degrees  of   officially
           sanctioned  discrimination,  particularly  in   the   areas   of
           employment, education and housing."


      16.   The report went on to confirm that the government does generally
           recognise  religious  minorities  rights  to  conduct   religion
           education of their adherence, although  it  does  restrict  this
           right considerably in some areas. It confirmed that  there  were
           separate and privately funded Zoroastrian, Jewish and  Christian
           schools which are supervised by the Ministry of Education, which
           imposes  certain  curriculum  requirements,  as  there  are,  of
           course, in  the  United  Kingdom.   "Evangelical  Christian  and
           Jewish  communities  have  suffered  harassment  and  arrest  by
           authorities for the content of school instruction and  religious
           services".  The report spoke of recognised religious  minorities
           being allowed by the government to establish  community  centres
           and certain cultural, social, sports or charitable organisations
           and that they finance themselves. The report went on to say:-


                 "The government is highly suspicious of  any  proselytising
                 of Muslims by non-Muslims and can be harsh in its response,
                 particularly against Baha'is  and  evangelical  Christians.
                 The government regards the Baha'i  community,  whose  faith
                 originally derives from a strand of Islam, as  a  heretical
                 sect and has fuelled anti-Baha'i and anti-Semitic sentiment
                 in the country for political purposes."


17.   Apostasy, specifically conversion from Islam,  may  be  punishable  by
      death.  In November 1999, the President publicly stated that no-one in
      the country should be persecuted  because  of  his  or  her  religious
      beliefs and added that  he  would  defend  the  civil  rights  of  all
      citizens, regardless of their beliefs of religion. Subsequently a bill
      of citizenship was approved affirming the social and political  rights
      of all citizens and their equality  before  the  law.   The  Christian
      community is estimated to be some 300,000, the majority of  which  are
      either ethnic Armenians or Assyro-Chaldeans.  Protestant denominations
      and evangelical churches  are  also  active,  although  non-ethnically
      based  groups,  report  restrictions   on   their   activities.    The
      authorities have become  particularly  vigilant  in  recent  years  in
      curbing, what is perceived as, increasing proselytising activities  by
      evangelical Christians, whose services are conducted in  Persian.   It
      has continued in  recent  years.   Christians  reported  instances  of
      government harassment of  church  goers  in  Tehran,  particularly  of
      worshippers at the Assembly of God congregation in the capital.

18.   Unfortunately the Amnesty International Report added  nothing  to  the
      question of freedom  of  Religion;  neither  did  human  Rights  Watch
      Report. However, we were assisted by the Iranian Country Assessment of
      April 2003. The situation of Christians  in  Iran  is  dealt  with  at
      paragraphs 5.53 to 5.61 of that report.  That spoke  of  proselytising
      apostate converts, who had  begun  preaching  Christianity,  as  being
      likely to face execution.  One western embassy  said  that  there  had
      been no reports of persons being executed on the grounds of conversion
      from Islam since 1994.  The source  thought  that  converts  who  were
      known to the Iranian authorities are summoned to an interview  at  the
      Ministry of Information in order to  be  reprimanded.  They  are  then
      allowed to go after being warned not to  talk  about  what  has  taken
      place at the Ministry.  If a criminal case is  brought  against  them,
      they  will  be  accused  of  something  other  than  conversion.  Many
      individuals try to convert with a view to emigrating, considering  the
      opportunities for obtaining asylum in the west  are  thereby  greater.
      The Christian churches send letters of recommendation to converts  and
      other persons belonging to the church, on request.  It  would  appear,
      however, that the present government is not  pursuing  an  active  and
      systematic  policy  of  investigating  and  prosecuting  of  cases  of
      apostasy.  The report went on to say that in practice, Muslim converts
      to Christianity might face obstacles, such as not  being  admitted  to
      university, or not being issues  a  passport.  Even  Muslim  converts,
      however, in reality, appear able to practise their new faith up  to  a
      point. This means, for instance, that weekly church  attendance  is  a
      possibility. On the other hand, those who actively display  their  new
      faith in public, particularly by proselytising,  can  expect  to  face
      severe repression, even if their conversion goes back decades.

19.   It is in this  context  that  the  Adjudicator's  comments  about  the
      Methodist Church not being an evangelising church must be considered.

20.   It is claimed on behalf of the Appellant that  he  has  evangelised  I
      the United Kingdom, in that he has introduced several Iranians to  his
      church at Tinsley.  However, there is no evidence before  us  that  he
      has been evangelising in the sense that  he  has  been  suggesting  to
      anyone he meets that they should attend his church.  As  a  Methodist,
      assuming the Appellant continues along the route to  confirmation,  he
      will not be required to evangelise either in the United Kingdom or, on
      his return to Iran.

21.   The Swedish Board Report makes it clear that it cannot  be  said  that
      every genuine Christian convert would be at risk on  return,  even  if
      the conversion were to become known to the authorities.  The Appellant
      would not, as a Methodist, be  required  on  his  return  to  Iran  to
      attempt to proselytise, or otherwise act in a manner that would expose
      him to a risk of persecution or to a breach of his Article  3  rights.
      The objective evidence before us shows that, even if  the  authorities
      were to become aware of his conversion, the Appellant would be able to
      continue to practise his faith.

22.   For all these reasons we have concluded  that  we  must  dismiss  this
      appeal.





                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
