

NH (Rule 45 - No Substantive Consideration) Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT 00191
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                 Date of hearing : 2 July, 2004[pic]19 May, 2004
                 Date determination notified:

21.5.2003

            Before:

            MR G. WARR Chairman
            DR H H STOREY


                 Appellant

            and

            THE SECRETARY OF STATE      Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appeals the determination  of
      an adjudicator (Mr A J Olson) dismissing  appeal against  the  refusal
      of the respondent to grant  application for asylum..

   2. Before us, the Appellant was represented by Miss K Marks,  Lawrence  &
      Co.  Ms J Sigley appeared for the Respondent.

   3. The appellant applied for asylum on the day after his  arrival  on  12
      January 2003. He was interviewed on 6 February 2003. The Secretary  of
      State gave his reasons for rejecting the application in a letter dated
      18 February 2003. In the grounds of appeal  the  appellant  stated  he
      wished  an  oral  hearing  and  indicated  that  the  services  of  an
      interpreter would be required.

   4. On 1 May 2003 the appellate authority issued a notice that the  appeal
      would be heard on 21 May 2003. Attendance would  be  excused  provided
      that the representatives replied to the directions  contained  in  the
      notice. Absent a reply by 12 May the adjudicator would  determine  the
      matter in the appellant's absence. A further hearing date would be set
      if the reply was sent in in time.

   5. The matter came before the adjudicator on 21 May 2003.  There  was  no
      attendance. The adjudicator determined the matter under rule 45 of the
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2003  for   the
      following reasons:

   6. "The appellant has not complied with directions issued. The  appellant
      did  not  attend  the   hearing   nor   give   instructions   to   his
      representatives to appear on his behalf, nor was a reply to directions
      completed. I have borne in mind the provisions of rule 4 of  the  said
      rules, namely the overriding objective is to secure the  just,  timely
      and effective disposal of appeals."

   7. The adjudicator's determination is dated 25 May  2003.  In  fact,  the
      representatives had replied to the notice by letter dated 19 May  2003
      and this letter was received by the appellate authority on 21 May 2003
      although it did not reach the adjudicator's hearing centre until after
      he had dealt with the matter.

   8. In the grounds of appeal it is argued, relying on Ishaq Saqi  Muhammad
      (01/TH/1233) promulgated on 14 June 2001,  that  the  adjudicator  had
      erred in failing to determine the appeal on its merits.

   9. The representatives  before  us  agreed  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted for a hearing before a different adjudicator.

  10. The adjudicator purported to determine the matter under rule 45(1)(c).
      Rule 45 is as follows:
        "45.- (1) An adjudicator or the Tribunal may, subject to paragraphs
        (2) and (3) of this rule, determine an appeal without a hearing if -



           (a) all the parties to the appeal consent;

           (b) the party appealing against a relevant decision is outside
           the United Kingdom or it is impracticable to give him notice of
           a hearing and, in either case, he is unrepresented;

           (c) a party has failed to comply with a provision of these rules
           or a direction of the appellate authority, and the adjudicator
           or Tribunal is satisfied that in all the circumstances,
           including the extent of the failure and any reasons for it, it
           is appropriate to determine the appeal without a hearing; or

           (d) the adjudicator or Tribunal is satisfied, having regard to
           the material before him or it and the nature of the issues
           raised, that the appeal can be justly determined without a
           hearing.

         (2) Where paragraph (1)(c) applies and the appellant is the party
         in default, the adjudicator or Tribunal may dismiss the appeal
         without substantive consideration, if satisfied that it is
         appropriate to do so.

         (3) Where paragraph (1)(d) applies, the adjudicator or Tribunal
         must not determine the appeal without a hearing without first
         giving the parties notice of his or its intention to do so, and an
         opportunity to make written representations as to whether there
         should be a hearing."


  11. It will be observed that although the adjudicator  considered  he  was
      acting under rule 45(1)(c) he was in fact determining the appeal under
      rule 45(2).

  12. Counsel submitted that there was no essential difference  between  the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000 and the  current
      rules save that the power for an adjudicator  under  the  former  rule
      33(2)(a) to allow a respondent's appeal without considering its merits
      no longer appeared.

  13. Both the representatives  submitted  that  where  there  was  material
      available  to  the  adjudicator  he  should   deal   with   the   case
      substantively under rule 45(1)(c). Rule 45(2) should be relied on only
      in exceptional circumstances.

  14. We agree with the parties' submissions. It  will  be  noted  that  the
      adjudicator determined the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  a  reply  to
      directions had not been completed. In fact, it had been completed, but
      sent in too late. As  the  Tribunal  observed  in  Muhammad,  had  the
      adjudicator determined the appeal on its merits, the  appellant  might
      have had much greater difficulty in getting the  decision  overturned.
      The adjudicator had regard to  the  overriding  objective  but  proper
      emphasis needs to be given to  the  word  "effective".  A  failure  to
      determine the appeal on its merits may well prove, as it has proved in
      this case, to be ineffective.

  15.  This  was  not  a  case  where  there  was  no  material  before  the
      adjudicator. There had been an interview and an appellant's  statement
      and  a  full  and  reasoned  refusal  letter.  There  was   sufficient
      documentation to enable the adjudicator to give the appeal substantive
      consideration. By substantive consideration we do not  mean  that  the
      adjudicator's determination of the issues needs to be set out  at  any
      great length. Indeed it may well  be  appropriate,  depending  on  the
      circumstances, to set out the reasons in a comparatively  brief  form.
      It must be appreciated that the adjudicator's primary duty is  not  to
      penalise the appellant but to determine his appeal justly.

  16. Where there has been no interview and a general lack  of  material  to
      enable the adjudicator to  make  any  informed  decision,  it  may  be
      appropriate  to  make  use  of  rule  45(2).  There   may   be   other
      circumstances where rule 45(2) would have a part to play but in asylum
      appeals and where Article 3 is  engaged  great  caution  is  advisable
      before recourse is had to the power to  determine  an  appeal  without
      giving the case substantive consideration.

  17. It is to be noted that there is a two stage process involved where  it
      is sought to rely on rule 45(2). The adjudicator must  first  consider
      whether it appropriate to determine the appeal without a  hearing.  If
      it is, the case may  fall  to  be  dealt  with  under  rule  45(1)(c).
      However, a further discretion has to be exercised  to  bring  rule  45
      into play. The adjudicator needs to consider whether it is appropriate
      to  determine  the  appeal  without  substantive  consideration.   The
      decision maker needs to be especially wary before taking  that  second
      step.



  18. This decision is concerned with rule 45 only, cases where there is  no
      hearing. Where either party attends, rule 44 is the relevant rule  and
      this rule makes no  provision  for  the  determination  of  an  appeal
      without substantive consideration.

  19. For the reasons we have given above, and with  the  agreement  of  the
      representatives, the appeal  is  remitted  for  a  hearing  before  an
      adjudicator other than Mr A J Olson.

  20. The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.



                                                                     G. Warr

                                                                    Chairman

                                                            17 November 2003

