
Ar                                            KD (Risks on Return) DR Congo
[2003] UKIAT 00112

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing : 26 September 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           ...29/10/2003....

                                   Before:

                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                          Mr J A O'Brien Quinn, QC




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
      D.G. Zucker) who allowed the appeal of  a  DRC  national  (hereinafter
      referred to for convenience as the appellant) from the decision of the
      Secretary of State to refuse his application for  asylum.  The  appeal
      was allowed on human rights grounds of appeal only, under Article 3.

2.    Miss C. Hough appeared for the Secretary of  State.  Mrs  P.  Maudsley
      represented the appellant.

3.    The appellant claimed to be a supporter of the  MPR  and  he  used  to
      work as a singer accompanying the late President Mbutu and sign  songs
      in  his praise between 1990 and 1991. He worked in  a  bakery  and  in
      1996 set up his own bakery. At  a  meeting  which  the  appellant  had
      called with his customers on 14 April 2000 to discuss the rising price
      of flour and bread, six soldiers came and arrested  the  appellant  on
      suspicion of supporting rebels. The appellant declined to sign a paper
      incriminating him in this activity and was detained until an explosion
      near the place where he was held enabled him to escape.
4.    The Adjudicator found a number of significant inconsistencies  in  the
      appellant's  account  which  undermined  it  in  its   entirety.   The
      Adjudicator made it clear that he was not  accepting  the  appellant's
      credibility and had not satisfied him that he had  been  a  singer  in
      support of President Mbutu. He approached the case purely on the basis
      of a person who in fact had no reason  to  be  concerned  about  being
      returned to the DRC.  He then considered the evidence about  returning
      failed asylum seekers to the DRC and found that the appellant would be
      returned on documentation obtained by the  Secretary  of  State  which
      would put the authorities in the DRC on notice that the appellant  had
      sought asylum in the United  Kingdom.   In  the  light  of  the  UNCHR
      letters - to which we will make reference below - there was  a  strong
      likelihood that the appellant would  be  interrogated  and  that  ill-
      treatment would follow. He allowed the appeal on that basis.

5.    Mrs Maudsley applied for  an  adjournment  on  the  footing  that  the
      Tribunal was to consider the issue in what she  described  as  a  test
      case. She was aware that other appeals had been adjourned the previous
      week.

6.    We carefully considered the application. We  noted  that  this  appeal
      had been listed for hearing on 21 July 2003  and  there  had  been  no
      application for an adjournment in advance of the hearing.  Miss  Hough
      had lodged two comparatively recently Tribunal decisions dealing  with
      the relevant issues and we saw  no  reason  why  the  case  should  be
      adjourned.   We refused the application.

7.    Miss Hough relied on the grounds of appeal and the cases of  M  [2003]
      UKIAT 00071 and N [2003] UKIAT 00050.  These cases had been heard on 9
      July 2003 and 9 May 2003 respectively.  Both  cases  had  two  legally
      qualified chairmen as well as a lay member.

8.    It was clear that the Tribunal in the case of  N  was  concerned  with
      the issue of risk on return as a failed asylum seeker - see  paragraph
      5 of the determination.  At paragraph 43 the Tribunal had concluded as
      follows:

             '(a) On the information available to it, as at 9 July 2003, it
                 is not the fact that a person returned to the  DRC  is,  by
                 reason only of being a failed asylum seeker, at  real  risk
                 of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment;


             (b) In order to run a real risk of being taken into detention,
                 following the screening of a returnee at Kinshasa  Airport,
                 there  must  be  something  further   in   the   returnee's
                 background, such as past political or  military  activities
                 or nationality of a state regarded as hostile to the DRC.


             (c) There is nothing in the circumstances of the appellant  in
                 this case to suggest that he would of any adverse  interest
                 to the DRC authorities.'

9.    In N the first  issue  identified  at  paragraph  8  was  whether  the
      appellant would be at risk as a failed asylum  seeker.   The  Tribunal
      considered at paragraph 10.8 that it would be inconceivable  if  there
      were a real risk of persecution in the DRC for returning failed asylum
      seekers that the letter from the UNHCR would not have made this clear.
      At paragraph 10.16 the Tribunal concluded that failed  asylum  seekers
      were not at real risk of ill-treatment in breach of Article  3  simply
      because they were failed asylum seekers.

10.   Mrs Maudsley relied on the UNHCR letters  and  reminded  us  that  the
      Adjudicator found that the appellant  would  be  returned  on  a  Home
      Office travel document.  Mrs Maudsley referred us to  the  April  2002
      UNHCR letter which  indicated  that  agents  of  the  security  forces
      frequently interrogated Congolese returning to Kinshasa  from  abroad,
      particularly those who were known to have sought asylum.    The  UNHCR
      was aware of instances were interrogation  at  the  airport  had  been
      followed by arbitrary detention and  serious  ill-treatment.   If  the
      returnee was not already known to the DRC authorities that there was a
      strong likelihood  that  were  he  to  be  returned  to  Kinshasa  his
      background would be revealed  in  the  course  of  interrogation  upon
      arrival.

11.   There had been a Home Office Bulletin  dated  30  January  2003  which
      confirmed there were currently administrative  problems  in  obtaining
      travel documents from the DRC Embassy in  London.  However,  the  Home
      Office was cooperating with  the  embassy  to  resolve  the  problems.
      Removals of DRC  nationals  with  valid  national  passports  was  not
      affected.   The  administrative  problems  were  not  related  to  the
      question of the safety of returning failed  asylum  seekers.   It  was
      normally safe to return failed asylum seeker to Kinshasa provided  the
      returnees had valid identification and travel documentation.  However,
      the British Embassy letter dated 22 November 2002, which was  also  in
      the respondent's bundle, gave rise to concern as  the  ambassador  was
      not in a position to offer assurances that returnees  would  not  face
      prosecution if it were established that they had left the DRC  without
      the mandatory travel documents, or if they had  been  the  subject  of
      criminal arrest warrants or of  legal  investigation  prior  to  their
      original departure.  The UNHCR had  changed  its  position.  Reference
      should now be made to the letter from the  UNHCR  dated  15  September
      2003.   The  appellant  would  be  identified  because  of  UK  travel
      documents and he would need to go through immigration control  and  he
      would be questioned and ill-treated because of his perceived political
      opinion.

12.   Miss Hough submitted that the latest UNHCR letter  was  not  different
      to the previous ones and the Tribunal had had the  information  before
      it.  The Tribunal in the case of M had been given assurances that  the
      travel document issued to the returning  failed  asylum  seeker  would
      simply identify the individual as a DRC national but would not contain
      any other information as to why he or she  had  been  present  in  the
      United Kingdom - see paragraph 11(e).

13.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We have carefully considered all the material before us.

14.   Reliance is placed on the UNHCR letters, the latest of which is  dated
      15 September 2003.  Large sections of this letter appear identical  to
      the letter considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  M  dated  5  June  2003,
      reproduced at paragraph 34 of the determination.

15.   In the September letter, having referred to the position of the  UNHCR
      as recently as March 2003, that  it  was  UNHCR's  view  that  it  was
      generally possible to return  failed  asylum  seekers,  the  following
      paragraph appears :

             'This view was subject to two important caveats. Firstly, some
             areas remained unsafe and return to those areas  was  not  yet
             advisable. Secondly, individuals with certain  profiles  (e.g.
             those  with  real   or   perceived   political   or   military
             associations) were likely to be at risk and therefore deserved
             to receive particular and careful consideration. The  need  to
             bear these considerations in mind has been  further  fortified
             by the recent events in the DRC,  as  the  security  situation
             still remains a matter of concern  in  certain  parts  of  the
             country.   Thus, UNHCR is in a position to reassert its  March
             2003  recommendation  to  the  effect  that  states  need   to
             carefully ascertain the nationality of rejected asylum seekers
             as well as their areas of origin and profile, before they  are
             considered for return to the DRC.'

16.   We do not consider that the  material  placed  before  us  alters  the
      position that the Tribunal had to consider in July 2003.  Indeed,  the
      paragraph we have just quoted indicates the type  of  individuals  who
      might still be at risk. They have, as the UNHCR  put  it,  to  have  a
      certain profile. On the Adjudicator's findings this appellant  has  no
      profile at all.

17.   The Tribunal decisions of M and N to which we were referred appear  to
      us to reach clear conclusions on the issue which we have to  determine
      today. The material before us has not materially altered  since  those
      decisions. We have been referred to the up-to-date UNHCR  letters  and
      we have highlighted the most recent of all.   We  have  no  reason  to
      doubt that the appellant will  be  returned  on  proper  documentation
      which will not reveal the fact that he has been an unsuccessful asylum
      applicant. We do not believe that it is demonstrated to  the  required
      standard that he will be at risk because he will be perceived to  have
      some profile  or  opinion.   There  is  nothing  to  distinguish  this
      individual from the failed asylum seeker considered by the Tribunal in
      M on 9 July 2003. We see  no  basis  for  distinguishing  the  instant
      appeal from the cases to which reference was made. We agree  with  the
      reasoning of the Tribunal on the question  of  the  return  of  failed
      asylum  seekers  to  the  DRC.  We  adopt  that   reasoning   in   our
      determination. We appreciate that the Adjudicator was determining this
      appeal in March  2003  and  he  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  this
      jurisprudence or indeed the more up-to-date UNHCR letters.

18.   For the reasons we have given, the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
      allowed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      1


