
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |RJ (Article8 -              |
|                           |        |Proportionality - Inability |
|                           |        |to Comply) Serbia and       |
|                           |        |Montenegro [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00151                       |
|On  20 October 2003        |        |                            |
|Prepared 21 October 2003                                          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr R Scannell, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                       Peirce & Partners, Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Mrs A  K  Simpson)  who  allowed  the  respondent's
      appeal  against  the  decision  made  on  6  June  2002  refusing  his
      application for leave to remain on the basis that removal would  be  a
      contravention of his rights under Article 8.   In  this  determination
      the Tribunal will refer to  the  respondent  to  this  appeal  as  the
      applicant.

2.    The applicant made a clandestine entry into the United Kingdom  on  23
      December 1997.  He was discovered by the police and the following  day
      he made a claim for asylum on the basis that he was an ethnic Albanian
      from Kosovo.

3.    The way in which the asylum application was dealt with is relevant  to
      this appeal and can briefly be summarised as follows.  On 27  December
      1997 a third country  interview  was  conducted  at  Rochester  police
      station. Although the applicant denied claiming asylum in any other EU
      country it was established that he had entered Germany on  3  December
      1997 and had made an application for asylum there.  A  formal  request
      was made to the German authorities under  the  Dublin  Convention  for
      them to accept responsibility for  the  consideration  of  his  asylum
      claim and on 23 March 1998 Germany  accepted  responsibility  for  the
      claim.  However, as there was a pending case in the Court of Appeal on
      third country removals to Germany, no  ethnic  Albanians  from  Kosovo
      were being removed at that stage.   In  August  1998  the  applicant's
      representatives applied for judicial review.  The application was  not
      pursued pending the lead case.

4.    In November 2000 the Third  Country  Unit  invited  the  applicant  to
      withdraw  his  judicial  review  application  following  the  changing
      situation for Kosovan Albanians.  His representatives replied that  he
      had now married a UK citizen and asked that he  be  granted  leave  to
      remain on the basis of his marriage.  On 18 March 2002 the applicant's
      claim for judicial review was dismissed by the Court of Appeal.  On  6
      June 2002 the claim made under the Human Rights Convention was refused
      and on 11 June 2002 the applicant appealed to  the  Adjudicator  under
      Section 65 of the 1999 Act.

5.    The  Adjudicator  accepted  (and  it  is  not  in  dispute)  that  the
      applicant met his future wife  in  March/April  2000.   He  introduced
      himself as Nicol and that is the name the family has used for him ever
      since.  They began to go out together  and  the  applicant  became  an
      important part of the lives of her three children. They began to  live
      together in June or July 2000 and were married on 29  September  2000.
      The applicant's wife has three  children  by  her  previous  marriage,
      David born in 1986, Leanne 1998 and Craig in 1999.   There  is  now  a
      fourth child, Paige, who was 15 months at  the  date  of  the  hearing
      before the Adjudicator.

6.    The Adjudicator accepted  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
      applicant, his wife and  children.   Removal  whether  to  Germany  or
      Kosovo would amount to an interference.  It would  be  pursuant  to  a
      legitimate aim.  The substantive  issue  before  the  Adjudicator  was
      whether removal would be a proportionate response  to  the  legitimate
      aim within Article 8(2).  The Adjudicator noted that  the  Immigration
      Rules required that a person seeking rights of residence on grounds of
      marriage must  obtain  entry  clearance  first.   In  the  absence  of
      exceptional circumstances she commented that it  would  be  manifestly
      unfair to would-be entrants who are content to take their place in the
      entry clearance queue in their country of origin to  allow  others  to
      bypass this rule.  She accepted that the applicant's wife  and  family
      could not reasonably be expected to join him in  Kosovo.   They  would
      not have accommodation or any means of obtaining a home. Neither would
      be able to find employment.

7.    The Adjudicator went on to consider whether  the  applicant  could  be
      expected to return to Germany or Kosovo and apply for entry  clearance
      as a spouse.  She noted that there was no  visa  issuing  post  within
      Kosovo, the nearest  posts  are  Belgrade,  Tirana  and  Skopje.   The
      waiting time in Belgrade is about four weeks, Tirana  nine  weeks  and
      Skopje four weeks, although the applicant may also need to  apply  for
      and obtain an UNMIK travel document which could delay the process by a
      further two or three weeks.  The decision was likely to be made on the
      same day if the requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met.   The
      Adjudicator rightly took the view that delays of about nine weeks were
      not excessive.

8.     However,  she  went  on  to  comment  that  the  applicant  was   the
      breadwinner in the family.  If he had to leave the United  Kingdom  he
      would have to give up his employment and it would be more likely  than
      not that he would then be unable to show that he could  be  maintained
      and accommodated in the United  Kingdom  without  recourse  to  public
      funds.  He might well be refused a visa  and  this  would  lead  to  a
      lengthy delay before his wife was able to obtain  suitable  employment
      to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.   She  took  the  view  in  these
      circumstances   that   the   applicant's   circumstances   could    be
      distinguished from those in Mahmood (2001)  Imm  AR  229   and  Baljit
      Singh (2002) UKIAT 06660.  In the light  of  the  lengthy  delay  that
      might  well  result  before  entry  clearance  was  issued   and   the
      detrimental effect that the delay might have on the future development
      of the applicant's relationship  with  his  infant  daughter  and  the
      cessation of his financial support for  his  wife  and  children,  the
      Adjudicator was satisfied that the interference to his right to family
      life was not justified and would be disproportionate.  Accordingly she
      allowed the appeal.

9.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the  Adjudicator  erred  by
      finding that it would not be proportionate to expect the applicant  to
      make an application for entry clearance from abroad.  She  should  not
      have given weight to the fact that the applicant  might  not  be  able
      immediately to satisfy the maintenance and accommodation requirements.
       Inability to comply with the  Immigration  Rules  in  any  subsequent
      application should not be weighed  when  considering  proportionality.
      In any event it is argued that the applicant's employment history  was
      such that he would be able to show that he would resume employment  on
      his return to the United Kingdom  and  so  any  delay  in  having  his
      application considered would not be as prolonged  as  the  Adjudicator
      suggested.   There  were  no  exceptional  circumstances   making   an
      application from abroad disproportionate.

10.   At the hearing before the  Tribunal  Mr  Scannell  indicated  that  he
      wished to rely on the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Shala  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 233.  There was some debate  about  whether  he  should  have
      submitted a respondent's notice under Rule 19 on the basis that he was
      asking the Tribunal to uphold the determination for reasons  different
      from or additional to those given by the Adjudicator.  In  the  event,
      the Tribunal took the  view that the sensible course was to permit  Mr
      Scannell to file a respondent's notice.  The case was put back  for  a
      short time to enable Mr Saunders  to  consider  this  notice  and  the
      judgment in Shala.

11.   Mr Saunders submitted that the facts  of  this  appeal  were  properly
      distinguishable from the facts in Shala.  This was not  a  case  where
      there had been an undue delay in determining the application.   By  23
      March 1998 the German authorities had indicated that they would accept
      the application  under  Article  8  of  the  Dublin  Convention.   The
      subsequent delay was caused by the progress of litigation in the Court
      of Appeal and House of Lords.  The applicant had not been deprived  of
      any substantial benefit which he could legitimately have  expected  to
      receive.

12.   Mr Scannell submitted that the principles set out  in  Shala  were  of
      direct relevance to this appeal.  He referred to the judgment of Keene
      LJ who had identified the error in the Tribunal's approach as equating
      the position of the appellant in that appeal with that of  any  normal
      applicant who wished to obtain leave to  enter  on  marriage  grounds.
      However, if his claim had been dealt with reasonably  efficiently,  he
      would probably have obtained at least exceptional leave to remain as a
      refugee, thereby giving him the  ability  to  apply  from  within  the
      United Kingdom for a variation of that leave on  the  grounds  of  his
      marriage.  The appellant did have a legitimate claim to enter  at  the
      time when, on  any  reasonable  basis,  his  claim  should  have  been
      determined.  The delay had deprived him of  that  advantage  and  this
      should be seen as an exceptional circumstance taking his claim out  of
      the normal run of cases where a person with no leave  to  enter  seeks
      such leave on the basis of marriage.  Keene LJ came to the  view  that
      it would be disproportionate to require the  appellant  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom and to apply from Kosovo for leave to enter.

13.   In paragraph 24 of his  judgment,  Schiemann  LJ  commented  that  the
      appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom at a time when Kosovo  was
      in the middle of a dreadful civil war.  He had applied for  asylum  on
      arrival.  He  could  not  have  done  more.   His  was  a  meritorious
      application for permission to remain but it was not  until  more  than
      four years  later  that  the  Home  Office,  after  chivvying  by  his
      solicitors,  got  round  to  arranging  an  interview  to   test   its
      genuineness.  It was a wrong approach  to  apply  automatically  to  a
      person  in  his  position  a  policy  designed  to   discourage   both
      meritorious and unmeritorious applicants from jumping the queue.

14.   Mr Scannell submitted that this applicant could not  have  done  more.
      He had come to the United Kingdom by way of Germany and  had  properly
      challenged his removal to Germany.  In  1998  the  German  authorities
      were taking an irrational approach to the assessment  of  claims  from
      Kosovo.  He could not have been lawfully returned there at that  time.
      The applicant could not be categorised as a queue  jumper  or  someone
      whose presence in the United Kingdom was not properly justifiable.  In
      the circumstances to require him now to return  to  either  Kosovo  or
      Germany to make an application from abroad was  disproportionate.   Mr
      Scannell also referred the Tribunal to the seven year policy  relating
      to children.  He was now a member of  a  family  where  three  of  the
      children had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  over  seven  years.
      Nothing should be done to upset that family unit.  The Adjudicator had
      been right to consider whether there  were  special  circumstances  to
      show that removal would be disproportionate.  It was for her to assess
      the consequences of the applicant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom
      and the effect on the family arising both from his  absence  and  from
      the lack of financial support.   The  consequences  of  the  applicant
      being separated from his young daughter were particularly relevant  in
      the light of the importance of  young  children  forming  a  good  and
      strong attachment to both parents:  see the article by Dr  Joan  Kelly
      at B128.

15.   There is no doubt as the Adjudicator found that the  applicant  enjoys
      family life within Article 8(1) with his wife and  children.   Removal
      would be an interference with that right.  However, it would be lawful
      and pursuant to a legitimate aim.  The issue is whether removal  would
      be proportionate to that legitimate  aim.   The  Adjudicator  accepted
      that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  applicant's  wife  and
      children to join him in  Kosovo.  The  issue  turned  on  whether  the
      applicant should return to Kosovo and apply for entry clearance  as  a
      spouse.  It is clear that the Adjudicator took the view that generally
      this was the proper course.  In paragraph 24 she considered  the  time
      such  an  application  would  make.   She  accepted  and  it  is   not
      challenged, that an application might reasonably be  processed  within
      about nine weeks, although taking into account the need to  travel  to
      Belgrade, Tirana or Skopje in reality  the  period  would  be  longer.
      However, she rightly took the view that any such delay  would  not  be
      excessive.

16.   The problem which concerned her was whether  the  applicant  would  be
      able to apply with the Immigration Rules when he made the application.
       He would need to show that he and his family could be maintained  and
      accommodated  without  recourse  to  public  funds.   At  present  the
      applicant is working and is  the   breadwinner.   If  he  were  to  be
      removed, he would lose  his  job.   As  the  Adjudicator  comments  in
      paragraph 25 of her determination, although the applicant's  wife  was
      optimistic that she could obtain some part time employment, this would
      not generate sufficient income to maintain herself  and  her  children
      without reliance on public funds.  There was a risk of a lengthy delay
      before the family were able to obtain suitable employment  to  satisfy
      the Immigration Rules.  It was on this basis that the Adjudicator took
      the view that the facts could properly be distinguished  from  Mahmood
      and Baljit Singh.  In the light of the lengthy delay that might result
      before entry clearance was issued, the detrimental effect of the delay
      on the future development of the  applicant's  relationship  with  his
      infant daughter and the cessation of his  financial  support  for  his
      wife and children, the Adjudicator held that the interference  to  his
      right to family life was not justified and would be disproportionate.

17.   This reasoning is based on an assumption that the applicant would  not
      be able to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  However, in  the  light  of
      the applicant's employment record in the United Kingdom  the  Tribunal
      are not  satisfied  that  he  would  be  unable  to  comply  with  the
      Immigration Rules.  When assessing maintenance and recourse to  public
      funds, an Entry Clearance Officer will  take  into  account  not  only
      whether an applicant is employed at the date of decision but what  his
      employment prospects are.  The applicant has shown that  he  has  good
      employment prospects.  He has obtained a job in the past and there  is
      no real reason to believe that he would not obtain a job in the future
      if need be.  In our judgment there is no reason to believe that  there
      would be an undue delay in obtaining entry  clearance.   The  Tribunal
      are  not  satisfied  that  the  applicant's  loss  of  job,  temporary
      separation from his family and his employment  prospects  or  lack  of
      them,   amount   to   exceptional   circumstances    making    removal
      disproportionate.

18.   Mr Scannell argues that the Adjudicator's decision  should  be  upheld
      on the basis that it is wrong to equate the applicant  with  a  normal
      applicant seeking to obtain leave to enter on  marriage  grounds.   He
      submits that it is wrong to apply  automatically  to  him  the  policy
      requiring entry clearance to be applied for from abroad.

19.   In Shala the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 25  June  1997
      and claimed asylum the same day.  Nothing was done about his claim for
      some time.  Eventually, after letters written by  his  solicitors,  he
      was interviewed on 17 July 2001 and his claim was refused on  25  July
      2001.  Meanwhile the appellant had met a Czech national who  was  also
      an asylum seeker.  They began living together in  December  1998.   In
      May 2000 she was granted refugee  status.   They  married  in  October
      2001.  The Court of  Appeal were satisfied that the Tribunal had erred
      in law by equating the appellant's position with that  of  any  normal
      applicant who sought to obtain leave to  enter  on  marriage  grounds.
      His case had an exceptional feature:  if his claim had been dealt with
      efficiently, he was likely  to  have  obtained  exceptional  leave  to
      remain which would have given him the  ability  to  apply  within  the
      United Kingdom for a variation of that leave  on  the  ground  of  his
      marriage.  When the appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  he  did
      have a legitimate claim to enter.  The subsequent delay  by  the  Home
      Office deprived him of that advantage and that should be  seen  as  an
      exceptional circumstance taking his case out  of  the  normal  run  of
      cases when a person with no leave to enter seeks leave on the basis of
      marriage.

20.   In the present  appeal  the  application  was  dealt  with  on   Third
      Country grounds.  Germany accepted responsibility  for  assessing  his
      claim. The applicant sought to  challenge  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to remove him to Germany:  he was fully entitled to take that
      course but the fact remains that his claim was  finally  dismissed  by
      the Court of  Appeal in March 2002.  Whatever the position in 1997  or
      1998 by 2002 it was safe for the appellant to be returned  to  Germany
      and indeed to Kosovo.  Even assuming  that  the  appellant  was  fully
      justified in the light of the situation in Kosovo  in  coming  to  the
      United Kingdom rather than remaining in Germany in 1997, the situation
      in Kosovo significantly changed in  1999  and  had  certainly  changed
      completely by March/April 2000 when he first met  his  wife.   In  our
      judgment the facts in this appeal are  properly  distinguishable  from
      the facts in Shala.

21.   In our view it is invidious when assessing proportionality  to  attach
      too much weight to an assessment of what the position might have  been
      if a claim had been assessed at an earlier date.  The  policy  of  the
      Secretary of State  has  been  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to  those
      entitled  to  refugee  status.   He  has  chosen  to  go  beyond   the
      requirements of the Convention which only  require  protection  to  be
      given when there is a current well-founded fear of  persecution.   The
      Tribunal are  not  saying  that  when  assessing  proportionality  the
      circumstances in which an applicant arrived in the United Kingdom  and
      any delay in dealing with a proper claim  should  not  be  taken  into
      account.  Clearly they are relevant factors.  In Shala, the  Court  of
      Appeal were satisfied that the Tribunal  left  out  of  account  these
      relevant factors:  the circumstances of the  appellant's  arrival  and
      the delay in determining his claim.   When  assessing  proportionality
      these factors must  be  assessed  together  with  all  other  relevant
      factors including the reasons that the applicant is seeking to  remain
      in the United Kingdom and, when the application is based on  marriage,
      the situation when the relationship formed and the situation  then  in
      the applicant's home country.

22.   When this applicant arrived in the United Kingdom he would  have  been
      in considerable danger if he had remained in  Kosovo.   He  cannot  be
      categorised as someone who did not have a properly arguable legitimate
      claim to enter  and  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  that  time.
      However, by the time of his marriage the situation had changed for the
      better in Kosovo.

23.   The factor which has caused the Tribunal most concern  is  the  effect
      on Paige of a period  of  separation  from  her  father.  This  is  an
      important factor to  which  the  Tribunal  would  attach  considerable
      weight. The seven year policy to which we were referred is a factor of
      limited relevance given  Paige's  age  and  the  length  of  time  the
      applicant has been part of the older children's lives.   However,  the
      Tribunal must also take into account the importance of maintaining  an
      effective immigration policy.  In the explanatory statement it is made
      clear that the Secretary of State attaches the greatest weight to  the
      mandatory requirement that a foreign national  seeking  settlement  in
      the United Kingdom  as  a  foreign  spouse  should  hold  prior  entry
      clearance for that purpose.  It is the Secretary of State's view  that
      this requirement should only be waived  in  the  most  exceptional  of
      circumstances.  This is a view properly open to the Secretary of State
      in the light of the Immigration Rules.

24.   Since the hearing before the Adjudicator the law has  moved  on.   The
      Adjudicator did not have the benefit of the judgments from  the  Court
      of Appeal dealing with the approach to  be  adopted  when  considering
      appeals on Article 8 grounds.  In Blessing Edore [2003] EWCA  Civ  716
      Simon Brown LJ held that an  Adjudicator's  task  on  a  human  rights
      appeal under Section 65 was to determine whether  the  decision  under
      appeal was properly within the decision-maker's discretion, i.e. was a
      decision which could  reasonably  be  regarded  as  proportionate  and
      striking a fair balance between the competing interests in play.

25.   This approach was confirmed by the Court of Appeal  in  Razgar  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 840 where the Court also dealt with the  proper  approach  if
      the facts found by the  Adjudicator were fundamentally different  from
      those determined by the Secretary of State.  In such cases it would be
      for  the  Adjudicator  to   determine   whether   the   decision   was
      proportionate by carrying out the balancing exercise  himself  but  he
      should pay considerable deference to the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
      State as to the importance of maintaining his policy.

26.   Looking at the facts of the present case, the Tribunal are  unable  to
      say that the Secretary of State's decision fell outside the  range  of
      responses open to him  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  which  are  not
      substantially in dispute.  When all the circumstances are  taken  into
      account it cannot be said that this decision was  so  disproportionate
      that it fell outside  the  area  of  decision  properly  open  to  the
      Secretary of State.

27.   In these circumstances  the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.





                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
