
Heard at Field House     YP (Maintenance - Detention Records) Sri Lanka CG
[2003] UKIAT 00145
On     7 May 2003
Written 9 May 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                               12.11.03

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                              Mr C A N Edinboro
                             Ms S S Ramsumair JP



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka. The Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr N K M  Lawrence,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 28 June 2002 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr D  Saville,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
     Appellant. Ms M Shaw represented the Respondent.

  3. There is no dispute over the specific facts relevant  to  this  appeal.
     They can be summarised as follows. The Respondent  is  a  single  young
     Tamil male from the village of Kodikamam. In 1996  the  army  began  to
     search for one of his brothers, Thevakumar, on suspicion of  his  being
     an LTTE supporter. In 1998 this brother sought asylum in the UK. On  26
     June  1998  the  army  arrested  the  Respondent  and  his  father   to
     interrogate them under  torture  about  Thevakumar's  whereabouts.  The
     father was released after three days and the Respondent  after  fifteen
     days. Thereafter when there was a local incident  involving  the  LTTE,
     the Respondent would  be  arrested  detained  and  tortured,  but  then
     released without charge. This happened on 18 March 1999,  when  he  was
     held for eighteen days, and on 17 October 1999 when  he  was  held  for
     about a month. The final arrest was on 1 March 2000 when  he  was  held
     for fourteen days.

  4. The Appellant did not seek to flee from Sri Lanka as a  consequence  of
     these detentions. But on 26 September 2000, some six months  after  the
     last detention, during general fighting, a shell exploded on the family
     home.  The Respondent's father and  sister  were  killed.   His  mother
     suffered very serious injuries, including the loss of her left arm  but
     survived.  His younger brother lost his right leg  but  also  survived.
     The Respondent was at the back of the house and suffered minor injuries
     for which he was treated at the local hospital.   However  he  suffered
     psychological damage. During the hours of darkness he  would  call  out
     for his parents and sister.  He would sleepwalk looking  for  his  dead
     family, and was shot at whilst doing  so  during  curfew.  Finally  the
     family decided that the Respondent should leave Sri Lanka and with  the
     assistance of an agent he left via Colombo airport for Moscow, where he
     stayed for five months, before being brought to the UK.

  5. Whether that history, tragic as it is, would result in the  authorities
     now having any adverse interest in the Respondent, has to be considered
     in the light of the objective material. It is a curious feature of this
     determination  that  the  Adjudicator,  though  he   directed   himself
     correctly as to the general principles of the applicable law,  made  no
     reference whatsoever to any of the very many  Tribunal  assessments  of
     the objective material made since the ceasefire. It  is  all  the  more
     curious because Ms Shaw, who represented the Respondent at the  hearing
     before the Adjudicator, confirmed that she  would  at  the  least  have
     supplied him with a copy of Jeyachandran  [2002]  UKIAT  01869.  Indeed
     part of her argument to us today, which we shall return  to  later,  is
     that the Respondent in this appeal is an exceptional  case  within  the
     terms of Jeyachandran. The Adjudicator however made  no  finding  about
     whether the Respondent was an  exceptional  case.  He  did  not  follow
     Jeyachandran or give no indication that he had even  read  it,  or  any
     other of the many Tribunal decisions that have followed Jeyachandran.

  6. His analysis in paragraph  5  of  the  determination  starts  with  the
     observation that "the CIPU report of April  2002  suggests  that  peace
     process is in place and therefore it is safe to return  Tamils  to  Sri
     Lanka. This document is general in nature and only has a small  section
     on the peace process." He then appears to ignore what was in  the  CIPU
     report but devoted a number of pages of the determination to a  summary
     of a report from the Refugee Council of  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the
     light of this he concluded that
           "The peace process, if there is one, is fragile;  many  previous
           peace agreements were dishonoured by  the  Singhala  government;
           therefore asylum seekers may be unwilling to trust the  Singhala
           government any more...... the Armed Forces  of  the  Sri  Lankan
           state and the LTTE on the ground level do not appear to  observe
           the  letter  let  alone  the  spirit  of  the  agreement;  there
           continues  to  be  violations  of  human  rights  by  both   the
           combatants; the Respondent  will  be  a  returnee  on  temporary
           documents indicating a failed asylum seeker; therefore I find it
           is reasonably likely  that  he  will  be  stopped,  interrogated
           and/or detained."
  7. On this basis and without addressing in terms  whether  there  was  any
     real risk of ill-treatment on return on the basis of his  record,  even
     if he were stopped and interrogated, he allowed the asylum  appeal.  In
     so doing he made a curious finding concerning internal flight, which is
     presumably the result of the typographical error.  He said
           "I do not find there is the option of internal flight  for  this
           Respondent.  He is a young male.  The conflict in Sri  Lanka  is
           far from over.  In the light of the breaches  in  the  ceasefire
           agreement noted above I am not satisfied  the  Respondent  would
           come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan   forces
           regardless of which part of the island  the  Respondent  locates
           himself."

  8.  He also assessed  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Kanagaratnam,  but
     although noting that the doctor made and observation about lack of  the
     availability of treatment in Sri Lanka he also noted  that  the  doctor
     gave no  indication  of  the  basis  of  his  knowledge  about  medical
     facilities in Sri Lanka. Nevertheless, the Adjudicator  concluded  that
     because the doctor was approved under section 12 of the  Mental  Health
     Act he  would  not  be  given  to  making  unsubstantiated  claims  and
     therefore accepted unconditionally the  opinions  expressed  concerning
     the lack of  availability  of  suitable  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka.  He
     therefore also allowed the human rights appeal under Articles 2, 3,  5,
     and 8.

  9. The grounds of appeal argue that the Adjudicator erred  in  failing  to
     take into account the full range of objective material  concerning  Sri
     Lanka, and the many decisions of the Tribunal concerning this  and  the
     present risk to returnees, and especially Jeyachadran. He also made  an
     error of fact concerning the availability of medical facilities in  Sri
     Lanka, which has also been confirmed in a number of Tribunal decisions.

 10. The Tribunal under  the  chairmanship  of  Collins  J  in  Jeyachandran
     undertook a most detailed review of the objective country  material  as
     at May 2002. It concluded as follows.
           "The situation has  changed  in  recent  months.   There  was  a
           ceasefire in February of this year  and  the  most  recent  CIPU
           report for April 2002 records some of the relaxations that  have
           occurred since that ceasefire.  Paragraph  3.67  notes  that  in
           April 2002 the LTTE opened a political office  in  a  Government
           held area in the north of the country and  that  that  had  been
           inaugurated under  the  ceasefire  agreement.   There  had  been
           permission for LTTE cadres wearing cyanide capsules to move back
           to an LTTE controlled area and those who were clearly recognised
           as  being  LTTE  activists  were  permitted   to   move   around
           unmolested.  On 13 April the LTTE signed a  pact  with  the  Sri
           Lankan Muslim Congress and agreed that  nearly  100,000  Muslims
           expelled from the north by the Tamil Tigers would be allowed  to
           return.  All this indicates a change of the situation and  gives
           hope that the situation will stabilise to such  an  extent  that
           the persecution which has existed in  the  past  and  the  havoc
           created by the civil war will  cease.   The  likelihood  of  any
           difficulties on return  has  also  been  considered  by  a  fact
           finding mission to Sri Lanka which visited that country  at  the
           end  of  March  this  year  and  those  involved  discussed  the
           situation  with  among  others  the  Director  and  the   Senior
           Superintendent in the Criminal Investigations  Department.   The
           report records that if a returnee were not wanted he  would  not
           be stopped at the airport.  We underline 'if a returnee were not
           wanted' because there is of course a finding in this  case  that
           the appellant was wanted.  He went on a computer which holds the
           name, address and age of a wanted man.  The police purely go  on
           records, scars would not make a difference and  the  authorities
           would not make a decision on this basis.


           Accordingly it seems to us that it is clear that there is  every
           likelihood that on return this appellant would because he was on
           a wanted list, be investigated.  He  would  be  stopped  at  the
           airport and would be questioned.  That should not of itself mean
           necessarily  that  he  would  be  tortured  but   although   the
           Government has regularly said that it is taking steps to prevent
           torture by the investigating  authorities,  that  has  not  been
           achieved.  Mr Buckley has submitted that  the  only  basis  upon
           which the appellant could be wanted was because of  a  political
           involvement in   that  the  LTTE  materials  that  he  had  been
           involved in printing had been found at his Tutory.   We  do  not
           know  on  what  basis  the  authorities  wanted  him  and   what
           suspicions they may have had.  We note  the  finding  about  his
           mother.  That does not suggest to us that he was necessarily  to
           be regarded as someone who was only a low  level  supporter  who
           would not be considered to have been involved with assisting the
           LTTE militarily.  We do not feel that we would be  justified  in
           making the assumption that it was in the circumstances merely as
           a political sympathiser.


           We note that the UNHCR has indicated that although in general it
           may be that asylum seekers can properly  be  returned  and  that
           scarring was perhaps not a significant  factor,  nonetheless  it
           could not be accepted that there was even now no risk to anyone.
           The situation  is  still  somewhat  fluid,  although  there  are
           reasons to be optimistic.  The fact is that this  ceasefire  has
           only been in  place  for  a  relatively  short  period  and  the
           authorities are still interested so far as we are aware, and  it
           would be surprising if they were not, in those who may have been
           involved in active assistance of the  terrorists  in  the  past.
           There are signs from reports that there is  still  a  degree  of
           mistrust  and  suggestions  that  the  Tigers  are  taking  some
           opportunity to regroup and possibly  even  to  re-arm.   Whether
           that in fact will result in a breakdown of the ceasefire in  due
           course we do not know.  We hope that it will not but  we  cannot
           at this stage be sure about it.

           The reality is in our judgment that it is as  yet  premature  to
           accept that everyone who has  claimed  asylum  in  this  country
           would be able to return safely.  We certainly are  of  the  view
           that in the present situation and having regard to  the  present
           trends it is only the exceptional cases that will not be able to
           return in safety.  The question is  whether  this  appellant  is
           such an exceptional case.  In our judgment he is for the reasons
           that we have indicated, namely that he is someone who is  wanted
           and is someone in our view who must be wanted  in  a  relatively
           serious fashion, if we may put  it  that  way,  because  of  the
           attitude in relation to his mother.  We do not  think  that  the
           scars add anything to the danger.  They were  inflicted  a  very
           long time ago and, as the Chief Adjudicator found, they were  in
           no way prominent nor were they caused in any form of combat.  He
           did conclude that there was  a  possibility  that  he  might  be
           investigated because of the scars.  We regard that as  a  remote
           possibility and we do not believe that there is  indeed  a  real
           risk that the  scars  themselves  would  have  resulted  in  any
           danger.  However  we  have  to  have  regard  to  the  scars  in
           conjunction with the fact that he was on a  wanted  list.   They
           are in that context of perhaps some marginal relevance.
           We make it clear that the Tribunal is in a  difficult  position,
           as indeed are all Adjudicators at this time in relation  to  Sri
           Lankan Tamils.  It is still too early to be satisfied  that  the
           situation has changed to such an extent that  there  is  now  no
           risk to anyone.  Equally we take the view that there are few who
           now would be at risk, but it is necessary always to consider the
           circumstances of each individual case.  That can only be done by
           considering the  facts  of  that  individual  case  against  the
           information that  exists  at  the  precise  date  on  which  the
           Adjudicator or the Tribunal has to reach a decision.  If  things
           are seen to be improving the time may well  come  and  may  well
           come soon when it can be said that all can be returned.  Equally
           it may be unfortunately that things do not  turn  out  quite  so
           well.

 11. In October  2002,  in  Thiagarajah  [2002]  UKIAT  04917,  a  different
     Tribunal reviewed the up to date objective material  in  the  light  of
     developments since Jeyachandran. It was promulgated a couple  of  weeks
     before the Adjudicator wrote  his  determination  and  was  based  upon
     similar objective material as before him. It concluded as follows.
           "Since May 2002 [when Jeyachandran was decided] the situation in
           Sri  Lanka  has  developed  further  and  for  the  better.  The
           continued passage of time without the collapse of the  ceasefire
           is in itself a positive factor. However the  parties  have  gone
           significantly  further  in  establishing  their  commitment   to
           reaching a lasting peace agreement.  The Government  has  lifted
           its ban on the LTTE, and the LTTE has  abandoned  its  claim  to
           independence.   These  were  the  two  major  obstacles  to  the
           commencement of negotiations, and after the concessions by  both
           sides, those negotiations have begun in  earnest  and  have  now
           continued for some weeks. This comes on top of the suspension of
           the Prevention of Terrorism  Act.  Whilst  it  is  true,  as  Mr
           O'Connor suggested, that there has not as yet been  any  general
           amnesty, or a full release of prisoners detained  prior  to  the
           ceasefire, it is clear that there has been a dramatic change  in
           the political and security situation  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  these
           circumstances and on the facts as established in this appeal, we
           conclude that the Adjudicator was wrong to find that there is  a
           reasonable likelihood that the Respondent will  be  stopped  and
           questioned on return to Colombo  airport  and  as  a  result  of
           inquiries into his record there will be a real risk of continued
           detention and  ill-treatment.  Most  returnees,  even  those  on
           emergency  travel  documents,  are  waved  through  the  airport
           controls.  Even if the Respondent were stopped  and  his  record
           investigated, we conclude there is no real risk to him. There is
           nothing  exceptional  in  his  record.  Most  Tamils   in   LTTE
           controlled areas were coerced into low level activities for them
           and there is no evidence that the authorities are interested any
           longer in such people. The Prevention of Terrorism Act has  been
           suspended and membership of the LTTE is no longer illegal. Known
           LTTE members are able to travel in government controlled  areas.
           If arrests of people like  the  Respondent  were  taking  place,
           there would by now be evidence of it from UNHCR  and  the  NGO's
           but there is not."

 12. These conclusions represent the overwhelming consensus of many Tribunal
     decisions. The approach in Jeyachandran has also been approved  by  the
     Court  of  Appeal  in  Selvaratnam.  All  this  was  ignored   by   the
     Adjudicator, who reached  very  different  conclusions  concerning  the
     objective  situation  in  Sri  Lanka.  Ms  Shaw  has  argued  that  the
     Adjudicator's   conclusions   about   the   objective   evidence   were
     sustainable. We do not agree.  The matters upon which he relied were in
     the main considered by the Tribunal in Jeyachandran and in  many  other
     subsequent determinations. It is not that the facts  he  described  are
     wrong, but that there are other important  positive  balancing  factors
     that he failed to take adequately into  account.  There  clearly  is  a
     ceasefire  in  place,  which  has  held   for   a   considerable   time
     notwithstanding some breaches on both sides. There has been violence by
     the LTTE against individuals especially in particular localities  under
     their control.  The  use  of  torture  by  the  security  forces  still
     continues, though the Government disapproves it. Nevertheless there  is
     and remains on the ground a  huge  change  for  the  better  since  the
     ceasefire began. There is an ongoing peace process, albeit  subject  to
     setbacks as each side jockeys for  position  in  the  negotiations.  We
     consider that the Adjudicator's assessment of  the  objective  evidence
     before him was unbalanced and incomplete, and his overall assessment is
     wrong and unsustainable. Hence he also erred in  his  approach  to  the
     nature of the current risk to returnees. With regard to his  assessment
     of the medical situation, the reasoning given by  the  Adjudicator  for
     concluding that there were no  adequate  facilities  for  treating  the
     Respondent in Sri Lanka is also  unsustainable. The doctor,  upon  whom
     he relied, proferred no expertise on the situation in  Sri  Lanka.  The
     Adjudicator did not have regard to the  guidance  of  the  Tribunal  in
     dealing with such health issues given in AE and FE [2002} UKIAT 05237*.
     For all these reasons we find that the determination is fatally  flawed
     and must be set aside.

 13. However, there is no dispute over the material facts  relating  to  the
     Respondent, and the Tribunal has therefore gone  on  to  make  its  own
     assessment of the Respondent's  claim  in  the  light  of  the  current
     objective material.

 14. Ms Shaw has based her submissions to  us  on  three  propositions.  The
     first is that the peace process, since the Adjudicator's  decision  has
     being undermined by recent developments. Second, the Respondent  is  an
     exceptional case within the terms of Jeyachandran.  Third, the  medical
     evidence shows that the Respondent is suffering from severe  depression
     and post-traumatic stress disorder and there is a risk of suicide, with
     psychotic symptoms.  He is in receipt of ongoing medical  treatment  in
     the UK and suitable help would be unavailable in practical terms in Sri
     Lanka. Mr Saville contested each of these propositions.

 15. With regard to the current objective  situation,  we  have  taken  into
     account the matters  raised  by  Ms  Shaw  and  contained  in  the  two
     comprehensive bundles of documents helpfully supplied by her.  It is to
     be expected that peace negotiations to bring to an end  a  long-running
     and very bitter conflict will be marked both by advances and  setbacks.
     It is inevitable that there will be differences  of  opinion  not  just
     between the two sides, but  also  between  individuals  with  different
     views on each side; even highly placed  individuals  such  as  the  Sri
     Lankan President who is of a different party to the government and  has
     taken over many months a different view from that  of  the  Sri  Lankan
     government.  Each side will also seek  advantage  in  negotiations  and
     will use a variety of  stratagems  to  achieve  this.  But  we  do  not
     consider that the evidence as  a  whole  suggests  that  the  will  and
     ability of both sides to achieve a settlement has eroded, or  that  the
     ceasefire, which has effectively held despite some since February 2002,
     has or, in the light of the current evidence, is reasonably  likely  to
     fail. Nor has the situation for returnees deteriorated.
 16. We note in this context the positive impact of the determination of the
     United States Government, post September 11, to bear down on terrorism.
      Thus whilst the LTTE  withdrew  on  21  April  2003  from  the  formal
     negotiations, the BBC News article of 24 April 2003  shows  the  United
     States government pressing the LTTE to return to the negotiating  table
     and to cease any actions inconsistent  with  the  ceasefire  and  peace
     process. We also note the Sunday Observer of 27  April  2003  reporting
     the leading LTTE theoretician, Anton Balasingham stating,  in  response
     to the US criticism, that the present suspension of the  peace  process
     was  only  to  give  a  timeframe  to  the  government  to  fulfil  its
     obligations. It also reports assurances that the withdrawal  would  not
     last long, and that the  LTTE  intended  to  continue  to  observe  the
     ceasefire.

 17. We accept that  although  very  considerable  progress  has  been  made
     already, difficult issues remain to be resolved especially  about  LTTE
     decommissioning and power-sharing.  We note the pessimistic view  taken
     by the academic expert, Dr Anthony Good,  about  whether  this  can  be
     achieved in a democratic context. However that is  a  prediction  based
     upon evidence that is substantially before us also, and upon  which  we
     must reach our own judgment.

 18. We consider that the substantial continuation of  the  ceasefire,  even
     with the imperfections in its implementation  on  the  ground  on  both
     sides,  is  still  effectively  holding.   Moreover  neither  side  has
     suggested any wish to bring it to an end. The  peace  talks  have  made
     substantial progress so far and although they  are  presently  stalled,
     both sides have expressed the view that this is only temporary  and  it
     does not affect the agreements already reached. We cannot predict  what
     the future will hold, or whether Dr Good's pessimism will prove  to  be
     justified. That however  is  not  our  task.  We  have  to  assess  the
     situation as it is now, and in particular the  risk  to  returnees.  We
     conclude, in the light of the evidence as a whole, that  the  ceasefire
     and peace process remains viable and ongoing and the gains made  remain
     in place. The  substantial improvements in the security  situation  and
     the consequent change, since the conflict ended, in  the  risk  profile
     for returnees is not now materially different from  that  described  by
     the Tribunal in Jeyachandran, and approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in
     Selvaratnam. We have therefore gone on  to  assess  the  risk  to  this
     Respondent on that basis.

 19. Ms Shaw has then argued that the  Respondent  is  an  exceptional  case
     though she accepted that he is not wanted in the sense  that  there  is
     any  warrant  for  his  arrest.  We  accept  her  submission  that   an
     exceptional case in terms of Jeyachandran is not confined to  a  person
     being wanted, but that each case must be assessed upon its  own  facts.
     She relies upon the psychiatric report by Dr Kanagaratnam  and  submits
     that he will stand out on return because of  his  mental  difficulties.
     He suffers panic attacks when he sees the police and  he  will  present
     himself at the airport in a poor light. He will appear  suspicious  and
     will as a result be detained and questioned.  His  background  will  be
     examined and he will be seen as someone who has been targeted  in  past
     whenever there was LTTE activity.  He will not then be able to  explain
     himself properly.

 20. The report upon which this submission is  based  is  dated  15  October
     2002. It was prepared by a Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr G  Kanagaratnam,
     who works at the Southwest London and St  George's  Mental  Health  NHS
     Trust. He was not and is not responsible for treating  the  Respondent.
     Prior to the interview for the report, the Respondent, who came to  the
     UK in April 2002, had not been receiving any medical attention at  all.
     The doctor noted the evidence given  to  him  by  the  Respondent  that
     uniformed personnel or police trigger panic attacks and he would faint.
      Immediately after the death of his  sister  and  father  he  had  been
     distressed, wandering at night and being  a  risk  to  himself,  whilst
     searching for the dead members of his family.  He  concluded  that  the
     Respondent suffered from post-traumatic  disorder  with  depression  of
     considerable severity and would experience psychotic symptoms.  He  has
     intense suicidal ideations with a sense  of  foreshortened  future.  He
     recommends that he will require treatment for  his  illness  comprising
     antidepressants and psychotherapy.  He considers that  these  forms  of
     treatment are not readily available in Sri Lanka and should  he  failed
     to receive them, he  will  be  extremely  incapacitated  and  extremely
     likely to deteriorate further.

 21. The most recent medical evidence comes from  the  Respondent's  GP,  Dr
     Maheshwaran and is dated 30  April  2003.  It  would  appear  that  the
     Respondent  registered  with  him   after   the   examination   by   Dr
     Kanagaratnam. He states that the Respondent  has  been  counselled  and
     treated with antidepressants.  He  is  seen  on  a  regular  basis  for
     medication.  There is no indication in this report that in the  UK  the
     Respondent is currently receiving  psychotherapy  or  other  specialist
     treatment. There is no indication in the  report  either  that,  taking
     antidepressants, the Respondent is  unable  to  function  normally.  We
     conclude from  this,  that  the  medication  now  being  taken  by  the
     Respondent has been  sufficient  to  deal  with  his  problems  because
     otherwise his GP would have referred him for psychotherapy.

 22. We do not therefore accept Ms Shaw's  assertions  that  the  Respondent
     would be unable to function normally on return to Sri Lanka airport  or
     thereafter. The likelihood is that he would be waved through like  most
     other returnees and would experience no difficulties.  However even  if
     he did attract attention to himself in some way and  as  a  consequence
     his record was examined, it would show nothing that would bring him  to
     the adverse attention of the authorities.  It would show  that  he  had
     been detained on three occasions during  the  conflict  for  relatively
     brief periods and had been released on each occasion without charge. He
     is not wanted for any offence.   The  reason  he  left  Sri  Lanka  was
     because members of his family were killed or mutilated in the  shelling
     around his home 2� years ago, in September 2000, and he  was  extremely
     disturbed thereafter.  Given that he was treated in hospital after  the
     shelling and indeed remained at home in Sri Lanka for more than a  year
     afterward without any further detention, his record might show this  as
     well. At all events there is nothing in his record, which would suggest
     to the authorities that the Respondent was of any adverse  interest  to
     them in the present circumstances.   We  do  not  therefore  accept  Ms
     Shaw's submission that the Respondent  would  be  an  exceptional  case
     within the terms of Jeyachandran. On this basis, he  therefore  has  no
     valid claim to asylum or under Articles 2, 3, 5 and 8.

 23. The final issue relates to whether or not the Respondent would be  able
     to receive appropriate medical treatment in Sri Lanka and whether  this
     can give rise to a successful human rights  appeal  in  its  own  right
     under Articles 3 and 8. In AE and FE [2002] UKIAT 05237*, the Tribunal,
     chaired by Collins J, summarised the  current  state  of  the  law  and
     authorities relating to the return to their home  countries  of  people
     suffering from illness in these terms:
           "The absence  of  proper  medical  facilities  to  deal  with  a
           particular  individual's   problems   will   not   normally   be
           determinative unless  his  right  to  life  is  thereby  put  in
           jeopardy. If the proper facilities  are  available,  a  person's
           medical condition however serious cannot make him a refugee."

 24. The evidence before the Tribunal is that the  Respondent  is  presently
     receiving antidepressants only.  He  is  not  receiving  psychotherapy,
     either as an inpatient or an outpatient. We must conclude that,  as  he
     is being treated by a competent GP in  the  UK  that  this  medication,
     coupled with his initial counselling, is adequate to  meet  his  needs.
     There is no evidence before us that suitable  antidepressants  are  not
     available in Sri Lanka or that the Respondent would be unable to access
     them. He still has substantial family in Sri Lanka who can assist  him.
     Some years have now past since the traumatic  shelling  of  his  family
     home. We consider in the light of all this that Ms Shaw's more alarming
     predictions about what will happen to  the  Respondent  on  return  are
     unjustified. The risk of suicide is very speculative, and the  evidence
     about this relates to a period  before  the  Respondent  was  receiving
     treatment.

 25. The Respondent would not in the light of this be in need of referral to
     a psychiatric hospital, but even if he  were,  we  are  satisfied  that
     there are proper facilities available in Sri Lanka, even if the quality
     of the care given is not comparable to that of the UK.  The  advice  of
     the British High Commission in Sri Lanka in July 2002 is that there are
     hospitals  specifically  devoted  to  mental  health  in   Angoda   and
     Mulleriyawa, even  though  they  lack  the  most  modern  standards  of
     treatment. Also since 1996, psychiatric treatment has been available at
     all teaching hospitals  and  main  district  hospitals  throughput  the
     country, as well as in Colombo general Hospital. A report of June  2001
     from the World Socialist Web Site criticises the quality of  in-patient
     treatment at Angoda Hospital, but confirms that there are 4 psychiatric
     institutions in the country providing  in-patient  care,  though  these
     services are overstretched. A report from Psychiatric News states  that
     20% of general hospital patients and 24% of  those  visiting  a  family
     practitioner suffer from a significant psychiatric disorder. Given  the
     extended conflict that has taken place in Sri Lanka for so many  years,
     this is  not  surprising.  Nor  is  it  surprising  that  hospital  and
     specialist resources for treating  mental  illness  are  overstretched.
     However the facilities available in Sri Lanka  clearly  meet  the  test
     described by Collins J in AE.

 26. Having said that, the medical evidence in this appeal does not  suggest
     that specialist or in-patient treatment  will  now  be  necessary.  The
     Respondent will have access to the network of family practitioners  and
     to the necessary anti-depressants. We do not therefore  accept  on  the
     basis of this evidence that there  is  a  viable  Article  3  claim  on
     medical grounds. In the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in
     Ullah, as the conduct complained of in the country of return is not  of
     the severity to  engage  Article  3,  Article  8  will  not  avail  the
     Respondent either.

 27.  For the reasons given above this appeal against the  decision  of  the
     Adjudicator is allowed, and the appeal by the  Respondent  against  the
     removal directions is dismissed






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
