
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 29 July 2003            |        |NL (Mozu-Facts) Democratic  |
|                           |        |Republic of Congo CG [2003] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00058                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.3RD September 2003                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|J Barnes                                                          |
|Prof D B Casson                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Connor, Counsel  instructed  by  Christian  Khan
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Hatton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,
      (formerly Zaire) (DRC) who was born on 16 May  1963.  He  entered  the
      United Kingdom on 27 July 1997 and applied for asylum on  arrival,  he
      was accompanied by his wife and five children who are  his  dependents
      in this appeal. Following an interview on 18 May 1999 his  application
      was refused for the reasons set out in a letter dated 12  March  2001.
      On 11 April 2001, the Secretary of State  issued  directions  for  his
      removal to the Democratic Republic of Congo following refusal of leave
      to enter after refusal of his asylum application. He appealed  against
      that decision on both asylum and human rights grounds. His appeal  was
      heard on 3 March 2003 by Mr R G Walters, an Adjudicator, who dismissed
      his appeal. He now appeals to the Tribunal against that decision.


   2. The basis of his claim was that  following  studies  in  Morocco  from
      October 1987 until January 1995 he returned to his own  country  which
      was then under the  rule  of  President  Mobutu  and  his  party,  the
      Mouvement Populaire de Revolution (MPR), and managed to obtain work in
      July 1995 with his brother-in-law in a garage. The appellant  was  put
      in charge of the financial department and, although he  said  that  he
      supported the Union pour la Democratie et  le  Progres  Social  (UDPS)
      whilst at University in Morocco, he became a member of the MPR because
      his brother-in-law was a member and he considered himself  obliged  to
      do so. He became known to one of the President's sons and acted as his
      customs agent in retrieving merchandise from the port supported  by  a
      Presidential guard escort. He said this made him known in his own area
      as an influential MPR member, but because his main allegiance  was  to
      UDPS he claimed to have been involved in a dialogue between  the  UDPS
      and the MPR from the end of  1995  and  subsequently  with  additional
      negotiations with the rebel Alliance de Forces  Democratique  pour  la
      Liberation (AFDL) aimed at seeking to establish a future power base in
      the DRC. He and a friend went to  Kisangani  in  March  1997  but  the
      rebels were in the process  of  capturing  the  town  and  denied  any
      knowledge of the intended dialogue when his friend  raised  the  issue
      with them. The appellant and his friend escaped back to Kinshasa where
      he remained until Kabila's troops entered on  17  May  1997.  At  that
      point anyone who had worked for the Mobutu  regime  was  at  potential
      risk and he fled into hiding, making arrangements to leave the country
      on 25 July 1997 by air with his family to  Belgium  whence  they  made
      their way to this country. Since his arrival in the United Kingdom  he
      has been a member of the UDPS  and  he  now  feared  that  if  he  was
      returned to his own country  he  would  be  at  risk  because  of  his
      membership of the UDPS which he would continue to demonstrate there.


   3. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had been a member  of  the
      UDPS since his arrival in the United Kingdom although he  agreed  with
      the view of the Secretary of State that this was a calculated  measure
      intended to create or substantially enhance his claim to asylum here.

   4. The Adjudicator rejected parts of the claim made as to his experiences
      in his own country prior to departure. He did not accept that he would
      have had to join the MPR in order to keep his job in what was  a  firm
      owned by a member of his family saying:

           "it is not an action which I find  consistent  with  that  of  a
           supposed Democrat as the appellant claims to be".


   5. In relation to the trip to  Kisangani  he  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had been detained there  or  persecuted  by  reason  of  his
      political opinion by AFDL soldiers. He said this at  paragraph  33  of
      the determination:


           "I find that he  was  detained  in  the  hotel  by  the  drunken
           soldiers as a means of extracting any property from him which he
           might have. The appellant was seen simply by the soldiers  as  a
           relevantly rich man from whom they believed  they  could  obtain
           money and goods."


   6. He continued at paragraph 35:


           "I did not find the appellant's evidence credible  that  he  had
           been involved in these various negotiations with  the  AFDL  and
           other political groups. There is no evidence that the  appellant
           had any real political power or any constituency. His jobs  were
           to work in the  accounts  department  of  the  garage  and  help
           Mobutu's son avoid customs duties on imported goods. He held  no
           political office in Mobutu's party. I could think of  no  reason
           why the AFDL would be interested in talking to him  at  all.  He
           described himself in interview as being a member of a group of a
           young people [sic] who tried to think about ways to  change  the
           situation and lead to dialogue. Such a group, I find,  would  be
           on no interest to the Kabila regime."


   7. Dealing with the Adjudicator's conclusions in  relation  to  the  past
      history in DRC, we accept that there is background evidence, including
      that in the expert report of Dr Eric Kennes of 17 February 2003  which
      appears at pages 69 to 116 of  the  appellant's  bundle,  which  would
      support at least the advisability of membership of  the  MPR  at  that
      time in what was then a one party state.  It  seems  to  us  that  the
      ground of  appeal  which  challenged  what  the  adjudicator  said  at
      paragraph 27 of his determination is based on a  misconception  as  to
      what he was in fact saying. It was assumed, and Mr O'Connor maintained
      this assumption in his submissions to us,  that  the  adjudicator  was
      saying that the appellant had not joined the MPR at  all.  That,  with
      respect, is not what the paragraph in question says.  It  says  merely
      that the adjudicator does not accept that


           "he would have to join the MPR in order to keep his job."


      That had been the appellant's evidence. That paragraph 27 has  such  a
      more  restricted  meaning  is  made  clear  by  paragraph  38  of  the
      determination which is as follows:


            "the appellant gave evidence that if  returned  to  the  DRC  he
      would continue his activities on behalf of the UDPS. I did not believe
      that evidence. I think it more  probable  that  he  would  adjust  his
      political affiliation to that of the regime in power as he did on  the
      previous occasion." (our emphasis)


      In other words the Adjudicator is saying no more than that he believed
      the appellant was prepared to trim his political affiliation  to  suit
      the circumstances in which he found himself.

   8. Turing to paragraph 35 and the reasoning there, it  is  challenged  on
      two bases in the grounds of appeal. First, that the appellant was  not
      suggesting that he  was  the  main  person  carrying  out  front  line
      negotiations with the  AFDL  and  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
      explored the extent to which the appellant was involved and whether he
      would be targeted because of his association  with  other  persons  of
      influence; secondly, that Dr Kennes did confirm that  there  had  been
      secret talks between MPR, UDPS and AFDL members around  1996-1997  and
      that the AFDL had subsequently attacked  influential  members  of  the
      other groups they formerly held talks with. Given  that  the  position
      put forward in the grounds of appeal is that  at  best  the  appellant
      played some sort  of  support  role,  entirely  contrary  to  what  we
      perceive to be the thrust of the claims made at interview and  in  his
      subsequent witness statement, it does not seem to us that the  grounds
      of appeal raise any arguable issue  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings
      were not sustainable  on  the  evidence  before  him.  Before  us,  Mr
      O'Connor sought to rely on the  claims  made  at  interview  that  the
      friend whom he said was actually conducting the negotiations with  the
      AFDL was, according to information he received, killed by rebel troops
      on their arrival in Kinshasa. The Appellant later learned that his own
      house had been looted and that his  parents  had  been  threatened  in
      their home. Initially Mr O'Connor put it to us that the threats to the
      parents had been  because  the  appellant  was  being  sought  by  the
      invading troops but he subsequently conceded that there was nothing in
      the evidence at interview or in the appellant's statement which  would
      support that additional gloss. The fact of knowledge of  the  sort  of
      dialogue which may have being going on at the time does not seem to us
      arguably to advance the credibility of the appellant who  was,  it  is
      accepted, a UPDS member in the United Kingdom for  six  years.  It  is
      clear from Dr Kennes' report that the fact of the  existence  of  such
      dialogue in the state of turmoil  then  existing  in  the  country  is
      historically known. Given the situation which then existed, it  is  no
      criticism of the appellant that he chose to  remove  himself  and  his
      family as soon as he was able to  arrange  to  do  so,  but  the  fact
      remains that on his own account he left by air from Kinshasa  in  late
      July  1997,  some  two  months  after  the  Kabila  regime  had   been
      established, at a time when the new government, although dominated  by
      AFDL members, also included members of the UDPS.


   9. Turning to the  appellant's  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
      Adjudicator summarises his evidence on this point at paragraph  36  of
      the determination in the following terms:


           "In his witness statement the Appellant details his  involvement
           with the UDPS in the  UK.  He  said  that  he  had  demonstrated
           outside the Rwandan, American and Angolan embassies and  outside
           the United Nations  office.  In  addition  he  had  demonstrated
           outside the French embassy and outside Downing Street. At p.  62
           there is a letter from the Chairman of the  Executive  Committee
           of the UDPS/UK Federation which states that these protests  have
           been held at the embassies of  all  countries  involved  in  the
           current Congolese civil war. The  Appellant's  telephone  number
           appears in a leaflet at p. 63 of A.1 where he  is  described  as
           "L.Marie". This leaflet calls on all Congolese people to protest
           against the presence on Congolese soil of troops from  Zimbabwe,
           Angola, Uganda, Namibia and Rwanda. It also bears an anti-Kabila
           message."


      He  also  records  the  appellant's  additional  evidence  as  to  the
      knowledge that might be had by the DRC government as to his activities
      in the United Kingdom as follows at paragraph 39 of the determination:


           "The appellant said in his witness statement that the  UDPS  has
           videotaped  these  demonstrations  for  its  own  purposes.  The
           appellant claimed that copies of these tapes had fallen into the
           hands of the DRC security services. The appellant said  that  he
           has been told this by an MPR member who he knows in the  UK  and
           who has contact with persons in Brussels who are  of  importance
           in the Kabila regime."


      As to that evidence the adjudicator commented at  paragraph  40  that,
      had it been the case, he would  have  expected  the  chairman  of  the
      UDPS/UK Federation to have mentioned it in his letter, but that he did
      not. Before us, Mr O'Connor accepted  that  he  could  not  fault  the
      approach  of  the  Adjudicator  at  paragraphs  39  and  40   of   the
      determination and he accepted that there was no evidence that the UDPS
      in London was regarded by the DRC authorities with suspicion.


  10. So far as the challenges  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings  are
      concerned, we are satisfied  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  raise  no
      arguable challenge that such findings are unsustainable. They point to
      no error of law or approach on the part of  the  Adjudicator  in  this
      respect and we see no basis on  which  it  would  be  proper  for  the
      Tribunal to interfere with findings made by an Adjudicator who has had
      the benefit of seeing and hearing the appellant give  evidence  before
      him.


  11. The remaining challenges raised are in  relation  to  whether,  having
      regard to his accepted UDPS membership whilst in the  United  Kingdom,
      the appellant would be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  breach  of  his
      protected human rights on return to the DRC. Returns are effected,  of
      course, only to Kinshasa which is his home area.

  12. So far as any activities while he was an MPR member between  1995  and
      1997 are concerned we see no arguable basis on which these  would  put
      him at any real risk. The position of persons closely associated  with
      the Mobutu regime is dealt with in the April 2003 CIPU  assessment  at
      paragraph 5.72 and 5.73. It is the clear view expressed there that  if
      persons closely associated with the Mobutu regime are not suspected of
      collaboration with the rebel forces by the security forces,  they  are
      not at risk of persecution and can therefore return to the country  if
      they are abroad. This includes persons  who  were  closely  associated
      with the MPR during the Mobutu regime. These findings are based on the
      Belgian 2002 Fact-Finding Mission Report on the DRC. It does not  seem
      to us that the appellant is somebody who could be regarded  as  either
      closely associated with the Mobutu regime or with the MPR  during  it.
      Even taking it at its highest, his evidence was to no  greater  effect
      than that he played some part in  negotiations  with  the  UDPS  at  a
      subordinate level at that time. But in any event there would  need  to
      be the additional factor of suspected collaboration with rebel  forces
      even if there was still some knowledge of past  association  with  the
      Mobutu regime. There is no suggestion the Appellant has any connection
      at all with the rebels.


  13. Given the adjudicator's findings that he did not believe there  was  a
      reasonable likelihood that the appellant would continue activities  on
      behalf of the UDPS if  returned  to  the  DRC  (paragraph  38  of  the
      determination), and that this, too, was a finding which is in our view
      sustainable for the reasons he gives, the only issue which we have  to
      consider is whether the adjudicator's finding in relation to the  risk
      on return is sustainable.

  14. The Adjudicator reviewed  the  background  evidence  as  to  this.  He
      considered the expert report of Dr Kennes at paragraphs 37 and  42  to
      44 of his determination. At paragraph 37, he refers to the evidence as
      to the treatment of UDPS activists in the  DRC.  The  adjudicator  had
      effectively discounted the relevance of these passages because he  did
      not accept that the appellant would continue overt activities for  the
      UDPS if returned. We accept that there is evidence that  some  members
      of the UDPS in the DRC may be the subject of adverse attention on  the
      part of the authorities. From the examples given  by  Dr  Kennes  they
      appear to be either prominent high level party officials and activists
      or members of any level who  take  part  in  political  demonstrations
      which are generally illegal and  broken  up  by  the  authorities.  Dr
      Kennes is quite clear in his report that it is not UDPS membership  as
      such which will bring adverse attention, but  UDPS  membership  allied
      with the belief that the  person  concerned  is  conspiring  with  the
      rebels in the Eastern part of the country.

  15. Having regard to the sustainable findings of the adjudicator  and  for
      the reasons given above, the issue now  before  us  therefore  narrows
      itself to whether the appellant faces a real risk  on  return  at  the
      point of entry. As to this the adjudicator said this at  paragraph  45
      of the determination:

           "The question is, of course, whether this Appellant faces a real
           risk on return. I am satisfied that he does not because  of  his
           activities under the Mobutu regime for the reasons which I  have
           mentioned above. I am also satisfied that there is  not  a  real
           risk that he faces imprisonment and ill-treatment because of his
           activities in the UK. There is no objective evidence  before  me
           to suggest that the security  services  are  targeting  returned
           asylum seekers because of participation in  activities  such  as
           the  Appellant  has  participated  in  upon  their   return   to
           Kinshasa."

  16. The background evidence before  us  from  the  respondent  as  to  the
      position on return to DRC is first a letter of 22 November  2002  from
      the British Embassy in Kinshasa to  the  Immigration  and  Nationality
      Directorate which confirmed that since the writer's appointment in May
      2000 the embassy has  not  come  across  any  evidence  that  the  DRC
      nationals forcibly  returned  to  Kinshasa  after  failing  to  obtain
      political asylum in European countries have faced persecution from the
      DRC  authorities.  The  letter  says  that  the  Belgian  and   French
      governments  regularly  forcibly  return  failed  asylum  seekers   to
      Kinshasa and that the Dutch government returned a group of  48  on  20
      November. The local embassies of these three countries  had  told  the
      writer  that  the  essential  requirements  for  DRC  immigration  are
      acceptable identification documents. He  was  not,  however,  able  to
      offer assurances that returnees who had left the DRC without mandatory
      travel documents or had been the subject of criminal  arrest  warrants
      or illegal investigation prior to their original departure  would  not
      face prosecution if those facts were established.


  17. Secondly, in its bulletin of 30 January 2003 the respondent has stated
      that there had been no suspension of removals of failed asylum seekers
      to the DRC although there were administrative problems , which were in
      the process of resolution, in obtaining the travel documents necessary
      from the DRC Embassy in London.

  18. Finally there was a copy of a letter of 15 July  2003  from  the  Home
      Office to the UNHCR seeking clarification of the Home Office  position
      on return of  failed  asylum  seekers.  It  recorded  that  the  UNHCR
      position paper of 25 April 2003 showed no objection  in  principle  to
      all removals to  the  DRC  but  called  for  them  to  be  based  upon
      principled decisions that took account of humanitarian  considerations
      and the fluid protection situation there. The  Home  Office  view  was
      that the political situation had improved with the  ceasefire  holding
      and a broad based transitional government  in  the  process  of  being
      established, but noted that there had been a recent letter from  UNHCR
      to a legal representative referring to "a  serious  deterioration"  in
      protection of security situations in the DRC. But in  discussion  with
      the UNHCR office by a senior case worker it had been established  that
      the main reason for that view was the ethnic  conflict  in  the  Ituri
      region in the north east of the country, far  removed  from  Kinshasa.
      The Home Office reiterated its view that they were not  aware  of  any
      deterioration in  the  situation  in  Kinshasa  and  other  government
      controlled areas in the West of DRC which would  call  the  safety  of
      returns there into question, but that the situation was  improving  in
      such government  controlled  areas.  For  that  reason  there  was  no
      intention to suspend removals to Kinshasa after asylum procedures  had
      been exhausted. The letter then added this:


           "I would if I may also like to raise a related  point  contained
           in the April UNHCR position paper. In that reference is made  to
           reports  from  the  local  human  rights  NGO's   that   certain
           individuals may  face  serious  problems  on  their  return.  In
           particular that they might face interrogation  by  the  Security
           services at Kinshasa Airport, and if the deportee is  considered
           to have a military or political profile, the individual would be
           at risk of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment. The  statement
           also referred to  other  individuals  being  sent  to  detention
           centres as a means of extorting money. However we are not  aware
           of any evidence of serious abuse by the Congolese authorities of
           individuals returning from the UK or other EU countries. We  are
           not aware of any international agency reporting on Human  Rights
           in the DRC reporting such abuse, neither are  we  aware  of  any
           such report by local human rights  organisations  and  would  be
           grateful for more information about the reports referred  to  in
           the position paper."


  19. It is clear from the respondent's documentation that the  position  is
      maintained that there is no reason why those who have been  through  a
      full asylum process and whose appeals have been dismissed  should  not
      be returned to Kinshasa, and that there is no information which  would
      confirm reports from certain local NGO's that any  persons  considered
      to have a military or political profile might be at risk of  arbitrary
      detention and ill-treatment. In any event, the Appellant certainly has
      no arguable military connection and, for the reasons  set  out  above,
      there is no reason to think that he would have a political profile  in
      the DRC.


  20. Dr Kennes deals with the position of returned failed asylum seekers in
      his report also, at pages 103 - 104 in the appellant's bundle. He says
      that there are no systematic studies on the fate  of  returned  asylum
      seekers or on the Kinshasa's government policy in relation to them. He
      says there was a statement from a former Ministry of Interior official
      on  13  October  2000  that  returned  failed  asylum   seekers   were
      immediately arrested at the airport and  subsequently  imprisoned.  No
      other source of information was known about such a practice and it has
      not been independently verified.

  21. There was further the official statement by the  Director  General  of
      the Congolese Immigration Services on 24 May 2001 which is  frequently
      cited before us. As the Tribunal has made clear in numerous  decisions
      the thrust of that statement was directed at people  traffickers  and,
      indeed, Dr Kennes confirms this  where  he  said  that  the  spokesman
      declared he wanted to dismantle underground immigration networks,  who
      operate under the  cover  of  applications  for  political  asylum  in
      Western countries. Dr Kennes says that  in  a  telephone  conversation
      with him, the maker of that statement made it clear that the migratory
      detention  centres  were  not  centres  for  imprisonment  but  simply
      intended for screening and identification of returned  asylum  seekers
      with the view of reintegration into society, combined  with  gathering
      information about individuals behind the underground networks to  able
      them to be brought to justice. Dr Kennes says that he sees no  problem
      if that is the use to which  such  centres  are  being  put  but  then
      continues:


           "When the centres  harbour  returned  asylum  seekers  who  were
           entitled to political asylum but were unjustly refused, then the
           authorities  immediately  have  their  opponents  at   hand   to
           interrogate them and put them into jail." (our emphasis)


      He added that he is not saying that all failed returned asylum seekers
      are put into jail,  but  he  is  saying  that  the  procedure  of  the
      migratory detention  centres,  which  he  is  informed  are  partially
      operational by the Director of Migration Services,  is  an  instrument
      for identification  of  failed  returned  asylum  seekers.  Despite  a
      comment later in the report that returned asylum seekers from  the  UK
      would  be  met  with  more   suspicion,   Mr   O'Connor   specifically
      disassociated himself from that comment in the report, accepting  that
      there was no evidence to support it.
      It is axiomatic that if the Appellant does not succeed  before  us  it
      will not be on the basis that he  is  someone  entitled  to  political
      asylum who is being unjustly refused, the  category  which  Dr  Kennes
      identifies in the passage we have quoted above.


  22. We are left then with this situation. It is accepted on behalf of  the
      appellant that there  is  no  evidence  that  UK  returnees  are  more
      seriously treated than those from any other country and that there  is
      no evidence that the UDPS in London is regarded by the DRC authorities
      with suspicion. In this country the appellant has been associated with
      the UDPS in relation to demonstrations largely  protesting  about  the
      actions of other countries involved in the civil war  in  the  DRC,  a
      matter in respect of which the authorities in the DRC equally protest.
      The thrust of the evidence is that UDPS membership is likely  to  draw
      adverse attention from the authorities only if linked with evidence of
      collaboration with the rebels in the Eastern part of the country,  but
      there is no evidence from the appellant that the  UDPS  in  London  is
      involved in any such activity at all, or regarded  with  suspicion  by
      the DRC  authorities.  It  is  known  that  France,  Belgium  and  the
      Netherlands return quite substantial  numbers  of  DRC  failed  asylum
      seekers to Kinshasa and  there  is  no  evidence  that  there  is  any
      reasonable  likelihood  that  such  returnees  face   persecution   or
      treatment in breach of their protected human rights on  return.  There
      is no evidence that even if the activities of the  appellant  for  the
      UDPS in London were known to the DRC authorities that of itself  would
      be reasonably likely to put him at real risk on their part. We have no
      doubt  that  had   any   such   evidence   existed   the   appellant's
      representatives would have been assiduous  in  ensuring  that  it  was
      brought to our notice. The burden of proof remains on the appellant to
      show to the level of a reasonable likelihood that he runs a real  risk
      of persecution or treatment in breach of his protected human rights if
      now returned. The Adjudicator found that he failed to  discharge  that
      evidential burden and we see no basis on the  evidence  before  us  on
      which it can be said that his decision was unsustainable.


  23.  There is one further matter which it is appropriate for  us  to  deal
      with in this determination because we have taken  the  opportunity  of
      analysing Dr Kennes' report as to  risk  on  return.  The  grounds  of
      appeal placed reliance on the Tribunal decision in Mozu  [2002]  UKIAT
      05308.  It   is   a   decision   frequently   cited   by   Appellant's
      representatives as authority for the broad proposition that  a  failed
      asylum seeker is at risk of persecution on return to the  DRC.   There
      have been many Tribunal decisions both before  and  since  which  have
      undertaken a  detailed  consideration  of  the  basis  on  which  this
      proposition depends. It arises from a misconstruction of what was said
      by the Director General of the Congolese Immigration Services  in  the
      statement referred to above. The effect of that statement had been the
      subject of analysis by the Tribunal in at least  two  previous  appeal
      decisions which were apparently not drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
      Tribunal in Mozu. That analysis is effectively the same as that  given
      by Dr Kennes in his report referred to above.  As  will  be  seen,  Dr
      Kennes' report is certainly not now, if it ever was, authority for the
      broad proposition sought to be derived from Mozu, although his opinion
      is there referred to. Finally, as another division of the Tribunal has
      recently commented in [2003] UKIAT 00032 K (DR Congo), not only should
      Mozu be regarded as confined to its specific facts, but it  undertakes
      no detailed or reasoned assessment  of  the  objective  evidence  upon
      which it purports to rely.  We agree with and endorse that view.


  24. For the above reasons it follows that this appeal is dismissed.






                                                                 Mr J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
