
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |MS (Sikh - Suspected        |
|                           |        |Militant - Internal         |
|                           |        |Relocation) India           |
|                           |        |[2003]UKIAT 00098           |
|On 2 September 2003        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.21st October 2003                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley                                         |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is a claimant's appeal from a determination of Mr Davey,  sitting
      as an Adjudicator, on 8 June 2001.  In  that  appeal  the  Adjudicator
      dismissed the claimant's appeal from the refusal of asylum, a  refusal
      that was made by the Home Secretary on 13 March 2001.

   2. The facts of this matter are  briefly  these.    The  claimant  is  an
      Indian national from the Punjab.   He was born on 1 June 1953,  so  he
      is now 50 years old.  He is of the  Sikh  religion.    He  joined  the
      Indian army when he was a very young man in 1971 and  he  remained  in
      the Indian army until 1987, with the rank of Sergeant.    By  then  he
      had become gravely disillusioned at the  treatment  received  by  Sikh
      officers and other ranks after the Golden Temple events and also after
      the murder of Indira Gandhi by one of her Sikh body guards.

   3. Shortly after he left the Indian army and when he had returned to  his
      home area of Motiwala in the Punjab, he was  approached  by  a  person
      called Bhagicha Singh.   That  man  belonged  to  a  group  headed  by
      somebody known as Bittu; the group takes its name from that man and is
      called the Bittu  Group.   Bhagicha  Singh  wanted  the  help  of  the
      claimant  who  was  a  retired  soldier   obviously   with   armaments
      expertise, who was somebody who would be eagerly courted by separatist
      Punjabi organisations in  those  days.    He  was  not  interested  in
      joining such  a  group  despite  threats  that  were  issued  to  him.
      Bhagicha Singh himself proved  to  be  little  more  problem  for  the
      claimant because he was killed by the police about a year  after  this
      approach.   However, other radical Sikhs of the Bittu Group did get in
      touch with him, they threatened him and under  threats  he  agreed  to
      train some of their fighters.   By some means information that he  was
      doing this leaked to the police.    He  considered  the  situation  in
      India was far too dangerous for him to remain and in 1990 he left  the
      country going first to Dubai and then to Germany where he put in train
      a claim for asylum.

   4. In 1994 before his claim for asylum had  been  determined  he  decided
      that the situation in the Punjab had changed sufficiently for  him  to
      be able to go back in safety.   He went back voluntarily.   He made  a
      mistake.     Very shortly after his return he was  arrested.   He  was
      mistreated by the police force on his arrest, mistreatment that  could
      amount to torture.   He was released after a few days.   He  was  then
      re-arrested and detained for a period of some 5  months  in  Jullunder
      the nearest main city to where he lived.   After his  detention  there
      he was released again.   It appears that at no stage was  he  prepared
      to admit that he had acted against the Indian state  or  had  assisted
      terrorists.

   5. Upon his release he returned to his home area.    But that was not the
      end of his difficulties because what thereafter happened was  that  he
      was subjected to a cycle of frequent arrests by local police  officers
      who would pick him up and detain  him  on  some  pretext  or  another.
      They would normally ill-treat him, the ill-treatment  would  take  the
      form of a beating which sometimes left him unfit for work for a period
      of a week.  A bribe would eventually be paid and he would be released.
       He decided that this sort of life was intolerable.   He had relatives
      elsewhere in India and he went to stay with them for a period of time.
        First he went to Bikaner and then he went to  Delhi.    He  did  not
      have any trouble from the authorities in either of  these  places  but
      his relatives were apprehensive that his  presence  might  bring  them
      into difficulties so  they  asked  him  to  leave  and  he  left.   He
      concluded that staying in India held no future for him and  thus  left
      on a valid Indian passport which he  had  obtained,  arriving  in  the
      United Kingdom by air on 19 November 1999 as a visitor.
   6. On 23 February 2000 that is some 3 months after his arrival he claimed
      asylum.   As I have  already  mentioned  that  claim  for  asylum  was
      refused on 13 March 2001 and that is the genesis of these proceedings.

   7. The questions that arose before the Adjudicator and that arise  before
      us are these.   First, if he were to go back to his home area in India
      would he be persecuted for a Convention or other reason.   Second,  if
      the answer to that is yes, is there another part of India to which  he
      could go where he would not be at real risk of persecution or  article
      3 harm.   It seems to  us  that  these  are  the  questions  that  are
      decisive of this particular appeal.   The  facts  that  we  have  just
      recited are the agreed facts of this case.

   8. We have been greatly assisted by the background material that has been
      placed before us.   Chronologically the first item in that material is
      a short statement from Dr Cynthia Mahmood dated 19 July 2001.  She  is
      a Senior Fellow at the Institute for International  Peace  Studies  at
      the University of Notre Dame in Indiana.   It  appears  that  she  has
      considerable expert  knowledge  of  Sikh  terrorism  and  its  history
      although she has no personal experience of  being  in  India  herself.
      She considered the status of the Sikh Students Federation which is the
      formal name of the Bittu Group with which, of  course  was  the  group
      which as far as the authorities are  concerned,  this  claimant  would
      have been associated.

   9. At the time she wrote the report which is now  is  2  years  ago,  the
      position was that Bittu  had  been  arrested  by  the  police  1  year
      previously (he is still in custody).     She went on to say about  the
      group as follows:

      "I believe that police and security forces currently trying to mop  up
      the remains of the Khalistan militant organisations are paying special
      attention to remnants from  the  Bittu  federation.    If  they  could
      eradicate the last of the group they would be left with just a handful
      of small groups and radical Sikhs to monitor.   I wanted to  bring  up
      the peculiar situation of the Bittu Group here because it appears that
      Manjit Singh's main link is  with  this  organisation.   It  is  in  a
      slightly different  niche  right  now  in  light  of  the  mopping  up
      operations of security forces and the  police  in  the  Punjab.    The
      human rights situation in Punjab has improved dramatically  since  the
      1990s, disappearances and executions are  rare  to  non-existent,  the
      major risk faced by returned asylum seeker to  day  is  torture  which
      remains ubiquitous."


      She then went on:


      "Manjit Singh appears not to have been a high profile militant by  any
      means.  On the other hand he seems to have a local  history  of  abuse
      which points some sort of record keeping or listing  on  the  part  of
      police.   Perhaps the crown will be able  to  ascertain  the  probable
      level of police recognition of Manjit Singh with its further access to
      this individual and his history.   If indeed the crown believes him to
      be recognisable through police lists, then it is my  opinion  that  he
      may not be safe anywhere in  India,  despite  the  Canadian  documents
      which understate the level of communication of  among  Indian  police,
      they do have a national computer system to track down suspects  across
      state lines.   It is a system that is deeply flawed and people are  as
      likely to slip  through  the  holes  as  to  be  caught  in  its  net.
      Nevertheless it is there."


9.    That report dealt with the situation as Dr Mahmood perceived it to  be
      in 2001.   It will be recalled that was a time when there  was  active
      pursuit of the  Bittu  Group  or  (Sikh  Students  Federation).    The
      Tribunal has now been assisted by a further report  together  with  an
      addendum that adds materially to it from Dr Roger Ballard.  The Report
      is dated 1 May 2003  and  the  addendum20  May  2003.    There  is  an
      intermediate note from Dr Ballard that does not materially advance the
      contentions  of  either  side  in  this  case.     Dr  Ballard  is   a
      considerable expert on the Punjab.  He has  made  numerous  visits  to
      that province to conduct ethnographic field work and his profession is
      that of consultant anthropologist.   But he is also very  well  versed
      in the recent history of the province and on Sikhs and Sikh  politics,
      and he has published works on  these  particular  topics.    He  is  a
      currently a senior lecturer in applied  South  Asian  Studies  at  the
      University of Manchester.  His view which is not controversial in  the
      circumstances of this case is that the account given by  the  claimant
      is entirely credible and that he received the sort of  treatment  that
      one could  readily  understand  happening  to  somebody  who  had  the
      misfortune to find himself in the position that he  did  in  the  late
      1980s.

10.   He goes on to deal with what the claimant  would  be  likely  to  face
      were he to be returned to the Punjab, or India as a whole.   It is the
      view of Dr Ballard for reasons which he  clearly  expresses,  that  as
      very low level activist on behalf of the Sikh Students Federation  and
      indeed a coerced activist at that, he is not somebody who is likely to
      be of any interest to the central Indian authorities.   Indeed  it  is
      the view of Dr Ballard that his treatment is  best  explained  by  the
      fact that local police officers who know about his past have taken the
      opportunity to extort  money  from  somebody  whom  they  know  to  be
      vulnerable.   Police corruption is still endemic in India.    Officers
      on low pay operating in a corrupt force would see nothing particularly
      wrong in attempting to  extract  money  from  someone  whom  they  can
      readily put into the role of victim.   To quote Dr Ballard

       "In my view Manjit's tribulations are much better understood  as  the
      outcome of a little private enterprise in which some relatively junior
      police officers had chosen to engage."


11.   He goes on to say at page 5 of his report

       "Hence I see no reason to doubt that Manjit's first arrest  by  local
      police officers, his subsequent incarceration in Jullunder as well the
      numerous subsequent visits of police officers to his home were  driven
      not by so much by the Indian authorities' politically driven hunt  for
      the few remaining Khalistani  activists  but  rather  by  the  largely
      successful efforts of poorly paid local  police  officers  to  enhance
      their incomes.  It was in these circumstances that Manjit decided that
      he had had enough, so much so that he  decided  to  take  flight  once
      again, although this time to the UK rather than Germany.

12.   At paragraph 4.1 of his report Dr Ballard deals  with  the  claimant's
      profile as an activist.   This of course is a matter already mentioned
      in the report of Dr Mahmood.   He holds as follows:

      "I would entirely agree with Mr Davey's [the Adjudicator] comment that
      the appellant did not have a high  profile  as  an  activist.   Indeed
      there appears to be very little  evidence  that  he  was  in  any  way
      actively involved in the Khalistani insurgency at all-even  though  he
      found himself persecuted on the grounds that  he  was  or  might  have
      been.  In the light of all this I would argue that he was not  of  any
      serious interest to the properly constituted authorities, or in  other
      words to senior members  of  the  police  or  of  the  various  Indian
      intelligence agencies.   On the contrary, all the evidence  points  to
      him having been viewed by relatively junior police officers  based  in
      the immediate neighbourhood of his village as a convenient  target  to
      exploit as a means of adding significantly to their personal incomes."




      and later


      "Having  carefully  considered  the  available  documentation  all  my
      experience suggests that Manjit Singh is best regarded as a victim  of
      the collateral damage of the chaotic developments which arose  in  the
      aftermath of the attack on the Golden Temple, the assassination of Mrs
      Gandhi,  and  the  Khalistani  insurgency,  such  that  he  became   a
      convenient target for a little  private  enterprise  by  local  police
      officers.   I  can  also  readily   confirm   that   whatever   public
      announcements the Government of India might make, at a local level the
      properly constituted authorities are largely unable and  most  usually
      unwilling to contain such 'private enterprise', and most especially so
      when these activities can be covered up as  part  of  the  'the  fight
      against terrorism'.  Hence I would reach exactly the  same  conclusion
      as Mr Davey with respect to the issue of further  persecution  if  the
      appellant were now to return to the Punjab - even if  I  do  so  by  a
      rather different route.  But by the same token if  the  representative
      of the SSHD were to argue that conditions in Punjab are now even  more
      peaceful than they were two years ago  (a  contention  which  I  would
      certainly not dispute), it does not follow that Manjit Singh would  be
      any less vulnerable to local  harassment than he was before.

  13. Thus, the position is that Dr Ballard is of the view that the  central
      authorities in India would not be concerned  with  the  claimant,  but
      that local police officers are highly likely to use their local  power
      to attempt to persecute him yet again if he were to  return  to  their
      area because he can conveniently be so treated.

  14. The question of the interest of the authorities was further put to  Dr
      Ballard and he dealt with it in the addendum of 20 May 2003.  I  shall
      cite what he has to say about that.   He was asked specifically  about
      the Indian authorities and their interest in  militant  supporters  of
      the Khalistani movement.   He said as follows:

      "The Indian authorities do indeed take a very close  interest  in  the
      very small number of militant supporters of  the  Khalistani  movement
      who still remain actively committed to the cause.   Persons  who  fall
      into this category who are not in custody in India are  now  virtually
      all resident overseas.   Whilst Daljit Singh  Khalsa  (also  known  as
      Bittu) is still in custody in India, at least as far as I am aware,  I
      have found no indication that the authorities are still interested  in
      the followers who made up the Sikh Students Federation, the  group  he
      once led.  The South Asia Terrorism Portal - a  semi-official  listing
      of all insurgent movements and their current  activities  -  currently
      contains no references either to SSF or Bittu.


      Those people in whom the authorities regard as still  being  'actively
      committed to the cause (as defined in the previous  para)  can  indeed
      expect to be detained if the authorities detect  their  re-entry  into
      India.


      In my view Manjit Singh does not fall into this category - at least as
      far as the central authorities of India are concerned.


      If I  am  correct  in  thinking  that  [the  claimant]  has  not  been
      classified  as  a  militant  by  one  or  other  of  India's   central
      intelligence services, it is in my view  unlikely  that  he  would  be
      stopped at the  airport  on  his  return,  always  provided  that  his
      passport is not stamped in such a  way  as  to  cause  an  immigration
      officer to be instantly suspicious of his bona fides.


  15. The question that then arises is that if the claimant cannot  go  back
      to the Punjab because he will be subject to local  persecution  if  he
      does, and if the central authorities are not interested in him   could
      he safely relocate anywhere else in India.   Dr Ballard  does  not  in
      terms deal with the issue of  safety  when  covering  this  particular
      topic but he considers that the Adjudicator  was  substantially  over-
      sanguine  in estimation of the difficulties that  the  claimant  would
      face if the option of internal flight were to  be  pursued.    I  will
      quote what Dr Ballard has to say on this topic.

      "Firstly India is  very  much  a  land  of  families  embedded  within
      communities, rather than a land of individuals.  Apart  form  a  small
      elite of highly qualified professionals at one end of  the  scale  and
      the virtually destitute at the other, the  vast  majority  of  India's
      inhabitants find their jobs, their houses, their access to public  and
      private services and indeed their personal security through caste  and
      kinship networks.  Those without access to  such  a  network  find  it
      extremely difficult  to  survive,  let  alone  to  prosper.   This  is
      particularly the case for members of the minority communities such  as
      the Muslims and Sikhs, who are always in danger  of  being  viewed  as
      potential terrorists - particularly if, as in  this  case,  they  have
      spent some time overseas in search of asylum.  Hence whilst  Mr  Davey
      is quite right to note that Sikhs are free to travel to all  parts  of
      India, and that there is no nationally effective surveillance system -
      even for those persons who, unlike the appellant  are of  interest  to
      the authorities.  The most likely source of difficulties - and  indeed
      of persecution - as far as the appellant and his family are  concerned
      are firstly the lack of any of the local links which they  would  need
      to rebuild their lives were they to settle  elsewhere  in  India,  and
      secondly the extent to which he would be likely to find  himself  even
      more exposed to the kind of opportunistic  persecution  which  he  has
      encountered in Punjab if  he  was  indeed  to  pursue  the  option  of
      internal flight."


  16. He then went on to disagree strongly with  the  Adjudicator's  finding
      that the claimant would have no difficulty in making a  new  life  for
      himself and his family elsewhere in India.

  17. We agree with Dr Ballard that in the light of what we now have  before
      us  the  Adjudicator  was  too  sanguine.    There  would  plainly  be
      considerable difficulties faced by someone in the claimant's  position
      moving from the only area in India where he has  ever  lived  for  any
      length of time to a part of India to where he would perhaps not  speak
      the language and certainly would not have ready access to  employment.
       But that of course is not the question that we have to deal with.  We
      have to assess whether there is a part of India to which he  could  go
      where he would not be at real risk of persecution for a Convention  or
      Article 3 reason.   It should be borne in mind that if he were  to  go
      elsewhere in   India  he  would  not  be  registered  by  the  central
      authorities or indeed the local authorities as being someone with  any
      sort of terrorist or quasi-terrorist past, he would simply be arriving
      as a Sikh from another part of the country.  The question that must be
      asked therefore is whether a person in such a position  would   be  at
      real risk of persecution.

  18. First of all, might the authorities find out about his past.   It  was
      submitted to us that there would always be a danger  that  that  would
      happen.   We accept that one could not  entirely  eliminate  the  risk
      that such a thing might happen but we cannot see that there would be a
      real risk that it would for he  would  not  volunteer  what  his  past
      association with the Bittu Group was as    he  would  have  no  reason
      whatever to do so and it would be an unwise thing for him to  do.   We
      have no reason to suppose that he is an unwise man.     This would  be
      a matter about his past which he would wish to be discreet about.   We
      do not consider that that imposed reticence would place an intolerable
      burden of hardship upon him.

  19. That being the case one then turns to what the position is as  far  as
      internal relocation for  Sikhs  is  concerned  in  India.     This  is
      covered in addition to what we have  already  set  out  in  paragraphs
      6.117 to 6.120 of the CIPU report on India for April 2003.    The main
      findings are as follows:

      " 6.118.    "Some 4 million Sikhs live in India  outside  the  Punjab.
              Sikh  communities  are  found  in  most  Indian  cities   and
              virtually all states.  They are general urban and  prosperous
              and they control important  trades  and  occupy  a  prominent
              position within  the  central  and  regional  administration.
              Most Sikhs, particularly the better educated and urban Sikhs,
              have some knowledge of English and or Hindu.   Punjabi  Sikhs
              would have no more problem in  enrolling  their  children  in
              school  or  obtaining  employment  than  any   other   Indian
              relocating to a new area.

       6119.     There are no checks on a newcomer to  any  part  of  India
              arriving from another part of India even if the person  is  a
              Punjabi  Sikh.    Local  police  forces  have   neither   the
              resources nor the language abilities  to  perform  background
              checks on people arriving from other parts of  India.   There
              is no system of registration of  citizens  and  often  people
              have no identity cards, which in  any  event  can  be  easily
              forged.

        6.120.    The Director of the South Asian Human Rights documentation
              Centre believed [this was in  the  year  2000]  that  a  high
              profile person would not be able to move elsewhere  in  India
              without being traced but that this would be possible for  low
              profile people.   Sources from foreign diplomatic missions in
              India considered that there was no  reason  to  believe  that
              someone who has or has had problems in the Punjab  would  not
              be able to reside elsewhere in India.   Reference was made to
              the effect that the authorities in  Delhi  are  not  informed
              about those wanted in Punjab."

18.   It seems to us that when one takes all the  background  material  that
      has been placed before us and puts it together, the position  is  that
      the claimant  would  undoubtedly  face  difficulties  were  he  to  be
      compelled to relocate for his own safety to  another  part  of  India.
      These difficulties would be part linguistic, and they would be in part
      because he would be in a minority group wherever he would be likely to
      go and in part they would be because  he  does  not  have  the  family
      structures or relationships that might tie him to other Sikhs  already
      resident in the areas to which he would go.   He would thus be  placed
      at a genuine disadvantage perhaps even a serious disadvantage when  it
      came  to  the  question  of  looking  for  work  or  finding  suitable
      accommodation for himself and his family.   It  is  very  likely  that
      life will be hard for him in the short term and we would not  wish  to
      under estimate the difficulties that he would face.  But  we  have  to
      consider whether the hardship that relocation would involve  would  be
      undue; that is hardship not quite but almost approaching  destitution.
       As has been held in many of the decided cases on the topic it is  not
      sufficient to constitute undue hardship that a person does  not  speak
      the language or has no family or has no employment where he is  going.
       The level to which he has to be reduced before undue hardship can  be
      successfully claimed would be considerably beneath that and we can see
      no evidence despite what is said by Dr Ballard in this case that  that
      is the sort of level of hardship  to  which  this  claimant  would  be
      subjected  were  he  to  relocate  to  a  different  part  of   India.
      Difficulties yes, considerable difficulties quite probably, but  undue
      hardship we feel not.  The threshold for undue hardship  is  set  very
      high and deliberately so.  We do not feel that there is  any  evidence
      in this case that it would be crossed if  this  claimant  were  to  be
      relocated.

19.   For these reasons, we consider that this appeal must be dismissed.





                                        His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                        Vice President





