
jh
|Heard at Field House           |IA HC KD RO HG                    |
|On  12 May 2003                |(Risk-Guidelines-Separatist)      |
|                               |Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 00034      |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|28.07.03                                                          |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson                                               |
|Mr A R Mackey                                                     |
|Between:                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |
|                                                                  |
|and between:                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |
|                                                                  |
|and between:                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


|and between:                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                                                                  |
|and between:                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                                                                  |
|and between:                                                      |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    These appeals, which all concern the  risk  on  return  to  Turkey  of
      Kurds who are or  may  be  suspected  separatists,  have  been  listed
      together in order to  enable  the  Tribunal  to  provide  guidance  to
      Adjudicators on the proper approach to be taken in such cases.

2.    It was agreed at the hearing that the names of the claimants would  be
      anonymised,  a  practice  which  is  now  standard  for  reported  IAT
      decisions.  The claimants as we shall refer to them, in D,  G  and  O,
      were represented by Mr Grieves instructed respectively in those  cases
      by Sheikh & Co, Howe & Co and Trott & Gentry.  The claimant in  A  was
      represented by Mr Taghavi, instructed by Birnberg Pierce  &  Partners,
      and the claimant in C was represented  by  Mr  Huffer,  instructed  by
      Dicksons HMB Solicitors.  In all cases  the  Secretary  of  State  was
      represented by Mr Deller.  The Secretary of State appealed in A, C and
      G and is the respondent in D and O.  We have thus  avoided  the  terms
      "Appellant" and "Respondent" to overcome confusion.

3.    We are grateful to Mr Grieves  who  produced  a  consolidated  general
      skeleton argument described as a country material  summary  which  was
      relevant for the three claimants whom he represented.  Mr Taghavi  and
      Mr Huffer were happy to adopt the argument and the points set  out  in
      that summary, subject to several points made by Mr Taghavi to which we
      shall refer below.  There was  a  great  deal  of  objective  evidence
      before the Tribunal, and we adopt the helpful suggestion of Mr Taghavi
      of providing at the end of our  determination  an  index  of  all  the
      evidence that was before us.  As will be seen from  our  determination
      we derived particular help from certain  pieces  of  evidence  and  to
      which we have found it appropriate to go into greater detail than with
      others.

4.    The proposed structure of this determination is to provide  a  general
      assessment of the objective evidence under various headings, including
      our suggestions as to appropriate guidelines to be borne  in  mind  by
      Adjudicators in assessing this type  of  case.   Thereafter  we  shall
      apply our analysis to the facts of the particular cases before us.  In
      this regard we heard first  of  all  very  full  submissions  from  Mr
      Grieves picking  up  points  from  his  skeleton  argument.   We  then
      received submissions from Mr Deller who sought only  to  rely  on  the
      April 2003 CIPU report.  Mr  Deller  very  helpfully  indicated  those
      matters upon which  there  was  common  ground  between  him  and  the
      claimants' representatives, and as will be seen there was a good  deal
      of ground common to them all.  Subsequently we heard submissions  from
      Mr Taghavi based essentially  but  not  exclusively  on  his  skeleton
      argument, and we also then heard submissions from Mr Huffer.

      Overview of Current Situation
5.    We begin our  determination  with  a  brief  comment  on  the  current
      situation in Turkey at the date of the  Tribunal  hearing  on  12  May
      2003.  It is clear to us that  the  current  situation  in  Turkey  is
      volatile.  The war in Iraq has raised concerns in  Turkey  that  moves
      for separatism may be exacerbated by the downfall of the Ba'ath regime
      in Iraq.  It is relevant to note, as is pointed out at page 125 of the
      Netherlands Delegation  Report  to  CIREA,  (NDR)  entitled  "Official
      General Report on Turkey (January 2002), that a determining factor  in
      the position of Kurds in Turkey is the government's concept  of  state
      and society.  The point is made also in that report that  the  Turkish
      government views Kurdish nationalist aspirations as a  threat  to  the
      indivisibility of the unified state and  as  causing  a  rift  between
      Turkish citizens on grounds of ethnicity.  Kurdish origin, as a  basis
      for recognition as a separate ethnic group, is considered incompatible
      with the basic concept of the Turkish state.  Support for the  Kurdish
      cause is a criminal offence under Articles 124, 168, 169  and  312  of
      the Criminal Code or Articles 6, 7  and  8  of  the  Anti-Terror  Law,
      depending upon the type of support.

6.    The NDR is a report upon which a good deal of reliance  is  placed  on
      the relevant sections of the April 2003 CIPU report.  It is clearly  a
      report which deserves attention.  The point is made at page 5 of  that
      report, which is to be found in the bundle in G, that the  NDR  report
      has made use of a wide  variety  of  sources  including  on  the  spot
      conversations and findings and reports obtained from  the  Netherlands
      Embassy in Ankara and the Netherlands Consulate  General  in  Istanbul
      which consulted a network of contacts for this  purpose,  and  also  a
      variety of international sources including  the  UNHCR,  the  European
      Commission and the Council of Europe and also  NGOs  such  as  Amnesty
      International, Human Rights Watch and also the  Turkish  human  rights
      organisations IHTTHV and Mazlum-Der.  It is  we  think  common  ground
      between the representatives that being of Kurdish ethnicity in and  of
      itself does not lead to a risk of persecution but that it may well  be
      a factor depending upon other factors also  which  may  give  rise  to
      persecution.  We shall return to this factor subsequently.  For now we
      consider that it is worth making the point  that  we  are  determining
      these appeals in this somewhat volatile context, and the  particularly
      significant aspect of this which again we  shall  deal  with  in  more
      detail  subsequently  is  the  recent  outlawing  of  HADEP   by   the
      Constitutional Court.  This was done on the basis that it was  closely
      linked  to  Kurdish  rebels  and  therefore,  as  we  shall   describe
      subsequently, may arguably increase  the  risk  of  HADEP  members  or
      supporters being associated with the PKK.  This is clearly a  relevant
      factor in assessing risk on return.  HADEP's successor is DEHAP, which
      is currently a legal organisation.   However,  the  EU  has  expressed
      concern about the banning of HADEP and the not unlinked application by
      the Turkish Senior Prosecutor to close DEHAP  also.   This  has  clear
      relevance to the climate on return and therefore must be borne in mind
      as an aspect of the evidence concerning whether or not  a  person  has
      shown a well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of  their  human
      rights being breached  on  return  to  Turkey.  Whether  or  not  this
      heightened state of risk will continue is certainly not a matter which
      we can predict and indeed do not have to since we are  concerned  with
      the situation as at the date of the Tribunal hearing.

      Torture in Turkey
7.    The background evidence is that torture continues  to  be  endemic  in
      Turkey.  Thus we find the following in the US State Department  report
      for 2003 at pages 1-2:

           "Security  forces  continued  to   commit   unlawful   killings,
           including deaths due to excessive  use  of  force  and  torture.
           Torture, beatings and other abuses by security  forces  remained
           widespread, although the  number  of  reported  cases  declined.
           There were reports  that  police  and  Jandarma  often  employed
           torture and abused detainees during incommunicado detention  and
           interrogation. The lack of universal and immediate access to  an
           attorney, long detention periods for those  held  for  political
           crimes, and a culture of impunity  were  major  factors  in  the
           commission of torture by police and security forces.  The rarity
           of convictions and the light sentences  imposed  on  police  and
           other security officials for killings and torture  continued  to
           foster a climate of impunity.  Prison conditions remained  poor,
           despite some improvements."


8.    Again, at paragraph 6.1 of the April 2003 CIPU  report  (this  is  the
      current report and the one to which we shall refer) the  following  is
      stated:

           "There have been numerous reports by human rights  organisations
           of systematic use of  torture  by  security  forces,  deaths  in
           police custody, disappearances and extra-judicial executions."

      At paragraph 6.2 is recorded the view of the UN's  Special  Rapporteur
      following a visit to Turkey in 1998 that the practice  of  torture  in
      numerous  places  around  the   country   might   well   deserve   the
      categorisation of  systematic  in  the  sense  of  being  a  pervasive
      technique  of  law   enforcement   agencies   for   the   purpose   of
      investigation, securing confessions and intimidation.  The comment was
      made at paragraph 56 of the determination of the  Tribunal  in  Hayser
      [2002] UKIAT 07083 that the only improvement is  some  indications  in
      some cases that the authorities are using methods of torture which are
      less likely to leave visible  marks,  and  we  rather  agree  with  Mr
      Taghavi that it is difficult to see this as an improvement and in some
      respects it might indeed be regarded  as  a  deterioration  given  the
      apparent awareness on the part of the authorities  in  concealing  the
      marks of torture as a desirable development.
      Recent Human Rights Developments in Turkey
9.    In April 1987 Turkey made formal application to become a  full  member
      of the European Community.  In December 1999 Turkey was given official
      status as a candidate for European Union membership.  As  regards  the
      political and economic programme which Turkey would have to  adopt  as
      an EU candidate, the EU leaders made specific mention of the need  for
      Turkey to improve its record on human rights.  This point is noted  at
      paragraph 4.37 of the CIPU report.

10.   On 3 October 2001 Turkey completed a significant legislative  overhaul
      when the Parliament  approved  a  package  of  34  amendments  to  the
      Constitution designed to  pave  the  way  for  EU  membership.   These
      amendments, which ranged from easing restrictions on using the Kurdish
      language, reducing maximum detention periods for suspects before  they
      are charged and making it harder to ban political parties, represented
      the most significant amendment to Turkey's Constitution since  it  was
      drafted after the 1980 military coup.  On 3 August 2002 the Parliament
      formally approved a package of  key  democratic  reforms  designed  to
      improve Turkey's chances of EU membership.  This included such matters
      as an end to the death  penalty  in  peace  time,  and  TV  and  radio
      broadcasts being allowed in languages other than Turkish, but  not  in
      contravention of principles of  national  security  laid  out  in  the
      Constitution.  This change allowed for broadcasts in Kurdish.  Kurdish
      dialects are to be taught in special courses at private schools  under
      the regulation of the Ministry of Education, and there is an easing of
      restrictions on public demonstrations and  association,  allowing  48-
      hour notification to the authorities  and  an  end  to  penalties  for
      written, vocal or pictorial criticism of state institutions  including
      the  armed  forces.   This  package  was  welcomed  by  the   European
      Commission as an important sign of the determination of  the  majority
      of Turkey's political leaders to align Turkey further with the  values
      and standards of the European Union.

11.   In its October  2002  report  "Regular  Report  on  Turkey's  Progress
      Towards Accession", the European Commission in welcoming the  reforms,
      nevertheless concluded that Turkey does not fully meet  the  political
      criteria for EU membership for reasons including a number of important
      issues arising under the political  criteria  which  were  yet  to  be
      adequately addressed, these including the fight  against  torture  and
      ill treatment, the situation of persons in prison for expressing  non-
      violent opinions and compliance with the  decisions  of  the  European
      Court of Human Rights.  It is the case that the state of emergency  as
      it existed in various provinces of Turkey for some time has  now  been
      lifted.

12.   In this  regard  we  return  to  the  concerns  expressed  by  the  EU
      Presidency concerning the closure of HADEP and the apparent  intention
      to secure the closure of DEHAP.  The EU stated that it  would  examine
      both developments in depth and reiterated the  fundamental  importance
      it attached to democratic pluralism and to the freedom  of  expression
      and political opinion.  Mr Grieves cited a Reuters  report  suggesting
      that the proposed  ban,  together  with  other  matters  such  as  the
      collapse of the UN brokered Cyprus talks which led to a severe warning
      issued to Turkey by the EU Commission  that  it  could  be  called  an
      "occupier" in Cyprus which is due to be an EU territory soon, and also
      the conclusion of the European Court of  Human  Rights  that  Abdullah
      Ocalan, the leader of the  PKK  had  not  been  given  a  fair  trial,
      together seriously hampered prospects of Turkey becoming an EU  member
      in the future.  We note that a Human Rights Watch Report mentioned  at
      paragraph 4.45 of the CIPU report states that although there had  been
      more substantial human rights improvements than in any years since the
      1990 coup, there were two areas in particular where Turkey  still  had
      to act in order to demonstrate that it had broken with its history  of
      human rights abuses, torture and freedom of expression.

13.   From this we conclude that there have been some  steps  in  the  right
      direction in improving human rights  in  Turkey,  though  we  consider
      there is some force in the point made by Mr Grieves before us  and  in
      his skeleton argument  at  paragraph  105  that  there  have  been  no
      significant signs of implementation of the reforms which have led to a
      benefit to individuals potentially at risk.

14.   A further point made by Mr Grieves in this regard  is  the  extent  to
      which  the  proposals  on  minority  language   rights   signal   some
      improvement in the situation for Kurds.  Until 1991 the use of Kurdish
      was totally prohibited,  and  thereafter,  though  it  was  no  longer
      prohibited, Turkish was to be the only official language.   The  point
      is made by Mr Grieves that though the reform package has opened up the
      possibility of teaching the Kurdish language at  private  institutions
      it  does  not  ensure  that  Kurdish  becomes  part  of  any  national
      curriculum or an optional subject at state schools  or  that  subjects
      can be taught through Kurdish.  We note from  page  31  of  the  State
      Department report that by the end of the year there were  in  fact  no
      such private courses teaching Kurdish and other non-Turkish  languages
      in fact operating.  It is said that demand for private Kurdish courses
      was limited, and Kurdish rights advocates argued that the  regulations
      placed  prohibitive  costs  by  requiring  that  Kurdish  courses   be
      established in separate institutions rather  than  added  to  existing
      language schools.  The point is made that in November  the  government
      adopted  regulations  designed  to  allow  under  tight   restrictions
      broadcasts in Kurdish and other  non-Turkish  languages  but  that  no
      Kurdish language television broadcasts, radio  programmes  or  courses
      were in place at year's end.  The point is also made that the Ministry
      of Education tightly controls  the  curriculum  in  schools.   In  his
      submissions Mr Deller very fairly accepted that  the  assertions  that
      were made about progress and recognition  of  the  right  to  use  the
      Kurdish language had to be treated with caution.  We think  that  this
      is an accurate summary of the situation.  It can  at  least  be  noted
      that a start has been made, but progress is indeed slow.

      PKK/KADEK
15.   PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party) was founded in November 1978.   We  take
      our description of  it  from  the  helpful  summary  contained  in  an
      appendix to the CIPU report.  PKK advocates  armed  struggle  both  at
      home and abroad in order to achieve an independent Kurdish state.  Its
      armed operations in south eastern Turkey, which commenced in 1984  and
      peaked in the years  1990  to  1994,  involved  attacks  on  civilians
      including in many cases Kurds, and military targets and caused a large
      number of deaths.  PKK was guilty of human rights violations including
      murders especially in rural parts of the south east but also in  other
      areas.  From the outset the Turkish army took tough action against the
      PKK.  In February 1999 Abdullah Ocalan, the leader  of  the  PKK,  was
      captured by the Turkish authorities, tried and  convicted  of  treason
      and sentenced to death.  In July 1999 the  PKK  declared  a  universal
      ceasefire, and in August 1999 Mr Ocalan made a  statement  calling  on
      the PKK to end the armed struggle and withdraw its forces outside  the
      borders for the sake of peace.  It seems from figures provided by  the
      Turkish Army High Command in May 2000 that only five  hundred  out  of
      five thousand five hundred PKK  fighters  remained  at  that  time  in
      Turkey.  The number of armed clashes diminished significantly  in  the
      early part of 2000, and there were few armed clashes in  2001  and  an
      absence of PKK violence in 2002.

16.   In April 2002 the PKK announced that it had ceased activities and  had
      regrouped as KADEK, the Kurdistan Freedom and Democracy Congress.  The
      Deputy Prime Minister stated that  if  former  PKK  members  who  were
      involved in unlawful activities in the past  continued  to  be  active
      within the  same  organisation,  all  the  restrictive  decisions  and
      measures that had applied to the  PKK  must  also  apply  to  the  new
      organisation.  He stated that those who had been involved in terrorism
      in the past should definitely be brought to justice.

17.   Clearly there is a potential relevance in the decision by the  PKK  to
      renounce violence and work towards a peaceful solution to the question
      of Kurdish rights.  However it is stated at 6.184 of the  CIPU  report
      that there has been no change in  the  Turkish  authorities'  attitude
      towards the PKK  since  it  withdrew  its  fighters  outside  Turkey's
      borders, altered its objectives and renounced violence.   It  is  said
      that, like members of militant left wing  or  Islamist  organisations,
      PKK members still face criminal prosecution by the  authorities.   The
      point is also made at paragraph 6.188 that people  known  to  have  or
      suspected of having one or more family members in the PKK  can  expect
      some attention from the authorities.  This will depend upon  a  number
      of factors including the degree of kinship and suspected  position  of
      their relative within the PKK and varying degrees of intimidation  and
      harassment and other similar problems can be anticipated.  That having
      been said, the point is also made that countless people in Turkey  who
      have one or more relatives in the PKK will not experience  significant
      problems with the authorities as a result.  It would seem  from  this,
      and we did not understand that Mr Deller  disagreed,  that  there  has
      been no practical change in the attitudes of the  Turkish  authorities
      to KADEK from their attitude to the PKK.

      HADEP/DEHAP
18.   HADEP (The Peoples' Democracy Party) was founded in 1994.   It  was  a
      successor to the successively  banned  AGP,  DEP  and  OZDEP.   It  is
      described in the Dutch report, to which we  have  referred  above,  as
      having around 60,000 members and as drawing support mainly from  among
      Kurds.  HADEP campaigns for greater cultural rights for  Kurds  and  a
      peaceful solution to the Kurdish issue and is described as having kept
      to that position by never resorting to violence.  It  is  said  to  be
      viewed by the Turkish authorities as the PKK's political wing and as a
      consequence they view it with suspicion.  It is said that HADEP has no
      direct ties with the PKK but relies largely on the same supporters.

19.   As we have noted above, HADEP was banned by the  Constitutional  Court
      in March 2003 on the grounds that it aided and abetted the PKK.  DEHAP
      (The Democratic Peoples' Party) which was founded in 1997  claims  not
      to be solely a Kurdish party but to be a party of  Turkey.  It is said
      in Annex B to the CIPU report that in early September 2002 HADEP,  DEP
      and SDP (Socialist Democracy Party) decided to unite under the roof of
      DEHAP at the general election in November 2002.  DEHAP  has  not  been
      banned, but, as  is noted above, the Public  Prosecutor  has  filed  a
      case  to  close  DEHAP  also,  accusing  it  of  becoming  a   faction
      contravening the principles of equality and an  illegal  state  within
      the Democratic Republic.  We note that in the  November  2002  general
      election DEHAP claimed 6.2% of the vote but failed to win  a  seat  in
      the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.

20.   On page 25 of  the  US  State  Department  report  2003  we  find  the
      following:

           "HADEP/DEHAP leaders said state  harassment  of  the  party  has
           continued to decline  gradually  through  the  past  few  years,
           following a steep reduction in PKK related conflict.  They  said
           the party was able  to  operate  more  freely  in  the  November
           Parliamentary elections than in the previous election  in  1999.
           However, throughout the year,  police  raided  dozens  of  HADEP
           offices, particularly  in  the  south  east,  and  had  detained
           hundreds of  HADEP  officials  and  members.   DEHAP  and  HADEP
           members  were  regularly  harassed  by  Jandarma  and   security
           officials,  including  verbal  threats,  arbitrary  arrests   at
           rallies and detention at checkpoints.  The security forces  also
           readily harassed villages  they  believed  were  sympathetic  to
           HADEP/DEHAP.   Most  detainees  were  released  within  a  short
           period, many faced trials, usually for  "supporting  an  illegal
           organisation", "inciting separatism", or for violations  of  the
           law on meetings and demonstrations."

21.   In G's bundle at page 706 and thereafter there  is  a  report  of  the
      Turkish Human Rights Association of March 2003.  The major  activities
      of the Human Rights Association are described at  paragraph  6.208  of
      the CIPU report.  These are to collect and verify information on human
      rights violations and it publishes monthly reports and press  releases
      on arrests, torture, disappearances in custody, violation of the right
      to freedom of expression.  It has financial  support  from  EU  member
      states in organising courses for teachers and lawyers which also cover
      local procedures for the right of individual  petition.   There  is  a
      strong Kurdish current within the HRA.   It is regularly harassed  and
      obstructed by the  authorities,  and  in  recent  years  some  of  its
      regional  offices  have  temporarily  been  shut  down  and   criminal
      proceedings  brought  against  various  HRA  workers  for   separatist
      propaganda or support for illegal organisations.

      Risk on Return
22.   Mr Grieves took us to various examples set out in the report  covering
      the months January to March 2003.  This lists a number of instances of
      arrests of DEHAP members and  imprisonment  including  young  members,
      detention of the DEHAP secretary and DEHAP executive members including
      arrests on the basis of attending unauthorised Newroz celebrations and
      attending DEHAP district party buildings.  There is  a  report  of  Mr
      Yoruk, a doctoral student at the University of Essex who has worked as
      a reporter for the Turkish Daily News in Istanbul   between  1995  and
      1997.  He cites examples of detention and ill treatment of  HADEP  and
      DEHAP members and supporters in the first three months of 2003.  It is
      not clear what the sources of this information are, given that it does
      not appear from his report that he has been in Turkey since 1997,  but
      what he states appears to be broadly consistent with  what  is  to  be
      found in the Human Rights Association documentation.

23.   With these background matters in mind  we  move  on  to  consider  the
      specific situation of risk on return to  Turkey.   Mr  Grieves  argued
      that this was the essential point at which if problems were  going  to
      occur they would occur.  He based  this  upon  the  existence  of  the
      central information  system  usually  abbreviated  as  GBTS  which  is
      available to the Turkish state.  This is described at  paragraph  5.62
      of the CIPU report.   It  is  said  that  the  system  stores  various
      personal data, including information on outstanding  arrest  warrants,
      previous  arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,  possible  draft
      evasion or refusal  to  perform  military  service  and  tax  arrears.
      Sentences which have been served are in  principle  removed  from  the
      system and entered into the national accessible Judicial Records.   In
      the light of this we move on to consider further points  contained  in
      CIPU  report  concerning  treatment  of   returned   asylum   seekers.
      Paragraph 6.91 of the report states as follows:

           "6.91. The criminal records of  Turkish-Kurdish  asylum  seekers
           who are returned to Turkey are checked on entry just like  those
           of other Turkish nationals.  The records  may  concern  criminal
           convictions by a Turkish court,  but  can  also  be  related  to
           official judicial preliminary enquiries or investigations by the
           police or Jandarma.  Draft evaders and  deserters  are  also  on
           record at the border posts.


           6.92.  If a person is found to  a  have  a  criminal  record  or
           incorrect  border-crossing  documents,  to  have   left   Turkey
           illegally in the past or been expelled from another country, the
           Turkish  border  authorities  often   interrogate   the   person
           concerned.  Questioning is often intended to establish or  check
           personal particulars, reasons for and  time  of  departure  from
           Turkey, grounds for seeking asylum, reasons why the  application
           was rejected, any criminal records at home and abroad, including
           (drug related)  offences  and  possible  contacts  with  illegal
           organisations  abroad.    If,  however,  there  is  no  definite
           suspicion, as a rule the person is released after an  average  6
           to 9 hours detention.


           6.93.  Anyone suspected of having committed criminal offences is
           transferred  to  the  relevant   investigative  authority.    In
           Istanbul this is generally  the  police  headquarters  which  is
           located  in  Bakirkoy,  not  far  from  the  airport.    Persons
           suspected  of  membership  of  the  PKK,   left   wing   radical
           organisations such as the DHKP/C  or  TKP/ML,  militant  Islamic
           groups or anyone suspected of giving support or shelter  to  one
           of those organisations is handed over  the  Anti-Terror  Branch,
           which is housed at  the  police  headquarters  mentioned  above.
           Torture or ill treatment of suspects at the  police  Anti-Terror
           Branch cannot be ruled out."


      These paragraphs are essentially borrowed from the Dutch report  which
      we  have  quoted  above  in  other  contexts.   They  are  clearly  of
      significance  to  the  assessment  of  risk  on  return.   Of  further
      relevance are two other paragraphs in this section of the report:

           "6.99.  Turkey does not at present accept the removal to  Turkey
           of Turks using EU letters  (which  are  standard  format  travel
           identity documents adopted by the  General  Secretary  from  the
           Council of the EU in its recommendation of  13  November  1994),
           and Turks who are without passports are  therefore  returned  on
           one-way emergency travel  documents  which  are  issued  by  the
           Turkish Consul General in London.


           6.100.  A returnee without a valid Turkish  travel  document  is
           likely to be given an in-depth questioning by the Turkish border
           police, and  this  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  routine
           identity check on arrival.  The  German  authorities  stated  in
           July 1999 that, as a rule, the questioning  refers  to  personal
           data,  date  of  and  reasons  for  departing  Turkey,  possible
           criminal record in Germany and  contacts  with  illegal  Turkish
           organisations.  In some cases further enquiries will be made via
           other offices (e.g. Prosecutor's office, Registrar's  office  at
           the last Turkish residence of the returnee) in order to find out
           if the returnee is liable to prosecution for a criminal offence.
            These enquiries can take from several hours  to  several  days,
           during which time the returnee will be  kept  in  custody.   The
           German authorities advised that available information as of July
           1999 indicated that undocumented returnees  were  generally  not
           being maltreated while  being  kept  in  custody.   However  ill
           treatment could not be ruled out in cases  where  returnees  are
           suspected separatists.   UNHCR's  view  is  that  any  political
           profile and not simply PKK creates risk.  The Swiss  authorities
           took the view in  June  1999  that  nothing  can  be  completely
           excluded  or  assumed  from  the  start;   it  depends  on   the
           individual case."


      Elsewhere the point is  emphasised  that  everything  depends  on  the
      individual and his activities in  Turkey  and  abroad,  and  being  of
      Kurdish origin does not in itself constitute a higher risk of  inhuman
      treatment.

24.   It should also be borne in mind that there  is  no  organisation  that
      specifically monitors returnees.  There is some evidence, of  somewhat
      anecdotal nature on this, and we shall subsequently refer to  extracts
      of a report from Proasyl put in by Mr Grieves.

25.   In the light of this evidence, Mr Deller very helpfully made it  clear
      that he accepted that the computer system exists as recorded and  that
      interrogations at the border take place.  He  also  accepted  that  if
      there was reason for a person to get into the hands of the Anti-Terror
      Branch then there was a risk of torture.  Of particular  relevance  in
      this regard therefore as concerns risk on return is paragraph 6.93  of
      the CIPU report, which we have set out above.

26.   A point that was rightly emphasised before us is the  significance  of
      suspicion of involvement with a  separatist  organisation.   Suspicion
      may arise not purely on the basis of membership or of prominence in  a
      separatist or other disapproved organisation, but may extend  to  risk
      on account of suspicion.  In this context it is of  some  interest  to
      note the Proasyl report to which we have  referred  above.   It  seems
      that from early 1998 the Refugees Council of Lower Saxony and  Proasyl
      have begun to  collect  circulating  reports  on  arrests  and  abuses
      affecting refugees expelled or deported from Germany.  Most  of  these
      cases were researched in close  cooperation  with  the  Turkish  Human
      Rights Group IHD and with pro bono lawyers.  It is said that  in  many
      cases it has been possible to  establish  contact  with  the  affected
      person and where the matters came to court to  obtain  access  to  the
      court files.  A few examples of this are  documented  in  the  bundle.
      The problem that we have with these is that there is no indication  as
      to the history of the particular people in Turkey prior to their going
      to Germany and subsequently being returned to Turkey.  For example the
      first case is a case of Kemal O who was deported with  his  family  in
      February 1998.  Following 8 hours of checks  at  the  airport  he  was
      initially set free and after his release opened a tea shop and appears
      to have experienced no problems beyond harassment of the customers and
      searching.  Because of these matters, however, the customers ceased to
      come to the shop and the shop had to be closed in early  2000  and  he
      then returned to his village.  After some two weeks he was arrested in
      the fields and interrogated and tortured and accused firstly of having
      joined the guerrillas and secondly of having worked  for  the  PKK  in
      Germany.  He is therefore somebody who did not experience a problem on
      immediate return but subsequently.  We do not know  what  his  history
      was , but it appears that he was not persecuted or treated  in  breach
      of his Article 3 rights on immediate return to  Turkey.

27.   The same cannot be said of the next  case,  that  of  Hakkant  who  on
      return to Turkey was accused of having been sentenced in  Germany  for
      acting for the PKK which it seems on the limited information may  have
      been the case, and who  was  subsequently  taken  to  the  Anti-Terror
      Department where he was interrogated and  tortured.   The  next  three
      cases all  involve  people  who  in  two  cases   after  two  days  of
      questioning at the airport and in the other  after  three  days,  were
      released and experienced problems  subsequently.  Again  it  does  not
      appear that they were persecuted or suffered ill treatment  in  breach
      of their human rights while at the airport  and  experienced  problems
      subsequently.  Again the problem is that we do  not  know  what  their
      history  in  Turkey   was.    These   examples   also   sit   somewhat
      inconveniently with the arguments generally accepted before us that in
      light of the extensive and  effective  computer  system  operating  in
      Turkey that a person's history  would  be  obtained  either  from  the
      central computer or by information being obtained from their own local
      area, to enable the authorities to come to a view concerning them.  In
      at least some of these cases returnees  were  initially  able  to  get
      through the airport and only experienced problems  subsequently.   The
      main difficulties with these examples is that in the absence of  clear
      information and evidence  about  their  background  in  Turkey  it  is
      difficult to see what assistance we can derive from these examples  in
      providing guidelines on the assessment of risk on return in the  cases
      before us.

28.   The representatives before us urged on us a unitary  approach  to  the
      kind of guidelines that might be thought to be appropriate.  Mr Deller
      cautioned us against providing anything that might be  interpreted  as
      being a list, in that on the one hand it was at risk of being  treated
      as a checklist by Adjudicators rather than as a series of  factors  to
      be considered in the round, and that  on  the  other  hand  it  risked
      tempting claimants to tailor  their  stories  to  factors  which  were
      regarded as being relevant.  We bear in mind these cautions.
            Polat & Hayser
29.   In this regard it is worthwhile our  reviewing  some  of  the  matters
      raised in two particular determinations of the Tribunal which in  some
      respects led to these five cases being listed for consideration  by  a
      legal panel of the Tribunal.  The first of these is Polat [2002] UKIAT
      04332.

30.   There the Tribunal bore in mind the UNHCR letter of March  1999  which
      appears to represent the UNHCR view today, that those most  likely  to
      be exposed to harassment/ prosecution/ persecution are Kurds suspected
      of being connected to or being sympathisers of  the  PKK,  and  it  is
      essential to find out if Turkish asylum seekers if returned  would  be
      at risk of being suspected of connections to or sympathy with the  PKK
      or otherwise have a political  profile.

31.   Various factors were thought to  indicate  that  mistreatment  at  the
      point of return is a limited phenomenon.  The first of  these  is  the
      comment reported by  a  senior  official  at  the  Department  of  the
      Ministry of Foreign Affairs who said in March 2001  that  the  Turkish
      government now recognise the overwhelming number of Turkish  nationals
      who had applied for asylum overseas had done so  for  purely  economic
      reasons and were not of any interest to  the  Turkish  government  and
      would not be imprisoned on return.

32.   We find ourselves in agreement  with  the  view  expressed  to  us  in
      submissions that one would  hardly  expect  the  Turkish  government's
      representative to admit to ill treatment of its nationals  on  return.
      Thus in our view limited weight only can be afforded to this.

33.   The next point made by the Tribunal in Polat was that such  statistics
      as there are do not indicate  that  mistreatment  of  returnees  is  a
      serious problem  in  quantitative  terms.   In  this  regard  we  find
      ourselves in agreement with the comment  of  Mr  Grieves  that  it  is
      important to bear in mind that if the state determining status outside
      Turkey has done its job  properly,  then  the  person  being  returned
      should not face a real risk of persecution or breach  of  their  human
      rights.  As a consequence one would not expect there to be many  cases
      of ill treatment  assuming  that  the  process  of  determining  their
      applications and appeals in the countries to which they had  fled  had
      been done properly.

34.   The third point made by the Tribunal in Polat in this context  can  be
      encapsulated in the view that the authorities are less concerned about
      prospective separatists now in the light  of  the  PKK's  decision  to
      cease the armed struggle in 1999.  We have set out above our  comments
      on that and indeed consider that there is little if any difference  in
      the attitude of the authorities to the PKK (now KADEP)  subsequent  to
      the ending of the use of violence proclaimed on the part of  the  PKK.
      In this regard we also note the point made by  Mr  Grieves  concerning
      the declaration in February 2003 of the PKK to undertake  a  defensive
      war, as it describes it, against Turkey on the basis of the failure to
      push forward the reform process to enhance fundamental human rights of
      Kurds and the enforced isolation of Ocalan.  We agree with Mr Grieves'
      conclusion that the Turkish authorities are likely to see this  as  an
      enhanced threat.

35.   The next point made in Polat is that the  evidence  of  actions  taken
      against those involved in separatist organisations such as the PKK and
      HADEP increasingly indicates that the principal risk of persecution is
      to those who are prominent members.  It goes on to state that the main
      focus of police raids and detentions and prosecutions has been against
      prominent PKK and HADEP officials or  supporters.   While  that  point
      appears to be right, we do not consider that it can properly  be  said
      to preclude the evidence which we have considered above concerning ill
      treatment of members of HADEP who do not have a level  of  prominence.
      Much depends on the circumstances, but it is not in our view right  to
      say that the risk is only to prominent members of those organisations.



36.   The final point considered as relevant in showing mistreatment at  the
      point of return is a limited phenomenon is the  evidence  from  UNHCR,
      based on its own dealings with returnees from Iraq, that as a category
      they are not subjected to persecution upon return to  Turkey.   Though
      we consider that that must also be a factor placed into  the  balance,
      we do not consider that it has much weight based as it is upon a  very
      limited category of returnees.

37.   The Tribunal in Polat went on to conclude that there remained  a  real
      risk that  persons  considered  to  be  "suspected  separatists"  will
      continue to face ill treatment at the point of  return.   It  went  on
      however to conclude  that  it  was  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
      authorities would include in that category  all  persons  who  have  a
      record of involvement in separatist organisations irrespective of  the
      degree and nature of that involvement.

38.   Various "guidelines" were set out  in  Polat  as  factors  which  were
      relevant to consideration in determining the question whether  or  not
      the authorities would  ill  treat  a  returnee  with  some  record  of
      involvement in a separatist organisation.  Having  set  these  factors
      out the Tribunal concluded  that  it  was  satisfied  that  a  Turkish
      appellant of Kurdish origin could not succeed unless he could show, by
      reference to factors of  this  kind,  something  more  than  that  the
      authorities would have a record of his involvement in or sympathy  for
      a separatist organisation.

39.   The Tribunal in Hayser, to which we have referred above, drew  certain
      general conclusions from  the  objective  evidence  which  led  it  to
      propose a modified series of "guidelines" to those set out in Polat.

      General Conclusions on Factors Relevant to Risk
40.   We consider that it may be helpful if  we  set  out  our  own  general
      conclusions before moving on to suggest ourselves the kind of  factors
      that  can  properly  and  relevantly  be  taken  into  account  by  an
      Adjudicator or other Tribunal assessing risk in  this  kind  of  case.
      Before doing so however we make some general observations which are to
      a large extent based upon points made  to  us  by  Mr  Deller  in  his
      helpful  submissions.   They  are  of  general  application   to   the
      determination of appeals in this jurisdiction, but are  of  particular
      relevance to the issues with which we  are  faced  in  these  appeals,
      given their complexity.  The factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in
      assessing risk on return have to be taken together with  the  question
      of whether or not there is a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.   It
      cannot be over-emphasised that the appeal  is  based  upon  whether  a
      person who is a refugee will in fact be refouled.  It is of  paramount
      importance to the fact finder to look at the facts as put forward  and
      determine whether they are true  and  whether  they  are  relevant  in
      coming to a decision.  That is, as in all assessments, the fundamental
      issue is:  objectively, and as  relevant  only  subjectively,  on  the
      facts as found,  does  the  Appellant  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution (or real risk of a breach of an  ECHR  right)  on  return.
      Then, of course,  the  Refugee  Convention  nexus,  if  any,  must  be
      assessed.

41.   In the Turkish situation this will begin with the usual assessment  of
      the truthfulness, or otherwise, of the Appellant's story and  then  it
      will be necessary to make an  assessment  of  what  matters  would  be
      recorded on the computer to which the authorities  would  have  access
      and whether such matters could arouse suspicions that the  person  was
      political, and that even if they got through the  airport  would  this
      happen to them again.  The fact finder will have  to  decide  what  is
      likely to be on record and  consider  the  story  very  carefully  and
      assess such matters as whether  there  were  detentions,  if  so  what
      circumstances led to them, what the circumstances were during them and
      in what circumstances did they end and what happened subsequent to the
      detentions.  Such other matters  as  the  manner  of  the  arrest  and
      anything said by the authorities  during  detention  may  also  be  of
      relevance.  Again if such issues as a claimed fear on account of being
      related to a separatist or  separatists are part of the claim then  it
      will be necessary to determine how it was that  the  authorities  knew
      about this, if they did indeed know about it, and whether  they  would
      have any interest subsequently in  this.   All  the  circumstances  of
      consequence are to be taken into consideration.  Overall there is  the
      need to decide which parts of a story are material  and  what  is  the
      core of the story.  A particular factor drawn to our attention  by  Mr
      Deller was the question of failure to claim asylum en  route  and  its
      implications for credibility which, he accepted, in the light of Adimi
      has largely fallen into disrepute.  He made however  the  very  proper
      point that a careful  assessment  of  the  facts  and  the  claim  may
      indicate an  inconsistency  between  the  claim  that  the  person  in
      question was ill-informed and nervous on the one hand and on the other
      had a sophisticated knowledge of which countries do and which  do  not
      take asylum seekers from outside Europe.  Given that the heart of  the
      question in cases such as this  is  whether  the  Turkish  authorities
      suspect the claimant of separatist  tendencies,  it  is  important  to
      determine such matters as how it is that they suspect that person  and
      how it is that they suspect them of being  a  separatist  as  relevant
      issues.  It will be necessary to  consider to what degree of certainty
      a suspicion of separatist tendencies has to be held and recorded.  The
      fact that something is plausible or possible does not mean that it  is
      true.  We have borne in mind ourselves these general cautions as  well
      as urging them upon fact finders in future appeals.

42.   It will be clear from our assessment of the general issues above  that
      we agree that there is a real risk that any history a  person  has  of
      previous arrests, outstanding arrest  warrants,  criminal  records  or
      judicial preliminary enquiries or  investigations  by  the  police  or
      Jandarma will be contained on the GBTS computer system.   The  typical
      returned Turkish  asylum  seeker  will  be  travelling  either  on  no
      documents or one-way emergency travel documents which  we  accept  may
      place the authorities on notice that they return as  someone  who  has
      sought asylum and has been  unsuccessful.   If  however  the  claimant
      holds a current valid Turkish passport it is significantly less likely
      that this perception will arise.

43.   Assuming possession of only a temporary travel document, it is  likely
      that the returnee will be detained for interrogation at the  point  of
      entry while enquiries  are  carried  out  by  them  because  they  are
      identified as being a failed asylum seeker who may  therefore  have  a
      history, or if the GBTS computer records reveal  information  regarded
      as relevant.

44.   The evidence from paragraph 6.92 of the  CIPU  report,  based  on  the
      Dutch report, is that the kind of  questioning  carried  out  at  this
      stage  would  often  be  intended  to  establish  or  check   personal
      particulars and matters such as reasons for and time of departure from
      Turkey, grounds for seeking asylum and reasons why the application was
      rejected and any criminal record and possible  contacts  with  illegal
      organisations abroad.  It  is  said  that  if  there  is  no  definite
      suspicion then as a rule the person is released after an average of  6
      to 9 hours detention.  Given the ways of the Turkish authorities,  ill
      treatment at this stage cannot be  ruled  out.   We  do  not  consider
      however that the evidence shows that such ill treatment would be  such
      as to be likely to be persecutory or to give rise to  maltreatment  in
      breach of the person's human rights.  We disagree with the  submission
      of Mr Taghavi in this regard.  Such reports as the Proasyl reports  to
      which we have referred above where persons were held for a  few  hours
      and released without any indication  of  ill  treatment,  particularly
      nothing giving rise to Article 3 ill treatment, are of relevance.   We
      bear in mind the point made by Mr Taghavi  concerning  the  difference
      between the kind of treatment involved in persecution and  Article  3,
      but even if that is right, we do not consider that the evidence  bears
      out the contention that detention during this period of  interrogation
      would be such as to give rise to breach of a person's human rights.

45.   More serious issues arise in the case of persons who, as  is  recorded
      in paragraph 6.93 of the CIPU report, are suspected of  membership  of
      the PKK, left wing radical organisations such  as  the  DHKP/CRTKP/ML,
      militant Islamic groups, or anyone  suspected  of  giving  support  or
      shelter to one of those organisations.  Such persons are  handed  over
      to the Anti-Terror Branch, and it was common ground before us that  in
      those circumstances they would face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      breach of their human rights.

46.   This leaves unclear the basis upon which a person would  be  suspected
      of such membership or  such  support  or  shelter.   It  is  essential
      therefore to identify the kind of criteria which on a proper  view  of
      the objective evidence and on a commonsense  view  are  likely  to  be
      regarded as of relevance in determining the  degree  of  risk  in  any
      particular case.  It should be borne in mind that none of the  factors
      which we set out below can be said to be  necessarily  of  greater  or
      less weight than of any of the others.  We agree with the Tribunal  in
      Hayser that there is no minimum number of  factors  which  has  to  be
      satisfied before an individual comes under suspicion.  The  assessment
      is a cumulative one but not all factors will be of equal significance.
       It may be that in a particular case one factor alone is  sufficiently
      weighty for it to be properly concluded that the individual  concerned
      is at risk on return.  We remind fact finders of the  points  that  we
      have set out above concerning the importance of careful  and  thorough
      scrutiny  of  the  evidence  and  for  a  clear   statement   in   the
      determination of the facts that are found, those  that  are  not,  and
      then the kind of issues and factors that must  be  properly  assessed.
      In this regard it is important to bear in mind the problems  faced  by
      Adjudicators hearing asylum appeals when they do not have the  benefit
      of assistance by a representative acting on behalf of the Secretary of
      State.  In what is essentially an accusatorial system, the Adjudicator
      is all too frequently placed in a near impossible situation on the one
      hand in avoiding descending into the  arena  and  on  the  other  hand
      wishing to have the evidence  properly  tested  in  order  for  proper
      findings of fact to be made.  We urge on the Secretary  of  State  the
      importance of ensuring that as far as possible he  is  represented  at
      all appeals before Adjudicators in order that a proper  assessment  of
      the evidence can be made and proper findings of fact made.

      The following are the factors which inexhaustively we consider  to  be
      material in giving rise to potential suspicion in  the  minds  of  the
      authorities concerning a particular claimant.

      a)     The  level  if  any  of  the  appellant's  known  or  suspected
           involvement with a separatist organisation.  Together with  this
           must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended  that  the
           authorities knew of or might suspect such involvement.


      b)    Whether the appellant has ever been arrested or detained and  if
           so in what circumstances.  In this context it may be relevant to
           note how long ago such arrests or detentions took place,  if  it
           is the case that  there  appears  to  be  no  causal  connection
           between them and  the  claimant's  departure  from  Turkey,  but
           otherwise it may be a factor of no particular significance.


      c)    Whether the circumstances of the appellant's past arrest(s)  and
           detention(s) (if any) indicate that the authorities did in  fact
           view him or her as a suspected separatist.


      d)    Whether  the  appellant  was  charged  or  placed  on  reporting
           conditions or now faces charges.


      e)    The degree of ill treatment to which the appellant was subjected
           in the past.


      f)    Whether the appellant has family connections with  a  separatist
           organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.


      g)    How long a period elapsed between the  appellant's  last  arrest
           and detention and his or her departure  from  Turkey.   In  this
           regard it may of course be relevant to consider the evidence  if
           any concerning what the appellant was in fact doing between  the
           time of the last arrest and detention and departure from Turkey.
            It is a factor that is only likely  to  be  of  any  particular
           relevance if there is a reasonably lengthy  period  between  the
           two events without any ongoing problems being experienced on the
           part of the appellant from the authorities.


      h)    Whether in the period after the appellant's last arrest there is
           any evidence that he or  she  was  kept  under  surveillance  or
           monitored by the authorities.


      i)    Kurdish ethnicity.


      j)    Alevi faith.


      k)    Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.


      l)    Whether there is any evidence that  the  authorities  have  been
           pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest  in  the  appellant
           since he or she left Turkey.


      m)    Whether the appellant became an informer or was asked to  become
           one.


      n)    Actual perceived political activities abroad in connection  with
           a separatist organisation.
      o)    If the returnee is a military draft evader there  will  be  some
           logical impact on his profile to  those  assessing  him  on  his
           immediate return.  Following Sepet of course this alone is not a
           basis for a refugee or human rights claim.

47.   We cannot emphasise too strongly the importance of  avoiding  treating
      these factors as some kind of checklist.  Assessment of the claim must
      be in the round bearing in  mind  the  matters  set  out  above  as  a
      consequence of a careful scrutiny and assessment of the evidence.  The
      central issue as always is the question of the real risk on return  of
      ill treatment amounting to persecution or breach of a person's Article
      3 rights.  The existing political and human rights context overall  is
      also a matter of significance as will be seen from our  assessment  of
      the particular appeals in our  determinations  of  those  below.   The
      particular circumstances that prevail today may not be in existence in
      6 months time for all we know.  In this  regard  we  note  that  there
      still appears to be no procedure in this country to consider cessation
      of refugee status, as is provided  for  in  Article  1C  of  the  1951
      Convention.  The "immigration" decision to grant indefinite  leave  to
      remain that is adopted appears in virtually all  cases  where  refugee
      status is determined, appears to pre-empt such an approach.   We  note
      this point, if only to stress that the concept of surrogate protection
      under the Refugee Convention is envisaged as  a  temporary  protection
      (safe haven) during a  time  of  risk,  not  necessarily  a  permanent
      immigration status.  This is of course a matter for the  Secretary  of
      State and not for us, but we consider that it is a  point  well  worth
      bearing in mind given the particular factors that  have  developed  in
      Turkey in the  last  three  months  or  so  which  may  give  rise  to
      particular risk in  particular  circumstances  which  might  not  have
      existed before that time.

      Assessment of the Individual Cases
48.   We now turn to  the  assessment  of  the  factual  situation  of  each
      individual claimant set against our above findings  and  the  specific
      submissions made by their representatives and Mr Deller to us  at  the
      hearing.

      Claimant 'A'
49.   This was a Secretary of  State appeal where the grounds were that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to show how the claimant fell within the  ambit
      of Polat and that the Adjudicator also had failed to take into account
      the authority of Sepet  and  Bulbul.   In  the  determination  of  the
      Adjudicator promulgated 6 December 2002 it was noted that 'A'  was  an
      Alevi Kurd from the district of 'E' in  South  East  Turkey.   He  had
      three brothers, one of whom has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a refugee and the other two remain in Turkey.   (One
      of them is in hiding with  the  PKK).   The  parents  also  remain  in
      Turkey.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in late 2001.  His claim was
      that his family were perceived as being involved with the PKK and  the
      claimant himself was a well known HADEP  supporter.   The  Adjudicator
      found his story was consistent with the background evidence, plausible
      and credible as to its core  elements.   He  noted  that  two  of  the
      claimant's cousins had  been  killed  at  the  hands  of  the  Turkish
      authorities on 30 July 2001 and that their deaths had  been  published
      in a newspaper.  He also noted the refugee status grant to  a  brother
      'T'.

50.   The Adjudicator, after referring to the Polat  determination  and  the
      report of Mr McDowell, dated 1 October 1999, summarised the facts  (at
      paragraph 24) finding that the claimant had a  history  of  harassment
      and discrimination at the hands of the Turkish  authorities.   He  had
      not left Turkey soon after his six day detention in March 1999 when he
      was tortured, or indeed after the violent attack on him by youths from
      the MHP in June 2000.  He noted that matters only came to  a  head  in
      summer 2001 with his  imminent  requirement  to  report  for  military
      service, the  release  of  his  brother  'B'  from  custody,  and  the
      discovery that not only was the claimant  selling  Kurdish  tapes  but
      also  had  been  reading  a  banned  book.   In  this  situation   the
      Adjudicator considered that the claimant  would  be  returning  as  an
      identified failed asylum seeker and, leaving aside the issue of  draft
      evasion, the other matters would place him seriously at  risk  of  ill
      treatment.  He therefore allowed the appeal on both asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.

51.   Mr Deller submitted  to  us,  after  our  full  consideration  of  the
      objective evidence detailed above, that this appeared  to  be  a  case
      where the  Tribunal  should  reach  its  determination  based  on  the
      totality of the evidence that had been presented and then noting  this
      individual  claimant's  circumstances  set  against   that   objective
      evidence.  On the face of it he conceded that there did not appear  to
      be a sustainable challenge to the Adjudicator's determination.

52.   Mr Grieves submitted that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  from  the
      analysis of the applicant's personal situation and the  acceptance  of
      his credibility.

      Decision on Claimant 'A'
53.   We have concluded, after taking into  account  the  accepted  credible
      evidence relating to this applicant and the objective analysis set out
      above, that the appeal of the Secretary of State  must  be  dismissed.
      The determination of the Adjudicator  is  sustainable  and  is  indeed
      confirmed by the analysis of his personal situation  set  against  the
      objective evidence analysed in  this  determination.   The  appeal  is
      therefore dismissed and the determination of the Adjudicator upheld.

      Claimant 'C' (HX/32172/2002)
54.   This also was an appeal by the Secretary of State.  It  was  submitted
      that  the  Adjudicator  had   again   not   correctly   followed   the
      determination in Polat and that the  conclusions  of  the  Adjudicator
      that the claimant would be viewed  as  a  "suspected  separatist"  was
      unlikely as he had only been approached  on  one  occasion  by  people
      claiming to be plain clothes policemen.

55.   The Adjudicator, in a determination  promulgated  27  September  2002,
      found  that  the  claimant  was  largely  credible  apart  from   some
      exaggerations in the  basis  of  his  claim.   He  accepted  that  the
      claimant had been a member of HADEP and that he had  been  sympathetic
      towards the PKK and sought to assist them in the  ways  he  described.
      In this situation he had come to the attention of the authorities  who
      kept a watch on him, arresting him in 1989 and again in November 1993.
       He also accepted that during detention  the  claimant  had  been  ill
      treated and therefore had moved to 'A'.  While in 'A' the  authorities
      had also watched him and knew that he was an active member  of  HADEP.
      Also they were aware that  he  was  a  friend  of  'VD'  who  was  the
      secretary of HADEP for the province.   The  Adjudicator  accepted  the
      evidence that a plain clothes police officer mistreated  him  in  1999
      and asked him to become an informer.  It was this  incident  that  was
      the catalyst to the claimant leaving  Turkey.   The  Adjudicator  then
      assessed the  appellant's  evidence  against  the  objective  evidence
      before him  and  concluded,  given  the  totality  of  the  claimant's
      profile, that he could be a person of  interest  to  the  authorities,
      particularly given his  significant  personal  connection  with  'VD'.
      The appeal was therefore allowed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.

56.   In this case, Mr Deller conceded  to  us  that  the  grounds  did  not
      appear to have substance to them following the detailed examination of
      the objective information carried out in these cases.

      The Issue
57.   We found the only issue before us was  whether  the  determination  of
      the Adjudicator was a sustainable one in the light of the  submissions
      put to us and the objective information now before us.

      Decision on Claimant 'C'
58.   We are satisfied that the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  must  be
      dismissed.  The grounds do not disclose any substantive error  in  the
      determination. We also satisfied on  the  totality  of  the  objective
      evidence and the validity of the claimant's story as accepted  by  the
      Adjudicator, that he is a refugee within the meaning of Article  1A(2)
      of the Refugee Convention and that there would be a  real  risk  of  a
      breach of Article 3 of the ECHR should he be  returned  to  Turkey  at
      this time.  This appeal is thus dismissed.

      Claimant 'D' (HX/58799/2002)
59.   This is an appeal made by the claimant  against  the  decision  of  an
      Adjudicator promulgated 8 January 2003 wherein he dismissed an  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of State who had  refused  leave
      to enter and asylum and human rights claims.  The Adjudicator accepted
      that the claimant had given a credible account of  his  ill  treatment
      during three detentions suffered in  Turkey in  1997,  July  2000  and
      March 2002.  The claimant had stated that his fear of persecution  was
      based on his Kurdish ethnic origin, his Alevi religion and his support
      and sympathies for HADEP.  The  Adjudicator  however  found  that  the
      arrests on each occasion had been as a result of the  claimant  taking
      part in demonstrations and that he was a very low level  supporter  of
      HADEP and not a prominent member or supporter, thus he was  not  in  a
      category where there was any real risk to  him  of  ill  treatment  on
      return.  He considered that the last arrest in March 2002 did not  put
      him in a specific category of risk as there was  nothing  to  indicate
      that he was in fact viewed as a suspected separatist.   He  was  never
      charged or placed on any reporting conditions and there  was  nothing,
      in the view of the Adjudicator, to  indicate  any  family  connections
      with prominent members of the PKK or HADEP, nor that he was kept under
      surveillance or monitored after his last release.  In  this  situation
      he considered the claimant would not be targeted at this time.

60.   Consideration was also  given  to  the  claimant's  medical  condition
      under an  Article 3 assessment and the  Adjudicator  considered  there
      were ample psychiatric and medical  facilities  available  in  Turkey.
      The appeal was therefore dismissed on both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.

61.   Mr  Grieves  submitted  to  us,  in  a  skeleton  argument,  that  the
      Adjudicator had found the claimant credible in all respects  bar  one.
      Accordingly there was credible evidence  that  the  claimant  and  his
      family  had  sympathised  with  HADEP  and  participated  in  numerous
      demonstrations and meetings, and had attended the HADEP building.  The
      claimant had been detained in May 1997 while marching  under  a  HADEP
      banner.  During four days  detention  he  had  been  punched,  kicked,
      subjected to falaka and food deprivation.  He had also been accused of
      being a separatist and linked  to  the  PKK.   In  July  2000  he  was
      detained when at a demonstration in remembrance of a massacre of Alevi
      Kurds he had been punched, kicked and  beaten,  including  scars  from
      metal and wooden sticks.  At this time he was interrogated  about  PKK
      and those who organised the meeting.  In March 2003 at Newroz  he  was
      again  taken  to  the  Anti-Terrorist  Branch  for  three   days   and
      threatened, kicked and beaten.  He was questioned about his brother in
      the DHKPC then, after further beatings, agreed to become an  informer.
      He then went into hiding.

61.   The adverse credibility finding  he  submitted,  should  be  rejected,
      primarily on the basis that at the time when he completed his  SEF  in
      June and was interviewed in July 2002, he could not have  known  about
      the authorities' attempts to find him.  The Tribunal was thus  invited
      to reverse the adverse credibility finding.

62.   The  risks  on  return  were  of  course  covered  at  length  in  the
      submissions set out above.

63.   Mr Grieves also submitted that the length of time and  the  activities
      of the claimant while in the United Kingdom in support of HADEP should
      also be seen as part of the total profile  of  this  claimant  and  be
      included in the risk assessment.

64.   Mr Deller, in his submissions,  agreed  that  the  correct  method  of
      assessment  was  to  look  at  the  total  profile  of   a   claimant.
      Potentially in this case the actions taken in the United  Kingdom  may
      be relevant if they came to the attention of the Turkish  authorities.
      He agreed that the submissions made  in  respect  of  the  credibility
      assessment of the Adjudicator did appear to have some merit.

      The Issue
65.   We found again the  only  issue  before  us  to  be  whether,  on  the
      totality  of  the  evidence  accepted  by  the  Adjudicator  and   the
      submissions made in relation  to  credibility  when  set  against  the
      objective evidence, the determination of  the  Adjudicator  should  be
      seen as a safe and sustainable one.

      Decision on Claimant "D"
66.    We  are  satisfied  in  this  case  that  the  negative   credibility
      assessment of the Adjudicator on the aspect of the  case  relating  to
      later interest in the applicant did appear to be unsustainable. Two of
      the three  reasons  for  the  assessment  appear  to  have  been  made
      erroneously given that the claimant had not ever claimed he was  aware
      of the continuing interest in him by the authorities until  after  the
      date of the SEF and his interview.

67.   Thus we find the claimant's  story  a  credible  one.   When  assessed
      against the totality of the evidence, in the round, we  are  satisfied
      that the determination of  the  Adjudicator  is  an  unsafe  one.   We
      consider that the claimant would be at a real risk  of  detention  and
      persecution on return to the airport in Turkey.  He is thus a  refugee
      within the meaning of Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention  and  we
      consider there are substantive grounds for considering there is a real
      risk of a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR should  he  be  returned  to
      Turkey.  Accordingly the appeal made by claimant 'D' is allowed.
            Claimant 'O' (HX/36244/2002)
68.   This was an appeal by the claimant 'O' against  the  determination  of
      an Adjudicator, Mr P S Aujla, promulgated 5 November 2002  wherein  he
      dismissed an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State who
      had refused leave to enter and asylum and human rights claims.

      The Adjudicator's Determination
69.   The  submission  made  by  Mr  Grieves  in  this  case  was  that  the
      determination of the Adjudicator was flawed  to  the  extent  that  it
      needed to be remitted for hearing afresh before  another  Adjudicator.
      Mr Deller agreed that this appeared to be the appropriate action.

      Decision on Claimant "O"
70.   After consideration  of  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  set  out
      between paragraphs 24 and 39 of his determination, we agree  that  the
      wholly adverse credibility finding appears to be  unsustainable.   The
      Adjudicator, at paragraph 32, found that because the authorities could
      have asked him to work for them in his home town then they  would  not
      have taken him to the station to do so.  This was submitted to reflect
      an unawareness of the intimidatory effect of detention in  Turkey,  or
      the methods of operation of the Turkish authorities.   We  agree  with
      this submission.

71.   It was  also  submitted  that  the  finding  that  "it  is  even  more
      unbelievable that the security forces would waste their time  thinking
      that the appellant, a 16-year old  shepherd,  would  have  a  credible
      knowledge of PKK hideouts" was also unsustainable.  We  agree  that  a
      shepherd, like this claimant, with a family history  of  PKK  support,
      would be one of the best people to know the whereabouts of the PKK  or
      their places of shelter.  Also  the  treatment  of  the  documentation
      presented by the claimant  does  not  appear  to  have  been  assessed
      following the guidelines of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed  ("starred")
      [ 2002] UKIAT 0439.

72.   In this situation we find ourselves in agreement with the  submissions
      put forward by Mr Grieves and acceded to by Mr Deller.  We do not have
      sufficient  clarity  of  findings  before  us   to   reach   our   own
      determination.  The most expedient and pragmatic manner of  proceeding
      therefore is for this appeal to be allowed to the extent that it is to
      be remitted for hearing afresh before another Adjudicator  apart  from
      Mr P S Aujla.

      Claimant 'G' (HX/35873/2002)
73.    This  was  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of   State   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs  C  M  A  Jones,  promulgated  11
      October 2002, wherein she allowed the appeal, both on asylum and human
      rights grounds, against the decision of the Secretary of State who had
      refused leave to enter and asylum and human rights claims.

      The Adjudicator's Determination
74.   The Adjudicator found the claimant, a female Kurdish citizen from  the
      district of 'G' in Southern Central Turkey,  to  be  wholly  credible.
      The Adjudicator noted that the claimant struck her as a person with  a
      committed pro-Kurdish viewpoint who,  if  returned  to  Turkey,  would
      continue her active support of HADEP.  She found that the claimant had
      been previously tortured.  This was supported by a medical report from
      Dr Steadman.  The Adjudicator had found that the claimant came from  a
      family of Kurdish rights activists.  Her father had been involved with
      HADEP from 1994 on.  He had been arrested and  maltreated  on  several
      occasions, as had the  claimant's  brothers.   In  2001  the  claimant
      herself became involved with HADEP and attended youth activities,  and
      was involved in soliciting support for HADEP.  In January 2002 she had
      been involved in a  protest  relating  to  education  in  the  Kurdish
      language and presented a petition to the local mayor.   This  petition
      was refused and some 15 other  demonstrators  sat  in  the  street  in
      protest.  They were arrested.  She  was  blindfolded  and  beaten  and
      hosed  with  pressurised  water.  She  was  accused  of  being  a  PKK
      supporter. She was released  after  one  day.   In  May  of  2002  she
      participated in a demonstration, also in support of Kurdish rights and
      was again arrested along with 30 HADEP supporters.  She was  taken  to
      the 'G' Anti-Terrorist headquarters where she was asked  to  admit  to
      her terrorist activities.  She refused. The police ran a check on  her
      and found that she had been arrested previously in January  2002.   It
      was then said that she had not listened before and that she was  going
      to be killed.  She was subjected to  falaka,  blindfolded  and  beaten
      over a period of some six days while in detention.  She  was  made  to
      strip naked and hosed with pressurised cold water.  Six days later she
      was released without  charge.   It  was  accepted  that  she  suffered
      psychological problems as a result of the torture she  sustained.   In
      June 2002 she was able to flee Turkey with the assistance of an agent.
       She stated that she had left  Turkey  on  her  own  passport.   After
      assessment  of  the  claimant's  account   and   acceptance   of   her
      credibility, the  Adjudicator  took  note  of  the  objective  country
      information that was before her and noted  that  as  it  appeared  the
      claimant would return to Turkey undocumented, save  a  one-way  travel
      pass, it was reasonably likely that  her  computer  records  would  be
      accessed and these would show that she had been detained twice in  the
      past on suspicion of involvement with PKK.  The appeal  was  therefore
      allowed.

75.   Mr Deller said that he noted the  positive  credibility  findings  and
      admitted that this appeal should now be determined by the Tribunal  on
      the basis of the claimant's story set  against  the  totality  of  the
      objective evidence reviewed by us in this hearing.

76.   Mr Grieves presented a skeleton argument of which we have taken  note.
       In particular, on the passport issue, he asked us to note that  while
      the Adjudicator may not have referred to the claimant  leaving  Turkey
      on her own passport and the airport official  retaining  the  passport
      for two or  three  minutes  before  returning  it  to  her,  this,  he
      submitted, was irrelevant given the finding by  the  Adjudicator  that
      the claimant would be at risk on return to Turkey.  He submitted  that
      the Tribunal should be cautious to infer that just because a  claimant
      had been able to pass through an airport  when  leaving  the  country,
      this did not negate the risk when forcibly returned.  He  referred  us
      to the determination in Jin Liao He v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2002] EWCA Civ. 1150 at paragraph 32 which stated:

           "Another pillar [of the IAT's reasoning] seems  to  be  that  he
           left on his own passport.  That at best goes to show that he  is
           not wanted for any outstanding offences.  Given that it is to be
           assumed that the passport was obtained by bribery, it  does  not
           even go that far.  In any event, it  tells  us  nothing  of  the
           likelihood of persecution on return.  History contains  examples
           of regimes which persecute a minority in their home country  but
           are content  for  them  to  leave  their  home  country.   Their
           attitude is:  we just do not want them here."

77.   Mr Grieves  submitted  that  the  claimant  was  obviously  under  the
      guidance of an agent. She did not even handle  her  own  passport  and
      bribery was a strong possibility.  It was unlikely that she  would  be
      on a list of persons to be prevented from leaving because she was  not
      someone who had committed a crime or evaded tax.

      The Issue
78.   We found the sole issue before us to be whether the  determination  of
      the Adjudicator was a sustainable one in the light of the evidence now
      before us and the submissions made by both parties.
            Decision on Claimant "G"
79.   We are satisfied that  the  determination  of  the  Adjudicator  is  a
      correct and sustainable one.  The submissions of Mr Grieves are, taken
      with the totality of the evidence, seen as  valid  ones.   Accordingly
      the decision of the Adjudicator is upheld.  The Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is dismissed.





D K Allen
Vice President
      INDEX OF OBJECTIVE EVIDENCE

US State Department Report March 2003-07-22

Amnesty International

      End Sexual Violence against women in custody!, 26 February 2003-07-22
      Systematic torture continues in  early  2002,  September  2002  Report
      2002

      Widespread and systematic torture committed  with  impunity,  December
      2001

      An end to torture and impunity is overdue!, November 2001

      Risk of torture and ill-treatment, 28 August 2002

European Commission and Human Rights Watch

      2002 Regular Report on Turkey's Progress Towards Accession  (extract),
      Commission of the European Communities, 9 October 2002

      A Human Rights Agenda for the Next  Phase  of  Turkey's  EU  Accession
      Process, Briefing Paper, Human Rights Watch, January 2003-07-22

      Human Rights Watch, World Report 2003, January 2003-07-22

      Press release February 2002

      Press release February 2002

Home Office

      CIPU Country Assessment November 2002

      Report of fact-finding mission to Turkey, 17-23 March 2001

      CIPU Country Assessment, April 2003-07-22
      CIPU source material

      Official General Report on Turkey,  Netherlands  Ministry  of  Foreign
      Affairs, January 2002 (source 2{a})

      Risk to Kurds when returning to Turkey, Amnesty  International  German
      Branch, 3 February 1999 (source 12{d})

      German Federal Office for the Recognition of Foreign  Refugees  letter
      with list of questions responded to, 15 June 1999 (source 48{b})

      Council of European Union Report to CIREA    , 24 January 1995

Amnesty International Annual Report 2002:  Turkey

Human Rights Watch World Report 2002 on Turkey

Human Rights Watch Report 2003 on Turkey

Amnesty  International  Public  Statement  19  February  2002   re:    "Mini
Democracy Package" in Turkey

Amnesty International September 2002 Report on Turkey

Home Office Operational Guidance January 2003-07-22

David McDowall's brief note on the torture of close relatives or friends  of
wanted persons in Turkey

Human Rights Foundation  of  Turkey  news  bulletins  29/04/2002,  26/08/02,
02/09/02, 16/09/2002, 18/10/02, 25/10/02, 31/10/02,  26-27-28-29  Nov  2002,
13/12/02, Dec 2002,  06/01/2003,  28/01/03,  29/01/03,  03/02/03,  17/02/03,
19/02/03, 21/02/03, 28/02/03 re: recent torture incidents

Human Rights Foundation of Turkey news bulletins 16/09/2002, 8/10/2002,  Nov
4 & 15, 2002

Human Rights Foundation of Turkey  News  Bulletins  04/03/2002,  25/03/2002,
24/04/2002, 27/01/2003, 31/01/2003

UNHCR letter, 22 March 1999, concerning persons suspected of  PKK  links  in
Turkey

A1 Urgent Action 09/04/2001

Three newspaper cuttings re:  detention of PKK suspects, with translation

Human Rights Foundation of Turkey news bulletins re:   PKK/KADEK  detentions
11/10/2002,  14/10/2002,  25/11/2002,  26/11/2002,  16/12/2002,  17/12/2002,
26/8/2002

The Associated Press extract

HRFT news bulletins:  23/12/2002, 17/01/2003, 27/01/o3, 30/01.03,  20/02/03,
25/02/03

IAT decision in the case of Suleyman Okur v SSHD, 27 March 2000

Human  Rights  Yesterday  and  Today,  05/01/2000,   14/02/00,   12/04/2000,
18/09/00, 16/11/00, 17/11/00, 27/11/00, 12/12/00, 26/04/01, 29/05/01, 20-21-
23-24/08/01

David  McDowall's  30/11/2001   report   on   the   persecution   of   HADEP
members/supporters

HRFT  News  bulletins  01/04/02,  13/02,  24/06,  08/07,  22/07,   24/07   &
29/07/2002, 29/8/2002, 18/9/02, 4/11/02, 16/12/02, 18/12/02  re:   detention
& torture of HADEP supporters
Asylum Seekers from Turkey 11, November 2002, pages 53-54, 120-125

Asylum Seekers from Turkey 11, November 2002, pages 53-54, 120-125

Declaration 25/02/2002 by Hadep Bornova (Izmire) branch, with translation

Newspaper extracts 10/5/2002 & 26/08/2002, with translation, re:   detention
of HADEP supporters/members

A note on Polat by Julian Bild

Observations by David McDowall

IAT Determination - Meral Hayser 6th March 2003

Letter from Amnesty International, 08.05.03

Turkish police raid human rights group, BBC News, 08.05.03

Translation of extracts of report from Pro Asyl

Report of Pro Asyl on returnees (marked passages translated)

Extract from conclusion to  Regular  Report  on  Turkey's  Progress  Towards
Accession (at pp.146-188 Vol.1, section 3 Respondent's bundle)
Turkey defies EU to ban Kurdish party, The Independent, 14.03.03.
