
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |MS (Objective Situation - At|
|                           |        |Date of Decision) Sierra    |
|                           |        |Leone [2003] UKIAT 00075    |
|On 29 August 2003          |        |                            |
|Dictated 1 September 2003  |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:17.09.03                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr. Richard Chalkley - Chairman                                   |
|Professor D. B. Casson                                            |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Mr M Davidson, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared  on  behalf
of the appellant and Mr K  Kuranchie  ,a  representative  with  Refugee  Law
Centre appeared on behalf of the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.  The
      respondent is a citizen of Sierra Leone. The appellant appeals against
      the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R J Oliver, sitting at Croydon
      Magistrates Court on the 8th November 2002,  who  in  a  determination
      promulgated on the 10th January 2003, allowed the respondent's  appeal
      against the decision of the appellant, taken on the 23rd August  2002,
      to refuse to grant leave to enter after refusing asylum.


   2. The grounds of appeal  reflected  an  apparent  contradiction  in  the
      Adjudicator's findings. He dismissed the  respondent's  asylum  appeal
      and said:

           "I therefore  find  that  there  was  no  serious  risk  of  the
           [respondent] being persecuted for a convention reason  in  those
           other parts Sierra Leone. The town certainly was safe."


      The Adjudicator allowed the human rights aspect of  the  appeal  under
      article 3. The grounds of application suggest that if the  Adjudicator
      was minded to allow the respondent's article 3 claim, then  he  should
      have allowed the asylum claim also.

   3. Addressing us on behalf of the appellant, Mr Davidson  suggested  that
      the Adjudicator's findings where contradictory. At paragraph 44 of his
      determination,   the   Adjudicator   quotes   from   the    Tribunal's
      determination in Paul Owen [2002] UKIAT 03285. However,  the  case  of
      Paul Owen was decided on the 13th May 2002 and referred  to  a  report
      which itself was dated the  7th  July  2001.  The  objective  material
      considered by the Tribunal in Paul Owen was out of date  by  the  time
      they considered it and simply did not reflect the situation in  Sierra
      Leone by the time Mr Oliver came to hear the  respondent's  appeal  in
      November 2002. In paragraph 35 of the determination,  the  Adjudicator
      refers to the elections in May 2002 and in paragraph 38 he  refers  to
      the disarmament of Government militia forces, which  was  achieved  in
      2002. He considered these factors when he dismissed the asylum  claim,
      but  for  some  reason  appears  not  to  have  considered  them  when
      considering the respondent's article 3 claim. It was  clear  from  the
      paragraph 46, that the Adjudicator had before  him  the  October  2002
      Country Information and Policy Report ("CIPU"). The current  situation
      is dealt with in the April 2003 CIPU at paragraphs 6.29 and 6.32. That
      showed that some 135,000 people were repatriated during 2002, although
      an estimated 70,000 people remained in Refugee  Camps  in  Guinea  and
      Liberia. The United Nations  found  no  evidence  to  support  earlier
      claims of sexual abuse of refugees, following their investigation into
      2001 reports. The Government was said to  cooperate  with  the  United
      Nations  High  Commission  for  Refuges  and  other  organisations  on
      repatriation matters and continued  to  provide  first  asylum  to  an
      increasing number of Liberians who had fled the conflict in their home
      country. UNHCR  reported  that  more  than  50,000  Liberian  refugees
      entered the country in 2002. Some camps,  such  as  Jendema  camp,  at
      times were unable to provide adequate food or shelter for  the  influx
      of refugees which caused border  areas.  However,  conditions  in  all
      camps were described as adequate by the end of 2002.


   4. Mr Davidson drew our attention to page 70 of the respondent's  bundle,
      which referred to all  but  two  of  the  countries  "149  chieftains"
      officially having been declared "safe for resettlement" by the end  of
      2002. Beneficiaries were offered resettlement  packages,  including  a
      two month food ration, household utensils,  plastic  sheeting  and  in
      some cases transportation. According to UN sources  a  total  of  some
      220,000 registered internally displaced persons were resettled in five
      places since April 2001, the last 12,800 of  them  in  November  2002.
      Many were said to have returned  home  spontaneously.  Officially,  at
      least, this left no more internally displaced persons in Sierra Leone.
      NGO sources in Sierra Leone privately reported there being 10  and  20
      thousand "unofficial" internally displaced persons,  mostly  in  rural
      areas.

   5. Mr Davidson submitted that this reflected the situation as it  was  at
      the date the Adjudicator heard the  appeal  and,  because  events  had
      moved so very quickly in Sierra Leone, the Adjudicator had been  wrong
      to place so much emphasis on the objective material  referred  to  the
      Tribunal  decision  in  Paul  Owen,  which,  at  the   date   of   the
      Adjudicator's determination  simply  failed  to  reflect  the  current
      situation.

   6. For the respondent, Mr K. Kuranchie suggested that the Adjudicator had
      before him the most up-to-date objective material that was  available.
      The Adjudicator's findings were not inconsistent, but the  grounds  of
      appeal  were  misconceived.   He   submitted   that   the   Tribunal's
      determination in Kacha was not authority for the proposition  that  no
      article 3 breach can be found where  an  asylum  claim  is  dismissed,
      except where an asylum claim does not engage the Convention. Following
      the decision of the Court of Appeal in Oleed v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department[2002] EWCA Civ 1906, the Tribunal are  not,  as  a
      matter of law, permitted to interfere in the determination.  There  is
      nothing wrong with the Adjudicator's findings, which are based on  the
      evidence which was available to him at the date of his  decision.  The
      Adjudicator could only come to a conclusion based on the reports which
      were before him. The Government had now shut down  the  Refugee  Camps
      and the resettlement process has been completed.

   7. Responding on behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Davidson  submitted  that
      Oleed did  not  preclude  the  Tribunal,  from  considering  objective
      evidence as to conditions which were prevailing as at the date of  the
      Adjudicator heard the appeal. That situation was in  existence  as  at
      the date the Adjudicator heard the appeal, but the objective  material
      which he considered was simply out of date. He submitted that this was
      not a speculative appeal. He does not argue that  there  has  been  an
      improvement  in  the  situation  since  the  determination  ,  on  the
      contrary, the objective material considered  by  the  Adjudicator  was
      simply out of  date at the date he actually considered it and,  if  he
      had been made aware of the facts as they then existed and reflected by
      the objective  evidence  now  before  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  true
      situation as it was last November,  he  would  not  have  decided  the
      appeal as he did.

   8. We reserved our determination.

   9. Having carefully read the Adjudicator's determination it  seems  clear
      to us that the Adjudicator was heavily  influenced  by  the  objective
      materials referred to in Paul Owen, which  comprised  the  global  IDP
      report of 7th July 2001.


  10. No criticism is made of the Adjudicator. He can only  be  expected  to
      consider objective material which is placed before  him.  The  danger,
      however, in considering objective material  which  is  several  months
      old, is that the actual situation on  the  ground  may  be  completely
      different, as appears to us to have been the case.  We  find  that  Mr
      Davidson has persuaded us that, as at the date  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination, the situation was vastly different from that  portrayed
      by the objective material he considered. Indeed by the  28th  November
      last year, the last of some 220,000  registered  internally  displaced
      people were being resettled.


  11. Mr Kuranchie drew our attention to Lord Justice Schiemann's remarks in
      Oleed. Unfortunately the copy of the  judgment  he  provided  us  with
      appears not to be numbered but in page 9 of the 15 page judgment, Lord
      Justice Schiemann's said:

           "Before us it was accepted on the behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
           State that the Tribunal should act even handily, and should only
           set aside a  decision  of  an  Adjudicator  who  has  heard  the
           evidence if it is plainly  wrong  on  unsustainable.  I  do  not
           regard the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  as  perverse  or  plainly
           wrong, nor do I think that the Tribunal  was  entitled,  at  any
           event by the process of reasoning which it had employed, to come
           to that conclusion.
           Mr Mandrik Gill QC advanced a submission to the effect that even
           if we were satisfied that  the  Adjudicator  was  plainly  wrong
           nonetheless we should dismiss the appeal by the  Home  Secretary
           because the "plainly wrong" test was only applicable to  appeals
           by immigrants and not to those by the Secretary  of  State.  For
           appeals in the latter category some even more stringent test was
           appropriate. I do not find it necessary to  reach  a  concluding
           view on this submission although I am not presently persuaded by
           it.
           Mr Wilken submitted, as I understood him, that even if  were  to
           allow the appeal and  quash  the  decision  of  the  Immigration
           Appeal Tribunal the effect of that would be to revive the appeal
           before  the  Tribunal.  He  submitted  that  the  situation  was
           changing in Sri Lanka and  that  it  would  be  useful  for  the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal to  consider  the  position  in  the
           light of the present day situation.
           It might well be useful but I do not consider that it would be a
           proper use of the court's powers now, to send the case  back  to
           the Tribunal. The powers of this court are set out in  CPR  part
           52.10. We have all the powers of the lower  court.  We  may  set
           aside or vary an order made by the lower court. Those provisions
           give us the power to  allow  the  appeal  from  the  Immigration
           Appeal Tribunal,  set  aside  its  determination,  substitute  a
           determination dismissing the appeal  from  the  Adjudicator  and
           thus restore his determination. The present is in my judgment an
           appropriate case in which to exercise that power, I accept  that
           the Tribunal examines the situation in the  country  from  which
           the refugee is fleeing as at  the  date  of  its  determination.
           However, in the present case in my judgment  there  was  nothing
           wrong with the Adjudicator's determination, there was  therefore
           no reasons to appeal it and it  would  be  wrong  for  the  Home
           Secretary, on the back of an appeal which has been dismissed, to
           seek to re-examine the threat to the refugee with reference to a
           date later than the Adjudicator's determination. To permit  this
           would merely encourage appeals by a party who has no ground  for
           appeal but hopes the  situation  would  change  sufficiently  to
           enable him to advance different arguments on different facts  on
           appeals. Such procedures would not be in anyone's interest."


  12. We have concluded that we must allow the Secretary of State's  appeal.
      The situation in Sierra Leone, both as at the date  the  Adjudicator's
      determined this appeal and, indeed for some little  time  before  that
      date, had been substantially different  from  that  described  in  the
      objective  material  before  the  Adjudicator.  We  do  not  make  any
      criticism of the Adjudicator, nor of representatives who  placed  that
      objective  material  before  him.  However,   the   Adjudicators   and
      representatives should always exercise great caution when  considering
      objective material, and particularly when it is  not  actually  before
      them but is in fact referred to only  in  a  copy  of  the  Tribunal's
      decision.

  13. We agree with Mr Davidson that this is not a speculative appeal. He is
      not arguing that there has been any improvement in the situation since
      the date of the Adjudicator's determination and were that the case, we
      would of course be bound to follow the Court of  Appeals  decision  in
      Oleed. Now, some 9 months after the Adjudicator  had  considered  this
      appeal, the Tribunal have had the benefit of considering the objective
      situation as it was up to November last year and  are  satisfied  that
      his removal to the United Kingdom will  not  cause  his  rights  under
      article 3 of the European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
      Rights and Fundamental Freedoms to be breached.

  14. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President

