

SP(Risk-Suicide-PTSD-IFA-Medical Facilities) Kosovo CG [2003] UKIAT 00017

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                              Date heard:   4 February  2003
                                         Date notified.:          01/07/2003
                                   Before:-


                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                         RT HON THE COUNTESS OF MAR
                               MR A A LLOYD JP

                                                       Between



                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia  (FRY),  has
appealed with leave of the Tribunal against a determination of  Adjudicator,
Miss M Lingard, dismissing the appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
of State refusing asylum although granting limited leave until  18  November
2002. This was a s. 69(3) appeal.  Ms J Alexander  of Counsel instructed  by
Messrs Thompson Leatherdale Solicitors appeared for the  appellant.  Miss  M
Banwait appeared for the respondent.

2. This appeal requires us to address issues relating to the  assessment  by
adjudicators of medical evidence and the proper  approach  to  be  taken  in
human rights cases based on a claim that return would give rise  to  a  real
risk of suicide.

3. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

4. The appellant based his claim on submissions  that  if  he  were  now  to
return to Kosovo, he would be at high risk of taking his own life  in  order
to avoid reliving traumatic experiences. At 14  years  old  he  had  escaped
from his family home when Serb  militiamen  had  set  it  on  fire.  He  had
subsequently learnt that his parents had been killed then or later.  He  had
been told they were buried in a mass grave. Before he  left  Kosovo  he  had
had to survive begging on the streets doing his best to avoid  being  harmed
or used by criminal gangs.

5. His asylum grounds of appeal were conceded before the adjudicator but  it
was maintained that in  view  of  his  traumatised  condition  the  decision
refusing him asylum would amount to a breach of Arts 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR.
The adjudicator did not accept there would be any breach of  the  claimant`s
human rights. Leave was granted confined to the Arts 3 and 8 issues.

6. In our view leave should not have been granted  since  at  that  time  (3
September 2002) the appellant still had limited leave to  remain  which  was
not due to expire until 18 November 2002. Whilst by virtue of the  Court  of
Appeal judgment in Saad, Diriye and Osorio (2002) INLR 34 the  claimant  was
entitled  to  have  his  asylum  grounds  of  appeal   determined   on   the
hypothetical basis of whether he would face a real risk  of  persecution  as
at the date of hearing, the same considerations cannot apply  in  an  appeal
based on human rights grounds. In an asylum-related appeal  based  on  human
rights grounds there is no link to a status recognised at international  law
or indeed to any status established by UK domestic law. Furthermore,  whilst
Strasbourg has identified the proper test as  being,  like  that  under  the
Refugee Convention, one of current risk to be assessed as  at  the  date  of
hearing, the obverse side of this recognition is that the  risk  has  to  be
shown to be an imminent one. A risk cannot be imminent if the appellant  has
available a further effective remedy: see  Vijayanathan  and  Pushparajah  v
France (1992) 15 EHRR 62. In the instant case, since  it  remained  open  to
the appellant as at the date of  hearing  before  the  adjudicator  to  have
applied for an extension of limited leave to remain and to have appealed  if
refused, there was just such an effective remedy available.

7. However, leave was granted and we are required to decide  the  appeal  on
the basis of the situation at the date of hearing. That is critical in  this
case because by the time of the hearing before us   (4  February  2003)  the
appellant no longer had limited leave to remain and so was at imminent  risk
of removal. We were informed that the appellant had  not  been  granted  any
extension of his exceptional leave to remain. It would appear that  ELR  was
granted because the appellant was a  minor  and  was  not  renewed  once  he
reached 18 on 18 November 2002.

8. The adjudicator accepted the claimant  had  given  an  entirely  credible
account in relation to  his  claimed  experiences  and  that  the  appellant
genuinely believed his parents were dead and that he  had  no  close  family
members to return to.

9. However, the adjudicator was not persuaded that  the  appellant`s  return
would place him at real risk of treatment contrary to Art 3 or  Art  8.  She
accepted that at 17 he was still a  minor  who  had  Post  Traumatic  Stress
Syndrome (PTSD) and unresolved bereavement with  guilt  about  survival  and
self-blame. But she did not accept he would be at high risk  of  taking  his
own life if returned. She gave several reasons. Firstly she considered  that
in the principal medical report relied on, that by  Consultant  Psychiatrist
Annette Goulden, no basis for this assessment had  been  given  and  in  the
guide attached to the addendum from Dr Goulden no mention was  made  of  the
general likelihood of the suicide option. Secondly she noted that there  was
no evidence of a history of self-mutilation.  Thirdly  she  considered  that
the appellant's journey to the UK demonstrated a  "certain  independence  of
spirit" and that in the UK he was considered in a Social Services report  to
be physically well. She concluded  that  he  had  shown  he  could  cope  by
undertaking studies and trainee  employment  as  a  chef  and  displaying  a
generally respectful attitude towards others and  for  the  law.  She  noted
that unilaterally he had requested a move from a YMCA establishment  to  his
own accommodation within  a  house  where  facilities  were  shared  and  he
appeared to be  independent  both  financially  and  socially,  albeit  with
important  social  services  back  up.  Fourthly  she  noted  the  objective
evidence indicating that there existed secondary schools in the  appellant`s
home area and that there were a number of specialist  departments  including
in psychiatry and paediatrics at the main University  hospital  in  Pristina
together with 6 health centres operating within  the  municipality  and  one
specialist psychiatric institution with  6  state-owned  pharmacies  and  23
private pharmacies operating in the Pristina municipality.

10. The principal contentions raised in the grounds and before us were  that
the adjudicator  had  wrongly  rejected  the  medical  evaluation  that  the
appellant was a high  suicide  risk  and  had  wrongly  concluded  that  the
objective country materials  showed  that  persons  in  a  vulnerable  state
requiring medical care for mental health  problems  would  receive  adequate
care there. They stated that  the  adjudicator  had  erred  in  taking  into
account irrelevant factors such as the appellant`s  character  and  progress
in the UK and had effectively sought to give  a  medical  opinion  different
from that of the medical expert.

11. We would accept that the first two of the adjudicator`s  reasons  cannot
withstand closer examination.

12. It is now clear from Dr Goulden`s additional reports that  there  was  a
medical basis for her assessment. She referred in particular  to  recognised
criteria for assessing depressive  disorders:  the  Composite  International
Diagnostic Interview system as set out in  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical
Manual of Mental  Disorders  (DSM-IV  diagnoses)  and  the  ICD10  which  we
understand to be a fully standardised and modified version of the  Composite
International  Diagnostic  Interview.  She  also  referred  to  three  other
research studies. One said that regarding specific  diagnoses,  multivariate
co morbidity analyses indicated the highest  risk  for  suicide  attempt  in
those suffering from anxiety  disorder,  particularly  PTSD.  Another  dated
2001 stated that an emerging literature suggests that PTSD patients  are  at
an increased risk for suicide and that  "in  assessing  suicide  risk  among
persons  with  PTSD,  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   levels   of
impulsivity, which may increase suicide risk, and to social  support,  which
may reduce the risk". Another study, a 1996 study by  Ferrada-Noli  designed
to assess the prevalence  of  suicidal  behaviour  among  asylum  applicants
diagnosed as having PTSD and the impact of cultural bias  factors  (such  as
religion and nationality), stated that:

      "Another noteworthy finding in the present  study  was  that  suicidal
      behaviour did not differ significantly between asylum  applicants  and
      refugees granted  residence  permits.  Thus  the  notion  that  asylum
      applicants might manifest a higher frequency  of  suicidal  behaviour,
      possibly due to the threat of imminent  expulsion  from  the  country,
      derived no support from our findings".

13. Albeit the medical evidence is not entirely consistent, it  does  appear
that the adjudicator was wrong to say there  was  no  history  of  attempted
self-harm. There was, albeit as  we  shall  see  it  was  limited.  We  have
disregarded the failure of Dr Goulden and  other  reports  to  mention  this
consistently because we believe it can  be  put  down  to  the  medical  and
social services persons involved having to produce  reports  in  some  haste
within the constraints of their difficult work responsibilities.

14. However, in our view these two flaws  do  not  seriously  undermine  the
adjudicator's conclusion that return of the  appellant  would  not  in  fact
breach Art 3 or Art 8. Why we take that view will  become  clearer  when  we
deal with the other grounds of appeal.


 Evaluation of the medical evidence

15. The grounds of appeal take issue with  the  adjudicator's  treatment  of
the medical evidence, arguing that, having accepted much of it,  she  should
have been slow to reject that part of it indicating a breach of  fundamental
human rights. In order to address these grounds in more detail, we  consider
it is useful to summarise the main principles  underlying  the  approach  of
the  appellate  authorities  to  cases  involving  evaluation   of   medical
evidence.


The approach of the appellate authorities

16. The grounds in  this  case  are  not  unique  in  complaining  that  the
adjudicator failed to attach proper weight to  (significant  parts  of)  the
medical evidence. The appellate authorities are frequently  called  upon  to
evaluate medical reports which deal with the risk facing  asylum-seekers  if
returned in the light of their medical history. How  should  they  go  about
this task? Drawing on past cases such  as  Ademaj  [2002]  00979  and  Cinar
[2002] UKIAT 06624 and in particular on the  starred  determination  of  the
Tribunal in AE and FE [2002] UKIAT 05237, it is  possible  to  identify  the
following principles:

a) It is not the job of an adjudicator to make clinical judgments.  That  is
the job of medical experts. Equally, however, it  is  not  the  function  of
medical experts to evaluate conditions in an appellant`s country of  origin.
Except in very rare cases they have no expertise about such matters.

b) Albeit not medical experts, adjudicators  are  perfectly  entitled,  when
evaluating a medical report, to consider to  what  extent  it  is  based  on
established medical methodology and criteria. Adjudicators should  obviously
be cautious about criticising medical  reports  unnecessarily,  particularly
given that they do not have  the  benefit  of  a  medical  report  from  the
respondent so as to enable a comparison to be made. But  by  virtue  of  the
frequency with which the immigration appellate authorities have  to  examine
and assess medical reports in asylum-related cases,  a  fund  of  experience
and knowledge has been built up, making it  possible  to  identify  what  is
expected from a "good report", and to discern which medical  experts,  among
the  many  whose  reports  they  see,  produce  reports  based  squarely  on
established medical methodologies and criteria.  If  confronted,  therefore,
with a diagnosis (or prognosis), which  departs  for  no  good  reason  from
methodology and criteria established within  the  medical  profession,  they
cannot be expected to overlook that kind of deficiency. And  to  the  extent
that  a  medical  report  fails  to  base  itself  on  established   medical
methodologies and criteria, an adjudicator may  be  justified  in  attaching
lesser weight to it as a consequence.  A medical report purporting  to  give
an in-depth diagnosis of PTSD based  on  one  superficial  interview  is  an
obvious example.  As the Tribunal highlighted in AE and FE,  an  adjudicator
is also entitled to assess to what extent  a  medical  report  is  based  on
examination which has been conducted as soon as possible after the  time  of
the  injury  or  event  which  is  said  to  have  caused  the  physical  or
psychological disorder.

c) Irrespective of the quality of the  medical  report,  the  assessment  of
risk upon return that has to be made by an adjudicator must be based on  the
notion of real risk as established by refugee  law  and  human  rights  law.
That will not necessarily be the  same  concept  of  real  risk  applied  by
medical experts.

d) Since an adjudicator must base his assessment on a consideration  of  all
the evidence viewed in the round, it is always ultimately a  matter  for  an
adjudicator what weight if any to attach to medical evidence.  In  order  to
assess whether there is a real risk, the medical evidence has to  be  placed
alongside all the other evidence. Where a doctor's report has based some  of
its key findings on the truth of what his patient has told  him  about  past
experiences and/or current fears, it may well be  that  an  adjudicator  who
having made a global assessment finds the appellant`s account not  credible,
will reject that report`s principal findings. Depending  on  the  particular
circumstances,  medical  evidence  stating  that  a  person`s  injuries   or
condition is "consistent with" his account of what happened to  him  in  his
country of origin may or may not add credence to his claim.


The treatment of self-harm by Strasbourg jurisprudence

17. This case involves a claim based on a  high  risk  of  suicide  being  a
foreseeable consequence of removal. How  should  the  appellate  authorities
approach such a claim? Insofar as  the  issues  arising  under  the  Refugee
Convention and the Human Rights Convention are concerned, suicide  is  self-
evidently a type of serious harm: Pretty v UK (2002)  35  EHRR  1.  Although
suicide is a form  of  self-harm  and  is  to  be  distinguished  from  harm
inflicted by others, if the real risk of it is a foreseeable consequence  of
a removal decision, then that may well be enough to establish  serious  harm
under both Conventions. Under the Human Rights Convention  we  would  accept
in principle that if the evidence in  a  case  establishes  that  a  removal
decision will expose a person to a  real  risk  upon  return  of  committing
suicide, then a decision requiring him  to  return  could  give  rise  to  a
violation of  Article  3  and  Article  8.  So  much  we  understand  to  be
established by cases such as D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR  423  and  Bensaid  v  UK
[2001] INLR 325. In Bensaid at paragraphs 36 and 37 it was accepted that  in
principle deterioration in mental condition causing the  risk  of  self-harm
resulting from difficulties in obtaining medication, could fall  within  the
scope of Art 3.

18. We recognise too following Bensaid, that, even if it was not  reasonably
likely a person would commit suicide upon return, there  could  still  be  a
breach of Art 3 or Art 8 if a claimant could show, because of  other  mental
or psychological problems, that the decision to return him would expose  him
to a real risk of serious  harm  or  significant  detriment.  Following  the
Court of Appeal judgment in Ullah and Do [2003] INLR 74, however,  it  would
appear there is little or no ambit for an Art 8  claim  when  real  risk  of
significant detriment in the receiving state is the sole ground on which  it
is advanced.


The current medical approach to suicide cases

19. With these key principles  in  mind,  we  need  next  to  set  out  some
relevant background on the current medical approach  to  suicide  cases  and
then turn to consider the medical evidence specific to this case.

20. In relation to assessment by doctors of  risk  of  suicide,  one  common
point of reference is  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental
Disorders (American Psychiatric Association, Fourth Edition  (DSM-IV),  Text
Revision, Washington DC, American Psychiatric Association 2000. As we  shall
see, the Consultant Psychiatrist who did  the  main  reports  in  this  case
refers to this text. This Manual  states  that  one  of  the  nine  symptoms
forming diagnostic criteria for a major depressive episode is:

      "Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal  ideation  without  a
      specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for  committing
      suicide".

21. This aspect is elaborated further:

      "Frequently there may be thoughts  of  death,  suicidal  ideation,  or
      suicide attempts (Criterion A9). These thoughts range  from  a  belief
      that others would be better off if the person were dead, to  transient
      but recurrent thoughts of committing suicide, to actual specific plans
      of how to commit suicide. The frequency, intensity, and  lethality  of
      these  thoughts  can  be  quite  variable.  Less   severely   suicidal
      individuals may report transient  (1-2  minute),  recurrent  (once  or
      twice a week) thoughts. More severely suicidal  individuals  may  have
      acquired materials (e.g. a rope or a gun) to be used  in  the  suicide
      attempt and may have established a location and time when they will be
      isolated from others so that they can accomplish the suicide. Although
      these behaviours are associated statistically  with  suicide  attempts
      and may be helpful in identifying a high-risk group, many studies have
      shown that it is not possible to predict accurately whether or when  a
      particular individual with depression will attempt suicide. Motivation
      for suicide may include a desire to give up in the face  of  perceived
      insurmountable obstacles or an intense wish to end  an  excruciatingly
      painful emotional state that is perceived by the person to be  without
      end.


      A diagnosis of a Major depressive Episode is not made if the  symptoms
      meet criteria for a Mixed Episode (Criterion B). A  Mixed  Episode  is
      characterised by the symptoms of both a  Manic  Episode  and  a  Major
      Depressive Episode occurring nearly every day for at  least  a  1-week
      period. The degree of impairment associated with  a  Major  Depressive
      Episode  varies,  but  even  in  mild  cases,  there  must  be  either
      clinically  significant  distress  or  some  interference  in  social,
      occupational or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). If
      impairment is severe, the person may  lose  the  ability  to  function
      socially or occupationally. In extreme cases the person may be  unable
      to perform minimal self-care (e.g. feeding or  clothing  self)  or  to
      maintain minimal personal hygiene".

 22. In outlining associated descriptive features and mental disorders  this
text goes on to state:

      "Individuals with a Major Depressive Episode frequently  present  with
      tearfulness, irritability, brooding,  obsessive  rumination,  anxiety,
      phobias, excessive worry over physical health, and complaints of  pain
      (e.g. headaches or joint, abdominal, or other pains). During  a  Major
      Depressive Episode, some individuals have Panic Attacks that occur  in
      a pattern  that  meets  criteria  for  Panic  Disorder.  In  children,
      separation anxiety may occur.  Some  individuals  note  difficulty  in
      intimate  relationships,  less  satisfying  social  interactions,   or
      difficulties in  sexual  functioning  (e.g.  anorgasmia  in  women  or
      erectile dysfunction in men). There  may  be  marital  problems  (e.g.
      divorce), occupational problems (e.g. loss of job), academic  problems
      (e.g. truancy, school failure). Alcohol or Other Substance  Abuse,  or
      increased  utilisation  of  medical   services.   The   most   serious
      consequence of a Major Depressive Episode is  attempted  or  completed
      suicide.  Suicide  risk  is  especially  high  for  individuals   with
      psychotic features, a history of previous suicide attempts,  a  family
      history of completed suicides, or concurrent substance use. There  may
      also be an increased rate of  premature  death  from  general  medical
      conditions.  Major  Depressive  Episodes  often  follow   psychosocial
      stressor e.g. the death of a loved one, marital separation,  divorce).
      Childbirth may precipitate a Major Depressive Episode, in  which  case
      the specifier with Postpartum Onset in noted."



The medical evidence in this case

23. The medical evidence in this case consisted in the following.

- Report of 11 October 2001 from Mr  Andrew  Robinson,  Care  Manager,  West
Berkshire Social Services Adolescent Team.  Mr  Robinson  notes  that  aside
from the psychological issues relating to PTSD Mr Plaku  had  not  presented
any health issues and has made good progress in studies  and  in  vocational
work and had friends in Oxford and in Reading. He  had  adequate  self  care
skills and was said to be "... a mature young man  who  has  survived  great
adversity".

- Psychiatric Report by Annette Goulden,  Consultant  Child  and  Adolescent
Psychiatrist dated 7 January 2002. In her  "Summary"  she  stated  that  the
appellant demonstrated all the diagnostic criteria for PTSD. His  sleep  was
helped by medication but he had told her it made it  difficult  for  him  to
wake up in the mornings in order to attend college so he stopped taking  the
tablets.  He had an unresolved bereavement due to the  death  of  his  other
family members, particularly his  parents.  This  compounded  the  emotional
trauma consequent upon the PTSD.  She concluded as follows:

      "If Mr Plaku returns to the situation  where  these  traumatic  events
      took  place,  he  will  without   doubt   re-experience   the   trauma
      emotionally, physically and psychologically. Undoubtedly, Mr Plaku has
      been supported since his arrival in the UK and has made excellent  use
      of any opportunity offered to him, e.g. to  learn  English  and  start
      training as a chef. However, independently of any other motives he may
      have to remain in this country,  I  am  confident  that  he  has  Post
      Traumatic Stress Syndrome and unresolved bereavement, with guilt about
      survival and self-blame.


      My belief is that if Mr Plaku returns to his own country  there  is  a
      high risk that he will take  his  own  life  in  order  to  avoid  re-
      experiencing the traumatic events of his childhood".

24. She also described a lack of interest in activities with his peer  group
and hyper-vigilance and lack of trust in people he does not know.  She  said
he avoided going out on his own.

-  Addendum Psychiatric Report by Annette  Goulden  on  appellant  dated  31
January 2002. In this report Dr Goulden set out her diagnostic criteria  for
PTSD and went on to summarise what the appellant had told her in the  course
of two interviews in November and December of 2001. We  have  already  noted
the sources and studies she said  she  relied  on.   At  paragraph  16  with
reference to the November interview she wrote:

      "His mood was consistently serious and low and his  facial  expression
      masked. He told me he had suicidal thoughts but had no real  intention
      of taking his own life at this time. "

25. At paragraph  24  she  said  the  appellant  did  not  describe  intense
psychological distress, such as the terror experienced with his  bad  dreams
or a state of panic. However, he avoided situations,  as  far  as  possible,
which would resemble aspects of the traumatic event  (e.g.  fireworks).   At
paragraph 26 she said his main  concern  was  "to  avoid  returning  to  the
source of the  traumatic  memories,  that  is,  returning  to  Kosovo".   At
paragraph 40 she said that from what the appellant had  told  her  and  from
her  observations  of  him,  she  believed  there  was  evidence  that   the
disturbance was causing  significant  distress  as  well  as  impairment  in
social functioning.  At paragraph 42 she wrote:


      "Mr Plaku`s description of events and  of  his  current  mental  state
      accords with the DSM IV criteria for PTSD. Both Criteria for Section A
      are fulfilled. At least three of the criteria from Section B are  met.
      Most of the criteria from Section C are described and at  least  three
      of those in Section D. E and F criteria are also present. Duration  is
      chronic (more than three months) and  not  likely  to  be  of  delayed
      onset".

-  Addendum Psychiatric Report by Annette Goulden on appellant of  25  March
2002. In 5c of this report, Dr Goulden said that in the course  of  his  two
interviews which took place before her original report,  the  appellant  had
described two clear and serious suicidal attempts while in  Kosovo.   In  5d
she said the appellant had described persistent  low  mood  with  bleak  and
pessimistic views of the future and persistent suicidal thoughts when he  is
alone.  She said he had told her he would kill himself  if  he  returned  to
Kosovo "and, in view of the general truthfulness of his account, I  have  no
reason to disbelieve this".

26. She went on  to  explain  that  the  appellant  had  been  referred  for
treatment at a specialised Trauma Clinic in Oxford.

27. At 6a she  mentioned  research  evidence  showing  a  proven  connection
between adolescent suicidal behaviour and stress. She cited the  1996  study
we have already mentioned. At 6b she noted that:

      "It is well-recognised that re-exposure to the scene of the  traumatic
      event causes the person to be re-traumatised. It is  for  this  reason
      that people with PTSD make huge efforts to avoid revisiting the  scene
      of the trauma, whether it is in  the  physical  state  or  the  memory
      state.... Facing the traumatic past without the support  of  a  stable
      home environment,  social  network  and  therapeutic  setting  may  be
      intolerable  and  precipitate  severe  avoidance  reactions  such   as
      suicide....".


 28. In her Conclusions at 7 she wrote:

      "I believe Mr Plaku is at serious risk of  committing  suicide  if  he
      returns to Kosovo. This is based  on  my  assessment  of  his  current
      mental state of chronic depression, together with a diagnosis of  PTSD
      within the context of lack of family support in  Kosovo  and  the  low
      likelihood of the intensity  of  treatment  he  requires.  ...Thus,  a
      return to his country will re-expose him not only to the  memories  of
      being  burnt,  but  also  to  longer  term  traumatic  events  of  his
      adolescence. Re-stimulation  of  these  memories,  together  with  the
      impact of bereavement  from  his  family,  could  lead  to  unbearable
      recurrence of trauma. This would be within the context of the  further
      loss of his educational and social attainments in this (sic) UK so far
      and major adjustment required for any person returning to Kosovo.


-  Letter  of  22  October  2002   from   Dr   Michael   Hobbs,   Consultant
Psychotherapist, Psychotherapy  Department,  Oxfordshire  Mental  Healthcare
NHS Trust. He said he had not seen reports from Dr Goulden "but  Mr  Plaku`s
suicide risk was identified by Suzanne Rose (Clinical  Nurse  Specialist  in
Psychological Trauma with the Berkshire  Psychological  Injuries  Unit)  who
referred Mr Plaku to me earlier this  year.  When  I  interviewed  Mr  Plaku
first on 14 March 2002, he acknowledged that he had  considered  suicide  at
times since escaping from Kosovo in autumn of 2000.


-  Report by  Liben  Gebremikael,  Coordinator  Refugee  Resource,  Woodpath
Project dated 24 January 2003. In describing his background she noted  that:


      "He also had active suicidal thoughts and had once attempted to commit
      suicide in the autumn of 2001. He has clearly expressed to me that  if
      he was made to return he would rather kill himself here than face  the
      harassment, torture and death at the hands of the  gang  members  from
      whom he managed to escape in the past.... Mr Plaku has once  attempted
      suicide here and this makes me take the threat of  attempting  against
      very seriously".


The issue of real risk to this appellant

29. In the light of the above we now turn to the  question  of  whether  the
adjudicator was entitled to conclude  that  the  decision  appealed  against
would not have the foreseeable consequence of exposing the  appellant  to  a
real risk of suicide or other significant  detriment  to  his  physical  and
moral integrity.

30. Working backwards, we see nothing unsustainable about  her  findings  in
relation to the availability of relevant medical facilities in Kosovo.

31. It is true that the UNHCR Position on the Continued Protection Needs  of
Individual from Kosovo Update of 2002 refers at paragraph  a8  among  others
to persons with severe and chronic mental illness whose  condition  requires
specialised medical intervention of a type  not  yet  available  in  Kosovo.
Such invididuals are said to be in a particularly vulnerable  situation  and
may have special needs that should be taken into account in the  context  of
return in the present circumstances.

32. It is also true that the CIPU  materials  are  essentially  confined  to
descriptions of the medical facilities that are  available.  Paragraph  5.39
of the October 2002 Assessment records that:

      "Although mental health provision in Kosovo is relatively undeveloped,
      treatment for psychological conditions including Post Traumatic Stress
      Disorder in available in Kosovo. Details of the "Kosovo Rehabilitation
      Centre for Torture Victims (KRCT)" which provides treatment  for  PTSD
      are included in the source materials"."

33. However, paragraph 5.38 does mention that a review of  the  EWHO  mental
health project in July 2002 made a positive evaluation of  the  progress  in
mental health sector in Kosovo. It goes on to state that:  "The  WHO  mental
health programme has impacted on the development of a  comprehensive  mental
health  strategy  developed  in  collaboration  with  local  mental   health
processionals...".

34. Certainly there is no current evidence we have been made aware  of  that
mental health  facilities  have  been  considered  of  poor  quality  or  as
seriously deficient or as  unlikely  to  ensure  intensive  treatment  of  a
mental health condition when that  was  required.  Furthermore,  it  appears
that particular steps have been taken to cater for the needs of persons  who
have been victims of trauma.

35. This brings us to the issue of  assessment  of  the  appellant's  mental
health in consequence of a removal to Kosovo.

36. The grounds contend that the  adjudicator  was  wrong  to  approach  the
assessment of risk upon return to this appellant  by  reference  to  factors
such as his character and progress in this country. We cannot agree.  As  we
have  already  seen,  "social  performance"  factors  relating  to  personal
conduct and the quality  and  extent  of  a  person`s  engagement  with  the
external world, through friends, study and work etc are clearly much to  the
fore in DSM-IV- based diagnoses.

37. It is true that the ICD10, F32 criteria, as set out by  Annette  Goulden
as an Appendix to her March 2002 report, appear more cautious, stating:

      "Differentiation  between  mild,  moderate,  and   severe   depressive
      episodes rests upon a complicated clinical judgement that involves the
      number, type, and severity of symptoms present. The extent of ordinary
      social and work activities is often  a  useful  guide  to  the  likely
      degree of severity of the episode, but individual, social and cultural
      influences that disrupt a  smooth  relationship  between  severity  of
      symptoms and social performance are sufficiently common  and  powerful
      to make it unwise to include social performance amongst the  essential
      criteria of severity".


38. However, irrespective of the extent to which social performance  factors
played a part in Dr Goulden`s assessment (or should have), the question  the
adjudicator had to ask was one about the impact  on  the  appellant  of  any
removal to Kosovo. Factors relating to  his  ability  to  cope  with  social
relationships and to pursue normal activities such as  study  and  work  and
sharing living accommodation with other  people  were  plainly  relevant  to
that assessment.

39. This brings us directly to the issue of the risk of suicide.

40. We would note two particular features of the medical  evidence  relating
to this issue.

41. One is that it falls short of stating that the  appellant  represents  a
real suicide risk regardless of his location. Indeed, it maintains that  the
appellant`s current environment in the UK is assisting  him  in  maintaining
the level of psychological equilibrium he does have.

42. Another is that in alluding to problems the appellant  would  face  upon
return, the report is somewhat equivocal. It contains passages which  appear
to state that the mere fact of return to the  appellant`s  country  (Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia) would  psychologically  destabilise  the  appellant.
But its underlying logic would appear to be that return there is  only  seen
to give rise to a real risk of suicide  because:  (i)  within  that  country
there is the place where the appellant suffered the events which caused  him
to become traumatised;  (ii) having to return to such a place  would  compel
him to re-experience that trauma in  a  way  he  could  not  cope  with  (in
Annette Goulden`s words, "[f]acing the traumatic past  without  the  support
of a stable home environment, social network and therapeutic setting may  be
intolerable and precipitate a severe avoidance reaction such  as  suicide");
and (iii)  he would not have the necessary medical  and  social  support  in
order to ensure he can cope.

43. As regards (i) and (ii), we would not question  that  return  to  Kosovo
will cause the appellant to recall traumatic events in a different way  than
he does at present: he will be back  in  the  country  where  his  traumatic
experiences occurred. But we do not see that the mere fact of return to  the
country of Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia  or  to  the  region  of  Kosovo
entails that the appellant will be compelled to revisit  the  scene  of  his
trauma in the village of Matcan, north-east of Pristina. For one  thing  the
appellant, whatever he subjectively believes now, will see for himself  upon
arrival in Kosovo  that  the  Serbs  no  longer  pose  a  threat  to  ethnic
Albanians in Kosovo and that there had been a  considerable  improvement  in
the political  and  security  situation  in  Kosovo.  None  of  the  medical
evidence suggests that he would be incapable of perceiving  such  realities.
For another it will be entirely a matter  for  him  whether  he  chooses  to
visit his old house or the village of Matcan:  indeed,  it  is  implicit  in
what is said in the medical reports that he will not  want  to  revisit  the
scene of his trauma for some considerable time, if  ever.

44. Viewed in this light it is clear  that  the  principal  medical  reports
wrongly equated return to a country with return to a scene of trauma.  Thus,
to the extent that the medical  reports  postulated  a  re-exposure  to  the
scene of the  trauma,  they  go  well  beyond  the  limits  of  a  realistic
appraisal. So long as the appellant seeks medical help when he returns,  and
again the medical evidence does not suggest he would not seek medical  help,
his return will not be to the scene of his trauma  but  into  the  hands  of
medical and related services whose focus will be  on  treating  his  trauma,
not re-activating it. Those administering the medical help will  be  persons
very familiar with victims of trauma arising out of the Kosovan conflict.

45. As regards (iii), we would accept that the  appellant  currently  enjoys
medical and social support to a good standard. But it is sufficiently  clear
that he has managed to cope well enough with his trauma to  attend  college,
train as a chef and conduct social relationships. When he returns to  Kosovo
he will not have (so far as we are aware) any family  support  network.  But
when he returns, no longer as a minor, we  consider  that  his  demonstrated
ability to engage with the external world  will  stand  him  in  good  stead
there. Indeed, since he will be returning to his own culture to  live  among
people of the same ethnic background and,  in  addition,  will  be  able  to
access adequate medical  facilities  and  receive  assistance  with  finding
housing and employment, we do not consider that he  will  in  fact  have  to
face conditions anywhere near as adverse as those which the medical  reports
appear to presuppose.

46. Accordingly, In view of the question the adjudicator had to  decide,  we
consider it was entirely open to her  to  conclude  that  return  would  not
expose the appellant to a real risk of suicide  or  to  any  other  type  of
serious or significant detriment to his physical  and  moral  integrity.  We
further consider that in this regard she was perfectly  entitled  to  attach
significant weight  to  the  evidence  relating  on  the  one  hand  to  the
appellant`s ability to cope with normal daily  functions  presently  and  on
the other hand to the relatively positive conditions he would actually  face
in Kosovo.

47. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




