
Heard at Field House                     FR (Article 8 - Mahamood) Serbia &
Montenegro [2003] UKIAT 00187
On 22 oct 2003
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date determination notified

      05/11/2003

                                   Before:
                                Mr J Perkins
                                 (Chairman)
                              Mrs M E McGregor
Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us Mr G Phillips, a Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for  the
appellant (herein after "the Secretary of State")  and  Mr  Y  S  Lim,  from
Antons,  Solicitors,  appeared  for  the  respondent  (herein   after   "the
claimant).

The claimant is a citizen of the Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia.   He  was
born on 15 March 1981 and so is  now  22  years  old.   In  a  determination
promulgated on 30 January 2003 an adjudicator, Mr T.  O'Flynn,  allowed  the
claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State that  it  was
not  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
Convention  on  Human  Rights  to  return  the  claimant  to  Kosovo.    The
adjudicator accepted that the claimant had married a British National  on  1
March 2002.  Their son, Leo, was born on  21  July  2002.   The  adjudicator
took account of the appellant's wife being settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
where she had strong family support and decided it was not proportionate  to
the proper purpose of immigration control to  expect  the  claimant's  young
family to remove to Kosovo.

The Secretary of State had never considered the point because the  form  SEF
was not returned and the Secretary of State was not told of  the  claimant's
marriage.  The adjudicator was right in the  circumstances  to  address  his
own mind to the issue. On the facts of this  case  the  adjudicator  had  to
decide if the decision to remove the claimant was  an  interference  in  his
family life and, if it was, then if that interference was  proportionate  to
the proper purpose of enforcing  immigration  control.   Following  Edore  v
SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  716  we  can  only  interfere  if  the  adjudicator's
conclusion was not  lawful,  that  is  if  the  decision  that  removal  was
disproportionate was not one that he could reasonably have made.

Mr Lim repeated orally an application made by facsimile on  the  day  before
the hearing  for  the  hearing  to  be  adjourned.   The  claimant's  former
solicitors were not able to represent him before the Tribunal  because  they
were closing their immigration department and the claimant was  looking  for
alternative representation.  He had only recently contacted Mr  Lim's  firm.
We accept that the claimant  was  concerned  that  the  preparation  of  his
appeal was not improperly rushed.  It was not  his  fault  that  his  former
solicitors were no longer undertaking immigration work.  However  it  seemed
to us that the case did not need a great deal  of  advanced  preparation  or
notice.  It turned on a  particular  point  of  law.   The  adjudicator  had
decided that the decision to remove the claimant was contrary to his  rights
under article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   The  Secretary
of State had been given permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was
arguable that this conclusion was not open to the adjudicator.   We  saw  no
reason why competent solicitors could not deal  with  this  point  at  short
notice and refused the application.  We  put  the  case  back  in  the  list
because Mr Lim wanted time to prepare further.

The adjudicator reminded himself of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
Mahmood v Secretary of State 2001 Imm AR 229 and  particularly  the  summary
of European case law given by the Master of the Rolls at paragraph 55.  Sub-
paragraphs 3 and 4 are well-known and  are  set  out  in  the  Secretary  of
State's  grounds  of  appeal.   At  sub-paragraph  3  it  says  "removal  or
exclusion of one family member from a  state  where  other  members  of  the
family are  lawfully  resident  will  not  necessarily  infringe  article  8
provided that there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  family  living
together in the country of origin of the family member excluded, even  where
this involves a degree of hardship for some or all members of  the  family."
The use of the word "necessarily" implies that there will be occasions  when
removal of a family member infringes article  8  even  where  there  are  no
insurmountable obstacles to the family living together  in  the  country  of
origin of the family member excluded.   Whilst  it  is  right  to  say  that
article 8 will normally be breached if there are insurmountable obstacle  (a
very high test) to family life being resumed in the  country  of  origin  of
the family member excluded it is just wrong to say that article 8  will  not
be breached unless there are insurmountable obstacles. To  the  extent  that
the grounds of appeal suggest otherwise we disagree with them.

This is explained to some extent in sub-paragraph 4 which  says  "article  8
is likely to be violated by the expulsion of a member of a family  that  has
been long established in a state if the circumstances are such  that  it  is
not reasonable to expect the other members  of  the  family  to  follow  the
member expelled." Although the appellant has not been  long  established  in
the United Kingdom he is a member of a family  that  has.   The  adjudicator
has addressed his mind to this at paragraph 11.5 of the  determination.   He
has also recognised that the claimant married at a time when  he  knew  that
his right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  was  precarious.   In  fact  he
married on 1 March 2002.  He had been told in a letter  dated  10  May  2001
that his application for refugee status had been refused.

With respect to the adjudicator we do not accept that it was open to him  to
decide on these facts that it was unreasonable to  require  the  appellant's
family to remove to Kosovo with him.  We recognise  that  Mr  Lim  had  only
been recently instructed and we interrupted proceedings  to  enable  him  to
take instructions to make quite sure that there were not, for  example,  any
serious health problems or any other reason that made it necessary  for  the
claimant's wife and child to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  were
none.  Mr Lim explained that the claimant's son had,  or  was  suspected  of
having, epilepsy when he was born but the situation had now resolved to  the
extent that he was not being treated but  he  was  monitored  by  a  general
medical practitioner.  Medical care is available in Kosovo and  we  did  not
see this is a reason to justify the conclusion that it was  unreasonable  to
expect the claimant's family to remove with him to Kosovo.

The adjudicator correctly recognised that a state  is  entitled  to  enforce
immigration control but did not, we find, give  sufficient  weight  to  this
when  conducting  the  balancing  exercise  required  to   decide   if   the
interference is proportionate to that proper  purpose.  The  entitlement  to
enforce an immigration policy always weighs heavily  (not  conclusively)  in
favour of upholding the decision of the Secretary of State. A decision  that
requires family members to  remove  to  a  different  country  in  order  to
preserve family unity will only be unreasonable, and therefore  contrary  to
article 8 in the way contemplated in Mahmood, where the disruption  inherent
on removal is exceptionally severe.  That is simply not the case  here.   In
reaching this conclusion we recognise that  conditions  in  Kosovo  are  far
from ideal but there is no reason why the claimant's  family  could  not  be
expected to cope if they chose to go and live there.

We also know that that the immigration rules provide for a husband  to  join
his wife in the United Kingdom  provided  that  certain  conditions  can  be
satisfied. Again the Secretary of State is entitled to operate a  policy  of
immigration control and it is not  normally  proportionate  to  that  proper
purpose to permit a person to circumvent  the  rules  by  being  allowed  to
remain in the United Kingdom. A husband (or wife)  should  not  normally  be
permitted to "queue jump" or avoid satisfying the immigration rules. We  see
no justification for  the  finding  that  this  claimant  ought  not  to  be
expected to leave the United Kingdom and make an  application  to  join  his
wife as the rules contemplate.

In all the circumstances we  have  to  conclude  that  the  adjudicator  was
wrong. The decision that he made was not within the range of decisions  open
to him. We allow the Secretary of State's appeal.


Jonathan Perkins
Vice President

28 October 2003
