
EM (Sufficiency of Protection - Article 8) Lithuania [2003] UKIAT 00185
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 6 August 2003
Prepared: 6 August 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                             Professor DB Casson


                                Mr DR Bremmer







Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Ms J De Souza, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr J Gulvin, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The claimant is a national  of  Lithuania.   The  Secretary  of  State
      appeals against the decision of an adjudicator, Ms S Beg, following  a
      hearing on 4 March 2003 dismissing the claimant's appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his  asylum  claim  but
      allowing his human rights appeal.


   2. The claimant's case was that he worked for the police as a police  dog
      trainer.  The dogs were used to discover narcotics.  In 1994 the Chief
      of Police  was  imprisoned  and  the  Minister  for  Home  Affairs  of
      Lithuania was dismissed as a result of criminal  activity  within  the
      illegal narcotics trade.  The claimant said  that  he  was  forced  to
      leave the police service and threats were made against him because  he
      was to be a witness in the trial.  In due course, the Chief of Police,
      Mr Lekevicius, was convicted and sentenced to four years imprisonment.
       He was released, having served two years.  The  claimant's  case  was
      that he is at risk from Mr Lekevicius because he gave evidence against
      him.


   3. In paragraph 23 of the determination, the adjudicator  considered  the
      position of Mr Lekevicius who appears to be a thorough-going  criminal
      with a record of past convictions.  He is said to operate  a  security
      firm and the claimant alleged he had close links  with  the  Mafia  in
      Lithuania.  The adjudicator, however, also considered the Home  Office
      Country  Assessment  for  Lithuania  dated  October   2002   and   the
      Operational  Guidance  Notes  on  Lithuania.   She   relied   on   the
      information contained there  that  the  Lithuanian  government  has  a
      witness protection scheme that offers real  protection  against  those
      persons who have given evidence,  particularly  evidence  against  the
      Mafia. She said:


           "The witness protection scheme does protect witnesses  who  have
           given evidence in criminal cases particularly against the Mafia.
            It also protects victims  of  crime.   The  witness  protection
           scheme is in place in Lithuania, Latvia  and  Estonia.   I  find
           that the appellant's involvement with Mr Lekevicius is now  over
           five years ago.  I  find  that  if  the  appellant  returns  the
           Lithuania he could seek the protection of the witness protection
           scheme."


   4. The adjudicator also referred to the mechanisms by which an individual
      is able to complain about harassment.  The adjudicator concluded  that
      the claimant did not have a well-founded fear of  persecution  because
      the state offered a sufficiency of protection in accordance  with  the
      principles of Horvath.  She concluded:


           "Whilst I entirely accept that Mr Lekevicius may be a well-known
           figure and an unsavoury character, nevertheless I find that  the
           appellant would receive a sufficiency of protection in Lithuania
           within the Horvath principles.  There is a criminal law in force
           in Lithuania and perpetrators of criminal offences are regularly
           prosecuted and sentenced by the courts."


   5. In paragraph 24 of the  determination,  the  adjudicator  reached  her
      conclusions that the claimant had not established his claim under  the
      Refugee Convention.  She then  considered  the  claimant's  Article  3
      claim and, having reviewed the  medical  evidence,  decided  that  the
      claimant had not reached the high threshold required to establish that
      his return to Lithuania would operate as a violation of his Article  3
      rights.


   6. The adjudicator then went on to  consider  the  claimant's  Article  8
      rights.  In doing so, she took into  account  the  fact  that  he  had
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 April 1996 as a visitor, that  his
      son entered the United Kingdom on 27 July 2000 claiming  asylum  as  a
      dependant of the claimant, and that the claimant married a  Lithuanian
      national in the United  Kingdom  whose  daughter  forms  part  of  his
      current family.  The adjudicator dealt with  the  claimant's  domestic
      situation at  considerable  length  in  paragraphs  8  and  9  of  the
      determination.  It is apparent  that  he  and  his  family  are  well-
      integrated into life in the United Kingdom.  In paragraph  26  of  the
      determination, the adjudicator considered the claimant's  family  life
      and decided that there were no insurmountable obstacles in the way  of
      the  family  returning  to  Lithuania  and  that,   accordingly,   the
      claimant's Article 8 rights to private and family life  would  not  be
      violated.  In paragraph  27  of  the  determination,  the  adjudicator
      expressly found that the claimant's return to  Lithuania  would  be  a
      proportionate response on behalf of the Secretary of  State  and  that
      any interference in the claimant to private and family life  would  be
      in the legitimate pursuance  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  goal  of
      maintaining firm and fair immigration control.


   7. Had the determination stopped there, the  result  would  have  been  a
      foregone conclusion.   The  adjudicator  had  already  considered  and
      dismissed the claimant's asylum appeal and his Article 3 claims.   She
      had also considered family and  private  life  and  concluded  that  a
      return to Lithuania would not violate the claimant's Article 8 rights.
       In paragraph 28, however, the adjudicator  considers  the  claimant's
      physical and moral integrity.  The adjudicator states:


           "Miss De Souza submitted on the appellant's behalf that he would
           be at risk of interference in his physical and  moral  integrity
           if he returns to Lithuania.  I bear in mind that  the  threshold
           of Article 8 is much lower than that of  Article  3.   Whilst  I
           entirely accept that the evidence given by the appellant in  the
           criminal trial in Lithuania was now some time ago,  nevertheless
           there is a distinct and real possibility that the appellant  may
           be targeted for revenge by the  former  police  officer  against
           whom he gave evidence and who subsequently served two years of a
           four year  prison  sentence...  whilst  the  witness  protection
           scheme is  available  there  is  a  real  possibility  that  the
           appellant may not have the full protection from the scheme since
           he is no longer a  witness  and  the  trial  in  which  he  gave
           evidence was completed some years ago... for all  these  reasons
           and considering  the  evidence  in  the  round  I  come  to  the
           conclusion that there is a real  risk  of  interference  in  the
           appellant's physical and moral integrity."


   8. It was as a result of paragraph 28 that the  adjudicator  allowed  the
      claimant's appeal on human rights grounds only.


   9. It is this finding that forms the subject of the Secretary of  State's
      appeal.  There are two points that are immediately apparent.

        a) The adjudicator's finding in paragraph 28 that there is  a  real
           possibility that the claimant may not have the  full  protection
           of the witness protection scheme is directly  contrary  to  what
           the adjudicator had previously found  in  paragraph  23  of  the
           determination (which we have set out  above)  that  the  witness
           protection scheme afforded protection to witnesses and that  the
           scheme was available to the claimant.  It was  for  this  reason
           that the adjudicator  considered  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
           protection in Lithuania within the principles of Horvath.


        b) The reference to Article 8 being much lower than  the  threshold
           of Article 3 clearly indicates that the adjudicator was applying
           a lower threshold than that necessary for Article 3.  It is also
           apparent  that  it  was  his  lower  threshold  by   which   the
           adjudicator was making  her  assessment  of  conditions  in  the
           receiving state, Lithuania.   This  is  a  clear  error  in  law
           because it fails to pay regard to the decision of the  Court  of
           Appeal in Ullah and Do [2002] EWCA Civ 1856.


  10. Ullah and Do was concerned with Article  9,  that  is,  the  right  to
      Freedom of Thought, Conscience and Religion.  In paragraph 65  of  the
      judgment, Lord Phillips, MR, giving the judgment of the Court stated:


           "Our reasoning has,  however,  wider  implications.   Where  the
           Convention is invoked on the sole ground  of  the  treatment  to
           which an alien, refused the right to enter or remain, is  likely
           to be subjected by the receiving state, and  that  treatment  is
           not sufficiently severe to engage Article 3, the  English  court
           is not required to recognise  that  any  other  Article  of  the
           Convention is, or may be, engaged.  Where such  treatment  falls
           outside Article 3, there may be cases which justify the grant of
           exceptional  leave  to  remain  on  humanitarian  grounds.   The
           decision of the Secretary of State in such cases will be subject
           to the ordinary principles of judicial review  but  not  to  the
           constraints of the Convention."


  11. The Court of Appeal  expressly  considered  the  unusual  position  of
      Article 8 and, in particular, the distinction between the violation of
      Article 8 experienced by a claimant in the United Kingdom  arising  by
      the enforcement  of  his  or  her  removal  and  the  quite  different
      situation where the claimant experiences the violation of her  Article
      8 rights in the receiving state.  The  distinction  is  obvious.   The
      category of those entitled to the benefits of the ECHR is not confined
      to United Kingdom nationals but  applies  to  everyone  "within  [the]
      jurisdiction".  Hence, in its simplest form, a visitor is entitled  to
      the benefit of the Convention.  The incorporation  of  the  Convention
      into English domestic law does not,  however,  mean  that  the  United
      Kingdom  government  guarantees  that   every   visitor   within   the
      jurisdiction is to have the  benefit  of  the  Convention  within  the
      territory of his own nationality.  The Convention is, after  all,  the
      high-water mark of human rights protection provided  by  the  European
      signatories to the people within  those  countries.   There  would  be
      little need to have the  Convention  at  all  if  the  standards  were
      universal.  The European jurisprudence also draws a  firm  distinction
      between Article 3, which is non-derogable, and the other  Articles  in
      the Convention.  The Convention itself is often seen as a hierarchy of
      rights.


  12. These  considerations,  doubtless,  prompted  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      approach to Article 8 in Ullah.   See  paragraphs  43  to  47  of  the
      judgment.  In paragraph 47, the Court said:


           "Part of the reasoning of the Court suggests that the  treatment
           that any deportee is at risk of experiencing  in  the  receiving
           state might so severely interfere with his Article 8  rights  as
           to render his deportation contrary to the Convention.  The  more
           significant Article 8 factor was, however,  the  destruction  of
           private life within this country.   There  is  a  difference  in
           principle between the  situation  where  Article  8  rights  are
           engaged in whole or in part because of the effect of removal  in
           disrupting and individuals established enjoyment of those rights
           within this jurisdiction  and  the  situation  where  Article  8
           rights are alleged to be  engaged  solely  on  the  ground  that
           treatment that the individual is likely to be  subjected  to  in
           the receiving state.  In Bensaid the Court considered  that  the
           right to control immigration constituted a  valid  ground  under
           Article 8 (2) from derogating from the Article 8 rights  of  the
           applicant in that case."

  13. In Berkhani  [2002]  UKIAT  01704,  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
      presided over by its  President,  Collins  J.,  decided  that  "it  is
      difficult to envisage a case where Article 8 would be breached  absent
      persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment because, as we say, the need to
      control immigration would make the removal proportionate."


  14. In recent times, the jurisprudence has been enlarged.  In   Soumahoro,
      Nadarajah and Razgar [2003]EWCA Civ 840 (a decision made  on  19  June
      2003), the Court of Appeal set out the principles in paragraph  22  of
      the judgment.  Consideration of proportionality is itself a  two-stage
      process.  First, the claimant's case in relation to his  private  life
      in the United Kingdom should be considered.  The second  stage  is  to
      consider what treatment he can expect in the receiving state.  In  the
      present appeal, it was the  treatment  in  the  receiving  state  that
      adjudicator was considering in paragraph 28 and by applying Article 8,
      she was in error.

  15. At the commencement of this appeal,  we  drew  the  attention  of  the
      parties to these matters.  We had understood Ms De Souza, who appeared
      on behalf of the claimant, to concede that the Secretary of state  was
      correct in his grounds of appeal and had noted it accordingly.  During
      the course of the hearing, however, Ms De Souza appeared  to  withdraw
      from that concession.  In our judgment, however, the  adjudicator  was
      plainly in error in paragraph 28 of the determination.   Having  found
      that there was a sufficiency of protection in the form of the  witness
      protection scheme, it was not then open to  the  adjudicator  to  find
      that the claimant's return to Lithuania would be a breach of his human
      rights.  Furthermore, by adopting a threshold that was  clearly  lower
      than the threshold for  a  claim  under  Article  3,  the  adjudicator
      reached the wrong conclusion.  It is apparent that,  had  she  applied
      the high threshold (as she described it) of Article 3, she would  have
      dismissed the appeal.

  16.  At the hearing before us,  anticipating  these  difficulties,  Ms  De
      Souza sought to introduce a cross-appeal.  Although we  did  not  have
      the bundle before us, she told us that on the day before,  that  is  5
      August 2003, her  instructing  solicitors  had  sought  permission  to
      appeal by serving a draft Grounds of Cross-Appeal, out of time.  Those
      draft Grounds seek to argue that  the  adjudicator  was  in  error  in
      deciding that there was a sufficiency of protection in  Lithuania  for
      this claimant.

  17. The adjudicator's determination was  promulgated  on  18  March  2003,
      before  the  introduction  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum   Appeals
      (Procedure) Rules 2003, which came into force on 1  April  2003.   The
      claimant's appeal was, therefore,  governed  by  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000 which did not expressly  contain
      provisions in relation to cross-appeals.  Where,  however,  an  appeal
      was in being, it was open to the respondent to  the  appeal  to  raise
      matters that might have been raised in a cross-appeal.

  18.  We approached the claimant's application to raise  these  matters  on
      the basis that the  claimant  should  be  no  worse  off  than  if  an
      application  had  been  made  under  the  2003  Procedure  Rules.   In
      particular, in considering the application, we considered the  overall
      merits of the grounds that were being put forward.

  19. The substance of the Grounds of Appeal is found in paragraphs 3 and 4.
       It is argued  that  the  Article  8  was  correctly  decided  by  the
      adjudicator but that the adjudicator failed to apply the reasoning  of
      the Court of Appeal in  Svazas  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  74  in  considering
      sufficiency of protection.  In paragraph 4 of the grounds it  is  said
      that the adjudicator did not take into account the risk posed  by  the
      former Chief of  Police  against  whom  the  appellant  gave  evidence
      because of his position within  the  authorities.   It  is  said  that
      Svazas rather than Horvath should have been applied.

  20. This ground of appeal  is  misconceived.   The  adjudicator  expressly
      considered the risk posed by the former Chief of Police and  concluded
      in paragraph 23 of the determination that  the  claimant  was  not  at
      risk.  She did so by reference to the witness  protection  scheme  and
      the other background material.  If the ground of appeal  is  construed
      to be a criticism of that  finding  of  fact,  the  criticism  has  no
      arguable prospect of success for the reasons that we will later  give.
      Furthermore, to suggest that Svazas rather than  Horvath  should  have
      been applied is to misunderstand the principles settled by  these  two
      cases, which are not mutually inconsistent.

  21.  In Svazas, the Court of Appeal considered the case of a claimant  who
      had been repeatedly detained and ill-treated by the Lithuanian  police
      because  of  his  political   activity.    The   background   material
      established there was a degree of police brutality against Lithuanians
      associated with the previous Soviet regime. Both the  adjudicator  and
      the Tribunal found that there was a reasonable likelihood  this  would
      re-occur in future were he to be return to  Lithuania.  The  Court  of
      Appeal decided that the degree  of  ill-treatment  was  sufficient  to
      establish persecution.  In cases of ill-treatment by state  officials,
      it was necessary that an  adjudicator  consider  whether  a  practical
      standard of protection existed.

  22. It is apparent from the foregoing that Svazas is concerned  with  ill-
      treatment by state officials and not, as in the  instant  appeal,  the
      adequacy of protection afforded by the police or state authorities  to
      persons who are at risk by non-state agents  such  as  Mr  Lekevicius.
      The adjudicator was not, therefore, at fault in failing to  apply  the
      principles set out in Svazas which were not applicable.

  23. We have considered whether the claimant is at risk from Mr Lekevicius.
       The background material is contained in the October 2002 CIPU  Report
      and the Operational  Guidance  Note.   In  the  CIPU  Report,  witness
      protection is considered in the following paragraph:

           Witness Protection


           4.48 On 17 March 2000,  the  Interior  ministers  of  Lithuania,
           Latvia and Estonia signed an  agreement  on  the  protection  of
           witnesses and victims of crime. The agreement allows for  cross-
           border protection of witnesses and victims, either for a limited
           period of time or permanently.  The  individual's  property  and
           legal interests are protected and all housing, medical and other
           re-settlement costs are covered by the country of  origin.  This
           arrangement is unique in Europe.


  24. The general position of internal security is considered  in  paragraph
      4.35:


           Internal Security


           4.35 The Constitution  specifically  forbids  torture;  however,
           according to the US State Department Report for 2001: 'at  times
           police  beat  or  otherwise  physically  mistreated  detainees'.
           Press  reports  in  2001  indicated  that  incidents  of  police
           brutality had decreased, and that victims were more  willing  to
           bring charges against police officers.   The Office of Inspector
           General (established in 1999)  and  the  Internal  Investigation
           Division at the Police Department investigate, on the orders  of
           the Minister  of  Interior,  abuses  committed  by  the  police.
           Prosecutors and the Parliament controller carry out  independent
           investigations.   During  the  first  half  of  the  year,   the
           controllers  investigated  86  complaints  (37  of  them  deemed
           justified) about the activities of Interior  Ministry  personnel
           and the police (63 such complaints  were  found  to  have  merit
           during the first half of 2000).  In five cases of alleged police
           brutality, criminal charges were filed against  police  officers
           (compared with four such cases in 2000),  and  in  a  number  of
           other cases, the controllers proposed to  relevant  institutions
           that they take action or amend laws.  However, according to  the
           Ministry of Interior, from January 2000 to July 2001, no  police
           officers were convicted for abuse  of  power.   A  total  of  79
           officers were dismissed for illegal or fraudulent activities  in
           the first 6 months of 1998 for a variety of  offences,  compared
           with 182 for all 1997. During the first six months of 1999  four
           police officers were charged with abuse of power and one officer
           was sentenced.


  25. This is not directly applicable in the claimant's case because he does
      not face a risk of ill-treatment from the police.  Mr Lekevicius is no
      longer a serving officer.  The passage does,  however,  indicate  that
      the Lithuanian  state  does  not  permit  its  officers  to  act  with
      impunity.  Indeed, in the context of the present  appeal,  it  is  the
      claimant's own case that Mr Lekevicius was prosecuted  and  imprisoned
      for misconduct in the course of his duties.


  26. For these reasons, we are in no  doubt  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
      cannot succeed.

  27. In these circumstances, it hardly seems necessary  to  deal  with  the
      application for permission to appeal at  such  a  late  stage  in  the
      proceedings.  The application was made under cover of a  letter  dated
      yesterday, 5 August 2003.  Justification for the delay is referred  to
      in the fourth paragraph of the letter in which it is stated that on  4
      August 2003, two days before the hearing, Ms De  Souza  (who  appeared
      before the adjudicator as long ago as 4 March 2003),  advised  that  a
      cross-appeal should be attempted.  There is no  explanation  why  this
      was not done before.  It does not begin  to  justify  or  explain  the
      delay.

  28. In support of the application, we have been provided with  an  undated
      and unsigned statement from the claimant.   In  paragraphs  2  and  3,
      events that happened "a few months  ago"  are  described  but  without
      identifying the  time  and  whether  or  not  it  occurred  after  the
      adjudicator's decision.  It is said that  three  young  men  from  the
      claimant's village in Lithuania attempted to  blackmail  the  claimant
      and told him they were aware the Mafia was in pursuit  of  him.   This
      information should, of course, have been immediately  acted  upon.  We
      are not prepared to attach weight to it in its present form.  It  does
      not persuade us that the conclusions we  have  reached  and  expressed
      above require a further hearing before an adjudicator.

  29. For these reasons, we refuse the claimant's application for permission
      to pursue his cross-appeal.  As a result of what  we  have  found,  it
      goes without saying that, had we  permitted  the  cross-appeal  to  be
      pursued, there  is  nothing  further  that  the  claimant  could  have
      submitted in support of it and  we  would  have  rejected  it  on  its
      merits.



   Decision: The appeal at the Secretary of State is allowed.   The  finding
   that the claimant had established that his return to Lithuania would be a
   violation of his human rights is set aside.  Permission  to  cross-appeal
   is refused.








Andrew Jordan
Vice President
6 August 2003
