
                    AA IA (Article 8- Medical facilities) Kosovo CG [2003]
UKIAT 00123




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
HHeard at Field House
On : 12 September 2003                                         Date
Determination notified:
Prepared: 12 September 2003
30/10/2003


                                   Before:


                         Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)
                               Mr P Rogers, JP
                               Mr N Kumar, JP






                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and
                                                                 RESPONDENTS

Representation
For the applicant :    Miss R. Dunbavin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents : Mr I.  Ali,  counsel,  instructed  by  Welfare  Rights
Advice Service





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Mr P.E.A. Forrest,  who  allowed  the  respondents'
      appeals against the decisions made on 31 July 2001  giving  directions
      for their removal from the United Kingdom following  a  decision  that
      they were not entitled to asylum. In this determination  the  Tribunal
      will refer to the respondents to this appeal as the first  and  second
      applicant.

2.    The first applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on  20  August  1998
      claiming asylum the following day. The second applicant arrived on  30
      September 1999  claiming  asylum  on  12  November  1999.   The  first
      applicant was born in 1972 in Gjakova in Kosovo, a town  near  to  the
      Albanian border.  He left Kosovo because of a fear of persecution from
      the Serbian authorities, leaving  with  a  group  which  travelled  to
      Macedonia. He then paid 5000 Marks to travel by lorry  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The second applicant was born on 23 February  1980.  She  met
      her husband in April 1997  when  he  was  visiting  Driss.  They  were
      married on 15  November  1997  in  a  Muslim  ceremony  registered  in
      Gjakova.  They lived with the first applicant's parents until he  left
      in August 1998.  The second  applicant  was  forced  to  leave  Kosovo
      following the ethnic cleansing carried out by the Serb authorities. At
      the end of April 1999 two Serbian policemen arrived at her home,  tied
      up her father and mother and attempted to rape her.  Neighbours  heard
      the  noise  and  intervened  to  prevent  this.  However,  the  second
      applicant was terrified and traumatised, having nightmares  and  being
      unable to come to terms with the incident.  She left Kosovo with other
      members of her family and made her way to the United Kingdom.

3.    The claims for asylum by both the first  and  second  applicants  were
      refused by the Secretary of State. In  the  light  of  the  change  of
      circumstances in Kosovo the Adjudicator was not satisfied  that  there
      was any real risk of  persecution  or  indeed  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 on return to Kosovo. Their appeals were  dismissed  on  this
      basis. His findings in this respect  are  not  challenged  before  the
      Tribunal.

4.    The Adjudicator went on to consider the appeal under Article  8.  This
      was based on an assertion that there would be an interference with the
      private and family life of  the  applicants  if  returned  to  Kosovo,
      particularly in the light of the effect that would have on the  second
      applicant's mental and psychological condition.

5.    The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from both  the  first  and  second
      applicants. The first applicant said that his wife was suffering  from
      depression and was not yet cured. She was unable to receive medication
      at that time as she was breast feeding. She had  been  recommended  to
      see a counsellor. The second applicant said that she felt safe in  the
      United Kingdom but still suffered from nightmares and was very  scared
      about returning  to  Kosovo.   She  had  two  miscarriages  which  she
      believed to be caused by  stress.  She  had  been  on  medication  for
      depression  and  was  offered  counselling.  She  had  stopped  taking
      medication when she became pregnant and  since  giving  birth  to  her
      daughter, Melissa, on  16  October  2002.   In  cross-examination  she
      confirmed that her depression had started before her  first  pregnancy
      which had been an ectopic pregnancy. She continued  to  be  depressed.
      Her fear related to her own health and the situation not  getting  any
      better in Kosovo. The Adjudicator  also  had  before  him  documentary
      evidence including case law and a medical report prepared by  Dr  T.J.
      Gill. In this report Dr Gill stated that the second applicant had been
      registered with him since 24 December 1999.  He confirmed that she had
      been admitted to Northampton General Hospital in March with an ectopic
      pregnancy which required laparoscopic surgery from which she had  made
      a good recovery.  She  had  complained  of  panic  attacks  since  her
      ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage. There was a further miscarriage  in
      May 2001.  She was suffering from depression  and  was  provided  with
      fluoxetine. As she wished to conceive again other medication  was  not
      appropriate for her depression.  The Adjudicator  had  before  him  an
      ICMPD Information Fact Sheet on Mental Health in Kosovo. He noted that
      mental health care still faced serious difficulties there and that the
      needs of a severely traumatised population were very high.  The mental
      health centre in Gjakova had been open for one year. There  were  home
      care services to the city and surrounding villages but this was for  a
      population of about 300,000.

6.    The Adjudicator  was referred to a number of authorities which  he  as
      considered in paragraph 42-52 of his determination. As the Adjudicator
      rightly pointed out in paragraph 53, the issue he had to consider  was
      whether, in the particular circumstances of  these  applicants,  there
      would be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the  Human
      Rights Convention.  He commented  that  the  applicant  had  been  the
      victim of an attempted rape by Serbian policemen  which  had  affected
      her deeply. She was traumatised and deeply  distressed  as  a  result.
      She suffered from panic attacks and  post  and  pre-natal  depression.
      She had been unable to receive the necessary medical treatment due  to
      her  pregnancy.    She  said  that  treatment   would   be   virtually
      unavailable to her were she to be returned to Kosovo.

7.    The Adjudicator then went on  to  consider  whether  return  would  be
      disproportionate.  He reminded himself of Article 8(2).    He took the
      view that the  only  relevant  legitimate  purpose  was  the  economic
      wellbeing of the country. He commented that the  first  applicant  had
      been working for Debenhams for the past two years.  They  had  a  well
      settled family life and were making a  contribution  to  the  economic
      well being of the country.  Unless it could be shown  that  they  were
      interfering with the freedoms and right of  others,  it  would  appear
      that they did not come within  any  of  the  categories  mentioned  in
      Article 8(2).  In these circumstances it would be disproportionate for
      the family to be returned  to  Kosovo  in  the  light  of  the  second
      applicant's present and foreseeable medical condition. The appeal  was
      allowed on Article 8 grounds.

8.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued following the  judgment  of  the
      Court of Appeal in Ullah  and  Do  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1856,  that  the
      obligations of the United Kingdom government were not engaged when the
      interference with private or family life occurred because of events in
      or the situation in the receiving  state.   In  the  alternative,  the
      grounds  argue  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  conclude  that
      treatment would be virtually unavailable to the  second  applicant  in
      Kosovo and further the Adjudicator misdirected himself by  considering
      that it was only the economic wellbeing of the country which  was  the
      relevant legitimate aim in Article 8(2).

9.    Miss Dunbavin adopted these grounds in  her  submissions.  She  argued
      that in the light of the Ullah and Do the applicants could not rely on
      the absence of proper medical facilities in Kosovo to support a  claim
      that removal would be an  interference  with  the  second  applicant's
      right to private life, and in particular her  right  to  physical  and
      moral integrity. In any event, the objective evidence did not  support
      the Adjudicator's conclusions. A  review  of  the  WHO  Mental  Health
      Project in July 2002 made a positive evaluation of  the   progress  in
      the mental health sector in Kosovo.  Although mental health  provision
      was underdeveloped, treatment for psychological conditions,  including
      posttraumatic  stress  disorder  was  available  and  the  numbers  of
      patients   treated   for   psychiatric   disorders   by   the   Kosovo
      Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims had increased  substantially
      from 2001 to 2002: see paragraphs 5.47-8.

10.   Miss Dunbavin further  argued  that,  in  light  of  the  most  recent
      medical report which was dated February 2003, the  second  applicant's
      current symptoms of anxiety and depression  did  not  amount  to  full
      blown PTSD  although  there  were  symptoms  such  as  nightmares  and
      evidence of reliving her previous experiences. Dr Damle recommended an
      anti-depressant. She did not find her to be suicidal.

11.   Mr  Ali  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  determination  had  been
      correct at the date of decision. He had heard the appeal on 3 December
      2002 and his determination had been  prepared  on  12  December  2002,
      being promulgated on 13 January 2003.  He argued that as the  judgment
      had not been given in   Ullah and Do until 16 December 2002 after  the
      Adjudicator's   determination   was   prepared,   the    Adjudicator's
      conclusions had been right. Certainly the Adjudicator  can  hardly  be
      criticised for not taking into account a judgment which had  not  been
      delivered at the date of hearing but nonetheless  a  judgment  by  the
      Court of Appeal represents what the law is and it is the law by  which
      the Adjudicator's determination must be considered.  Mr Ali went on to
      argue that in any event the Adjudicator's conclusions were correct. He
      was entitled to find that there would  be  an  interference  with  the
      second applicant's private life by the very fact of her being  removed
      from the United Kingdom and returned to Kosovo.  The  Adjudicator  had
      looked at all the relevant information and his findings were  properly
      based on his assessment of the evidence. He had taken into account the
      second applicant's medical situation and the effect return would have.

12.   Since the grant of leave there  have  been  further  Court  of  Appeal
      judgments which the Tribunal must take into  account  in  addition  to
      Ullah and Do.  The first is a Blessing Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716.   In
      this judgment the Court of Appeal held that the proper  approach  when
      considering the issue of proportionality was to consider  whether  the
      Secretary of State's decision  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable
      responses open to him on the facts of the appeal.   In  Razgar  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 840 the Court of Appeal confirmed that this  was  the  proper
      approach subject only to the situation when the essential facts  found
      by  the  Adjudicator  were  so  fundamentally  different  from   those
      determined by the Secretary of State as to substantially undermine the
      factual basis of the balancing exercise performed  by  him.  In  those
      circumstances it would be for the Adjudicator or the Tribunal to carry
      out the balancing exercise, but when deciding how much weight to  give
      to the need to maintain an effective immigration  policy  considerable
      deference should be paid to the Secretary of State's views.

13.   The court also considered the circumstances in which Article  8  could
      be engaged an expulsion case. In paragraph 22 the court said that  the
      applicant's case in relation to his  private  life  in  the  deporting
      state should be examined.  Where the essence of the claim was that his
      expulsion would interfere with private  life  by  harming  his  mental
      health, that would conclude a consideration of what was said about his
      mental health in the deporting country, the treatment he would receive
      and any relevant support which he enjoyed there, and secondly it would
      be necessary to look at what was likely to happen to his mental health
      in the receiving country, what treatment can  be  received  there  and
      what support he can expect to enjoy.  If serious harm  to  his  mental
      health would be caused or materially contributed to by the  difference
      between the treatment and support he is  receiving  in  the  deporting
      country, and what would be avialable in  the  receiving  country,  the
      territoriality principle would not be  infringed  and  the  claim  was
      capable of falling within Article 8.    The degree  of  harm  must  be
      sufficiently serious to engage Article 8. There must be a sufficiently
      adverse affect on physical and mental  integrity  and  not  merely  on
      health.

14.   This case was further considered in Januzi [2003] EWCA Civ 1187  where
      the Court  of  Appeal  having  referred  to  this  passage  in  Razgar
      emphasised that in the context of an Article 8 claim it was  necessary
      to make a comparison between the conditions enjoyed by  the  applicant
      in this country  and  the  conditions  which  would  affect  him  when
      transferred to another country.

15.   It is clear that the second applicant  has  suffered  from  depression
      arising from the effect of her treatment in Kosovo when  she  was  the
      victim of an attempted rape.  She  also  suffered  the  experience  of
      seeing many Albanians killed: see paragraph 25  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination. Since her arrival in the United Kingdom she has had the
      misfortune to  suffer  two  miscarriages,  one  following  an  ectopic
      pregnancy.  Her  depression  was  treated  by  the   prescription   of
      fluoextine. It would have been possible for  other  medication  to  be
      prescribed but for the fact that she wished to become pregnant  again.
      The Adjudicator accepted her evidence  that  she  was  deeply  worried
      about returning to Kosovo. This is reflected in the psychiatric report
      of 11 February  2003.  This  refers  to  the  applicant's  history  of
      depression and to the fact that her feelings of desperation were quite
      overwhelming before the baby was born. She tried to kill herself twice
      by taking overdoses, the last overdose being more than  twelve  months
      ago.  She did not go to hospital but did disclose what she  had  done.
      She was not on any antidepressant medication when seen  by  Dr  Damle.
      She  recommended  a  small  dose  of  antidepressants  and  supportive
      psychotherapeutic contact. She described the applicant  as  presenting
      with mixed anxiety and depressive  reaction.  She  was  depressed  and
      isolated. She appeared to be quite determined to learn English and  to
      settle down if allowed to. She had hopes of going on to college to  be
      a teacher.

16.   The Adjudicator came to the view that  treatment  would  be  virtually
      unavailable in Kosovo.  It is  certainly  the  case  that  psychiatric
      facilities are limited but it is clear both from the CIPU  Report  and
      from the Topical Information Fact Sheet, Mental Health in Kosovo, that
      treatment  is  available.  Indeed  the  Adjudicator  referred  to  the
      determination in Ismail [2002] UKIAT 03998 where  the  Tribunal  found
      that there was no evidence to suggest  that  an  applicant  could  not
      receive pharmaceutical treatment for depression in Kosovo. In the view
      of the Tribunal there is no  reason  for  believing  that  the  second
      applicant would not be able to receive antidepressants in  Kosovo.  It
      is clear from the  reports  that  her  main  support  comes  from  her
      husband. He would be returning  to  Kosovo  with  her.  Comparing  the
      second applicant's position  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  what  the
      position would be in Kosovo, the Tribunal are not satisfied that there
      is any adequate evidential basis for a finding that there would  be  a
      sufficiently adverse affect  on  the  second  applicant's  mental  and
      psychological state arising from removal  such  as  to  amount  to  an
      interference with her private life.

17.   The Tribunal now go on to consider in the  alternative  the  issue  of
      proportionality.  It was the  Adjudicator's  view  is  that  the  only
      relevant category in Article 8(2) was the economic  wellbeing  of  the
      country. He was plainly wrong in this conclusion. The  legitimate  aim
      of primary relevance is the prevention of disorder or crime.  Disorder
      in this context does not of course just mean disorder in the sense  of
      a breach of the law such as disorderly conduct but disorder in the way
      society is regulated.   This includes  having  a  fair  and  effective
      immigration policy. When assessing whether removal  is  proportionate,
      it is right to take into account the fact that  both  applicants  made
      clandestine entries into the United Kingdom but to  set  this  against
      the fact that at the time ethnic Albanians were at  considerable  risk
      in Kosovo. Nonetheless, the situation has now  changed.  There  is  no
      appeal against the Adjudicator's findings that they would  not  be  at
      risk of persecution.  The Tribunal takes into account  the  fact  that
      the applicants do have a settled family life in  the  United  Kingdom,
      the first applicant is working and there is young child of the family.
      But nonetheless in our judgment these factors do not offset  the  need
      of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  maintain  a  fair  and   consistent
      immigration policy. In  these  circumstances  the  decision  to  issue
      removal directions was within the range of reasonable  responses  open
      to the Secretary of State. Insofar as the full circumstances  relating
      to the family have not been considered by the Secretary of State,  the
      Tribunal's view would be that removal is proportionate to a legitimate
      aim within Article 8(2).

18.   In these circumstances, for the reasons the Tribunal have  given,  the
      appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                                               H.J.E. LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                                     -----------------------
      1


