

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |FE (Risk-Minority           |
|                           |        |group-Yemeni Background)    |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00115                       |
|Date:  14 August 2003      |        |                            |
|Prepared 14 August 2003    |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......24/10/2003.............                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the appellant:  Miss A Hall of Counsel instructed by Adams, solicitors.
For the respondent:  Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen   of   Somalia,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr J R Devittie)  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against a decision made on 5 February  2002  giving  directions
      for his removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 July  2000  claiming
      asylum the following day.  He claims that he had left Somalia in  1991
      and then lived in Yemen for nine years.  He  was  asked  in  interview
      whey he had not stayed in Yemen.  He replied that  it  was  impossible
      for him to stay as he was a refugee  there:  Q6.   He  went  to  Yemen
      because he believed that was where his uncle and father had come  from
      originally.  He had no other option.  He had to  survive  on  a  daily
      survival job.  The appellant then travelled to Russia where he  stayed
      for six months.  He did not stay there because there was  no  life  in
      Russia and no way he could continue staying there.

3.    He had managed to obtain a false Djibouti passport which  had  enabled
      him to leave Yemen.  He then travelled to Poland where he remained for
      two months.  He commented that the situation was  no  better  than  in
      Russia.  He then travelled by lorry from Poland to the United Kingdom.
       He did not know through which countries he travelled.  The  Secretary
      of State set out his reasons for refusing  the  claim  in  his  letter
      dated  September 2001 and set removal  directions  for  Somalia  on  5
      February 2002.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision
      on 13 December 2002.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was of  Yemeni  background
      and that his  family  were  third  generation  Yemeni  descendants  in
      Somalia.  It was the appellant's account that the Hawiye Clan began to
      persecute them in 1991.  He says that he was detained for a few months
      and then released  in  June  1991.   In  September  1991  the  militia
      returned to his home and took him to a detention centre where  he  was
      beaten and tortured.  He managed to escape in November 1991 by walking
      out of the detention centre by the rear door.  A car  was  waiting  to
      pick him up.  He then realised that  the  escape  had  been  carefully
      planned by those of other ethnic  minorities  with  whom  he  escaped.
      Within a few days he was able to leave for Yemen.

5.    He stayed there for four years but was unable to trace his  relatives.
       He obtained work as a painter but those he shared a house with looked
      down on him and frequently  insulted  him.   In  June  1992  policemen
      carried out a random search of his  room  and  one  of  the  policeman
      assaulted him.  In 1999 there was an incident when he came across  the
      same policeman who had harassed him in 1992.  He was detained and only
      released after payment of a bribe.  He was advised to leave  or  there
      would be further trouble.  He bought a passport and obtained a visa to
      travel to Russia.

6.    It was argued on the appellant's  behalf  that  he  faced  a  risk  of
      persecution in Somalia firstly because a political  opinion  would  be
      imputed to him as a result of his father's involvement with  the  Barr
      regime.  It was also argued that he would be at risk  because  he  did
      not belong to any major clan group.  The Adjudicator found it unlikely
      that  after  so  many  years  the  appellant  would  face  a  risk  of
      persecution because of his family's involvement with the Barr  regime.
      The appellant had asserted that he would be at risk because he did not
      belong to any majority clan.  Having considered his  evidence  in  the
      context of the objective evidence the Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied
      that Somalis of Yemeni extraction were singled out for persecution  as
      a minority group.  He did not believe  that  the  appellant  had  been
      persecuted on account of being a member of the Yemeni minority but  he
      commented that this was not to say that Somalis  from  Yemen  did  not
      suffer disadvantages as a minority group.  They probably did  but  the
      Adjudicator did not  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
      suffered persecution because of his Yemeni origins.

7.    The Adjudicator noted that the appellant had stayed in Yemen for  nine
      years where he had worked and established a family life.  He had  left
      his wife and children in Yemen in 2000.  When interviewed he had  said
      nothing about the police persecuting him there. This issue was  raised
      in a subsequent witness statement. The Adjudicator did not believe the
      evidence of persecution in Somalia nor of persecution or ill-treatment
      in Yemen. He was not satisfied that there was any  basis  for  finding
      that the appellant would be at risk  in  Somalia.   He  did  not  fall
      within a minority group that was specifically mentioned  as  being  at
      risk.  It would be safe for  him  to  be  returned.   The  appeal  was
      dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

8.    When granting leave to appeal the Vice President  commented  that  the
      key issue was whether the appellant would  now  be  at  real  risk  on
      return  to  Somalia.   He  said  that  it  was   arguable   that   the
      determination did not address the risk on return today for a person in
      the appellant's position.

9.    Miss Hall submitted that the appellant would be  at  risk  because  he
      belonged to a minority group of  Yemeni  Somalis.   She  referred  the
      Tribunal to the Danish Report and in particular to  paragraph  283  at
      page 37.  This appears to be the only reference in all the  background
      evidence to the Yemeni minority.  It is said  that  ethnic  minorities
      faced social segregation while  occupational  groups  are  denied  the
      right  to  inter  marry  and  they   both   have   limited   political
      representation.  The CIPU Report confirms that  those  in  a  minority
      group  would  be  at  risk.   Miss  Hall  referred  in  particular  to
      paragraphs 6.1, 6, 60, 62, 64 and 73.  The Adjudicator found that  the
      appellant was of Yemeni ethnicity. This  placed  him  inn  a  minority
      group.  He had accepted the probability that this group  had  suffered
      disadvantages.  It followed in the light of this profile when assessed
      against the background evidence that the appellant would be at a  real
      risk bearing in mind that the risk had to be established only  to  the
      lower standard of proof.

10.   Mr McGirr submitted  that  the  heart  of  the  determination  was  in
      paragraph 7.  The appellant was not within a minority group which  had
      been identified as being at particular risk.  He referred the Tribunal
      to paragraph 6.85 of the CIPU Report which indicated that  persecution
      solely on the basis of clan  membership  or  ethnicity  was  now  very
      unlikely in most areas of Somalia.

11.   The Tribunal are not satisfied that there  is  any  substance  in  the
      submission that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  consider  the  issue  of
      whether the appellant would be at risk on return to Somalia.   At  the
      beginning of paragraph 5 the Adjudicator correctly identified that the
      issue for him was whether there was a reasonable degree of  likelihood
      that the appellant would suffer persecution for a Convention reason on
      return to Somalia.  The Adjudicator did  not  accept  the  appellant's
      evidence of persecution in Somalia nor his account of ill-treatment in
      Yemen.  In our view this finding was properly open to the  Adjudicator
      on the evidence.  The appellant is someone who on his own account left
      Somalia in 1991.  He stayed in Yemen for nine years.  The  Adjudicator
      did not believe his account of his reasons for leaving.   He  went  to
      Russia where he stayed for six months without claiming asylum and then
      Poland for two months again without  seeking  asylum.   Inevitably  he
      would have travelled through a number of countries before arriving  in
      the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  purports  not  to  know  which
      countries he travelled through. He certainly did not claim  asylum  in
      any of them.  Looking at this background, it is  impossible  to  argue
      that the Adjudicator's findings on credibility were not properly  open
      to him.

12.   It is clear that the Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant  was  a
      member of a minority group in that he was of Yemeni background.   When
      interviewed the appellant described his  clan  as  Ridaaci  (a  Yemeni
      clan).  The Tribunal  have  not  been  referred  to  anything  in  the
      documentary evidence showing that this clan is at any particular  risk
      in Somalia.  Miss Hall argues that the appellant  as  a  member  of  a
      minority group is, if anything, worse off than a member of a  minority
      clan.  She refers the Tribunal to the general background situation set
      out not only in the CIPU Report but also in the Amnesty  International
      Report 2003 and the US State Department Report.  There is a  reference
      in the Amnesty Report at page 2 to Somali minorities being at risk  of
      inter-factional and inter-clan fighting in  the  south.   The  general
      security position for minority groups is set out in the CIPU Report at
      paragraph 6.83-5.  In paragraph 6.84 it is recorded that some minority
      groups such as the low cast Midgan, Tomal, Yahar, Iyle  and  Yabr  may
      risk harassment by Somali clans in rural areas but do not  necessarily
      find themselves facing particular human rights or security problems in
      Mogadishu.

13.   There was no mention of the Yemeni minority clan or the Ridaaci.   The
      Tribunal are fully aware of the unstable situation in Somalia although
      it is worth noting from paragraph 6.2 that  there  are  areas  of  the
      country where the situation is virtually stable and that basic law and
      order is the norm in most locations.  There is  evidence that  members
      of particular minority clans may be vulnerable.  In paragraph 6.85  it
      is reported that  while  many  displaced  minority  groups  would  not
      necessarily face persecution  on  the  basis  of  clan  membership  or
      ethnicity were they to return to the home areas, they  may  well  face
      difficulty in regaining land and homes  seized  by  the  clan  militia
      which took control  of  their  territories.   It  also  reported  that
      members of smaller clans and minority groups such as the Benadiri have
      been able to settle in Somaliland and Puntland.

14.   In summary the Adjudicator  did  not  believe  the  account  that  the
      appellant gave of his  reasons  for  leaving  Somalia  in  1991.   The
      Tribunal have not been pointed to any particular  background  evidence
      relating to the Ridaaci or a minority group comprising Yemeni  Somalis
      to show that they are at any particular risk.  In these  circumstances
      the Adjudicator was fully entitled to conclude looking at the evidence
      as a whole that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  that  there
      would be a real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or  a
      breach of his rights under Article 3 were he now  to  be  returned  to
      Somalia.

15.   Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.





                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
