
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On  10 March 2003          |        |DC (Article 3 - Article 8)  |
|                           |        |Albania [2002] UKIAT00060   |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|4th September 2003                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mrs S Hussain, JP                                                 |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant was represented  before  us  today  by  Ms  K  Negus  of
      Counsel  instructed  by  Salmons  and  the  Secretary  of  State   was
      represented by Ms M Walton, Home Office Presenting Officer.  We  would
      like to record  our  indebtedness  to  both  Counsel  for  their  able
      submissions before us and for the assistance which they have given  to
      us.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 25 January 1960  and  he
      arrived clandestinely in  the  United  Kingdom  on  12  November  2000
      accompanied by his wife and two children.  He  claimed  asylum  on  13
      November 2000 and  after  submitting  a  self  evidence  form  and  an
      interview the Secretary of State refused his  asylum  application  for
      the reasons set out in  a  letter  dated  18  December  2000.   On  29
      November 2000  although  this  did  not  become  effective  until  its
      delivery with the refusal letter  the  Secretary  of  State  had  also
      prepared removal directions  for  the  removal  of  the  appellant  to
      Albania as  an  illegal  entrant.   The  wife  and  two  children  who
      accompanied the appellant had claimed as  his  dependants  and  so  it
      follows that their position will be governed by the  outcome  of  this
      appeal since they will fall to be treated in line with the  appellant.
      The appellant appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision  on
      both asylum and human rights grounds and his appeal was  heard  on  10
      June 2002 by Mrs D Taylor an Adjudicator.  She  dismissed  his  asylum
      and human rights claims including that put forward on the basis of the
      effect of removal under Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention by
      reason of the medical condition of the appellant and his  eldest  son.
      Leave to appeal against that decision to the Tribunal has been granted
      only in respect of the claims under Articles 3 and 8 on the  basis  of
      the medical evidence and  their  psychological  condition.   Following
      Kehinde, a "starred" decision of the Tribunal  [2002]  UKIAT,  we  are
      concerned of course primarily with the situation of the appellant  but
      we are able to take into account the situation of  his  dependants  to
      the extent that they will impinge upon the appellant and any breach of
      his human rights by removal.  In the present case the medical evidence
      is to  the  effect  that  the  appellant  is  strongly  concerned  and
      influenced by the psychological problems of his eldest son and to that
      extent it is appropriate that we should consider the medical  evidence
      in relation to the son also since it appears quite clear that it  does
      impinge on the removability of the  appellant,  his  father.   It  was
      accepted by the Adjudicator that there had been a serious attack  upon
      the appellant in February 1999 following a situation where he had been
      charged with and acquitted of criminal charges relating to motoring in
      which an old lady had died in an accident.  It was believed that those
      responsible for that assault and a subsequent  assault  in  June  2000
      were members of the family of the lady concerned but  the  Adjudicator
      found that there was in Albania a sufficiency of  protection  for  the
      appellant and his family against any such attacks and  on  that  basis
      his claims to asylum and to Article 3 treatment for that  reason  both
      failed, there is as  we  say  no  appeal  against  that  part  of  the
      determination before us.

3.    The arguments and submissions before us have centred on  the  question
      of whether the psychological condition of the father  and  his  eldest
      son is such that it  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under Articles 3 or 8 of the European Convention  for  the
      appellant and his family now to be returned to their own country where
      they are held not to be in any danger otherwise of persecution or  ill
      treatment which would engage Article 3.

4.    The Adjudicator dealt with the matter at some length at paragraphs  15
      to 19 of her determination and it is helpful if we set  out  what  she
      then said to show the background to the case.

           "15.  This family is clearly a very close one and a very  loving
           one.  There is no doubt that Mr Capi's principle concern is  for
           his children.  His older son Santiljano is  not  well.   He  was
           traumatised by witnessing the assault on his father.  The family
           took him to hospital on  16  December  1999  because  they  were
           concerned about his state of health.  There is a report from the
           Tirana University Hospital Centre which states  that  Santiljano
           was suffering from depressive neurosis.  He  was  said  to  have
           arrived at  the  hospital  in  a  state  of  delirium.   He  was
           immediately hospitalised and seen by  a  psychiatrist.   He  was
           given medication.  I have no doubt  that  it  was  the  family's
           concern for their son which led  them  to  come  to  the  United
           Kingdom.  Mr Capi told me that he had been told by  the  doctors
           in Albania that they could not do anything for Santiljano.


           16.  He is still unwell.  A letter from his school  states  that
           he often  has  a  vacant  look  in  his  eyes,  has  significant
           difficulty  in  remember  simple  instructions  and  is   easily
           confused.  A psychological report prepared for the hearing by  L
           Carrick Smith , a Chartered Forensic Psychologist states that he
           is deeply traumatised.  He is currently suffering severely  from
           post  traumatic  stress.   He  needs  intensive  support.    The
           psychologist considers that should he return  to  Albania  there
           would be no realistic chance of treatment.  The Communist  party
           repressed psychology to the  point  of  obliteration  leaving  a
           system dependent on medication  and  institutionalisation.   The
           first graduates of psychology are starting work  but  they  have
           neither clinical training nor depth of experiences.  They return
           to  a  situation  reminding  Santiljano  of  previous  stresses,
           carries the risk of serious generalised psychological harm.   He
           states that a substantial period of stability is needed for this
           family.


           17.  The Presenting Officer asked me to find that the  appellant
           would  receive  the  help  that  he  needs  at  the  Centre  for
           Psychiatry at the University  Hospital  in  Tirana.   Mr  Capi's
           representative asked me to find that returning this family would
           breach their rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


           18.  Amongst the papers with which I have been provided there is
           an article by Anna Klein in Psychology  International  reporting
           on the current state of psychology in Albania.  It  states  that
           psychology is being reconstructed after 50  years  of  Communist
           rule.  Although great strides have been made it still has a long
           way to go to establish a professional  standard.   It  is  clear
           from the article that  the  role  of  psychology  has  now  been
           recognised in Albanian society and that the young graduates  are
           committed   to   providing   professional   psychological    and
           counselling services to  help  Albanians  cope  with  their  own
           personal psychological problems


           19.  I have every sympathy for this family who have clearly done
           everything they possibly could  to  help  their  son.   However,
           again, the human rights arguments must fail by reference to  the
           objective evidence.  The family would return as a unit, at least
           one grandparent remains in Albania, no  evidence  was  given  in
           relation to other family members.  Clearly the family feel  that
           the treatment which they are getting for Santiljano is better in
           the United Kingdom.   It  is  wholly  understandable  that  they
           therefore wish to remain here.  Nevertheless it cannot  be  said
           that the UK would be in breach of its obligations under  Article
           3 or Article 8 upon their return to Albania.   Whilst  they  may
           feel that  the  treatment  Santiljano  would  receive  there  is
           inferior nevertheless it is clear both  that  there  is  a  unit
           which could treat him in Tirana and that psychological  services
           in Albania are expanding."

5.    It is perhaps helpful if we note at this point  that  the  article  by
      Anna  Klein  referred  to  in  paragraph  18  of   the   Adjudicator's
      determination is dated to Spring 2000 and is  therefore  now  somewhat
      out of date.   The  medical  evidence  to  which  reference  was  made
      comprised two reports from Mr Carrick Smith;  one on the appellant and
      one on his  eldest  son.   The  report  on  the  appellant  said  that
      psychological features of his distress included severe depression with
      suicidal  ideation,  acute  anxiety,  sleep  disturbance  and   social
      dysfunction and that a  number  of  the  features  he  described  were
      consistent with a diagnosis of post traumatic  stress.   In  terms  of
      prognosis the psychologist said:

           "This is difficult.  If he were able to assure himself  that  he
           was in a safe environment and even more so that there was safety
           and constructive future for his sons, also  the  opportunity  of
           healing for his elder son, then it  is  probable  that  his  own
           difficulties would recede.  Should the converse  transpire  then
           it would prove to Mr Capi that his efforts, for right or  wrong,
           had been to no avail and a helpless  situation  compounded  such
           that I cannot  speak  for  his  psychological  future,  suicidal
           ideation does figure in the assessment.  It  is  further  to  be
           noted that Mr Capi sees his own  life  and  future  as  entirely
           secondary to the welfare of his son."

6.     The  psychologist  therefore  recommended  that  there  should  be  a
      substantial period of stability for the family.  "Not  least  so  that
      some of the needs of his elder son can be  approached".   Although  he
      said that in that context psychological input would be  desirable  for
      the appellant as well as  his  son,  he  noted  that  it  might  prove
      impractical for both and indeed there is no evidence  before  us  that
      the appellant is in receipt of any medical or psychological  treatment
      at all.

7.    So far as the elder son is concerned, the report of Mr  Carrick  Smith
      is based on interviews which took place as Ms Walton properly  pointed
      out at the family's solicitors office with an interpreter present  and
      both on the same day.  It is clear however from looking  carefully  at
      the report on the eldest son that as  she  submitted  there  does  not
      appear to have been  any  questioning  at  all  of  the  son  and  the
      diagnosis and prognosis of Mr  Carrick  Smith  appears  to  be  wholly
      dependent upon an acceptance of what  he  was  told  about  the  son's
      situation by his father, the appellant.  He concluded that the son was
      currently suffering  severely  from  post  traumatic  stress  and  was
      displaying a complex of symptomology  typical  both  of  children  and
      adults in this situation.  He said that he  needed  intensive  support
      although that would not be  easy  only  by  reason  of  language.   He
      recommended  that  a  copy  of  the  report  be  provided   to   those
      professionally involved to avoid need for reassessment and  said  this
      about the situation on return.

           "In terms of any treatment for Santiljano should he be  returned
           to Albania, this  seems  beyond  realistic  consideration.   The
           Communist  Party  repressed   psychology   to   the   point   of
           obliteration (see Appendix Report) leaving a system dependent on
           medication and institutionalisation (and Santiljano has  already
           had some exposure to this).  Rebuilding of psychology is at  the
           point of its first graduates  but  they  have  neither  clinical
           training  nor  depth  of  experience.   I  cannot  therefore  be
           confident  of  effective  provision.   Furthermore   return   to
           anything like previous stressors (or even a situation  reminding
           of them) carry risk of seriously generalised psychological  harm
           to this boy."

8.    Ms Negus laid her primary emphasis upon the  report  relating  to  the
      eldest son and it was her submission that return  would  first  breach
      Article 3 rights by reason of the risk which had been identified by Mr
      Carrick Smith and the lack of treatment as she said which  existed  in
      Albania.  It is perhaps right also to mention at this point that there
      was a report from the  Tirana  Hospital  before  the  Adjudicator  and
      before us made on 11 December 2000 which referred to the admission  of
      the son on 16 December 1999 and that he had recovered from  in-patient
      treatment by 21 December 1999, depressive syndrome and  neurosis  were
      diagnosed and  it  appeared  that  he  had  been  given  some  medical
      treatment and that there was a recommendation that he be treated as an
      out-patient  and  to  be  "controlled  (under  observation)   of   the
      psychiatrist for depressive situation every date 13  of  each  month".
      It may be that the appellant and his family left Albania  whilst  such
      out-patient  treatment  was  still  continuing.   There  is  no  clear
      evidence one way or the other but what it  does  demonstrate  is  that
      there had been a recognition on the part of the Albanian hospital that
      there was a need for continuing treatment of this young child  who  is
      now nearly 16 years of age.

9.    The issue with which we are concerned is  primarily  whether  for  the
      reasons advanced it can be said that the findings of  the  Adjudicator
      are not sustainable.  Ms Negus urged us to that course saying that the
      family had now established a private life in this country  where  they
      were well settled and in their own  accommodation  with  the  children
      going to secondary school.  It was her essential submission  that  the
      disruption to be caused would be so  great  if  the  family  were  now
      returned that it would effectively be to subject them to  inhuman  and
      degrading treatment for the purposes of  Article  3  of  the  European
      Convention.  That is a very high threshold  to  reach  as  is  clearly
      illustrated in the European decision in Bensaid the United Kingdom  of
      6 February 2001 under application  number  44599/98.   It  is  perhaps
      helpful to set out the situation there.  Mr Bensaid was a  citizen  of
      Algeria who had for  a  considerable  period  resided  in  the  United
      Kingdom ultimately on the basis that he had a  right  to  be  here  by
      reason of his marriage to a British citizen but  it  was  subsequently
      held that the marriage was a sham simply for the purpose of preserving
      his residency in the United Kingdom and the leave to remain  initially
      granted to him  was  withdrawn  and  the  Secretary  of  State  issued
      directions for his deportation.  At that point it was raised  that  by
      reason of his medical condition he could not  be  removed  because  it
      would  be  in  breach  of  his  human  rights  which  were  then   not
      incorporated formally into English law as they are now  by  virtue  of
      the Human Rights Act 1998 but which were nevertheless to  be  observed
      by the Secretary of State in  his  removal  directions.   The  medical
      situation of  Mr  Bensaid  is  recorded  in  the  following  terms  at
      paragraph 36 set in the decision of the European Court.

           "36. In the present case the applicant is suffering from a  long
           term mental illness, schizophrenia.  He is  currently  receiving
           medication,  Lanzopine,  which  assists  him  in  managing   his
           symptoms.  If he returns to Algeria this drug will no longer  be
           available to him free as an out-patient.  He has not enrolled in
           any social insurance fund and cannot  claim  any  reimbursement.
           It is however the case that the drug would be available  to  him
           if he was admitted  as  an  in-patient  and  that  it  would  be
           potentially available on payment as an out-patient.  It is  also
           the case that other medication used in the management of  mental
           illness is likely to be available.   The  nearest  hospital  for
           providing treatment is at Bleda, some 75 to 80  kilometres  from
           the village where his family live.


           37.  The difficulties in obtaining medication and  the  stresses
           inherent in returning to this part of  Algeria  where  there  is
           violence and active terrorism are alleged to endanger  seriously
           his health.  Deterioration in the applicant's  already  existing
           mental illness could involve  relapse  into  hallucinations  and
           psychotic delusions involving self-harm and harm  to  others  as
           well as restrictions in social functioning, e.g. withdrawal  and
           lack of motivation.  The  court  considers  that  the  suffering
           associated with such a relapse could in  principle  fall  within
           the scope of Article 3.


           38.  The court observes however that  the  applicant  faces  the
           risk of relapse even if he stays in the United  Kingdom  as  his
           illness is long term and requires constant management.   Removal
           will arguably increase the risk as will the differences  in  the
           available personal support and accessibility of treatment.   The
           applicant has argued in particular that  other  drugs  are  less
           likely to be of benefit to  his  condition  and  also  that  the
           option of becoming  an  in-patient  should  be  a  last  resort.
           Nonetheless medical treatment is available to the  applicant  in
           Algeria.  The fact that the applicant's circumstances in Algeria
           would be less favourable than those enjoyed by him in the United
           Kingdom is not decisive from the point of view of Article  3  of
           the Convention.


           39.  The court finds that  the  risk  that  the  applicant  will
           suffer a deterioration in his condition if  he  is  returned  to
           Algeria and that if he did he would not receive adequate support
           or care is to a large extent speculative.  ...


           40.  The  court  accepts  the  seriousness  of  the  applicant's
           medical condition.  Having regard however to the high  threshold
           set by Article 3 particularly where the case  does  not  concern
           the direct responsibility  of  the  contracting  state  for  the
           infliction of harm, the court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the  applicant's  removal  in  these
           circumstances would be contrary to the standards of  Article  3.
           It does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of the D case
           where the applicant was  in  the  final  stages  of  a  terminal
           illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of  medical  care  or  family
           support on expulsion to St Kitts."

10.   Ms Negus sought to distinguish Bensaid on the  basis  that  the  risks
      were speculative and that the nature of his illness was different  and
      in particular that he could suffer a deterioration in his condition in
      the United Kingdom even if not removed.  She sought  to  rely  on  the
      Court of Appeal decision in Kilic of 27 January 2000 Neutral  Citation
      No. 997005/4 CA.  Kilic was a case in which the appellant sought leave
      to move for judicial review which had been refused at  first  instance
      and was concerned only with the question of whether it was appropriate
      to say that there was an arguable issue for consideration on  judicial
      review.  It does not to our  mind  materially  assist  this  appellant
      because it reached no conclusion on the matters which he  put  forward
      but merely said, as has been accepted in this case, that the issue  is
      arguable.  Of more pertinence  it  seems  to  us  is  the  later  case
      referred to us by the Secretary of State of K v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department again heard in the Court of Appeal and reported at
      2001 Imm AR.  In that case the court was concerned with  the  question
      of a return to Uganda where it was said  that  the  medical  treatment
      available was not as easily available or as comprehensive as  was  the
      case in the United Kingdom.  The Court of Appeal  again  distinguished
      the position from D v United  Kingdom  and  referred  to  I  v  United
      Kingdom [1997] Imm AR172 in which the Court of Appeal  had  held  that
      albeit appropriate medical facilities in Uganda were inferior to those
      in the United  Kingdom  they  were  available  and  that  it  was  not
      unreasonable for the Secretary of State to require  the  applicant  to
      return to Uganda, although it  might  have  been  the  case  that  the
      position would be different  if  there  were  no  appropriate  medical
      facilities at all.  The fact that the applicant's lifespan and that of
      her daughter might but not necessarily would  be  reduced  was  not  a
      reason for her not returning to Uganda.  That  proposition  and  ratio
      was adopted again by the Court of Appeal in K  where  they  posed  the
      question at paragraph of 11 of the judgment in the following terms:

           "What it comes to is this.  Would it  be  inhuman  or  degrading
           treatment to send Mr K back to Uganda on the grounds that he may
           or may not be able to afford all the treatment that he requires.
             It does seem to be that if we were to accede to that  argument
           we would be in effect adopting a rule that any country which did
           not have a health service which was available free to all people
           within its bounds would be a place to which it would be  inhuman
           and degrading to send someone.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
           European Court of Human Rights would reach that conclusion.   It
           seems to me that one has to weight up all the  circumstances  of
           the case as was done in the case of D and  decide  whether  that
           test is fulfilled.  In those circumstances I am  unable  to  say
           that the Secretary of State's decision was illegal or irrational
           or procedurally  improper  or  ought  to  be  revisited  by  the
           courts."

11.   In adopting that ratio the Court of Appeal was of course  echoing  the
      point made by the European Court in Bensaid that not only did the harm
      have to be looked at  but  that  it  was  an  important  consideration
      whether there was any direct responsibility of the  contracting  state
      for the infliction of the harm.  Quite clearly there is none  such  in
      the present case.  For our part we  reached  the  conclusion  that  it
      cannot be  said  that  there  is  not  appropriate  medical  treatment
      available to the appellant insofar as he needs any and to his  son  in
      Albania.  The evidence satisfied the Adjudicator. She relied upon  the
      CIPU assessment which we have before us in the  October  2002  edition
      which deals with medical services in Albania  at  paragraphs  5.56  to
      5.59.  At 5.58 it says as follows:

           "The  University  Hospital  in  Tirana  has  a   neurology   and
           psychiatry clinic with qualified  staff  and  various  kinds  of
           medicines  available.   A  Danish  NGO  is   providing   therapy
           (physicians  and  social  workers)  within  the   hospital.    A
           neurology service is also provided in  polyclinics  in  regional
           hospitals around Albania."

      That effectively follows on from the report of Anna Klein which as  we
      have noted was in the spring  of  2000  and  talked  about  the  first
      psychologists graduating in that year  and  made  it  clear  that  the
      psychology school was well supported with additional  under  graduates
      in some numbers  studying  the  subject  so  that  the  position  will
      necessarily have improved since her report.  It is also significant in
      our view that there was treatment offered to the son in  Albania  when
      it was sought and not simply on a short term but on a long term  basis
      of counselling and for all these reasons we are entirely satisfied  on
      the evidence that the Adjudicator was right in saying that  Article  3
      would not be breached.  We are clear  that  the  very  high  threshold
      involved in such treatment is not breached on the facts of this  case.



12.   That leaves Article 8 to be considered but we note from  Bensaid  that
      in any event again it is said there that a high  threshold  is  to  be
      applied and Mr Bensaid was no more successful under Article 8 than  he
      was under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention.   We  have  in  the
      "starred" Tribunal decision of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  000702  held
      that for there to be a violation or engagement of Article 8 under  the
      head of physical or moral integrity there would need to be a  flagrant
      denial or gross  violation  of  the  human  rights  concerned  in  the
      receiving country.  Since then there has of course  been  a  Court  of
      Appeal decision in Ullah [2002] EWCA Civ  1856  which  has  held  that
      where the European Convention is invoked on the  sole  ground  of  the
      treatment which an alien refused the  right  to  enter  or  remain  is
      likely to be subjected by the receiving state and  that  treatment  is
      not sufficiently severe to engage Article 3 the English court  is  not
      required to recognise that any other Article of the Convention  is  or
      may be engaged.  On the basis of the ratio in Ullah which binds us the
      Article 8 claim must fail in our view.  Even were that not  so  we  do
      not consider  that  there  would  be  the  flagrant  denial  or  gross
      violation necessary under the ratio of Devaseelan.

13.   Whilst therefore like the Adjudicator we have every sympathy  for  the
      appellant  and  his  family,  we  are  satisfied  that  none  of   the
      submissions put before us lead us to the view that the findings of the
      Adjudicator were based on any error  of  law  or  of  approach  having
      regard to her factual findings, and that her findings are sustainable.
       It follows from this that the appeal must be dismissed.  We ought  to
      add perhaps that were we considering the matter afresh now on the fact
      as found by the Adjudicator and having regard to the principles of law
      which we have enunciated above we would also be of the same view  that
      the appeal cannot succeed on the basis they are put before us.  As  we
      say this appeal is dismissed.

                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
