
ar                MM (Risk-Return-Tuni) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00129


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 3 October 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                  04 November 2003 .........

                                   Before:

                           Mr P R Lane  (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe
                               Mr N Kumar, JP





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr  R.  Blackford,  counsel,  instructed  by  Pearson  &
Winston
For the respondent :   Miss A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia, appeals with  leave  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr C.B. Buckwell, sitting at Bromley,
      in  which  he  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
      his asylum claim and grant him only limited leave (which has  in  fact
      now expired).

   2. The appellant's account was as follows. He said he was a member of the
      Tunni clan, living in Hamarwyne, Mogadishu, Somalia. He  had  suffered
      ill-treatment as a result of his membership of  the  Tunni  clan,  His
      brother had been killed. The family had attempted to relocate  to  the
      coastal area in 1993 but had not been made welcome and  thus  returned
      to Somalia.

   3. The appellant said that he was a businessman,  selling  goods  from  a
      shop. He had to pay protection money  to  bandits  or  'Mooryaan'  who
      particularly preyed upon minority clans whom the bandits knew 'have no
      protection or help from  their  clans  or  from  the  majority  clans'
      (statement of 2 July 2002).

4     In that statement the appellant said that 'At the  beginning  of  this
      year [2002] I have to sell the shop, as I was no longer able  to  keep
      it under these conditions, I even sold  it  cheaper  than  the  normal
      price in order to sell it quickly'.

5.    With the US $3000 which he received from the sale  of  the  shop,  the
      appellant obtained the services of an agent. This agent posed  as  his
      wife, taking the appellant to  Dubai.  The  appellant  did  not  claim
      asylum there. Instead, he travelled on to the United Kingdom.

6.    According to the appellant's interview record, he left his  wife,  son
      and brother's son behind in Mogadishu. When  asked  why  he  had  left
      them, the appellant replied 'My life comes from first' (B6).

7.    The Adjudicator did not find the appellant to be  credible.  He  noted
      that, in the statement of 2 July 2002, the appellant said that he  had
      sold his shop at the beginning of the year. However, in his interview,
      he said that the last difficulty with the militia had occurred  on  10
      June 2002 and that his shop was looted then by  the  Hawiye.  He  then
      said that 'After that I  sold  my  shop'.  If  that  was  the  correct
      timescale then the Adjudicator found it surprising that the  appellant
      was able to make arrangements within four days to depart the  country.
      However, the Adjudicator noted the discrepancy  between  this  account
      and the statement of 2 July 2002, in which the appellant said he  sold
      the business at the beginning of that year. The Adjudicator considered
      this to be 'a very serious discrepancy' which 'seriously  damages  the
      credibility of the appellant' (determination paragraph 32).

8.    The Adjudicator  went on to analyse the evidence regarding the  nature
      of the Tunni clan. His findings are set out at paragraphs 33  and  34.
      The Adjudicator concluded that the Tunni appear to have  a  connection
      with the Digil who are a major Somali  clan  family.  The  Adjudicator
      considered 'that the Digil do not appear to be a persecuted  minority,
      nor is there evidence that the  Tunni,  particularly  those  who  have
      lived in Mogadishu for some time, form part of a  persecuted  minority
      group' (paragraph 34).

   9. At paragraph 35, the Adjudicator concluded that the appellant had made
      payments, probably protection money, to a group  of  individuals,  and
      that he

             'may well have been a victim of the general  lawlessness  that
             resulted from  the  problems  which  arose  as  from  1991  in
             Somalia. Nevertheless it is the case that during  this  period
             people  continued  to  live  in  Mogadishu  despite  all   the
             difficulties and the attacks from various groups  and  militia
             which took place in the period which followed the start of the
             troubles. It may will be that the appellant became involved on
             one or more occasions, but I believe that  if  so  he  is  the
             victim of general lawlessness, or of  those seeking protection
             money, rather than being an individual who was  persecuted  on
             account of his clan background or ethnicity ....  I  take  the
             view that he, like many thousands of other innocent Somalians,
             may well have  been  the  victim  of  the  general  chaos  and
             lawlessness which Somalia experienced. I do not believe he has
             made out his case that any suffering he endured was based upon
             his clan or ethnicity.' (paragraph 35).

10.   The Adjudicator accordingly dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
      and, at paragraph 39, found that there would not be a real risk  of  a
      breach of Article 3 or 14 of  the  ECHR,  were  the  appellant  to  be
      returned to Somalia.

11.   On 31 July 2003, the appellant sought to adduce a  further  statement.
      Permission was granted by a  Vice  President  to  give  oral  evidence
      before the Tribunal, in connection with this statement.

  12. The appellant did so, with the benefit of a  Somali  interpreter.  The
      statement says that  'approximately  six  weeks  ago'  (from  when  is
      unclear)


             'I learned that  members  of  a  large  clan  in  Somalia  had
             murdered my young child, who was just two years  of  age.  Her
             name was Abikar and she had  been  living  with  my  wife  and
             mother in Hamarwyne. I was informed of this tragedy from  some
             Benadiri people who I had met in the United Kingdom. They  had
             had contact with people who knew my family as they told me the
             awful news. I am completely devastated and what makes it worse
             is that I have no way of personally contacting  my  family  to
             share my grief and to ensure that they are alive. I know  that
             they remain in danger in Hamarwyne as  members  of  the  Tunni
             clan and I know my life would be at risk if I were  to  return
             there.'

13.   Expanding upon this statement, the appellant  said  that  he  met  the
      people  concerned  in  Wembley,  where  there  was  a   large   Somali
      population. The people had  told  the  appellant  that  'my  son'  was
      killed. When the appellant asked them why his  son  was  killed,  they
      said that it was during an attack by the militia on Hamarwyne.

14.   The appellant confirmed that he was a Tunni and that  the  Tunni  were
      not part of the Digil. Asked who the killers were, he  said  that  the
      area was mainly controlled by Habergedir Murarsebe.

15.    Cross-examined,  the  appellant  was  asked  why  his  statement  had
      referred to a daughter whereas he had referred in oral evidence to his
      son, as the victim of the killing. The appellant said that he did  not
      have a daughter and that  there  must  have  been  a  mistake  in  the
      translation. Wembley was the contact point for Somalis living  in  the
      United Kingdom and different clans would meet there.  The  family  who
      told him the news knew his family. His  son  had  been  killed  during
      indiscriminate firing. His wife had also been injured.  They  were  at
      home at the time, so he had been told.

16.   The appellant was asked  why,  if  he  had  learned  of  these  events
      through his contacts, he could not use the same contacts to share  his
      grief with his family in Somalia. He said that he did convey a message
      through these people but he had no  means  of  contacting  the  family
      directly. He had asked the family to  contact  members  of  their  own
      family in Mogadishu, and pass a message on to his family.  The  family
      who had given  him  the  news,  and  whom  he  had  asked  to  act  as
      intermediaries, were members of the Reer Hamar.

17.   There was no re-examination.

18.   Mr  Blackwood  did,  however,  ask  the  Tribunal  if  we  would  give
      permission for him to adduce oral evidence as to the  explanation  for
      the discrepancy,  referred  to  in  the  adjudicator's  determination,
      regarding the date when the  shop  was  sold  by  the  appellant.  The
      Tribunal gave such permission.

19.   The appellant said that he had goods in his shop but the  shop  itself
      was owned by another person. When he had said that he sold the shop at
      the beginning of 2002, he actually had sold the goods  in  June  2002.
      There was no system of leases in Somalia. Everything was done  orally.
      In other words, the appellant  had  'had  to  sell  the  shop  at  the
      beginning of 2002'. He had not actually done so until later.

20.   Cross-examined, the appellant said that he sold  the  stock  from  the
      shop in June. He had been looted several times at the beginning of the
      year. Asked why he had said otherwise in his statement, he  said  that
      he had not said that he had sold the shop at the  beginning  of  2002,
      but that he had had to sell it. That was a decision he  had  made.  He
      had decided at the beginning of 2002 to sell the shop.

21.   Asked why, therefore, it took him until June to dispose of the  stock,
      the appellant replied that it was not easy to arrange for the sale  of
      the stock and it took until June to do so. The  stock  had  been  sold
      through a broker.

22.   Asked by the Tribunal why, therefore,  he  could  not  have  sold  the
      stock in January to the broker, he replied that  things  were  not  as
      easy in Somalia and everything  was  complicated.  He  could  not  get
      anyone to buy the stock until June.  It  was  also  a  very  difficult
      decision because he had to leave his family.

23.   Asked by Miss Holmes why he had to leave  his  family,  he  said  that
      they were all in difficulties and he decided to go to a  safe  country
      and bring them to him, wherever he chose to settle.  The  proceeds  of
      the sale of the stock had not been sufficient for all of the family to
      go to a safe country. Asked why he had not been  concerned  about  his
      family, since they came from  the  same  clan,  he  said  it  was  not
      possible for them  all to leave at the  same  time  and  it  had  been
      decided that he would bring them to wherever he settled.

24.   There was no re-examination.

25.   The Adjudicator did not find the appellant to  be  credible.  That  he
      was fully entitled to that view is borne  out  by  the  oral  evidence
      given by the appellant to the Tribunal itself.

26.   The discrepancy regarding the point at which the appellant decided  to
      sell his shop or, as he would now have it, the stock  from  the  shop,
      was sought to be explained on the basis that what  the  appellant  had
      actually meant in his statement was that he had 'had to sell the shop'
      at the beginning of 2002. That, clearly, carries the implication  that
      the shop had actually been sold at that time. In a further elaboration
      of his position, the appellant said that he had decided  to  sell  the
      shop at the beginning of 2002 but had not  been  able  to  effect  the
      relevant sale until June. This was because it was difficult to  do  so
      such things quickly in Somalia.

27.   The Tribunal observes, however, that in his statement of 2 July  2002,
      the appellant said that 'I even sold it cheaper than the normal  price
      in order to sell it quickly'. There is no suggestion at  all  in  that
      statement that there was, nevertheless, a delay  of  some  six  months
      between the decision to sell and the actual sale to the broker.

28.   The appellant's  statement  submitted  in  July  2003,  regarding  the
      alleged death of his child,  in  no  way  assists  his  case.  She  is
      referred to as a female in the statement, whereas the  appellant  says
      that it was his son who was killed and that there had been  a  mistake
      in translation. Given  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  other
      evidence, referred to above, we are not prepared  to  accept  such  an
      explanation. On the  contrary,  everything  points  to  this  being  a
      further embellishment of a false story.

29.   The  Tribunal  finds  further  support  for  that  conclusion  in  the
      remainder of the oral evidence given by the  appellant.  Contradicting
      what he had said at his interview, about putting himself  first,  when
      it came to escaping from the country, the appellant told us  that  his
      plan had been to settle in a country, and then arrange for his  family
      to join him.  Such  a  plan,  however,  completely  depends  upon  the
      appellant having the ability at any stage to contact  his  family  and
      arrange for them to join him. This flies completely in the face of the
       further written statement, which  claims  that  'I  have  no  way  of
      personally contacting my family to share my grief and to  ensure  they
      are alive'. As the evidence emerged, it was only through  an  apparent
      chance encounter with members of another clan, whom he met in Wembley,
      that the appellant learnt about the supposed death of his child.

30.   Although  the  Adjudicator  does  not  expressly  say  so,  the  clear
      implication of the adjudicator's conclusions is that  the  Adjudicator
      found to the requisite standard that the appellant was  a  Tunni,  but
      that the Tunni are not a minority group in Somalia.

31.   The nature of the Tunni is, accordingly, a matter  to  which  we  must
      now turn.  Even if the appellant's account of his  actual  experiences
      in Somalia is false (which it is) he would still be  able  to  contend
      that his removal to Somalia would violate both the Refugee  Convention
      and the European Convention, if the evidence shows that members of the
      Tunni are, at the present time, facing a real risk of persecution from
      majority clans in Somalia.

32.   At page 36 of  the  joint  British,  Danish  and  Dutch   Fact-Finding
      Mission Report (the so-called Report on Minority Groups  in  Somalia),
      contained in the appellant's bundle, we find this passage at page 36:-

             'The elders from Brava told the delegation that they consisted
             of two subgroups:  the Bravanese and the  Tunni.  Both  groups
             are from Brava and they share  to  a  large  extent  the  same
             culture. They intermarry between their  groups.  However,  the
             Bravanese consider themselves Benadiri,  while  the  Tunni  do
             not. The Bravanese  are  of  Persian/Arab/  Portuguese/Spanish
             origins. According to the Bravanese elders, the  Tunni  belong
             to the Digil clan-family. They are originally from the  region
             of Brava. However, the elders gave the delegation a copy of  a
             letter, written by the Bravani elders in Nairobi to  a  number
             of  organisations  (including  UNHCR,   the   US   Immigration
             Department and Amnesty International) on  their  situation  in
             Kenya, in which the Tunni are mentioned with the Bravanese  as
             part of the  Bravani community.'

33.   Immediately following this passage is this:

          'The UNHCR overview classifies the Tunni with the Digil.'

34.   The French researcher,  Marc-Antoine  Perouse  de  Montclos,  is  then
      recorded as having stated  that  'Some  of  the  Tunni  Torre  of  the
      hinterland claim a relationship with the Adjuran and the Gurreh of the
      Hawiye clan family, while others claim a relationship with  the  Helai
      and the Hadam of the Rahanweyn clan-family. In  concrete  terms,  they
      are the vassals of the Tunni Digils of the Brava coast.' (page 36).

35.   Later on  the  same  page,  referring  to  the  Somali  of  the  Brava
      surroundings, it is said that their minority status 'is more  doubtful
      because they are part of the Tunni lineage of the Digil'.

36.   At page 30 of the same report, under the  heading  '6.4  Security  and
      Human Rights Situation', the Bantu elders are recorded as saying  that
      the Bantu 'are  unarmed  and  are  victims  of  serious  human  rights
      violations'.  They also claim that 'their voice is not  being  heard'.
      Perouse de Montclos 'comes to a similar conclusion  when  he  makes  a
      distinction between the Bantu and the so-called Sab castes (the  Digil
      mainly the Tunni and Rahanweyn). The camel-herding clans  of  northern
      Somalia despise the latter, but they are  still  part  of  the  Somali
      lineage system and they will still be able to negotiate 'when the Arab
      reconciliation arrives in Somalia'. Minorities, who are  not  part  of
      the lineage system, the Bantu and the 'half  castes  argue  that  they
      will never benefit from any compensation mediation procedures  amongst
      the Somali clans.'
37.   At 11.1 of the report, at page 48, there is an analysis of  the  Digil
      and Mirifle (Rahanweyn) clan. The relevant passage is worth quoting in
      full:

             'The Digil and Mirifle, or Rahanweyn, seem to  take  a  middle
             position between the Somali clan  and  a  minority.  They  are
             considered as a minority group by some experts (such as the UN
             Special  Rapporteur  on  Human  Rights  in  Somalia,  Ms  Mona
             Rishmawi).  By others they are considered as clans related  to
             the Somali clans, both considered as  less  "noble".  In   the
             Transitional  National  Assembly  (TNA)  recently  formed   in
             Djibouti, the Digil and Mirifle have been included as  one  of
             the major Somali clan-families  (with  thirty-three  subclans)
             and allotted forty-nine seats, distinct  from  the  recognised
             "official" minorities grouped together at Arta under the title
             "Alliance Clans Community".


             Different use is made of the names  Digil,  Mirifle  (Mirifle)
             and Rahanweyn.  A UN source in Nairobi explained that this  is
             the consequence of an effort made by Siad Barre to  amalgamate
             all these clans under one name, Rahanweyn (the largest group).
              Originally,  however,  the  Somali  distinguished  two  clan-
             families, one called the Digil and  another  variously  called
             the Rahanweyn or the Mirifle.


             The Digil and Mirifle are related ethnically to the four  main
             Somali clan-families in various ways. Both Somali  and  Digil-
             Mirifle trace their origins back to the same ancestor, at  the
             highest genealogical level: the ancestor of the Digil-Mirifle,
             Sab and the ancestor of the four main  Somalia  clan-families,
             Somali (or Samale) are traced back  to  the  common  ancestor,
             Hill, who  is  believed  to  have  had  Arabian  origins.  The
             descendents of Sab are  segmented  into  three  families:  the
             Digil, the Mirifle (or Rahanweyn) and Tunni; the  Mirifle  and
             Tunni derive from Digil. The Mirifle and Tunni are numerically
             the  most  important,  but  the  Digil  survive  as  a   small
             independent confederacy.'

38.   It should be mentioned  at  this  stage  that  the  four  major  clan-
      families, referred to in  the  passage  just  quoted,  are  the  Isaq,
      Hawiye, Daroud and Dir.

39.   On page 47, Lewis, another expert, 'describes the  Tunni  as  a  large
      tribe, or rather tribal confederacy'.

40.   At paragraph 6.79 of  the  April  2002  Country  Assessment,  we  find
      material which broadly reproduces that set out in  the  passages  from
      the Minorities Report, to which we have made reference.

41.   At Annex B of that Country  Assessment,  there  is  a  list  of  major
      Somali clan families, derived from the Minority Group Report and  also
      the Netherlands Situation in Somalia Report.  Under 'Digil' are to  be
      found the following subclans:-

      Dabarre
      Jiddu
      Tunni
      Geledi
      Garre

42.   From this, the  Tribunal  considers  that  it  is  apparent  that  the
      predominant view (including that of  the  UNHCR,  notwithstanding  the
      view of the Special Rapporteur) is that the Tunni, whilst  originating
      from Brava, where there are also to be  found  the  Benadiri  peoples,
      belong to the Digil clan-family. The Digil are, in turn, part of  (or,
      at the very least, closely associated with) the Rahanweyn.

43.   None of this material demonstrates  that  the  Tunni  are  a  minority
      clan, currently persecuted in Somalia  by  other,  majority  clans  or
      groups.

44.   The Tribunal was referred to a Tribunal determination in the  case  of
      Hanaf [2002] UKIAT 05912.  This case is cited  as  authority  for  the
      proposition  that  the  Tunni  are  a  persecuted  minority.   Reading
      paragraph 26 of  the  determination  in  that  case,  however,  it  is
      apparent to this Tribunal that the Tribunal in that case did not  have
      available to it the range of materials which we have  before  us.  The
      submissions in Hanaf  appear to have proceeded on the basis  that  the
      Tunni were part of the Brava people. As is apparent, however, that  is
      not the case.

45.   Putting this analysis  together  with  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings, and those of the Tribunal, concerning the appellant, a clear
      picture emerges. As a person living and working in the Mogadishu area,
      the appellant has,  no  doubt,  suffered  in  common  with  all  other
      inhabitants of that area from the lawlessness that has  resulted  from
      the collapse of a central administration in Somalia. He may well, on a
      relatively regular basis, have had to pay protection money in  respect
      of his business. Any problems faced by the  appellant,  however,  were
      clearly not of such severity as to have impelled him to flee with  his
      family, for their own safety. On the contrary, the appellant chose  to
      dispose of his business in what can only be said to  be  a  relatively
      relaxed manner. With the US$3000 he  obtained  from  the  proceeds  of
      sale, he could quite clearly have removed himself and  his  family  to
      Kenya. At 4.3 of the Report on Minorities, at page 20,  the  UNHCR  is
      recorded as saying that 'No Somali citizen - whether a person  from  a
      minority group or a person from  one  of  the  major  Somali  clans  -
      recognised as a refugee  in  Kenya  has  been  deported  to  Somalia',
      although the informant was (quite understandably) unable  'to  exclude
      fully the possibility that this has ever happened'.

46.   Instead, the appellant chose to travel to the  United  Kingdom,  there
      being content to wait until he was able to call for his family to join
      him.

47.   Looking at the evidence as a whole, the Tribunal finds that  there  is
      nothing to show that this appellant left Somalia at a time when he was
      at real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the
      ECHR. There is nothing in the documentary  evidence  to  show  such  a
      deterioration in the position of people  living  in  Mogadishu  as  to
      require the Tribunal to find that he would face such a real  risk,  if
      returned today.

48.   Even if that were not the case,  however,  it  is  apparent  from  the
      documentary materials that, as a Tunni and, as such,  associated  with
      the Digil (one of the Rahanweyn clans) the appellant could relocate to
      South West Somalia. Paragraph 6.80 of the April 2003 Assessment is  of
      particular relevance in this regard:

             'The Rahanweyn clans  were  largely  excluded  from  political
             participation  in  the  Rahanweyn-populated  Bay  and   Bakool
             regions following their capture by  General  Aideed's  Hawiye-
             based USC/SNA in September 1995, when the  Rahanweyn-supported
             SDM regional administration was ousted. Since then the RRA has
             fought to reassert Rahanweyn control,  capturing  Huddur  town
             from the USC/SNA in October 1998 and  taking  Baidoa  in  June
             1999 with  Ethiopian  assistance.  The  [Rahanweyn  Resistance
             Army] set up a regional administration for a Bakool region  in
             December 1998. In March 2002, the RRA set up  a  new  regional
             administration, SWS [South West Somalia] effectively  covering
             Bay and Bakool but claiming to cover other regions.'

49.   Paragraph 4.67 of the same Assessment tells us more:

             'The decision to establish the SWS Administration was taken at
             a meeting in Baidoa of the RRA's Central  Committee  and  over
             seventy Elders from the Digil and Mirifle  (Rahanweyn)  clans.
             The meeting elected RRA Chairman, Colonel Hassan Mohammed  Nur
             'Shaatigaduud' as President of the new regional state to serve
             for  a  four  years  term.  There  was  speculation  that  the
             establishment of a new autonomous  state  would  lead  to  the
             demise of the SSRC, of which the RRA  is  a  member.  The  RRA
             governor of Baidoa announced that  the  RRA  will  attend  the
             peace talks due to take place in Nairobi as the new state  but
             that they would, however, 'still be under the SSRC umbrella'.

50.   In April 2002, there appears to have arisen a  power  struggle  within
      the RRA. This is noted at paragraphs  4.68  to  4.70  of  the  Country
      Assessment. The  resultant  fighting  seems  to  have  centred  around
      control of Baidoa.  As a result, security conditions in Baidoa and its
      environs  were  described,  in  2003,   as   'deteriorating'   (4.70).
      Paragraph 6.141 of the Assessment notes  that  'Humanitarian  agencies
      have not been able to access Baidoa since July 2002. There has been  a
      reported increase in the number of people killed because of their clan
      affiliations.'

51.   Whilst the situation in South West Somalia is, at  present,  far  from
      ideal, the information which is available does not indicate  that  the
      whole area is in anything approaching turmoil. The internal  rivalries
      that have resulted in fighting appear to have centred upon control  of
      a particular town. There is no suggestion that  this  appellant  would
      have to go to Baidoa.  Nor can the 'reported increase in the number of
      people killed because of their clan affiliations,' at paragraph  6.14,
      be properly interpreted as indicating that the appellant, as a  Tunni,
      would as such be at risk in South West Somalia. There is  no  evidence
      that the fighting within the RRA has assumed such a dimension.

  52. At page 51 of the July 2002 Joint British/Danish Fact Finding  Mission
      to Somalia, President Nur Shaatigaduud discussed with  the  delegation
      the possibility of European governments  returning  persons  to  South
      West Somalia.  Whilst the discussion clearly shows that the  President
      will be looking for some form of assistance from such governments,  in
      return for accepting failed asylum seekers, there is nothing  in  what
      he says to suggest that, rather than fleeing to  the  United  Kingdom,
      this particular appellant could not have used his financial  resources
      to establish himself  in South West Somalia.  Nor  does  the  evidence
      show that, if the appellant were  to  be  returned  to  that  part  of
      Somalia, he would face such a situation as to  make  it  unduly  harsh
      (with reference to the Refugee  Convention)  to  expect  him  to  live
      there, or as to put him at real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment
      or punishment.



53.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.





                                                     P.R. LANE

                                             VICE PRESIDENT










-----------------------
      1


