
Heard at Field House                    TJ (Marriage - Telephone
Relationship) Pakistan
[2003] UKIAT 00167
On      23 October  2003
Written  24 October  2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             9 December 2003

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                               HH Judge Foley






                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,  ISLAMABAD





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appeals, with leave, against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C J Lloyd, dismissing  her  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 21  January  2002  to  refuse
     entry clearance as a spouse. The issue before the Tribunal is whether a
     person who entered into a telephone marriage  that  is  not  recognised
     under English law, and has never met or  cohabited  with  her  intended
     spouse, can be said to have family life for the purpose of Article 8

  2. Mr A Mahmood represented the Appellant.  Mr  J  Jones,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The relevant facts can be summarised as follows.  The sponsor,  who  is
     British by birth, is now aged 23 and lives in Birmingham. He attended a
     special school from September 1991 and,  according  to  his  consultant
     cardiologist, has had a stormy time following aortic valve  replacement
     in 1994 for congenital aortic valve disease. Since then he has suffered
     from an extremely rare disorder, which results in extreme difficulty in
     controlling the  level  of  anticoagulation  of  his  blood.  This  has
     resulted in different times in  his  blood  being  too  coagulable  and
     producing small  cerebral  strokes  and  spontaneous  bleeding  in  the
     gluteal muscle on his left thigh. He requires a  stable  situation  and
     proper control of his medication. Consequently he is unable  to  travel
     outside the United Kingdom and will be unlikely to be able to do so for
     at least another five years. According to his sister, he has missed out
     on his schooling and this  has  not  helped  him  with  his  education,
     confidence or communication skills. He  is  in  receipt  of  disability
     living allowance and severe disability allowance.  He  has  never  been
     able to work.  He cannot walk or stand without support as  this  causes
     him discomfort or pain.  He lives with his parents and sister.

  4. He is a distant relative of the Appellant by marriage.   He  has  never
     met her but saw her on family photographs and videos and  expressed  an
     interest in her. His family arranged a marriage between them.  It  took
     place in Pakistan on 6 September  2001.  The  sponsor  participated  by
     telephone, as he was unable to travel to Pakistan. The sponsor's mother
     returned to Pakistan on 26 November 2001 to take the Appellant  to  her
     house there, where they stayed together for several weeks.  This is  of
     symbolic significance and reflects the fact that both families regarded
     the couple as married. The sponsor's mother then returned to the UK and
     the  Appellant  returned  to  live  with  her  parents.   They   couple
     subsequently  maintained  contact  by   letter   and   telephone.   The
     application for entry  clearance  for  settlement  as  a  spouse  under
     paragraph 281 of HC 395 was made on 10 January 2002. It was refused  on
     21 January 2002 primarily on the basis that the parties to the marriage
     had not  contracted  a  valid  marriage  because,  under  English  law,
     telephone marriages are not recognised  when  one  of  the  parties  is
     domiciled in the UK.

  5. The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 27 January 2003.  It  was  conceded
     that, as the sponsor was domiciled in the UK, a telephone marriage  was
     not valid and an application under  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not
     succeed. Accordingly the appeal proceeded solely in respect of  Article
     8. The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal on the basis that the Appellant
     had not established that  family  life  existed  between  her  and  the
     sponsor in terms of Article 8 (1). She  did  not  therefore  go  on  to
     consider other matters under Article 8 (2).  The Appellant has appealed
     to the Tribunal against this decision.

  6. At the outset of the proceedings before us, the representatives  agreed
     various points.  Mr Jones said that he would  not  be  challenging  the
     medical evidence to the effect that the sponsor could not travel abroad
     and would not be able to do so for at  least  five  years.  Mr  Mahmood
     accepted that there was no valid marriage under English law,  and  that
     section 77 (4) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 applied,  as  the
     Tribunal decision in SK related to removals  and  not  entry  clearance
     cases. He also accepted that the Appellant could not succeed under  the
     Immigration Rules and that this  appeal  related  only  to  Article  8.
     Furthermore both representatives agreed that if the  Tribunal  were  to
     accept that the Adjudicator was wrong, and there was established family
     life, the appeal would have  to  be  remitted,  probably  to  the  same
     Adjudicator, to consider the further issues arising under Article 8(2).



  7.  Article 8 states as follows.
           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country for the prevention of disorder  or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.

  8. We have been  referred  to  various  authorities  in  relation  to  the
     applicable law in respect of the interpretation of "family life."

  9. Macdonald's at paragraph 11.43 summarises the relevant law in  relation
     to spouse applications in the following terms.
           A spouse application refused on invalidity grounds could attract
           an appeal on human rights grounds if the parties  had  cohabited
           and family life was established, and if the refusal  constituted
           interference with family life (because  the  parties  could  not
           live together in the other spouse's country of residence)  which
           was disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued  by  the
           decision.

 10. Mr Jones submitted that this  analysis  of  the  law  disposed  of  the
     appeal. The Appellant and the sponsor had been  refused  on  invalidity
     grounds. The parties had  never  cohabited  and  family  life  was  not
     established.

 11. Mr Mahmood accepted that there were  no  authorities  directly  on  the
     point but argued that there were indications in several cases that were
     relevant. He referred us first to Abdulaziz, Cabales and  Balkandali  v
     UK 919850 7 EHRR 471, where the ECHR stated
           62. The Court recalls that, by guaranteeing the right to respect
           for family life, Article  8  "presupposes  the  existence  of  a
           family".  However this does not mean that  all  intended  family
           life falls entirely outside its gambit.  Whatever else the  word
           "family" may mean it must at any rate include  the  relationship
           that arises from a lawful and genuine marriage ....  Even  if  a
           family life of the kind referred to by the  government  has  not
           yet been fully established.  Those marriages must be  considered
           sufficient to attract such respect as may be due  under  Article
           8.
           Furthermore, the expression "family life",  in  the  case  of  a
           married couple, normally  comprises  cohabitation.   The  latter
           proposition is reinforced by the existence of Article 12, for it
           is scarcely conceivable that the right to found a family  should
           not encompass the right to live  together.   The  Court  further
           notes that Mr and Mrs Abdulaziz had not only contracted marriage
           but had also cohabited for a certain period before Mr  Abdulaziz
           was refused leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Mr  and  Mrs
           Balkandali had also cohabited and had a son, although they  were
           not married until after his leave to remain  as  a  student  had
           expired and an extension been refused;  their  cohabitation  was
           continuing when his application for leave to remain as a husband
           was rejected.
           63. The case of Mrs Cabales has  to  be  considered  separately,
           having regard to the question raised as to the validity  of  her
           marriage.  The government argued that in the  circumstances  her
           application was inadmissible ratione materiae and thus  did  not
           have to be examined by the Court.  Although this plea was framed
           in terms of disability, the Court is of the opinion that it goes
           to the merits of the application  and  is  therefore  preferably
           dealt with on that basis.  The Court does not consider  that  it
           has to  resolve  the  difference  of  opinion  that  has  arisen
           concerning the effect of Philippine law. Mr and Mrs Cabales have
           gone through a ceremony of marriage and the evidence before  the
           Court confirms that they believed themselves to be  married  and
           that they genuinely wished to cohabit and lead a  normal  family
           life.   And  indeed  they   subsequently   did   so.    In   the
           circumstances the  committed  relationship  so  established  was
           sufficient to attract the application of Article 8."

 12. Pausing at this point, we cannot see that  this  case  is  of  material
     assistance to the Appellant.  The principles stated  in  it  are  first
     that a genuine and lawful marriage with the intent to cohabit  attracts
     the right to respect under Article 8, and second that even  an  invalid
     marriage,  which  the  parties  believed  to  be  valid,  followed   by
     cohabitation, also attracts the right of respect for  family  life.  In
     other words their needs to be a trigger of some substance to  establish
     family life. It can be a genuine marriage with the intent  to  cohabit,
     or an invalid marriage with cohabitation. These  propositions  are  not
     today controversial. Indeed, now even  "common  law"  marriages,  where
     there is no marriage at all but there is established cohabitation,  are
     recognised as attracting the right to respect for family life.  However
     none of this covers the situation  where  there  has  been  an  invalid
     marriage without subsequent cohabitation, as in the  appeal  before  us
     between the Appellant on the sponsor.

 13. Mr Mahmood then referred us to the case of Glowacka on 26 June 1997. It
     was unreported and he has been unable to provide us with a copy of  the
     judgment, which rather limits the value of the reference.  He  told  us
     however that it reflected the agreement of the Home Office to treat the
     parties to an invalid Roma marriage as if they were validly married for
     the purpose of family reunion.  However again we cannot see  that  this
     is of any assistance to his case because if,  as  it  would  seem,  the
     "wife" was a cohabiting dependant partner, then  she  would  have  been
     entitled to the benefit of the family reunion policy.

 14. Next he referred us to  Kroon v The Netherlands  (1994)  IIHLR  89.  It
     states
           30. The Court recalls  that  the  notion  of  "family  life"  in
           Article 8 is not confined solely to marriage based relationships
           and may encompass other de facto (family ties) where parties are
           living together outside marriage.  Although  as  a  rule  living
           together  may  be  a  requirement  for  such   a   relationship,
           exceptionally other factors may also served to demonstrate  that
           a relationship has  sufficient  constancy  to  create  de  facto
           "family ties"; such  is  the  case  here,  as  since  1987  four
           children had been born to Mrs Kroon and Mr Zerrouk.

 15. This case shows, as we have noted above, that that  as  a  rule  living
     together  is  a  requirement  of  family  life.   It  also  shows  that
     exceptionally other  factors  can  create  family  ties.   However  the
     exceptional factors in this case were that  the  couple  had  a  stable
     relationship, though they were not living  together,  as  a  result  of
     which four children had been born to them. Plainly such a  relationship
     is a very substantial trigger that effectively establishes family  life
     and the right to respect for it. It is however very  far  removed  from
     the circumstances of the appeal before us.

 16. Mr Mahmood's final case reference was to Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.
     In paragraph 25 Arden LJ states
           Because there is no presumption of family life, in  my  judgment
           family life is not established between the adult child  and  his
           surviving parent or other siblings unless something more  exists
           then normal emotional  ties.   Such  ties  might  exist  if  the
           Appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa.  It is not
           however essential that members of the family should  be  in  the
           same  country.   The  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that   that
           possibility may exist, although in my judgment it will  probably
           be exceptional.  Accordingly there  is  no  absolute  rule  that
           there must be family life in the UK.

 17. Mr Mahmood argued from this and that  it  was  not  necessary  for  the
     parties to family life to be in the same country  and  that  dependency
     was a significant factor. However, Kugathas was in  the  context  of  a
     relationship between an adult child and his parents  and  siblings.  It
     appears to us that the thrust of this case is that once family life has
     been established, as between  a  child  and  his  parents  and  between
     siblings, then subsequently when the child is an adult  and  has  moved
     away, even to another country, family life can  in  principle  continue
     but it requires evidence of something more than just  normal  emotional
     ties, e.g. dependency. Again this case, in our judgment, is not of much
     assistance to the Appellant, because the issue in her appeal is whether
     there has been a sufficient trigger to establish  family  life  in  the
     first place.

 18. Mr Mahmood has then argued, on the facts of this appeal, that  although
     the marriage was invalid in the eyes of UK law, we should  have  regard
     to the cultural context and the fact that the parties and the  families
     believed it to be valid, and that it is valid  and  subsisting  in  the
     eyes of Moslem law and would continue unless terminated.  Unfortunately
     Mr Mahmood did not provide us with any  legal  opinion  concerning  the
     status of this marriage in Moslem law.  However,  whilst  we  can  have
     regard to the cultural context and the belief of the parties and  their
     families at the time that the marriage was valid, the reality  is  that
     the sponsor is a British citizen, born and domiciled in the UK.  He  is
     bound by English law and  his  marriage  plainly  is  not  valid.   The
     cultural context and the  alternative  legal  position  in  Moslem  law
     cannot affect that reality.  The marriage is not therefore, even  given
     the wish of the parties to cohabit, sufficient to create  in  itself  a
     sufficient trigger to establish family life under the first limb of the
     decision in Abdulaziz. As to the second limb of  Abdulaziz,  given  the
     absence of any cohabitation, there  can  be  no  trigger  to  establish
     family life here either.

 19. The next question posed by Mr Mahmood is whether the subsequent conduct
     of the parties, even though it does  not  constitute  cohabitation,  is
     sufficient to create family life when aggregated with the  invalid  but
     genuinely intended marriage. The  couple  have  maintained  contact  by
     letter and telephone and have expressed affection for each other, which
     is only culturally possible because their families  have  arranged  and
     approved a marriage between them.  The Appellant has spent  some  three
     weeks living with the sponsor's mother in the  Pakistani  home  of  the
     sponsor's parents, but then returned to living with her own parents and
     there is no evidence of any financial support for her from the  sponsor
     or his family. That essentially is it.  Mr Mahmood has argued that  the
     communication creates  a  dependency  between  the  Appellant  and  the
     sponsor.  We do not agree.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  financial
     dependency. Any other dependency requires something more  tangible  and
     substantial than  the  emotions  expressed  in  correspondence  between
     people who have never met. We conclude that the conduct of the  parties
     since the invalid marriage is not a sufficient trigger for the creation
     of family life under Article 8.

 20. We accept that this is an unusual case because of the sponsor's medical
     condition. However, for the reasons described above, we do not consider
     that the established principles of law enable the relationship  between
     the sponsor and the Appellant to constitute family  life  in  terms  of
     Article  8,  thus  attracting  the  right  to  respect  for   it.   The
     Adjudicator's analysis was correct and should be upheld.

 21. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.




                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
