
AZ (Home Office Concessions) Cameroon [2003] UKIAT 00183

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 12 August 2003
Prepared: 13 August 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                        Rt. Hon. The Countess of Mar




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Ms.. H.  Williams, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr J. Wyatt, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a  national  of  Cameroon  who  appeals  against  the
      decision of an adjudicator, Mr N. J. Osborne, following a  hearing  on
      25 March 2003 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent to refuse both his asylum and his human rights claims.


   2. The claimant was born on 20 July 1975.   He  claimed  that  he  was  a
      member of the SDF, the Social Democratic  Front.   In  elections  that
      took place on 30 June 2002, he told the Secretary of State that he was
      an observer in elections and was required to oversee  the  casting  of
      votes.  A local political leader attempted to bribe a  number  of  the
      electoral observers to rig the election by placing false votes in  the
      ballot boxes.  Some of the observers refused to do so, even though the
      bribes had been paid over.  Fighting ensued at the voting station.  As
      a result, the claimant said that one of his colleagues was killed.  He
      was advised by the SDF to flee the country.

   3. In answer to questions 21 to 25 of his interview, the claimant  stated
      that he was an active member of the SDF and that he was  a  member  of
      the OJSDF faction within the party.  He described this as meaning  the
      "organisation des jeunes" - the organisation of the youth".   He  gave
      the name of the leader of the youth organisation and stated  that  the
      basic principle of the youth section was to win the elections  and  to
      find jobs for young people.

   4. In paragraph 6 of the Reasons for  Refusal  letter  dated  3  December
      2002, the Secretary of State considered the claimant's account to be a
      member of the SDF:

           "You  claim  that  you  are  a  member  of  the  SDF  and   have
           satisfactorily proved this at interview.  The Secretary of State
           accepts that you are a member of one of the  biggest  opposition
           parties in Cameroon."


   5. In paragraph 15 of his determination,  the  adjudicator  recorded  the
      fact that the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  claimant  was  a
      member of the SDF.  At the hearing before the adjudicator,  Mr  Niger,
      who appeared on behalf of the claimant, referred to paragraph 6 of the
      refusal letter and the Home Office concession that the claimant was  a
      member.  In the Record  of  Proceedings  there  is  a  note  that  the
      Secretary of State's position  is  not  in  line  with  the  objective
      material.  There is also a record of what Mr Richards, who appeared on
      behalf of the Secretary of State,  said  in  his  submissions  to  the
      adjudicator.  It appears that he stood by the contents of the  refusal
      letter, save as to paragraph 10, (the claimant's failure to apply  for
      asylum en route to the United Kingdom).  Nevertheless, he drew to  the
      attention of the adjudicator the fact that the  SDF  did  not  have  a
      youth section.  At best, it is not clear what was being asked  of  the
      adjudicator.  Nevertheless, there is no suggestion in  the  Record  of
      Proceedings that the concession was being withdrawn by  the  Secretary
      of State or that the claimant was asked to agree  to  that  course  of
      action.


   6. A copy of the Cameroon Extended Bulletin prepared by  CIPU  and  dated
      November 2002 was before the adjudicator.  The Social Democratic Front
      Party is dealt with in paragraphs 5.64 to 5.69.
Paragraph 6.66 states:


           "Unlike other political parties, the SDF and  does  not  have  a
           women's section or a youth section."


   7. The adjudicator relied upon the  discrepancy  between  the  background
      information to the effect that there was no youth section in  the  SDF
      and the claimant's account that he was involved with the  organisation
      des jeunes as undermining his credibility.   Accordingly,  he  decided
      that he was  not  satisfied  to  the  appropriate  standard  that  the
      claimant was a member of the SDF.


   8. Later in his determination, however, the adjudicator appears to  adopt
      a somewhat different approach.  In paragraph 24 of the  determination,
      for example, the adjudicator states:

           "The political party of which the  appellant  is  a  member  has
           popular support in four provinces within Cameroon and also it is
           active internationally... The appellant in our case accepted  in
           his Home  Office  interview  that  he  had  never  suffered  any
           problems in Cameroon until this incident.   When  this  incident
           escalated, the vice president of the appellants party called the
           police.  I find that in all the circumstances of this case  that
           confidence was being shown in the police as the members  of  the
           SDF party involved in this incident had done  nothing  wrong  at
           all and therefore had nothing to fear."


   9.  It is, of course, open to an adjudicator to make alternative findings
      of fact.  He could, for example, have said:  "Although  I  have  found
      that the claimant was not a member of the SDF, even if he had been, he
      has not established his claim." This is not, however, the way that the
      adjudicator expresses his contradictory findings.  The Tribunal may be
      excused for thinking that, when he came to write paragraph 24  of  the
      determination, he had forgotten the finding he had made  at  paragraph
      15.


  10. The grounds of appeal assert that the adjudicator was not entitled  to
      go behind the concession made by the Secretary of State in the refusal
      letter.

  11. In Carcabuk (00/TH/01426), the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  (Chairman:
      the President, Collins J)  gave  guidance  that  was  intended  to  be
      authoritative and should be regarded as binding  on  all  adjudicators
      and Tribunal chairmen.  The issue before the  Tribunal  was:  In  what
      circumstances (if at all) may an  adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  make
      adverse findings concerning the credibility of an appellant  when  the
      Secretary of State has not sought to impugn it?  In  paragraph  12  of
      the determination, a series of guidelines are produced.   The  refusal
      letter  or,  where  appropriate,  the  Explanatory  Statement   should
      identify the matters in issue and make clear what facts, if  any,  are
      found in the applicant's favour.  If the HOPO wishes to  withdraw  any
      concession made, he must inform the appellant or his advisers as  soon
      as possible and it will be  for  the  adjudicator  to  decide,  if  an
      application for an adjournment to enable the new case  to  be  met  is
      made, whether to grant it.  If he does not, the concession will stand.
       If the concession is made by a HOPO,  it  must  be  accepted  by  the
      adjudicator.  A concession can be withdrawn but, if a HOPO seeks to do
      this, the adjudicator must be satisfied that the appellant will not be
      prejudiced  if  the  hearing  continues  and  should  only  allow   an
      adjournment if persuaded that there was good reason  to  withdraw  the
      concession.


  12. We are satisfied that the adjudicator did not follow these  guidelines
      and should not have treated whether the claimant was a member  of  the
      SDF as an issue before him.

  13. We considered whether it was possible  to  excise  that  part  of  the
      adjudicator's determination on the basis that the adjudicator's  other
      findings of fact were sufficient.  Unfortunately, whether the claimant
      was a member of the SDF was central to his  case.   It  was  for  this
      reason that he was an  election  observer.   He  claims  that  he  was
      advised to leave Cameroon by the vice president of the party.  In  our
      judgment, membership of the SDF was intimately connected to  the  core
      of the claimant's account and  the  adjudicator's  rejection  of  this
      evidence renders all of the adjudicator's findings flawed.

   Decision: The claimant's appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is
   remitted for hearing afresh before an adjudicator other  than  Mr  N.  J.
   Osborne.




   Directions: It is directed that the  Home  Office  informs  the  claimant
   within 28 days of service of this determination as to whether  they  seek
   to withdraw the concession made in paragraph 6 of the Reasons for Refusal
   letter to the effect that the Secretary of State accepts the claimant was
   a member of the SDF.  A copy  of  the  letter  must  be  filed  with  the
   Immigration Appellate Authority.  If the Home Office fails to notify  the
   claimant of its decision, the concession contained in paragraph 6 of  the
   refusal letter will stand and the Home Office will not  be  permitted  to
   argue that the claimant was not a member of the SDF.  This will not  then
   be an issue before the adjudicator.






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
13 August 2003
