

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |TS (Psychiatric Treatment - |
|                           |        |Articles 3 and 8) Sri Lanka |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00172          |
|Date: 3 October 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....30th December 2003....                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr M E A Innes                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr G Davidson of Counsel instructed by M K Sri & Co.
For the respondent:  Mr A Hutton, a Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of  Tamil  ethnicity  born  on
      30 March 1975.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 April 2000 and
      claimed asylum immediately on  arrival.   Following  submission  of  a
      statement  and  an  interview  her  application  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State for the reasons set out in a letter dated  8 March
      2001.  On 8 May 2001 the Secretary of State issued directions for  her
      removal to Sri Lanka following refusal of leave to enter after refusal
      of her asylum application.  She appealed against that decision on both
      asylum and human rights grounds.  Her appeal was heard on 7 March 2003
      by an Adjudicator, Mr R J Haynes, who dismissed her appeal.  She now
      appeals with leave to us against that decision on grounds  limited  to
      the  availability  of  medical  treatment,  particularly   psychiatric
      treatment, for the appellant if she were now returned to Sri Lanka.

2.    The Adjudicator had accepted that the appellant had been  detained  on
      two  occasions  in  Sri  Lanka  by  the  army  on  suspicion  of  LTTE
      connection.  She was subsequently  released  without  charge  in  each
      case.  She claimed that she was raped by two soldiers on the  occasion
      of her first detention and indecently assaulted by another soldier  on
      the occasion of her second  detention.   The  Adjudicator  reached  no
      final conclusion on whether he accepted the accounts of the  rape  and
      indecent assault but does say at paragraph 9.4  of  his  determination
      that "the traumatic experiences which the appellant has  suffered  are
      described in the doctor's report" and that such treatment might  occur
      is constant with the known country background evidence.  What  he  did
      find was that he gave the benefit of the doubt  to  the  appellant  in
      respect of those matters, nevertheless they were  gratuitous  acts  by
      the men involved and did not form  part  of  a  consistent  course  of
      conduct  by  the  authorities  amounting  to  torture.   It  was   not
      challenged before us on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
      appellant had been treated  as  she  claimed  and  we  have  therefore
      proceeded to consider this appeal on  the  basis  that  those  factual
      allegations have been accepted.  The psychiatric report, to  which  we
      shall refer below in more detail, was not challenged by the Presenting
      Officer.

3.     The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  whatever  ill-treatment  had  been
      suffered in the past, there was no reasonable likelihood that it would
      occur again in the future if the appellant were now returned,  and  it
      was on that basis that the asylum and Article 3 claims were dismissed.
       There is no appeal against that part of the decision.

4.    In dealing with Article 8, the  Adjudicator  says  this  at  paragraph
      10.1 of his determination:

           "Article 8  -  the  right  to  family  and  private  life.   The
           appellant gave evidence that some of her family members  are  in
           the United Kingdom.  They have either arrived  before  or  after
           the appellant.  There was no evidence given to me  as  to  their
           status.  The burden of proving human rights  claims  is  on  the
           appellant.  I am not satisfied that any of her relatives in  the
           United Kingdom have been granted leave to remain  of  any  sort.
           No passports were produced and I therefore find that she has  no
           right to family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Moreover,  her
           father remains in Sri Lanka and although she said that  she  did
           not know where he was at present, I am  not  satisfied  on  that
           ground that there  are  sufficient  "exceptional  circumstances"
           (Mahmood) to justify the appellant's  remaining  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  To remove her to Sri Lanka in my judgment,  would  not
           be disproportionate given the government policy  and  within  an
           immigration context.


           It  was  submitted  that   because   of   her   medication   and
           psychotherapy  treatment  requirements,  her  claim  under   the
           definition of "private life" could ground a  claim.   I  am  not
           satisfied that they could.   It  is  clear  from  the  objective
           evidence that there is treatment available for persons suffering
           from conditions of which this appellant does.  There is evidence
           to say that some medication is available at reasonable costs and
           there  are  specialists  and  others  who  are  experienced   in
           psychotherapy.  In reaching this decision  I  have  applied  the
           ratio in Bensaid."


5.    The thrust of Mr Davison's submissions to us was that the  Adjudicator
      had erred in his approach to the claim that removal would, because  of
      her mental condition, be in breach either of her Article 3 or  Article
      8 rights.  In this respect he relied upon the psychiatric report by Dr
      Gunam Kanagaratnam dated 26 February 2003.  He records  the  clinical
      symptoms of psychiatric illness at the beginning of his report in  the
      following terms:

           "The appellant purported that for nearly two years she had  been
           in a state of extreme mental and emotional  distress,  suffering
           from anxiety and depression.  Her mood remains low with feelings
           of sadness as if her life is empty.  She is unable  to  take  an
           interest in almost all of the  daily  activities  with  loss  of
           enjoyment and loss of appetite.  Her sleep  is  affected,  being
           unable  to  sleep  with  early  morning  awakening.   She  would
           experience recurrent nightmares in  which  she  would  dream  of
           being attacked by soldiers and would  wake  up  in  a  state  of
           distress.   Thereafter  she  is  unable  to  return  to   sleep.
           Frequently she would experience palpitations and  dizziness  and
           then would become agitated.  She feels worthless and  is  unable
           to think or concentrate, with current thoughts of pessimism  and
           pointlessness amounting to suicidal ideations."


6.    A little later in dealing with the mental state  examination  he  says
      that during the assessment and examination  the  appellant  was  in  a
      state of extreme distress and found it difficult to  report  the  rape
      and talk about it.  The diagnosis made is that the appellant  has  the
      clinical  features  of  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)  and
      depressive illness.  He summarises her symptoms as follows:

           "The appellant is a victim of incarceration, torture,  rape  and
           had been displaced as a refugee.  She had witnessed  bombardment
           of civilians with death and injury of loved ones.  The stressors
           she had experienced were extreme.  They  involved  actual  death
           threat of physical integrity.   The  stressors  caused  powerful
           subjective  response   and   she   experienced   intense   fear,
           helplessness  and  horror.   She  re-experiences  the  traumatic
           events because of intrusive  distressing  recollections  of  the
           events,  flashbacks,  nightmares,  exaggerated   emotional   and
           physical reactions.  She has features of avoidant and  emotional
           numbing.  Arousal is increased because she has  difficulties  in
           sleeping with hyper-vigilance, impairment of  concentration  and
           exaggerated startled  response.   The  depressive  symptoms  are
           evidence because of impaired confidence, tearful low mood state,
           loss of enjoyment, impairment of  attention  and  concentration,
           tearfulness,  loss  of  appetite,   pointlessness,   pessimistic
           ideation and psycho-motor agitation.


7.    The doctor recommends treatment by medication  being  anti-depressants
      both for her depressive illness and PTSD combined  with  psychotherapy
      to include anxiety management, cognitive therapy, exposure therapy and
      psycho-education.  As to the availability of  such  treatment  in  Sri
      Lanka he  says  that  drug  treatment  is  not  readily  available  or
      affordable there and that psycho-therapy is restricted  and  resources
      are inadequate.  He adds that  an  essential  aspect  of  the  therapy
      includes therapeutic alliance  which  is  extremely  difficult  for  a
      victim of ethnic conflict  to  develop  within  a  context  of  social
      instability.  He is of the view that she does not  have  the  required
      emotional support of her family or community in Sri Lanka and that her
      home area is occupied by the armed  forces  so  that,  should  she  be
      returned, her mental illness is extremely likely to  deteriorate  with
      consequent likelihood of dangerousness to herself or others.

8.    As we have noted above, the Adjudicator accepted  that  the  appellant
      did require the treatment recommended for her diagnosed conditions but
      was of the view that adequate provision for treatment existed  in  Sri
      Lanka.

9.    The availability of such treatment as  is  recommended  in  Sri  Lanka
      formed the major part of the submissions made to  us  cogently  by  Mr
      Davison.  It is not necessary for us to go into the evidence  in  this
      respect in any detail because Mr Hutton conceded for the Secretary  of
      State that the psychiatric treatment required by the  appellant  might
      not be available in Sri Lanka although he was of  the  view  that  the
      appropriate medication would be available.  He said that he could  not
      point  to  any  evidence  indicating  the   existence   of   secondary
      psychiatric treatment of the kind needed by  the  appellant  as  being
      available in her home country.  Nevertheless, it was  his  submission,
      having regard to the very high threshold set in D v UK [1997]  24  HER
      423 that the appellant could not meet the threshold required to engage
      Article 3 because she would not be subjected to inhuman  or  degrading
      treatment if now returned.  As to Article 8 considerations it was  his
      submission that there was some treatment available in  Sri  Lanka  and
      that for this reason removal would not be in breach of her  Article  8
      rights to the private life which she had  established  in  the  United
      Kingdom and in respect of which she was in  the  course  of  receiving
      treatment for her  diagnosed  condition,  albeit  that  the  secondary
      psychiatric treatment had not yet commenced partly  because  it  could
      not commence until her confidence was  sufficiently  engaged  to  make
      that possible and partly because she was currently on a  waiting  list
      having reached that stage in the treatment to date.

10.   As to the Article 3 claim, we accept Mr Hutton's submission  that  the
      feared harm is not so extreme as to be capable of engaging Article  3.
      There is no past history of self harm and no adequate  explanation  of
      why such  should  occur  on  return  beyond  what  we  regard  as  the
      essentially speculative nature of what the  psychiatrist  says  as  to
      this in his report.  This approach is wholly in line with the approach
      of the European Court in Bensaid  v  UK  [2001]  INLR  325  where  the
      speculative nature of arguably more  positive  medical  opinions  were
      considered. Although we are prepared to accept that it  is  reasonably
      likely that the effect of return will be  some  deterioration  in  the
      mental state of the appellant, nevertheless, there is no  valid  basis
      in our view for concluding that it will be of such extreme seriousness
      as to engage Article 3 of the European Convention.

11.   The  claim  as  to  the  engagement  of  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention is far more difficult.  We  are  guided  initially  by  the
      judgments in the Court of Appeal in Soumahoro,  Nadarajah  and  Razgar
      [2003] EWCA Civ 840. What is said at paragraph 22 of the  judgment  by
      Dyson LJ is this:

           "... We suggest that, in order to determine whether the  Article
           8 claim is  capable  of  being  engaged  in  the  light  of  the
           territoriality principle, the claim should be considered in  the
           following way.  First, the claimant's case in  relation  to  his
           private life in the deporting state should be  examined.   In  a
           case where the essence of  the  claim  is  that  expulsion  will
           interfere with his private life by harming  his  mental  health,
           this will include a consideration of  what  he  said  about  his
           mental  health  in  the  deporting  country,  the  treatment  he
           receives and any relevant support he says that he enjoys  there.
           Secondly, it will be necessary to look at what he says  will  be
           likely to happen to his mental health in the receiving  country,
           what treatment he can expect to receive there, and what  support
           he can expect to enjoy.  The third step is to determine whether,
           on the claimant's case, serious harm to his mental  health  will
           be caused or materially contributed to by the difference between
           the treatment and  support  he  is  enjoying  in  the  deporting
           country and that which will be available to him in the receiving
           country.  If  so,  then  the  territoriality  principle  is  not
           infringed, and the claim is capable of being engaged."


12    Approaching this appeal on that basis, we  observe  firstly  that  the
      appellant is accepted to have lost touch with her father  who  remains
      in Sri Lanka and that the known family she has there  consists  of  an
      aunt and remoter family connections.  She  has  two  sisters  and  one
      younger brother living in the United Kingdom as well  as  her  mother.
      We are told they have all entered on visas  and  have  apparently  had
      their entry clearance extended by six months  permission  at  a  time,
      over a period of up to three or four years in the case  of  those  who
      have been here longest. The precise basis  under  immigration  law  on
      which this prolonged lawful stay has been given was not explained, but
      it is clear that none of them has a settled right to remain here. They
      all live in London and the appellant does not see them very often  but
      she lives in Wembley and so is not physically far removed  from  them.
      We note that one of her  sisters  accompanied  her  to  Court  at  the
      hearing before us and that we were told other members  of  her  family
      here were outside Court.  It would, therefore, appear that there is  a
      degree of family support available to  her  as  and  when  it  may  be
      necessary although not of the close nature  which  would  appear  were
      they all living together.  We have already noted that the appellant is
      receiving medical treatment here and that her  psychiatric  state  has
      been assessed although no secondary psychiatric  intervention  of  the
      kind envisaged in the report has yet commenced.  Nevertheless she  has
      now reached the stage where it has been felt appropriate for her to be
      referred for counselling and this occurred on 26 September 2003.


13.   Turning to the second consideration we  have  already  noted  that  Mr
      Hutton  has  conceded  that  there  is  no  evidence  indicating  that
      treatment of the kind which she is said to require, other than by  way
      of medication prescriptions, is available to her  in  Sri  Lanka.   At
      paragraph 5.39 of the current CIPU Assessment it says:

           "Hospitals specifically dedicated  to  mental  health  exist  in
           Angoda and Mulleriyawa where there is also  treatment  of  PTSD.
           It is reported in the Sunday Times (of Sri Lanka) in 1996,  that
           psychiatric treatment was available at  all  teaching  hospitals
           and  the  main  Government  district  hospitals  throughout  the
           country, and at Ward 59 of the Colombo General Hospital."


      That does not accord  with  the  remaining  evidence  which  has  been
      produced to us. In June 1999 the Harvard Medical School, Department of
      Social Medicine, produced a newsletter  giving  an  update  on  global
      mental and social health.  In relation to Sri Lanka it said  that  the
      usual medical approach to trauma typical of a country which  has  been
      the subject of considerable violence  would  be  individual  or  group
      counselling sessions conducted by mental health professionals  and  it
      notes that such a process can take a considerable amount of  time  and
      involve the build up of a trusting relationship between the counsellor
      and the client.  It continues as follows:

           "In the Sri Lanka  context  this  approach  is  not  a  feasible
           option.  For a population of over seventeen million,  there  are
           only six psychiatrists, most  of  whom  live  and  work  in  the
           capital, Colombo. There are many 'counsellors'  but  as  yet  no
           standardised training or registration.  Many NGOs have sprung up
           to counsel the tortured and the war widows,  some  may  well  be
           doing more damage than good."


      In the letter of 30 March 2001 from the  British  High  Commission  in
      Colombo the Immigration and Nationality Directorate acknowledges  that
      "the only speciality in short supply is  psychiatrists".   The  report
      from the World Health Organisation of July 2001 on mental  health  and
      substance abuse, including alcohol in the south east  Asia  region  of
      WHO is hardly encouraging.   It  records  the  approximate  number  of
      psychiatrists per million population in Sri Lanka  in  2000  as  being
      0.53.  Other studies have suggested a figure of perhaps up  to  twenty
      clinically trained psychiatrists in  Sri  Lanka  but,  as  Mr  Davison
      fairly submitted, it would be unrealistic to think that  all  were  of
      Tamil ethnicity and there is a difficulty in  cultural  terms  in  the
      engagement of the  degree  of  trust  necessary  between  patient  and
      counsellor where there are ethnic  differences  which  have  been  the
      subject of so much recent polarisation in the society in question.  In
      the light of that background  evidence,  we  have  no  doubt  that  Mr
      Hutton's concession was  sensibly  and  properly  made  and  that  the
      prospect  of  the  appellant  being  able  to  receive  the  treatment
      recommended by the report must be regarded as remote.


14.   This then  leaves  the  third  issue  of  whether  the  difference  in
      available treatment  and  support  is  likely  to  result  in  serious
      detriment (see Bensaid) to the appellant's mental health.

15.    By  reason  of  our  findings  as  to  the  likely  availability   of
      appropriate treatment in Sri Lanka, it follows that we  are  satisfied
      that the Adjudicator's findings in this respect are  unsustainable  on
      the evidence.  It is therefore for us to reconsider  those  issues  in
      the light of the findings which we have made above.

16.   It is quite clear from the decision in Bensaid v United  Kingdom  that
      it is the risk of damage to health by removal  which  is  the  pivotal
      factor to consider.  That damage must be more than speculative in  the
      sense in which  that  was  considered  in  Bensaid.   The  psychiatric
      opinions  submitted  in  evidence  in  Bensaid  are  referred  to   at
      paragraphs 16 and 21 of the judgment where it was said that return, in
      that case to Algeria, were put in stark terms  in  the  final  medical
      report saying that it was,

           "...highly likely that stressful life events such as deportation
           together with more stressful environment he will  be  likely  to
           encounter in Algeria would trigger exacerbation of his  symptoms
           as occurred on his last visit  to  Algeria.  ...his  fearfulness
           when unwell and also the motivation difficulties and flatness of
           affect makes it very difficult for him to seek appropriate  help
           when he does become unwell.  ...if  he  were  unable  to  obtain
           appropriate help, if he began to relapse I think there would  be
           a great risk that his deterioration would be very great  and  he
           would be at  risk  of  acting  in  obedience  of  hallucinations
           telling himself to harm himself or others...  Thus  I  do  think
           there is a substantial  likelihood  that  forcible  repatriation
           would result in significant and lasting adverse effect."


  17. When, therefore, the European Court speaks of the risk on return being
      speculative it is against that sort of medical  opinion  submitted  on
      behalf of the claimant.  If anything, it seems to us  to  be  somewhat
      stronger than  applies  in  the  present  case.   The  appellant  has,
      according to the psychiatric report, being living here for nearly  two
      years in a state of extreme mental and emotional distress so that,  as
      in Bensaid, we are concerned with a  condition  which  is  long  term.
      There is no indication in the medical report as to whether or not  the
      treatment advised will be effective in curing the depression and  post
      traumatic stress disorder from which the appellant  suffers.   Insofar
      as it is treatable by medication, there  is  no  evidence  basis  that
      appropriate medication will  not  continue  to  be  available  to  the
      appellant in Sri Lanka and it is therefore only the  question  of  the
      psychotherapy and its availability that has  to  be  weighed  in  this
      connection.  Although there may now be  some  such  treatment  in  the
      future if the appellant remains here, although its  timing  cannot  be
      stated with any accuracy, there is no evidence as to whether  it  will
      be successful or not.  What is certain  is  that  the  United  Kingdom
      bears no responsibility for the condition  from  which  the  appellant
      suffers because it must in the nature of the  diagnostic  requirements
      for PTSD have existed prior to her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Moreover, we are well aware from the number of Sri Lankan appeals with
      which we deal in the Tribunal that allegations of rape  such  as  have
      been made in this case are not  uncommon  so  that  there  can  be  no
      question but that there  will  be  many  people  in  Sri  Lanka  in  a
      situation similar to that which applies to this appellant by reason of
      similar experiences in detention, as well as considerable numbers  who
      have been subjected to torture in the past in detention.   Inevitably,
      given the history of the conflict in Sri Lanka prior to the  ceasefire
      in February 2002, there will be  considerable  number  of  traumatised
      individuals there.


  18. Although we can well understand that  the  appellant  might  currently
      subjectively fear a repetition of what has happened in the past, it is
      clear from the current country background evidence that  such  a  fear
      would not be objectively well-founded, as is  indeed  demonstrated  in
      this appeal by  the  lack  of  any  challenge  to  that  part  of  the
      Adjudicator's findings. She  would,  therefore,  see  for  herself  on
      return that there was no longer any reason to  fear  a  repetition  of
      what had happened in the past.  There is no medical evidence before us
      that she would not have  such  cognitive  ability  by  reason  of  her
      diagnosed condition. Finally, we know  that  she  does  have  extended
      family in Sri Lanka because she has in the past been assisted  by  her
      aunt and the fact that she may currently not  be  in  touch  with  her
      father does not mean that through her family connections it would  not
      be reasonably likely that she  could  re-establish  contact  with  him
      comparatively quickly in the post-conflict  situation.   Even  if  her
      immediate family here, whose immigration status remains uncertain  and
      temporary, were not returned to Sri  Lanka,  she  would  not  be  left
      without some family and connection in her home area, where it has been
      found it would be safe for her to return.

  19. It seems to us, for the reasons which we have given,  that the risk of
      deterioration on return for this appellant is rightly, as in the  case
      of Bensaid to be regarded as speculative in nature.  Although the same
      standard of treatment as is available here is unlikely to be available
      in Sri Lanka that is not to say no treatment facilities exist.

  20. In order to show that removal would demonstrate a lack of respect  for
      the appellant's right to family and private life under  Article  8(1),
      the Strasbourg jurisprudence, and  Bensaid  in  particular,  makes  it
      clear that the threshold to be reached before interference occurs is a
      high one. It must amount to a demonstrably significant denial  of  the
      Article 8 right. It is reasonably likely that familial support similar
      to that currently enjoyed by the appellant  here  will  exist  in  Sri
      Lanka from the extended family, even if her father  cannot  be  easily
      traced. On the facts of this appeal that is of  relevance  to  private
      life rather than to family life. The appellant is  28  years  old  and
      living apart from her mother and siblings currently here. It  was  not
      urged upon us that removal would interfere with family life as enjoyed
      here, and had that submission been made we would have rejected it.  We
      are satisfied that removal would not engage the right to  family  life
      under Article 8(1). Such support as exists  is  in  our  view  clearly
      directed to private rather than family life but the evidence does  not
      show that removal would be of such significance as to  interfere  with
      it in breach of Article 8(1). For these reasons we have  come  to  the
      conclusion that the appellant has not, on the totality of the evidence
      before us, discharged the evidential burden upon her to show  that  to
      the lower standard applicable in  human  rights  appeals  her  removal
      would be in breach of her Article 8 right  to  private  life  and  the
      physical and moral integrity which is a part of that right. It follows
      that on our findings the appellant does not succeed in the application
      of the third step recommended in Razgar.

21.      Had we, however, reached the conclusion that removal would  on  the
      facts have constituted an interference with  Article  8  rights,  such
      interference would clearly  have  been  in  pursuit  of  a  legitimate
      purpose, and lawful. The issue would then have  been  whether  removal
      was proportionate to the pursuit of the public interest in the regular
      enforcement of immigration law and policy which is recognised as being
      a legitimate aim of the state  within  the  derogation  provisions  of
      Article 8(2). It is clear from the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  that  a
      wide margin of appreciation is to be  accorded  to  decisions  of  the
      state. We refer to the review of such jurisprudence by the  Master  of
      the Rolls in Ullah & Do [2002] EWCA Civ. 1856, where he concludes that
      the public interest will often outweigh or trump the private rights of
      the individual  claimant.  Taking  into  account  the  factors  as  to
      foreseeable harm to the appellant's mental condition, and  giving  due
      weight to the fact that her condition is not one which is  the  direct
      responsibility of the United Kingdom on any  view  (see  Bensaid),  we
      would have concluded that removal would in any event be  proportionate
      to the public interest.

22.     This  appeal  was  heard  and  the  determination  prepared   before
      transcripts of the important judgments in N [2003] EWCA Civ. 1369  and
      Djali [2003] EWCA Civ. 1371 were available. In view of the conclusions
      which we had already reached, we did  not  consider  it  necessary  to
      invite further submissions  in  the  light  of  those  judgments.  The
      judgment of Simon Brown LJ in Djali, particularly at paragraphs 16  to
      20, clearly supports the reasoning in our primary finding that removal
      would not engage Article 8 rights at all. Similarly, at paragraphs  25
      to 30 there is nothing which  is  contrary  to  our  approach  to  our
      secondary and alternative finding on the proportionality of removal.

23.   Whilst, therefore, we do have sympathy with the appellant as we  would
      have for anyone in such a position, we find  that  removal  would  not
      engage Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  and  this  appeal  is
      dismissed.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
