
Ar           DO (Risk on Return - Standard of Proof)  Turkey  [2003]  UKIAT
00039


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing : 5 March 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            15th AUGUST 2003

                                   Before:

                       Professor D B Casson (Chairman)
                             Mrs S I Hewitt, JP




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr A. Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent :  Mr  P.  Morris,  counsel,  instructed  by  Winstanley-
Burgess


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr P. Conway) allowing an
      appeal on asylum and human rights grounds  by  Mr  Deniz   Ozdemir,  a
      Kurdish citizen of Turkey  ('the claimant') against  the  decision  by
      the Secretary of State of 2 May 2002 to give directions for removal to
      Turkey as an illegal entrant.

2.    There is no record of  the  claimant's  lawful  entry  to  the  United
      Kingdom. He claimed asylum by post on 8 March 2002  and  said  he  had
      entered hidden in a lorry on 18 February 2002, having left Turkey with
      the help of an agent. He  was  undocumented  and  said  he  had  never
      obtained a passport.  He gave his date of birth as 20 March  1974  and
      said he was single. An asylum interview was held on 18 April 2002, and
      further representations and a  nufus  card  were  submitted,  but  the
      asylum application was refused for reasons given in a letter dated  29
      April 2002.

3.    The claimant said he was  Kurd who had been accused  by  the  army  of
      helping PKK.  He said he  and  his  father  used  a   van  to  deliver
      supplies to PKK; that in July 2001 the van was involved in an accident
      causing the death of his father and serious injury to him as a  result
      of which he suffered memory loss. He said he  was  arrested  on  three
      occasions because of suspected involvement with PKK,  first  in  1999,
      second in 2000 and third in 2001.  He said  he  was  tortured  on  all
      three occasions and then released after  two  or  three  days  without
      charge. Because of these events and  his  belief  that  he  was  under
      surveillance, he decided to leave the country.

4.    In the refusal letter the Secretary of State attacked  the  claimant's
      credibility.   The  memory  loss  asserted  was  described   as   very
      selective. He said he was unable to remember the dates on which he had
      been detained and tortured, but he was able to remember the length  of
      detention,  the reason for it and exactly what torture he had faced on
      each occasion. He was also able to remember  the  exact  date  of  the
      accident and the dates on which he joined and left the army.

5.    At the hearing of his appeal before the Adjudicator the  claimant  and
      his aunt both gave  what  is  described  as  brief  evidence.  Another
      witness said he had known the claimant's family in Turkey and that his
      father had been a PKK supporter. The claimant told the Adjudicator  he
      was still suffering from the effects of the road  accident.  He  could
      not  remember giving a statement to his representative; nor  could  he
      really remember his interview and how many times he had been  detained
      or when.  He did recall that he had been  detained  for  helping  PKK.
      His activities had included taking provisions to them.

6.    The Adjudicator considered a report by  Craig  McNulty,  a  consultant
      criminal psychologist, and a statement by Zafer  Yoruk,  a  bi-lingual
      legal clerk with Winstanley Burgess,  describing  how  the  claimant's
      statement was taken.

7.    The Adjudicator saw  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truthfulness  of  the
      account on core matters, and  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  left
      Turkey  because  he  was  in  fear.   On  the  issue  of  return,  the
      Adjudicator considered background documentation and noted  a  document
      submitted for the claimant which showed that 'wherever a person  moves
      in Turkey they are required to register with the local mukhtar or  the
      local authority who will conduct security checks on that  person  with
      the local security forces.'  The Adjudicator found at paragraph 28:

             'It seems to me likely that as a Kurd, known for his  family's
             political activity and because of his own  detentions  by  the
             Turkish authorities, any report by the local  security  forces
             would be likely to be unfavourable.'

8.    The Adjudicator found that checks which had been made  on  arrival  in
      Turkey would inevitably reveal the claimant's record of detention  and
      those of his family, which led to  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  ill-
      treatment amounting to persecution at the airport or later.

9.    Before us, Mr Morris  for  the  claimant  confirmed  that  no  medical
      report had ever been adduced in this case. Mr McNulty  is  a  clinical
      psychologist, and not a psychiatrist.  Mr Morris also confirmed that a
      bi-lingual clerk at  Winstanley-Burgess  had  helped  to  compile  the
      claimant's statement and that, as  recorded  at  paragraph  6  of  the
      determination, the claimant  said  he  could  not  remember  giving  a
      statement to his representative.

10.   In his submissions, Mr Sheikh for the Secretary  of  State  said  that
      the Adjudicator had failed to give an  adequate  explanation  for  his
      finding that the claimant was in fear of the authorities when he  left
      Turkey;  he had failed to consider the fact that on his  own  evidence
      the claimant had remained in Istanbul without difficulty for at  least
      five months before his departure and he had failed to consider all the
      evidence as to risk on return. The claimant had no criminal record but
      was released without charge on each of  the  occasions  of  his  brief
      detentions; the Adjudicator appeared to accept Mr  McNulty's  evidence
      that the claimant had a cognitive ability consistent with  performance
      of a person with a mental handicap, but  failed  to  explain  why  the
      Turkish authorities would have an adverse interest in such  a  person.
      The Secretary of State maintained his submission that  the  claimant's
      memory loss remained selective. Mr Sheikh invited us to  consider  how
      the claimant could produce a very detailed witness statement  in  view
      of what he had said to the Adjudicator, as recorded at paragraph 6  of
      the determination, and in light of the  psychologist's  opinion.   The
      Adjudicator had failed to  consider why the Turkish authorities  would
      have an adverse interest in a person who appeared  to  have  a  mental
      handicap, or why such a person would be perceived to pose a threat.

11.   In his submissions Mr Morris referred  to  a  detailed  skeleton,  and
      said the Adjudicator had properly taken into account all the  evidence
      before him. He had accepted the appellant's evidence, and  made  'what
      he chose' of the witness statement before  him.  Mr  Morris  submitted
      that torture was still widespread in Turkey,  and  that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate.

12.   This is a case with unusual features.   It  is  the  claimant's  story
      that he was severely injured in a  road  accident  in  July  2001  and
      suffered memory loss as a result. Although  no  medical  evidence  has
      been produced, Mr McNulty prepared a report dated 14  June  2002,  the
      contents of which have not been challenged. Mr McNulty said  that  the
      appellant's score on a test designed to provide a general estimate  of
      cognitive ability (IQ) the appellant's score was consistent with  that
      for a person with mental handicap. The Adjudicator said:

             'Mr McNulty notes that at interview  with  him  the  appellant
             appeared to have difficulty answering  very  basic  questions:
             he did not know his correct age and  could  not  calculate  it
             from his date of birth;  he did not know the correct date  and
             month, although he knew the year was  2002;  he  was  able  to
             count up to ten, but was unable to  count  upwards  in  threes
             ...'

13.   At paragraph 6 of his determination, which Mr  Morris  accepted  as  a
      correct record, the Adjudicator said:

             'In brief evidence the appellant said he was  still  suffering
             from the effects of the road accident.  He could not  remember
             giving a statement to his representative nor could  he  really
             remember his interview and how many times he had been detained
             or when.  He did recall that he had been detained for  helping
             the PKK. His activities  had  included  taking  provisions  to
             them.'

14.   That evidence was given at the hearing on 13 August 2002.  It must  be
      considered in the light of a written statement consisting of  fourteen
      paragraphs giving a detailed account of his circumstances and  alleged
      experiences in Turkey.  The statement is undated but another statement
      in the name of Zafer Yoruk, a bi-lingual legal clerk with  Winstanley-
      Burgess, says that he  took  the  claimant's  statement  'in  February
      2002', some six months before the hearing.  Mr Yoruk says:

             'He told me that his memory had been severely affected by  his
             father's death and his subsequent detention and  ill-treatment
             by the gendarmes.  He had particular difficulty in remembering
             dates. I therefore had to  work  out  with  him  the  date  he
             started school and the date he left school by asking  him  the
             age  he  started  school  and  if  he  completed  the  primary
             education.  Children in Turkey normally start school when they
             are seven years  old  and  the  primary  school  education  is
             compulsory for five years.  This way I  worked  out  with  the
             help of Deniz the  year  he  began  school  and  the  year  he
             completed. The same applies to the military service.  I  asked
             him if he went to the military  service  when  he  was  twenty
             which is the normal age for military  service  in  Turkey  and
             Deniz confirmed this. I also asked him if he served the normal
             time which  is  eighteen  months  and  he  confirmed  this.  I
             therefore worked out that he began military  service  in  1994
             and completed his service in 1996. He also  told  me  that  he
             went to visit  his  grandfather  a  year  after  his  military
             service (par. 4) and I wrote down the date of  this  visit  in
             his statement as 1997.'

15.   As we have said,  the  claimant's  statement  gives  a  very  detailed
      account of his alleged experiences. There must be some uncertainty  as
      to the date it was made, since, at paragraph 5, it  corrects  what  is
      said to be an error in the interview at the  Home  Office.   The  date
      recorded for that interview is 18 April 2002.  We have  no  reason  to
      disagree with the Secretary of State's comment that  the  memory  loss
      appeared to be very selective.  The claimant told the Adjudicator that
      he could not remember giving a statement  to  his  representative  and
      could not really remember his interview or  when and how many times he
      had been detained.  In our judgment, the Adjudicator was not  entitled
      to find  that  the  evidence  given  in  the  circumstances   we  have
      described was of sufficient reliability  to  be  accepted  within  the
      Karanakaran criteria.  We regard the Adjudicator's  decision  that  he
      had 'no reason to doubt  the  truthfulness  of  the  account  on  core
      matters' as unsustainable. The Adjudicator should have found  that the
      claimant had failed  to  establish  his  account  on  the  established
      standard of proof.  Even, however,  if  he  was  entitled  to  make  a
      positive credibility finding, we accept Mr  Sheikh's  submission  that
      there is nothing in the background documentation to sustain a  finding
      that a person having a cognitive ability consistent  with  performance
      for a person with a mental handicap would be of  adverse  interest  to
      the Turkish authorities on  return,  or  that  the  authorities  would
      perceive such a person to be a threat.

16.   We consider the position further on the  basis  that  the  Adjudicator
      was, contrary to our view, entitled to accept the claimant's  account.
      Mr Sheikh submitted, relying  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,  that  the
      Adjudicator failed to give an adequate  explanation  for  his  finding
      that the claimant was in fear of the authorities when he left  Turkey;
      he said he had been last detained in July 2001 and was released  after
      three days being, he said, under surveillance for about  a  month.  He
      then moved to Istanbul, where he remained  undisturbed  for  at  least
      five months. The Adjudicator  failed  to  consider  whether  this  was
      consistent with a subjective or objective fear.  We accept Mr Sheikh's
      submission that, given that the claimant had no  criminal  record  and
      was released without charge after each of his detentions, there is  no
      basis for the view that he would be at risk on return. Paragraph  6.88
      of CIPU November 2002  states  that  there  are  no  indications  that
      Turkish nationals are persecuted in Turkey purely because they applied
      for asylum  abroad.  The  Turkish  authorities  are  aware  that  many
      citizens leave the country for economic reasons and apply  for  asylum
      elsewhere.    Paragraph  6.97  states  that  Turks  who  are   without
      passports are returned on one way emergency travel documents which are
      issued by the Turkish consul general in London. Paragraph 6.100 states
      that being of Kurdish origin does not in itself  constitute  a  higher
      risk of inhuman treatment. Everything depends on  the  individual  and
      his activities in Turkey and  abroad.  We  do  not  accept  that  this
      claimant's declared experiences indicate that he left Turkey  in  fear
      of persecution or breach of protected human rights, or that his return
      to Turkey would expose him to such a risk.

17.   The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.



                                 D.B. CASSON
                            ACTING VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


