
ar                                                   TA (Homosexuality -
Family life - Immigration Rules) Latvia [2003] UKIAT 00189


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing : 29 September 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                  12/11/2003

                                 ...............

                                   Before:

                           Mr P R Lane (Chairman)
                            Professor D C Jackson





                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an  Adjudicator
      (Mr D.M. Page) dismissing his appeal against the refusal of  leave  to
      remain following refusal of an asylum   application.   The  respondent
      also claimed that removal would be in  breach  of  his  human  rights.
      Before the Tribunal the Secretary of State was represented  by  Mr  D.
      Ekagha and the respondent by Mr B. Seddon of  counsel,  instructed  by
      Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants.

The respondent's case
2.    The respondent is a citizen of Latvia.  On arrival the respondent  had
      a valid passport and a visit visa. He was given leave  to  enter   for
      six months as a visitor.     His case before the  Adjudicator  was  in
      two parts - first, that he would be at risk of persecution contrary to
      the Refugee Convention or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the
      Human Rights  Convention  were  he  to  be  returned  to  Latvia,  and
      secondly, that any return would be in breach of Article 8 of the Human
      Rights Convention.   The first aspect of the claim was based on a fear
      of ill-treatment or persecution because of Armenian ethnicity and also
      as a homosexual.  He complained of assaults by  the  police  initially
      because of his ethnicity and subsequently because  of a  complaint  he
      made about the initial assault. He was beaten on two  occasions  until
      he was unconscious and he received hospital treatment.

   3. As to his homosexuality, the respondent's case was initially  that  he
      had been  unable  to  reveal  his  homosexuality  in  Latvia  as  this
      sexuality was not accepted, a common conception of  homosexuals  being
      that they were mentally ill and perverted.    Discrimination  on  this
      ground would be contrary either to Article 3 or Article 8 of the Human
      Rights Convention. In his Statement of Evidence form (submitted on  24
      November 2000) he referred also the fact that he and Mrs Simon Horsler
      were living together as partners at the  home of Mr Horsler's parents.

   4. The respondent's claims were refused by letter of  15  November  2001.
      In that letter the Secretary of State dealt in some  detail  with  the
      approach of the Latvian government  to non-ethnic Latvians  and  gays.
      There was however  no  reference   to  the  relationship  between  the
      respondent  and  Mr  Horsler.   The  letter  ended  with   the   usual
      requirement of a  Statement of Additional Grounds for remaining in the
      United Kingdom.  In response to the refusal letter Mr Asatrajan  filed
      a  Statement which included further and more detailed reference to the
      relationship

   5. The Adjudicator dismissed this aspect of the appeal.  He held that  on
      the objective evidence there was in place a sufficient system of state
      protection against individual criminals  even  if  these  were  police
      officers acting without authority. From  that  decision  there  is  no
      appeal based on the Refugee Convention and  Article  3  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention.

The respondent's case under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention
   6. As we say, the respondent's case under  Article  8  is  based  on  his
      relationship with Mr Simon Horsler. This began in November 1999 and is
      continuing. The respondent asserted that this and his acceptance  into
      Mr Horsler's family  constituted family life and that if  he  returned
      to Latvia he would be unable to exercise his right to such a life. The
      Adjudicator allowed the appeal  in relation to this claim  and  it  is
      from that decision that the appeal is brought before us.

The proceedings before the Adjudicator
   7. In respect of the Article 8 claim, the Adjudicator heard evidence from
      Mr Horsler who stressed how happy he and the respondent  are  together
      and how his family have accepted the respondent as a member  of  their
      family.  If the respondent were forced to return to Latvia this  would
      have a 'devastating effect' on him and his family.  Mr  Horsler  would
      not be in a position to go to Latvia  because  of  his  occupation  (a
      manager of a mental health rehabilitation unit) and the dependence  of
      his  parents  upon  him.   Further,  said  Mr  Horsler,  it  was   his
      understanding that under Latvian law he would not be able to  live  in
      Latvia as a same sex partner with the  respondent,  he  would  not  be
      allowed to live there and he did not speak the language.

   8. Mr Horsler pointed out that the respondent had claimed asylum in 1998.
      He and the respondent had met in 1999 and had begun living together in
      April 2000. The refusal of the respondent's claim  was  not  until  18
      November 2001 and by that time the relationship  was  well  developed.
      The acceptance into Mr  Horsler's  family  was  supported  by  written
      evidence from family members.

   9. In putting the Secretary of State's case the  Presenting  Officer  did
      not disagree that the respondent had established a family life with Mr
      Horsler but contended that as the Immigration Rules  provided  for  an
      application to be made for entry  clearance,  the  state  interest  in
      immigration control meant that the respondent should return to  Latvia
      and apply for entry from there.  The Adjudicator commented that at the
      time of the decision to refuse leave as the couple had not been living
      together for two years the respondent  would  not  qualify  under  the
      Immigration Rules (see HC 395 para 295A(i)).  The  Presenting  Officer
      countered that for that very reason any interference with family  life
      under Article 8 would be justified.

  10. The Adjudicator took the view that he was required by statute to  take
      the date of the Secretary of State's decision as the critical date for
      determining the appeal.   At that  date,   held  the  Adjudicator  (1)
      there was a family life between the respondent and  his  partner,  (2)
      there  would  be  interference  with  that  family  life  should   the
      respondent be returned to Latvia but that that interference  would  be
      legitimate as an expression of immigration policy, but  (3)  that  the
      interference would not be proportionate to the aims of the immigration
      laws and policies.

  11. Any interference would be  disproportionate  to  immigration  control,
      first, because the delay in  reaching  a  decision  to  refuse  asylum
      encouraged the respondent  and  his  partner  form  the  relationship,
      secondly, that there were insurmountable obstacles to Mr Horsler going
      to Latvia including Mr Horsler's circumstances in this country, and it
      appearing from the objective evidence that there were  no  immigration
      rights for lesbian/gay couples in Latvia.  Finally, at the date of the
      Secretary of State's decision Mr Astrajan was not  in  a  position  to
      make any application for entry clearance.

The proceedings before the Tribunal
  12. The Secretary of State was granted leave to appeal  on  grounds  which
      asserted that the Adjudicator had failed to consider the judgments  of
      the European Courts in Abdilaziz v UK [1985] and the Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in  Mahmood  v  Secretary  of  State  [2001]  ImmAR  229.  In
      particular  it  was  contended  that,  as  Mr  Horsler  knew  of   the
      respondent's immigration status, there would therefore be no breach of
      Article 8 and that there was nothing to prevent  Mr  Horsler  visiting
      Latvia. It was asserted that according to a Tribunal decision (Berkani
      [2002] UKIAT 01704) it would be difficult  to  envisage  that  removal
      would be in breach of Article  8  if  not  in  breach  of  Article  3.
      Further, it is said that as  the  respondent's  right  to   enter  the
      United Kingdom depends on  immigration  law  (and  not  European  law)
      removal would not be in breach of Article 8.

The hearing before the Tribunal
Circumstances at the date of hearing

  13. The case was listed before the  Tribunal  for  4  July  2003  but  was
      adjourned and was heard by us on 29 September 2003.   As at that  date
      there is no contention by the Secretary of State that the relationship
      between the respondent and Mr Horsler is not continuing and  that  the
      respondent continues to be  accepted  as  a  member  of  Mr  Horsler's
      family.  On 30 July 2003 the respondent  applied for extension of stay
      in the United Kingdom as partner of Mr Horsler.

The legal background
  14. It was common ground that (i) on entry the  respondent  had  leave  to
      enter and the application now under consideration is for variation  of
      that leave;  (ii) the leave to enter was continued  while  the  appeal
      process was in being pursuant to section 3(c) of the  Immigration  Act
      1971 as amended by the Immigration Act 1999 Section 3.  No  point  was
      made by the Secretary of State  that  the  application  for  leave  to
      remain made on 30 July 2003 was prohibited  by  s.3(c)(iii)  as  other
      than a variation of the initial application.

15.   The Adjudicator had applied the law as  it  then  appeared  to  be  in
      deciding that the critical date for decision of  matters  relevant  to
      Article 8 was that of the Secretary of State's decision.   However  it
      was also common ground that  under  the  law  as  it  now  stood,  the
      critical date for the Adjudicator was the date of the  hearing  before
      him (following Secretary of State v SK [2002] UKIAT 05613  (paras  19-
      22)).  In the context of the  present case, this particularly  affects
      the weight given by the Adjudicator to the inability of the respondent
      to apply for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules  if  returned
      to Latvia.  By the date of the hearing  before  the  Adjudicator  (3rd
      September 2003) the parties had been living together for the two  year
      period specified by the rules.

16.   A further substantive error by the Adjudicator flowed from  his  focus
      on the date of decision. Mr Seddon properly and helpfully referred  us
      to the Court of Appeal decision in R (Ekinci) v the Secretary of State
      [2003] EWCA Civ 765.  In that case Simon Brown LJ pointed out that  to
      accede to the kind of argument which attracted the  Adjudicator  would
      lead to 'a bizarre and unsatisfactory result  if  the  less  able  the
      applicant is to satisfy the full requirements of entry  clearance  the
      more  readily  he  should  be  excused  the   need  to  apply.'    The
      Adjudicator may have been led down this particular path by the  issues
      in Mahmood concerning the question of whether an applicant  for  entry
      should be made to return abroad in order to apply for entry  clearance
      instead of the application being considered while he was in the United
      Kingdom.  The essence of that case was, however, the converse of  that
      on which the  Adjudicator  apparently  placed  weight  i.e.  that  the
      applicant would be highly likely to succeed  in  any  entry  clearance
      application.  It is only in those circumstances that the  question  of
      whether removal or refusal of  leave  to  remain  is  disproportionate
      requires the balancing of the need to maintain immigration control and
      the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case  given  an   applicant's
      circumstances and the consequences which may flow from a need to apply
      from abroad.

17.   However, as Mr Seddon argued the principles  underlying  Mahmood  have
      limited application to the  present case. The  respondent  has  always
      been in this country with leave and at all times entitled to apply  to
      remain within the ambit of his original application to do so.   As  we
      have said, no contention was made that an application to remain as  Mr
      Horsler's partner fell outside that ambit.

18.   In these circumstances the rationale of Mahmood leads  at  most  to  a
      contention that the respondent should put his case (whether  under  or
      outside the rules) to the Secretary of  State.  And  this  formed  the
      principal submission of Mr Ekhaga.

  19. The requirements of the Immigration Rules relevant to leave to  remain
      for the respondent are set out in paragraph 295D.  Mr Ekagha contended
      that the respondent had not made any application for leave  to  remain
      under or outside the rules   until  30th  July  2003  and  unless  the
      Secretary of State was given  an  opportunity  to  consider  it,  this
      rendered the rules useless.  The  Tribunal  should  not  prejudge  the
      results of that application.

  20. Mr Seddon countered by arguing that under the  decision  in  S  K  the
      matters regarding Article 8 should be looked at  as  at  the  date  of
      hearing.    The  Secretary  of  State  could   not   require   further
      consideration of matters relevant to Article 8 through reliance on the
      applicability on the immigration rules.   Mr Seddon pointed  out  that
      the respondent had made it clear to the  Secretary  of  State  in  his
      Statement of Evidence form relevant to his asylum claim (submitted  on
      24 November 2000) that at least in part his  plea  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom was based on a continuation of his relationship with Mr
      Horsler and  Mr  Horsler's  family.   Further,  in  his  statement  of
      additional grounds on 22 November  2001,  the  appellant  had  plainly
      indicated that continuation of the long term relationship formed  part
      of the additional grounds for remaining in the United Kingdom.

21.    In  his  comprehensive  and  helpful  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Seddon
      asserted that as  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  the
      question of proportionality, it was open to the  Adjudicator  to  make
      that assessment - citing for that proposition Razgar  v  Secretary  of
      State [2003] EWCA Civ 840 and two other cases considered in that  case
      (Blessing Adore v Secretary of State  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  716  and  Ala
      [2003] EWCA 521).  However, the focus of the courts in discussing  the
      appellate jurisdiction to make an assessment  of  proportionality  was
      findings of fact by an Adjudicator causing the  Secretary  of  State's
      consideration of the matter to become irrelevant or otiose.

22.   Where the Secretary of State has not considered the matter,  there  is
      a view that the Appellate Authority  should  not  interfere  with  the
      primary role.   While that argument has force, in our view that  force
      will vary according to the circumstances of the case, and included  in
      those  circumstances  are  (1)  any  delay  which  has   occurred   in
      considering the  initial  application  (and  therefore  providing  the
      background to developing of a relationship  as  in  this  case);   (2)
      whether any application was made  or  the  matter  was  drawn  to  the
      Secretary of State's attention prior to the decision on a claim  other
      than that based on Article 8;  (3) the underlying  principles  of  the
      'one-stop' appeal process;   (4) the likelihood of compliance with the
      immigration  rules  and  the  relevance  to  the  application  of  the
      discretion of the Secretary of  State.    We  return  to  this  matter
      below.

Submissions as to the respondent's case
23.   Mr Seddon dealt with the substantive case  for  the  respondent  under
      Article 8, commenting that the Secretary of State had  not  challenged
      the Adjudicator's findings as to the existence  of  'family  life'  or
      that refusal of leave to remain would be an interference with that  or
      with the private life of the respondent.  Mr Seddon referred  in  some
      detail with the Adjudicator's approach to  the  substantive  questions
      and to matters raised by the Secretary of  State  in  his  grounds  of
      appeal. In particular Mr Seddon pointed to the  Adjudicator's  finding
      that there were 'insurmountable obstacles' to Mr  Horsler's  returning
      to Latvia with the respondent and his knowledge  of  the  respondent's
      immigration position.  He drew our attention to the  full  context  of
      the citation from Berkani v Secretary  of  State,  relied  on  by  the
      Secretary of State, and pointed to the fact that any  conclusion  that
      treatment in a foreign country would not be contrary to Article  8  if
      not contrary to Article 3 did not apply where there was family life in
      this country.

24.   In dealing with matters which arguably  undermined  the  Adjudicator's
      determination,  Mr Seddon sought  to  play  down  the  impact  of  any
      relevance of any weight given by the Adjudicator to  the  respondent's
      inability to obtain entry clearance and  the  focus  on  the  date  of
      decision.  In  any  event,  said  Mr  Seddon,  it  followed  from  the
      respondent having leave to  remain  that  there  was  no  'immigration
      imperative' to require the respondent to return  to  obtain  an  entry
      clearance.

25.   Mr Seddon urged us to uphold the Adjudicator's  determination.  If  we
      were minded to set it aside then we should dismiss  the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal bearing in mind the various factors which were accepted
      by the Adjudicator and not challenged by the Secretary  of  State  and
      the arguments put forward  in  relation  to  the  irrelevance  of  the
      ability to obtain entry clearance.

26.   At the hearing Mr Ekagha did not advance any arguments in  support  of
      the grounds of appeal  or  that  the  substantive  case  made  by  the
      respondent lacked foundation save to assert that the respondent  could
      return to Latvia. As it was said, Mr Ekagha's primary  submission  was
      that the respondent had not made any application for leave  to  remain
      until long after the date of decision.  In order to give force to  the
      Immigration Rules  the   appeal  should  be  dismissed  to  allow  the
      Secretary of State to consider that application.

Conclusions
The sustainability of the Adjudicator's determination

27.   We are unable to agree with Mr Seddon  that  the  two  errors  of  law
      which affected the Adjudicator's  determination  are  of  such  little
      weight that the determination can simply be upheld  on  the  basis  of
      other factors to which  the  Adjudicator  gave  force.  It  is  always
      difficult  to  separate  a  particular  aspect  of  an   Adjudicator's
      reasoning when reliance is placed on different factors. In  this  case
      the Adjudicator gave  considerable  emphasis  to  the  factor  of  the
      respondent not being able to obtain entry clearance. As pointed out in
      Ekinci,  this is a fundamental error. It follows that the  appropriate
      date for the decision as to the claim based on Article 8  is,  if  the
      Tribunal considers proportionality  substantively,  the  date  of  the
      hearing before us.

Consideration of proportionality?
28.   The question of whether the matter should be considered  substantively
      has two aspects - the relevance of (i) the  lack  of  any  substantive
      consideration by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the  various  factors
      relevant to Article 8 and (ii) the lack of any express application for
      leave to remain on grounds other  than  Article  8   by  the  date  of
      decision.

      (i)     At the date of decision  and  at  all  hearing  dates  in  the
           appellate process, Mr Asatrajan had (and has)  leave  to  be  in
           this country.  He was therefore entitled to apply to extend that
           leave and at most (to borrow Mr Seddon's phrase) any immigration
           imperative would be not to  consider  the  matter  substantively
           until  the  Secretary  of  State  had  considered  the   express
           application for leave to remain on the basis of the relationship
           with Mr Horsler.  Secondly, there has been a considerable  delay
           in consideration of the asylum  application  and  hence,  as  is
           asserted by the respondent, provision and  opportunity  for  the
           relationship with Mr Horsler to  become  established.   Thirdly,
           the Appellate Authorities have no power to direct the  Secretary
           of State to consider an application and the  very  fact  of  the
           delay in this case is hardly an encouraging sign in relation  to
           any  hope  that  the  matter  would   be  considered   speedily.
           Fourthly, it seems to us plain that the Secretary of  State  was
           on notice  prior  to  the  decision  of  the  respondent's  part
           reliance on his relationship  with  Mr  Horsler.   Fifthly,  any
           allowing  of  this  appeal  in  order  for  the  matters  to  be
           considered by the Secretary of State would be directly  contrary
           to those principles advocated  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
           legislation introducing the 'one stop' appeal  process.  Nothing
           could be more  curious than  requiring  an  appellant  to  state
           additional grounds of appeal and then to   urge  adjournment  to
           allow further administrative consideration .
      (ii)  The argument by Mr Ekagha that any substantive decision  by  the
           Tribunal  would  in  some  way  undermine  the  force   of   the
           Immigration Rules seems to us to be misplaced, given  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.    The rights under that Act are no more and no
           less than the rights under the Immigration Acts  or  Immigration
           Rules.   An appellant is as entitled to rely on any  claim  that
           the decision is in breach of his human rights  as  he  is  on  a
           claim which is made on the basis of the Immigration Rules.   The
           two  types  of  claim  are  obviously  not  distinct,  the  very
           existence of Immigration Rules and compliance with  them  having
           an impact on whether any action taken  is  disproportionate.  So
           the issue is not an undermining of  the  rules  but  which  body
           should decide on their applicability and relevance to any  human
           rights claim.


29.   There is no doubt that the appellate authorities have jurisdiction  to
      decide whether  there  is  compliance  with  the  rules  even  if  the
      Secretary of State has not considered  an  applicable  rule.   Whether
      the jurisdiction should be exercised depends  on the particular  case,
      generally relevant factors being  the  legitimate  expectation  of  an
      application that if there is compliance with the  rules a  claim  will
      be recognised and the power of the appellate authorities to declare  a
      substantive right based on such expectation  (see  e.g.  Arezi  [2002]
      UKIAT 07694).  Added to those in this case are the factors  listed  in
      paragraph 28(i) above in the  context  of  non  consideration  of  the
      Article 8 claim by the Secretary of State.

30.   An important element  in  these  factors  is  the  dependence  of  any
      successful claim on the discretion of the Secretary of State.  In this
      case, when this matter reaches us, the relevance  of  that  discretion
      outside the rules would be relevant only if the rules  so  provide  or
      the respondent does not comply with the rules.   In  deciding  whether
      the Tribunal should itself consider proportionality we first  consider
      therefore the likely application of the rules under the claim.

31.   Mr Ekagha did not advance any argument or  contend  that  the  various
      requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met although he did say
      that this was a matter primarily for  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
      requirements of the rules are  :

             '295D The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave  to
             remain as the  unmarried  partner  of  a  person  present  and
             settled in the United Kingdom  are that:


               i)  the applicant has limited leave to remain in  the  United
                  Kingdom; and


              ii)  any previous marriage (or similar relationship) by either
                  partner has permanently broken down; and


             iii)  the applicant is the unmarried partner of a person who is
                  present and settle in the United Kingdom;  and


              iv)    the  applicant  has  not  remained  in  breach  of  the
                  immigration laws; and






               v)    DELETED


              vi)  the parties have been living together in  a  relationship
                  akin to marriage which has  subsisted  for  two  years  or
                  more;  and


             vii)   the  parties'  relationship  predates  any  decision  to
                  deport the applicant, recommend him for deportation,  give
                  him notice under Section 6(2) of the Immigration Act 1971,
                  or give directions for his removal under section 10 of the
                  Immigration and Asylum  Act 1999; and


             (viii)  there will be adequate accommodation for  the  parties
                 and any dependants without  recourse  to  public  funds  in
                 accommodation which the own or occupy exclusively;  and


             (ix) the parties will be  able  maintain  themselves  and  any
                 dependants adequately without  recourse  to  public  funds;
                 and


             (x)    the parties intend to live together permanently.'

32.   Insofar as the requirements are relevant  to  the  respondent's  case,
      first they leave little room for any discretion to be exercised,  even
      within the rules.  On the facts of the case   it  is  plain  that  the
      requirements (i), (iii), (iv) and (vii) are satisfied. Insofar as  any
      assessment of evidence is required in relation to  requirements  (vi),
      (viii), (ix) and (x) it is plain that on the evidence that  these  are
      also satisfied. Indeed, there has never been any contention otherwise.



33.   It seems to us that it would be grossly unfair to  the  applicant  and
      against the public interest to allow this appeal in order to leave  it
      to the Secretary of State to carry out the task of assessment  of  the
      evidence  when  that  evidence  can  rationally  lead  only   to   one
      conclusion.  Not only would there be further delay and an increase  in
      the already considerable  workload  of  the  decision  takers  of  the
      Immigration and Nationality Directorate, it would, as we  see  it,  be
      contrary to the spirit and philosophy of the one-stop  appeal  process
      and the focus on the date of the appellate decision as  the  date  for
      deciding  any  question  of  human  rights.    The   fact   that   the
      relationship  on  which  the  application  is  based  was  before  the
      Secretary  of  State  prior  to  the  decision  being  taken,   simply
      underlines the lack of substance in any case for the matter to be left
      for further consideration.

Would return be contrary to Article 8?
34.   There was no argument put  before  us  that  the  respondent  was  not
      enjoying a family (or private)  life  in  this  country  or  that  the
      refusal of leave to remain would be an interference  with  that  life.
      The  question  therefore  is  as  to  whether  that  interference  was
      proportionate and in particular, as in so many of these cases, whether
      the  interest  in   immigration   control   makes   the   interference
      proportionate.

35.   We have set out above the factors, apart  from  the  question  of  the
      lack of ability to obtain entry clearance, which the Adjudicator  took
      into account in deciding that any interference with the right would be
      disproportionate.  No argument was put to us against the relevance  of
      the importance of any of the factors set out.  It seems  to  us  quite
      unrealistic to  envisage  the  return  of  the  respondent  to  Latvia
      together with Mr Horsler  because of  the  view  taken  in  Latvia  of
      homosexuality, and Mr Horsler's  commitments  in  this  country.   The
      period taken for deciding the asylum application  plays  its  part  in
      meeting any weight to be given  to  the  fact  that  the  relationship
      continued even though Mr Horsler knew of the respondent's  immigration
      status.  There  has  been  no  attempt  by  the  respondent  to  avoid
      immigration control and he did not enter and has never  been  in  this
      country without leave.

36.   For these reasons the appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.





                                D.C. JACKSON
                                LEGAL MEMBER



-----------------------
      1


