
Heard at Field House on:
21 October 2003
 | |MS (Article 8:family life - Extended family) Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT
00132
 | |
|Prepared on:               |       |                             |
|21 October 2003            |       |                             |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:  6/11/2003                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |       |                             |
|                           |Before |                             |
|                                                                  |
|MR H J E LATTER (CHAIRMAN)                                        |
|MR RICHARD CHALKLEY                                               |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |       |APPELLANT                    |
|                           |       |                             |
|                           |and    |                             |
|                           |       |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                           |       |RESPONDENT                   |


JD

Ms T Hart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of
the Appellant. Mr J  Patel,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Malik  &  Malik,
Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.
      The Respondent is a citizen of Afghanistan.


   2. The Appellant, appeals, with leave from the Tribunal, against the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Mr John S Law, who in a determination
      promulgated on 2 May 2003, following a hearing at Walsall  on  11
      April 2003, allowed the Respondent's appeal against the  decision
      of the Appellant taken on 25 January 2003,  to  refuse  to  grant
      leave to enter.

   3. The Adjudicator  dismissed  the  Respondent's  appeal  on  asylum
      grounds and on the grounds that  the  Respondent's  rights  under
      Article 3 of the ECHR would be breached, but allowed  the  appeal
      under Article 8 of the ECHR. However, the Adjudicator was of  the
      opinion that there would be a disproportionate interference  with
      the Respondent's family life with members of his extended family.
      The grounds of appeal challenge the Adjudicator's  findings  that
      there would be a breach of the Respondent's  family  life  within
      Article 8 (1) since the Respondent's immediate family, namely his
      wife and children, would be removed with him.


   4. Ms Hart relied on the grounds of appeal and pointed out  that  in
      paragraph 19 of the Adjudicator's  determination  he  found  that
      there would be no breach of Article 3. However, in  paragraph  21
      (1) the Adjudicator finds that the majority, if not  all  of  his
      family members are now within the United Kingdom  and  to  remove
      him together with his wife and  children  from  the  Respondent's
      extended family would  be  an  interference  with  his  life.  At
      paragraph 21(4) the Adjudicator said  that  within  the  extended
      family:-

         'that appears in evidence in this case there has been a  lack
        of proportionality in the individual members  that  have  been
        dealt with by the immigration  authorities.[sic]  Whilst  each
        case turns upon its own individual elements, it is clear  that
        the fears that have been espoused by all family members relate
        to their ethnicity and to their religion. The family are bound
        together by such elements and in this case it would be  wholly
        disproportionate for the United Kingdom to return  the  family
        group, in particular the [Respondent].'


      What  the  Adjudicator  did,  was  fail  to  recognise  that  the
      Respondent's family within the context of Article 8(1)  comprised
      the Respondent, his wife and his two children.  While  there  are
      family members within the United Kingdom, the Respondent does not
      enjoy a family life with them. She referred us to a  decision  of
      the Tribunal in Pubanesparan  [2002]  UKIAT  04476  in  which  at
      paragraph 10, the Tribunal said:-


        'In our  view  this  was  a  decision  properly  open  to  the
        Adjudicator. When the relationship relied upon is not a  close
        family relationship such as husband and  wife  or  parent  and
        child, but between adults such as brothers and sisters who are
        adults, there would have to be special circumstances before it
        was shown that there was a family life within Article 8 (1) as
        contemplated  by  the  Treisberg  jurisdiction  or  sufficient
        elements of private life to establish a protective right'.


   5. She invited the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.


   6. Mr Patel acknowledged the question for the Adjudicator to ask was
      whether family life had been established.  He  acknowledged  that
      mere blood relationship was not sufficient. In paragraphs 1 and 8
      of the  determination,  the  Adjudicator  named  several  of  the
      Respondent's family relatives in the  United  Kingdom.  Four  are
      mentioned in paragraph 1 and two are mentioned  in  paragraph  8.
      The Adjudicator records that there  is  now  an  intimate  family
      grouping of family members from the Respondent's extended  family
      in the United Kingdom. He found the Respondent to be  a  credible
      witness and at paragraph  21(iv)  demonstrates  that  he  clearly
      considered the evidence before him.  The  Adjudicator  was  faced
      with a Respondent whose other individual family members have been
      allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, one of them as  recently
      as January 2003. It  is  clear  from  paragraph  21(1)  that  the
      Appellant indicated that there would be  no  forcible  return  to
      Kabul if it is thought appropriate in the  circumstances  of  the
      case and on the face of it the Adjudicator obviously felt that it
      was unfair that this family were being treated  differently  from
      other extended family members. The Tribunal  pointed  out  to  Mr
      Patel that it did not know the full circumstances  of  the  other
      extended family members and were not, therefore, able to make any
      assessment on this point. Mr Patel indicated that the reasons why
      other family members were present in the United Kingdom were very
      similar to the Respondent's own reasons for coming here.


   7. We indicated to Ms Hart that we did not need to  trouble  her  to
      address us further. We reserved our determination.


   8. We have decided that we must dismiss this appeal and now give our
      reasons for doing so.


   9. Article 8 provides that:

        (1) Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private  and
        family life, his home and his correspondence.


        (2) There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
        the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
        with the law and is necessarily in democratic society  in  the
        interests of national security, public safety, or the economic
        well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
        crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others.


   10. In Navaratnam Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Lord  Justice  Sedley
       said, at paragraph 19:-


        'Returning to the present case, neither  blood  ties  nor  the
        concern and affection that ordinarily go  with  them  are,  by
        themselves, or together, in my judgement enough to  constitute
        family life. Most of us have close relations of  whom  we  are
        extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us,  from  time
        to time; but none of us would say on those grounds alone  that
        we share a family life with  them  in  any  sense  capable  of
        coming within the meaning and the purpose of Article 8'.


  11. In paragraph 20 of his determination  the  Adjudicator  correctly
      said:-

        'Under Article 8 I have to determine  the  following  separate
        questions:-


                  i) Is there an interference with the right to respect
                     for private life  (which  includes  the  right  to
                     physical and moral integrity) and family life?


                 ii)  Is that interference in accordance with the law?


                iii) Does that interference have legitimate aims?


                 iv) Is the interference proportionate in a  democratic
                     society to the legitimate aim to be achieved?'


  12.  He then went on in paragraph 21 (1) to say:-


        'The [Appellant] has indicated that  there  will  be  forcible
        return  to  Kabul  if  it  is  thought  appropriate   in   the
        circumstances of this case. With regard  to  the  [Respondent]
        and his family, it has been stated that the majority,  if  not
        all of his family, are now within the United  Kingdom  and  to
        remove him with his own family from the extended family  would
        be an interference to his rights. Evidence has been brought by
        family members that there has been a system  whereby  extended
        and indefinite leave has been made available to  other  family
        members within the group whose position,  therefore,  is  that
        they can remain within the United Kingdom for  a  definite  or
        indefinite period of time.'


  13.  In paragraph 21 (2) he found that the United  Kingdom's  action,
      'in seeking to remove the [Respondent]' is in accordance with the
      law and has a legitimate aim of maintaining  immigration  control
      and  in  paragraph  21  (3)  found  that  the  interference   had
      legitimate aims, 'namely to prohibit illegal immigrants, but also
      to maintain immigration controls which are  an  accepted  element
      required for the protection of disorder or crime'. He  then  said
      in paragraph 21(4):-


        'With  regard  to  the  [Respondent's]  claim  the  issue   of
        proportionality must take centre stage in any assessment under
        Article 8. The  United  Kingdom  is  entitled  to  impose  and
        interpret both conventions, but, more  importantly,  the  1951
        convention in dealing with its  valid  and  legal  immigration
        controls. However, within the extended family that appears  in
        evidence  in  this  case,   there   has   been   a   lack   of
        proportionality in the individual members that have been dealt
        with by the immigration authority. Whilst each case turns upon
        its own individual elements, it is clear that the  fears  that
        have been espoused by all  family  members,  relate  to  their
        ethnicity and to their religion. The family are bound together
        by  such  elements  and  in  this  case  it  would  be  wholly
        disproportionate for the United Kingdom to return  the  family
        group, in particular the [Respondent]. I can see no legitimate
        aim that would be achieved by such action.'


  14.  As the Tribunal have said on numerous occasions previously,  the
      correct approach when considering a claim under Article 8, is  to
      adopt that used by the European Court and to analyse  the  claim,
      using a logical step-by-step approach. The  first  question  that
      must be asked is whether there  is  an  existent  or  private  or
      family life? This the  Adjudicator  did  not  do.  Had  he  asked
      himself this question, he could only have  concluded  that  there
      was not. The Appellant does enjoy a family life with his wife and
      children, but the decision of the Appellant  does  not  interfere
      with that. The relationship relied upon by this Respondent is not
      a close family relationship but one between adults. There were no
      special circumstances before this  Adjudicator  that  demonstrate
      that there was a family life within Article 8 (1) as contemplated
      by the Strasbourg jurisdiction or sufficient elements of  private
      life to establish a protected right. This  Appellant  arrived  in
      the United Kingdom on 26 July 2002.


  15. For all these reasons we find that the Adjudicator was  wrong  to
      allow the Respondent's appeal and we therefore allow  the  appeal
      of the Secretary of State.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President
