

       JB(Torture and III treatment - Article 3) DR Congo [2003] UKIAT 00012

Heard at Field House on 24 February 2003

Date of Promulgation:12.06.03


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                   Before
                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                              Mr A G Jeevanjee


                                   Between






                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  RESPONDENT


REPRESENTATION:

For the Appellant:           Mr D O'Callaghan of Counsel instructed by
Waran & Co, solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo.  He
      appeals to us with leave against the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr  J
      R Devittie who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision
      not to allow him to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  11
      December 195 and claimed asylum. The  application  was  refused  on  1
      October 1996  and  his  appeals  against  the  decision  were  finally
      determined and dismissed on 10 May 1999. On 28 July 1999 the appellant
      made a claim to remain under human rights. That claim  was  considered
      but refused by the respondent on  15  January  2002.  The  Adjudicator
      dismissed appeal against that decision on 15 October 2002.

   2. The appellant had given oral evidence before the Adjudicator,  stating
      that since his arrival in the United Kingdom he had been active in the
      activities of the RNS, which fights for human rights in  the  DRC.  He
      told the Adjudicator that he had attended their meetings regularly and
      in June 2001 he had attended a  demonstration  when  the  Minister  of
      Information had visited London. He produced a newspaper article he had
      written at the time and which he said had been published in  Kinshasa.
      He said that he had not intended to publish the article. It had fallen
      into the hands of a journalist who had published it  in  Kinshasa.  He
      told the Adjudicator that because of this article and because  of  his
      activities in the United Kingdom, he would face torture and  degrading
      treatment if he were returned to the DRC. The Adjudicator said, "I  do
      not believe the appellant's evidence as to how the article came to  be
      published. He was vague and hesitant. The ground upon which  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal was granted was that arguably  the  Adjudicator
      did need to consider the possible effect of the article, self  serving
      though he found it: see Danian [2000] Imm AR 96.

   3. Before us Mr O'Callaghan relied upon the article and argued  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed  to  consider  the  issue  of  risk  on  return
      properly in that he had disregarded the article on an improper  basis.
      He argued that the Adjudicator ought to have considered in  the  light
      of the objective as well as subjective evidence whether the  appellant
      would be safe from persecution in the DRC  on  his  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom. He submitted that the Adjudicator's  approach  to  the
      relevant evidence had been wrong. He asked that we give due weight  to
      the objective evidence on DRC and also the decisions of  the  Tribunal
      in  Mozu  [2002]UKIAT  05308,   and  Bashiya  [2002]UKIAT  00186.   Mr
      O'Callaghan requested that the appeal be remitted for a fresh  hearing
      before a different Adjudicator. When we asked whether  there  was  any
      impediment as to why we could not deal with the appeal on its  merits,
      Mr O'Callaghan said that as far as he was concerned, there  was  none.
      He submitted that the appellant would be at real risk of  inhuman  and
      degrading treatment on return because it would soon be discovered that
      he was a failed asylum seeker and that he had been active in dissident
      politics of the DRC in the UK.

   4. Mr Buckley said he had "sympathy with the Counsel because it  was  not
      enough for the Adjudicator to find that the article was self-serving".
      He said that the determination of the Adjudicator  in  this  case  was
      "bad" as he should have considered  whether  the  appellant  would  be
      regarded as anti-government. He drew our attention to  paragraph  5.22
      of the CIPU on DRC and submitted that there has been some  improvement
      in the conditions in the DRC but "not a lot". He suggested that as the
      appellant has been  away  from  the  DRC  for  many  years,  his  past
      activities, if any, would be of little interest or  relevance  to  the
      authorities. He said that he would not oppose remittal of this appeal.
      When asked to address us on the merits, Mr Buckley  simply  said  that
      the appellant would now be at less risk than before and that he  would
      be likely to be arrested  on  arrival  but  investigations  would  not
      reveal anything adverse about him, He asked us to take account of  the
      CIPU January 2003 Bulletin on DRC. And the decision of the Tribunal in
      Madjidi [2002]UKIAT 02245. Mr Buckley's attention  was  drawn  by  the
      Tribunal to Paragraphs 5.19, 5.20  and  5.21  and  asked  whether  the
      contents of these paragraphs were contradictory  to  the  contents  of
      Paragraph 5.22, which he had asked us to bear in mind. He agreed  that
      there is a contradiction but asked us to find that the return  of  the
      appellant to the DRC would not breach his rights under Article  3.  In
      his final submission, Mr O'Callaghan drew our attention to the  report
      of the expert and also Paragraph 5.33 of the CIPU. He asked us to bear
      in mind paragraphs 4.14 to 4.17 in the event the appellant is detained
      on arrival. He also reminded us that according to Paragraph  5.38  use
      of torture is common in the DRC. He asked that the appeal be allowed.

   5. The parties are  agreed  that  the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  is
      unsustainable. In our view he not only erred  in  failing  to  address
      properly the risk on return due to the article that the appellant  was
      relying upon and his activities in the United Kingdom  in  support  of
      democratic rights of people in  the  DRC,  he  also  appears  to  have
      misread or misconstrued the objective evidence in relation to the DRC.
      With regard to the conditions in the DRC the Adjudicator has stated in
      his determination, "The CIPU report indicates that  political  parties
      are allowed to exist in the DRC particularly  in  Kinshasa.  There  is
      nothing in this appellant's  past,  which  makes  him  stand  out  for
      attention. There is no reason why his article  which  voices  concerns
      shared by many in the DRC should have ruffled feathers in the  DRC  to
      the extent of placing him in dander  (sic)  of  ill  treatment."  With
      great respect the Adjudicator understanding of the  situation  in  the
      DRC is far removed from what is apparent from a full  and  not  unduly
      selective reading of the CIPU. The government in  the  DRC  is  not  a
      functioning democracy that the Adjudicator seems  to  have  understood
      where "political parties are allowed to exist" and where the  concerns
      raised by the appellant in his  article  "are  shared  by  many".  Our
      reading of Paragraphs 5.19 to 5.22 of the CIPU  leads  us  to  believe
      that  freedom  of  assembly  and  political  association  is  severely
      restricted. " The Government  considers  the  right  to  assemble  and
      associate  subordinate  to  the  maintenance  of  public  order.   The
      Government requires all organisers to apply  for  permits,  which  are
      granted at Government's discretion. Public  activities  generally  are
      dispersed by the security forces. The  Government  requires  political
      parties to apply for  permits  to  hold  press  conferences  but  such
      permits are frequently denied." (Paragraph 5.19 of the CIPU).  In  our
      view the decree of 17 May  2001  which  allows  political  parties  to
      function legally and is therefore described as "liberalising political
      activities" is so full of conditions that political  parties  have  to
      meet before their notification as a Party  can  be  accepted  that  it
      makes the use of the  phrase  "liberalising  political  activities"  a
      mockery. (Refer to Paragraph 5.20). According to  Paragraph  5.22  the
      "political party offices by and  large  remain  open  and  members  of
      political parties can carry out internal administrative functions.  In
      2001, opposition parties were able to hold  private  meetings  without
      government harassment which had not been the case in previous  years."
      We note  that  offices  remained  open  for  "internal  administrative
      functions" and that opposition parties could only hold private and not
      public meetings without government harassment. Of  course  we  do  not
      disregard the fact that in years prior to 2001 the  government  caused
      harassment even in the private meetings of political parties and  that
      "government harassment of various political parties decreased in  2001
      as compared with previous years." At  the  same  time  we  note,  "The
      Government, however, prevented most  political  gatherings  and  press
      conferences." (Paragraph 5.22).   In  view  of  the  contents  of  the
      paragraphs referred to above and the contents of  paragraphs  4.12  to
      4.31 to which we will shortly make reference, we are left in no  doubt
      that  the  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  risk  on  return  to  the
      appellant  was  quite  superficial  and  in  serious  error.  In   the
      circumstances  we  agree  with  the  parties  that  the  Adjudicator's
      determination is unsustainable. We do not agree with Mr  O'Callaghan's
      initial submission and the submission of Mr Buckley  that  the  appeal
      should be remitted for a fresh hearing. We do not see how that can  be
      of any assistance to either party. The evidence  required  to  make  a
      decision in this case is before us as it was before  the  Adjudicator.
      His decision is set aside for lack  of  proper  consideration  of  the
      evidence that  was  before  him.  No  new  evidence  is  expected  and
      therefore we do not see the point of a new hearing.

   6. We have considered  all  the  evidence  and  the  submissions  of  the
      parties. We have taken due note of the cases that we were referred to.
      In this regard we should say that we did not find any of the cases  to
      be of any great help as most of the cases, as one  would  expect,  are
      very much bound by their own facts and do not purport to lay down  any
      general principles of law. To the extent of taking note of consistency
      in decision making we note that in Mozu the Tribunal said, "The DRC is
      in a very unsettled condition and the evidence  of  the  reception  of
      returned asylum seekers, particularly from the UK  is  such  that  her
      return  does  indeed  expose  the  appellant  to  a  serious  risk  of
      imprisonment and with it rape. The conditions in  prison  are  clearly
      inhuman and degrading anyway. This would  be  a  breach  therefore  of
      Article 3." The decision in this case was promulgated on  20  November
      2002. As against that we note that in its January 2003 CIPU  Bulletin,
      the respondent states that "There has been no suspension  of  removals
      of  failed  asylum  seekers  to   the   DRC.   There   are   currently
      administrative problems in obtaining travel  documents  from  the  DRC
      Embassy in London but the Home Office is fully co-operating  with  the
      DRC Embassy to resolve these administrative problems" It also goes  on
      to say, "It is normally  safe  to  return  failed  asylum  seekers  to
      Kinshasa in the DRC provided the returnees have  valid  identification
      and travel documentation."  We do not know whether the  appellant  has
      valid identification and travel documents  and  we  have  no  evidence
      before us of the likelihood of success in obtaining such documentation
      for him in the event that he does not have it. But that  is  not,  for
      us, the determinative factor in this case.

   7. We have considered the article that was  published  in  Kinshasa.  The
      Adjudicator did "not believe the appellant's evidence as  to  how  the
      article came to be published." The Adjudicator  did  not  dispute  the
      publication of the article. Nor did  he  dispute  its  anti-government
      content. He disputed or disbelieved the genuineness of the  motivation
      underlying the publication of the article.  This  he  did  because  he
      thought that in his evidence before him the appellant "was  vague  and
      hesitant". The Adjudicator has given no indication about the areas  in
      which he found the appellant to be vague.  Given  that  the  appellant
      appeared before him, if he had thought that the  appellant  needed  to
      give more detail than he had, he should have sought such  details  and
      if the appellant had not provided  the  detail  then  the  Adjudicator
      could properly  have  concluded  that  he  had  been  evasive  in  his
      evidence. To describe a person's evidence as vague and use that  as  a
      ground for disbelief is, in our view, quite unsatisfactory  unless  of
      course the areas of lack of detail, which cause concern,  are  clearly
      spelt out. The Adjudicator also disbelieved the  appellant's  evidence
      about how the article came to be published because he was  "hesitant".
      Again such a description is far from satisfactory  without  more.  One
      can be hesitant for  perfectly  bona  fide  reasons  and  one  can  be
      perceived to be hesitant for a number of bad reasons. As hesitancy  is
      so closely linked to demeanour and judging demeanour  across  cultural
      divides is fraught with danger, the less it is used  to  disbelieve  a
      person, the less likely is the chance of being criticised  for  unfair
      judgment. As is evident, we are not  impressed  by  the  Adjudicator's
      reasons for not believing how the article came  to  be  published.  He
      thought that the appellant  had  engineered  the  publication  of  the
      article. On the evidence that was before the Adjudicator and  applying
      the correct standard of proof, we seriously doubt the basis  for  this
      conclusion.  We  do  not  draw  that  conclusion.  Even  assuming  the
      conclusion to be correct, we are still required  to  consider  whether
      the very fact of publication  would  put  the  appellant's  Article  3
      rights at serious or real risk on removal from the United Kingdom.  In
      this context we bear in mind that the appeal before us  is  not  about
      asylum but solely on human rights grounds. In addressing  this  aspect
      Lord Justice Brooke  in  Danian  (CA)  [1999]  INLR  533  ,  page  553
      paragraphs D, E ,F and G referred to the relevant parts of  the  EctHR
      judgment in Chahal v United Kingdom (1996) 23  EHHR  413,  456-457  In
      Paragraph 79 the Court said, "Article 3  enshrines  one  of  the  most
      fundamental values of democratic society. The Court is well  aware  of
      the immense difficulties faced by States in modern times in protecting
      their communities from terrorist  violence.  However,  even  in  these
      circumstances, the Convention prohibits in absolute terms  torture  or
      inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  irrespective  of  the
      victim's conduct..." In paragraph 80 the Court said, "The  prohibition
      provided by Article 3 against ill treatment  is  equally  absolute  in
      expulsion cases. Thus, whenever substantial grounds  have  been  shown
      for believing that an individual would  face  a  real  risk  of  being
      subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3  if  removed  to  another
      State, the responsibility of the Contracting State to safeguard him or
      her against such treatment is engaged in the event  of  expulsion.  In
      these circumstances, the activities of  the  individual  in  question,
      however undesirable or dangerous cannot be a  material  consideration.
      The protection afforded by Article 3 is thus wider than that  provided
      by Articles 32 and 33 of the United Nations  1951  Convention  on  the
      Status of Refugees." He rejected the contention made on behalf of  the
      Secretary of State that protection afforded by  Article  3  should  be
      narrowed in cases where risk is created by acts  of  bad  faith.  Lord
      Justice Buxton agreed with this view in paragraphs E, F and G on  page
      566 of the judgment. The Tribunal decision in the case of Madjidi upon
      which Mr Buckley placed reliance is of no  assistance.  Besides  being
      fact specific, it was a decision under the Refugee Convention and  the
      dismissal of the appeal did not  give  the  respondent  the  power  to
      remove  the  appellant  from  the   United   Kingdom.   The   Tribunal
      specifically said, "If the Secretary of State  as  a  result  of  this
      decision decides that he will remove the appellant, the appellant will
      then have a human rights appeal"

   8. Mr Buckley conceded that the appellant was  reasonably  likely  to  be
      arrested on arrival and would be subjected to  interrogation.  However
      he argued that any investigation would reveal nothing of  interest  to
      the authorities and he would therefore be safe. We are sure  that  the
      appellant will be interrogated on arrival and he is most likely to  be
      detained pending investigation. While in detention  he  will  be  held
      either in one of the Detention Centres or the Prisons. In this context
      we have given careful consideration to the relevant parts of the CIPU.
      Paragraph 4.12 says, "Despite legal provisions  governing  arrest  and
      detention  procedures,  the  security  forces  have  reportedly   been
      responsible   for   numerous   cases   of   arbitrary    arrest    and
      detention......Security forces, especially those carrying  out  orders
      of any official who could claim authority,  use  arbitrary  arrest  to
      intimidate outspoken opponents and  journalists.  Charges  are  rarely
      filed and the legal basis for such detentions are  often  obscure...."
      We believe that the appellant will be perceived  to  be  an  outspoken
      critic of the government. The investigation is bound to  disclose,  in
      our view the publication f the article. It is accepted by all that the
      article was critical of the government and was published in  Kinshasa.
      There is no such thing as free press in the DRC. Once in detention, we
      find that there are substantial grounds for believing that he will  be
      tortured and subjected to inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.  We  are
      driven to this conclusion by a  careful  reading  of  the  section  on
      Prisons and Prison Conditions in paragraphs 4.14 to 4.31 of the  CIPU.
      Paragraph 4.14 states, "The present regime operates 220 known  prisons
      and other places of detention, and in all such facilities,  conditions
      are  harsh,  unsanitary  and  life   threatening.   Overcrowding   and
      corruption are widespread. Prisoners reportedly are beaten  to  death,
      tortured, deprived of food and water and die of starvation.  Prisoners
      are wholly dependent on their families for their survival."  (emphasis
      added). In paragraph 4.16 it is states, "The  Government  allows  some
      international humanitarian organisations to visit political  prisoners
      on a regular basis  but  when  the  detainees  are  held  in  official
      prisons. The Government does not allow these  organisations  to  visit
      the numerous unpublicised and unofficial  detention  sites  throughout
      the country where mostly newly arrested detainees are held, questioned
      and sometimes subject to abuse." Paragraph 4.31 states, "The situation
      in security service detention centres is  reportedly  worse  than  the
      main prisons. Detainees are held in communicado for long  periods  and
      are often subjected to torture and other forms of  cruel,  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment. (emphasis added) The detainees also lack  medical
      facilities for ordinary illnesses or the effects of torture. Detainees
      are often held in congested, dark and  poorly  ventilated  cells.  The
      cells lack toilets and inmates use either open containers,  which  are
      rarely emptied or plastic bags as toilets.  Detainees  spend  days  or
      even weeks without being allowed to wash themselves or change clothes.
      Beatings of detainees is a regular occurrence and some detainees  have
      their hands and legs bound, often as a punishment." We  believe  there
      is a real and serious risk that the appellant will be detained in  one
      such detention centre pending investigation or post investigation..

   9. We have reminded ourselves of the high threshold required for  Article
      3. At the same time we have borne  in  mind  the  absolute  nature  of
      protection afforded by Article 3. In our judgment the removal  of  the
      appellant to the DRC would infringe his rights  under  Article  3.  We
      therefore allow this appeal.




K Drabu
Vice President



