
Ar       RB (Hindu - No Risk on Return to Afganistan) Afghanistan [2003]
UKIAT 00139


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 23 July 2003 and
                                                       25 September 2003 and
                                                             27 October 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                  11 November 2003

                                   Before:


                       Mr Richard  Chalkley (Chairman)
                               Mr P Rogers, JP






                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




Ms C. Hulse of counsel, instructed by HSK Solicitors, appeared on behalf  of
the appellant and Mr S. Bilbe,  Senior   Home  Office  Presenting  Officers,
appeared on behalf of the respondent.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who appeals, with  leave  of
      the Tribunal, against the determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr  F.R.C.
      Such) who in a determination promulgated on 15 January 2003  following
      a hearing at Taylor House on 20 December 2002,  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the decision  of the respondent taken  on  26  March  2001  to
      direct his removal after refusing asylum.

2.    There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant,  nor  indeed
      on behalf of the respondent, at the hearing before the Adjudicator who
      proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  in  accordance  with  paragraph
      33(2)(b) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000.

3.    The appellant had been represented by solicitors who lodged  a  notice
      of appeal by way of letter on 28 March 2001. They wrote on 22 November
      2002 indicating that they no longer acted on behalf of  the  appellant
      and when the appeal came before the Adjudicator he  noticed  that  the
      notice giving date place and time of the appeal had been given to  the
      appellant who had failed to  comply  with  directions  which  included
      completing and returning a form of 'Notice of Reply'.

4.    The grounds of appeal assert that the appellant's  current  solicitors
      had been instructed as long ago as 27 September 2001 but that  because
      the appellant's previous solicitors had not notified  the  Immigration
      Appeal Authority that HSK, Solicitors, had now been  instructed,  they
      had only received notification of the hearing via the appellant on  19
      December 2002.  They indicated that the form of 'Reply' was posted  to
      the Immigration Appellate Authority  at  the  Arnhem  Support  Centre,
      Leicester on 19 December 2002.  How they could possibly  have  thought
      that an Adjudicator sitting in London at 10.0 am the following morning
      would receive a copy of such reply is not explained.

5.     The  Tribunal  took  the  view  that  in  these   circumstances   the
      Adjudicator's determination could not be permitted to stand and, at an
      earlier hearing on 4 June 2002, granted leave  for  the  appellant  to
      give evidence in order that the Tribunal could determine his appeal.

6.    Unfortunately  Miss  Hulse  had  not  been  fully  instructed  by  the
      appellant's solicitors. She was not aware that at the  hearing  before
      us on 23 July the Tribunal were  expecting  to  hear  the  appellant's
      asylum  appeal.   However,  the  appellant  was  present,  as  was  an
      interpreter and the appellant's wife.   After  ascertaining  that  the
      documents which had been submitted on behalf on the appellant had not,
      apparently, been handed to counsel or submitted to the Home Office, we
      granted an adjournment in order  that  the  representatives  could  be
      supplied with copies and have time to read the documents. We indicated
      that we would give them as much time as they would  require  and  that
      they should notify our usher when they were ready  to  proceed.  After
      the adjournment Miss Hulse was content to proceed with the hearing and
      fortunately that was not hampered by the failure  of  her  instructing
      solicitors to give her full and accurate instructions.

7.    The appellant was called to give evidence and we ensured that  he  and
      the interpreter both understood each other. He confirmed that his name
      was Ram Basant Talwar. He  confirmed  his  address  and  that  he  had
      instructed his solicitors to prepare  a  witness  statement.   He  was
      shown a copy of that  statement  by  counsel  and  he  identified  his
      signature at the end of it. He confirmed that the contents  were  true
      and correct and that he wished to adopt the statement as his evidence-
      in-chief.

8.    The Tribunal cautioned the appellant that he  should  only  adopt  the
      statement as part of his evidence if he was satisfied that it was true
      and accurate and he was happy with its contents.  We explained to  him
      that if later, when giving evidence, he contradicted some part of  his
      statement, that may cause us to believe that he was not telling us the
      truth and in that event there was a possibility that he may damage his
      appeal.  We asked him to satisfy himself that he  was  entirely  happy
      with the contents of the statement. He told us that he was and that he
      wished to adopt it. He confirmed that it had been read back to him  in
      his own language.

9.    In answer to questions put to him by his  counsel  he  confirmed  that
      the name 'Talwar'  was his family name. Counsel asked him  to  explain
      why, if Talwar was his family name, he had applied for asylum  in  the
      name 'Ram Basant' and subsequently given  notice  of  appeal  in  that
      name. He said that when he went  to  see  solicitors  he  produced  an
      identity card which was in the name of Ram Basant and  which  did  not
      bear his family name. His solicitors  had therefore told  him  to  use
      the name Ram Basant rather than his full name. He confirmed that  when
      he was married he told the registrar his full and accurate  name,  Ram
      Basant Talwar, and that is the name  which  appears  on  his  marriage
      certificate.

10.   He confirmed that in his statement he explained that  his  father  had
      been in the military in Afghanistan. This was both during  and  before
      the Communist Party regime  of  Dr  Najeeb.   His  grandfather  was  a
      magistrate also, both during and  before  the  Communist  regime.  His
      family had suffered under both the Mujahadeen and the Taliban  regimes
      and he now fears return to Afghanistan because he is a  Hindu.  Hindus
      were discriminated against under the Taliban because the Taliban  were
      Muslims. Counsel pointed out to him that the Taliban regime no  longer
      existed in Afghanistan and he replied to the effect that  the  Taliban
      have not actually left Afghanistan and are all over the country.

11.   Prior to the Mujahadeen, the government did not use  to  bother  about
      people's religion. After the Mujahadeen took power  they  said  Hindus
      should either convert to Islam or leave the country.

12.   People who were in power under the Mujahadeen  regime  were  the  same
      people who were in power under the Taliban. He did  not  believe  that
      these people had left the country now.  They are not in power but they
      are trying to gain control.

13.   The appellant's father was the leader of all "military  arms"  in  the
      Khugseani area. He  was  persecuted  because  he  was  in  control  of
      weapons. People came to the family  home asking where he had kept  the
      weapons. He said that he had  left  them  where  they  were  but  they
      accused him of selling arms and keeping the money. He was detained and
      a few days later his body was retuned to the  family.  They  were  not
      allowed to cremate it.

14.   His father was attacked because army weapons could not  be  found  and
      his father had been responsible for them.

15.   The appellant confirmed that he had  not  been  in  contact  with  his
      family since the end of the Taliban regime.

16.   Cross-examined on behalf of the respondent,  the  appellant  confirmed
      that his body was returned to the family at the end of May  1996.  The
      appellant was asked when his father was  arrested  and  the  appellant
      replied that it was in May 1996.  His father's body  was  returned  to
      the family  about two  to  three  weeks  after  his  father  had  been
      arrested.

17.   Miss Hulse asked the appellant if he was  sure  that  it  was  only  a
      matter of two to three weeks. The appellant confirmed that it was.

18.   The appellant was shown a copy  of  his  statement  of  evidence  form
      setting out the basis of his asylum claim, and referred to what he had
      said in an accompanying statement.  The appellant  confirmed  that  it
      was his signature at the end of the statement. When it was pointed out
      to the appellant that he had said that his father was arrested at  the
      end of 1996 and was detained and imprisoned until March 1997  when  he
      was executed in jail, the appellant said that   his  father  had  been
      arrested in 1996.  The discrepancies were put to the  appellant  again
      and he was asked for his explanation.  He remained silent. When he was
      pressed by the Tribunal to respond he  said  that  he  filled  in  the
      statement of evidence form with his solicitor and when he  was  called
      for interview he said his solicitor had failed to advise him.  It  was
      explained to the appellant that he had not answered the  question  and
      the discrepancy was again put to him.  He again remained silent.

19.   The Tribunal  read  to  him  what  he  had  said  about  his  father's
      detention , arrest and the return of his father's body and  asked  him
      if he could explain the discrepancy between what he had  said  in  his
      statement and what he had told us in giving evidence.   The  appellant
      replied that his father was detained in 1996  and when  his  body  was
      returned the family were prevented from  cremating  it.  The  Tribunal
      again asked the appellant if he could offer any  explanation  for  the
      discrepancy  between  what  he  had  said  in  his  written  statement
      accompanying his statement of evidence form and the  evidence  he  had
      given to us today.  He said he believed that this was because  of  the
      difference in the calendars used in Afghanistan and Europe.

20.   Mr Hulse asked the appellant when his brother and  sister  were  taken
      by the Taliban.  He replied that  it  was  on  20  December  2000.  He
      confirmed that he had arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 June 2000. He
      then said that they were taken away again after he came to the  United
      Kingdom.  In his statement he had described the  first  occasion  when
      his brother and sister were taken by the Taliban. They were beaten and
      asked about their father. Fellow Hindus made  representations  to  the
      Taliban and secured his brother's and sister's release. They  returned
      home and were again taken on 20 December 2000. Since then he  has  not
      received any news. The appellant added that his uncle and his  brother
      had sold a shop to send the appellant abroad.

21.   After the appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  he  was  told  by
      somebody here that they had seen the appellant's  mother,  sister  and
      brother and they were all fine. This was in 2000.

22.   The Tribunal explained that they had some questions on  parts  of  the
      appellant's evidence  on  which  they  would  like  clarification.  In
      response to questions put, the appellant explained that his father had
      been in the army since he was very small. He always served in the army
      in the same area and was a brigadier.  The appellant confirmed that it
      was very high rank.   He  said  that  his  father's  full  names  were
      Veshamber Bernet Talwar.  He was asked if he  could  explain  why  the
      identity card which the appellant had  produced  showed  his  father's
      names as  Veshamber Bernat. He said that this was because his father's
      full name had not been written on the identity card either.

23.    The  Tribunal  referred  the  appellant  to  his  statement  when  he
      described his father as a 'commander  in  the  army'.   The  appellant
      confirmed that his father was a senior regular army officer  stationed
      in the area where they lived.

24.    The  Tribunal  drew  the  appellant's  attention  to   his   marriage
      certificate which had been submitted on his behalf which described the
      appellant's father's  'rank  or  profession'  as  'army  clerk'.   The
      appellant said he could not explain this, he had had  said  that   his
      father was an army officer.

25.   The appellant confirmed that he had a relative in the United  Kingdom,
      his cousin's son. It was his cousin's son who had been  a  witness  at
      his wedding and  whose  name  appeared  on  the  appellant's  marriage
      certificate.

26.   Re-examined by Miss Hulse, the appellant  explained  that  his  father
      wore a uniform which had rank badges on it, but he did not serve in  a
      fighting unit because Hindus were not required to fight, only  Muslims
      were.

27.   His cousin's son does not have any contact with  either his father  or
      the appellant's mother.

28.   The appellant confirmed that his wife did not know him when  he  lived
      in Afghanistan. She was, however, aware that he was an  asylum  seeker
      when they were married.

29.   The appellant confirmed that he had asked both the Sikh and the  Hindu
      community in the United Kingdom if they could find out any information
      about his brother, sister or mother but he had not contacted  the  Red
      Cross.  He confirmed that his cousin's son had lived in Kabul  but  he
      used to visit in the winter time. He last  saw  his  cousin's  son  in
      Afghanistan in 1996 after his father's death.  His  cousin's  son  had
      come to the United Kingdom before the appellant and  is  younger  than
      the appellant. When he came to United Kingdom the appellant was living
      in Bolton. He had travelled to London to attend a  Hindu temple  where
      he met his cousin's son.

30.   Counsel confirmed that she had completed the appellant's evidence  but
      invited the Tribunal to consider granting an adjournment in order that
      consideration could be given to calling the appellant's relative as  a
      witness.

31.   The Tribunal find that counsel had not  been  properly  instructed  by
      her solicitors and as a result not had  the  opportunity  to  consider
      whether it would  be  appropriate  to  call  additional  evidence.  We
      granted leave and adjourned the proceedings until 12 August.

32.   The determination to this point was dictated on 23 July 2003.  At  the
      hearing on 23 July 2003, the Tribunal were joined by Mr D.B.  Bremner.
      He was not available to sit at the  adjourned  hearings  and  took  no
      further part in discussions concerning this appeal.

33.   The matter next came before the Tribunal on  25  September  2003,  the
      hearing on the 12 August having been adjourned before that  date,  due
      to administrative reasons.  We found ourselves in difficulty and  were
      forced to adjourn the hearing until  22  October 2003 in order that an
      interpreter who spoke Pushtu and Farsi or Urdu  or  Punjabi  could  be
      booked.

34.   At the hearing on 22 October 2003, the proceeding commenced  with  the
      Chairman reading aloud the  Tribunal's  record  of  proceedings.  Both
      representatives agreed that it was a true and accurate record. Neither
      of them had any comments or amendments to make on it.

35.   We confirmed with Mr Bilbe that he had the same documents  before  him
      as we did, including an additional bundle handed in by counsel at  the
      hearing.   We then heard evidence from Mr Shami Kumar Talwar.  He  has
      been granted four years exceptional leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom. He is related to the appellant. His father and the  appellant
      are cousins.  He confirmed that he was an Afghani  citizen  and  is  a
      Hindu. Before coming to the United Kingdom, he  lived  in  Kabul.   He
      knew the appellant's family who  lived  in  Jalalabad.  Prior  to  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom, the appellant and witness  had  met  in
      the appellant's home in Jalalabad sometime towards the  end  of  1996.
      The witness went to the appellant's home following the  kidnapping  of
      the appellant's father by the Taliban.  The  witness  and  his  family
      members went to the appellant's home to learn if there was any news of
      the appellant's father.  Later, the witness heard that the appellant's
      body had been returned.  It was sometime in 1997  when  the  body  was
      brought back to the appellant's family home. It was returned some  two
      or three months after the kidnapping.  The witness did not  visit  the
      appellant's family home again.  The witness left Afghanistan some  two
      years later during 1999.  He left because he feared that  the  Taliban
      would kill him because he was a Hindu. The witness has no contact with
      his family and has no news of them.  Mr  Bilbe  declined  to  ask  any
      questions by way of cross-examination. In answer to questions  put  to
      the witness by the Tribunal, he said that he did  not  know  what  had
      happened to the appellant's mother, brother or sister.  He  knew  that
      the appellant's father had been a soldier.

36.   We next heard evidence from Ashuk Kumnar.  He is the President of  the
      Afghan Hindu Cultural Society and knows the appellant.  He  has  known
      him since his father was a  manager  of  a  bank  in  Afghanistan.  He
      remembered one occasion in about 1994 when he accompanied  his  father
      to Jalalabad and he met the  appellant's  father  in  a  temple.   The
      witness's father had specifically commented to the witness  that  this
      man (meaning the appellant's father) was a Hindu who was in the  army.
      The witness remembered this because it was almost unique for  a  Hindu
      to serve in the Afghani army.  The witness was not cross-examined.

37.   The appellant's father-in-law, Mr Ram Bitta Puri, was called  to  give
      evidence.  He  confirmed  his  relationship  with  the  appellant  and
      confirmed that he was a Hindu and Afghani  citizen  from  Kabul.   The
      witness left Afghanistan because he was a refugee.  He confirmed  that
      he still owned property in Afghanistan. Hindu  properties  were  taken
      over by the Mujahadeen.  They were not purchased. Hindus  were  forced
      to  place  their  thumbprint  on  a  document  illegally  transferring
      ownership of the property.  He was asked by counsel  if  he  knew  the
      situation in Afghanistan for Hindus.  He said that there had  been  no
      change and if anything the situation is  deteriorating.  He  confirmed
      that he had no contact with anyone in Afghanistan.

38.   We lastly heard evidence from the  appellant's  wife,  Soneta  Talwar.
      She confirmed that she and the appellant were married on  20  November
      2002.  She has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   She
      met her husband in June 2002 and had not known him before  that  date.
      Theirs was an arranged marriage.  She confirmed that she knew  he  did
      not have the right to remain in the United  Kingdom.   She  said  that
      were he to be sent back to Afghanistan, he will  feel  it  very  badly
      because her life is with him.  Were they both to return they would not
      be allowed to survive in Afghanistan. She said it would be  very  hard
      for them.  She regarded her place as being with her husband and if  he
      were to be returned to Afghanistan she would go with him.

39.   Cross-examined by Mr Bilbe, the witness confirmed that  when  she  met
      her husband his application for asylum had been refused.

40.   The Tribunal adjourned briefly and following the  adjournment  advised
      the representatives  that  there  were  no  credibility  issues  which
      concerned us and that we were satisfied that  the  appellant's  father
      had been a senior military officer.

41.   Miss Hulse made her closing submissions to us. She  reminded  us  that
      the Taliban are no longer in power in Afghanistan but  they  have  not
      left the country. They are still there. Nothing has happened over  the
      last  two  years  to  indicate  that  the  Taliban  have  become  less
      fundamental.  The present regime is, she suggested, well  reported  to
      have control in Kabul but not throughout Afghanistan.  The  difficulty
      now is that there are very few Hindus left in Afghanistan because  the
      majority fled.  She submitted that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk
      under Article 3, if not Article 2 on  his  return.   He  came  to  the
      United Kingdom as a refugee and, she submitted, there is  'foreseeable
      risk' to him in the future.  There is no  protection available and his
      appeal should be allowed.

42.   Mr Bilbe pointed out that the appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom
      on or some time prior to 8 June 2000 and the Secretary of  State  gave
      directions for his removal on 26 March 2001.  He referred  us  to  the
      Afghanistan Country Assessment of April 2003 and pointed out  that  at
      paragraphs 6.35  to  6.43  the  report  specifically  deals  with  the
      situation of Sikhs and Hindus.  That assessment suggests that there is
      religious tolerance shown towards  both Sikhs and Hindus and that they
      have the right to practice their religion.  The situation is described
      as being generally good for Hindus and there is no objective  evidence
      which has been adduced on behalf of the appellant to  contradict  that
      assessment. In paragraphs 2 and 11  of  counsel's  skeleton  argument,
      reference is made to the fact that the appellant's father was  a  high
      ranking  administrative  officer  in  the  army  under  the  communist
      government  and  that  his  grandfather  was  also  a  civil  servant.
      Following the takeover by the Taliban,  both  the  appellant  and  his
      family were persecuted, not simply for  being  Hindus,  but  also  for
      being or being perceived as supporters of the former communist regime.
       However, Mr Bilbe suggested that there were  no  links  between  this
      appellant and the  former  communist  regime.  He  himself  was  never
      involved in politics. He remained in Afghanistan for almost four years
      following the death of his father and had he been of any  interest  to
      the authorities he would have been detained at that time. He drew  our
      attention to the  assessment  of  the  current  situation  for  former
      members of the communist regime which had  been  overthrown  in  1992.
      This was set out at paragraphs  6.133  to  6.138  of  the  Afghanistan
      Country  Assessment.  That  the  appellant  was  able  to  remain   in
      Afghanistan for a long period  following  the  death  of  his  father,
      clearly demonstrated that he was of no interest. There is no objective
      evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant to the contrary.   There
      is, in the appellant's bundle, a report by the  BBC  correspondent  in
      Kabul but that deals with the situation of Sikhs, rather than  Hindus.
      There is also a copy of a report  published  on  28  January  2003  by
      Religioscope.  However, at the foot of that  report  it  is  explained
      that the article was originally published by  the  Institute  for  War
      Peace reporting.  It does not appear to be dated.

43.   The Tribunal invited Mr Bilbe to comment on the appellant's Article  8
      rights.  Counsel had not made any submissions in relation to them  but
      the Tribunal indicated that Mr Bilbe may wish to  address  them  since
      counsel might refer to them in her response.  He submitted that  there
      were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  his  wife
      returning to Afghanistan and, given that she  knew  at  the  time  she
      married him that he had no right to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      there would be no breach of her Article 8 rights.

44.   We asked Miss Hulse if she wished to respond. She  asked  us  to  note
      paragraphs 6.139 to 6.145 of the Country Information and  Policy  Unit
      Assessment which dealt with the situation of those affiliated  to  the
      former communist regime during the period 1996 to  22  December  2002.
      She asked us to note that family links and stay abroad may be relevant
      factors.  She asked us also to note that  the  protection  enjoyed  by
      some apparently stemmed from their  clan  membership  and  links  with
      influential  ethnically  and  family  based  groupings.    Given   the
      dwindling numbers of Hindus in Afghanistan  now,  this  appellant   is
      unlikely to receive any protection on his return.   He will  be  known
      as being the son of a Hindu former army officer and the grandson of  a
      former civil servant.  Both served under the former communist  regime.
      This would place  the appellant at additional risk. While the  Taliban
      are no longer in control in Afghanistan, these people are still in the
      country.  The property of refugees has been stolen from  them  and  if
      the appellant were to return he would be at an additional risk.  While
      a large number of people have benefited from the disappearance of  the
      Hindu community, they are not likely to welcome them back.   There  is
      no  security outside Kabul and, looking at the  Amnesty  International
      Report reproduced in her supplemental bundle, it  is  clear  that  the
      situation is still unsafe. There  is  no  network  of   Hindu  support
      available for this appellant and he has no  contact  with  any  family
      members who might remain in Afghanistan. He has no  support  there  at
      all and there is nowhere that he, with a young wife, would find  safe.
      She submitted that if there was a foreseeable risk then the  appellant
      was entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention.

45.   We invited counsel  to  address  us  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
      Article 8 rights. She reminded us that the appellant had married at  a
      time when his application for asylum had been refused but only because
      of his failure to attend the interview. He had an expectation that his
      appeal  would  be  allowed.  She   said   that   'removal   would   be
      disproportionate because it is foreseeable  that  he  could  apply  to
      return to the United Kingdom as the spouse of someone settled  in  the
      United Kingdom'.

46.   We reserved our determination.

47.   We should say at the outset that we found  Mr  Puri,  the  appellant's
      wife, Mr Talwar and  Mr  Kumar  to  be  credible  witnesses.  We  were
      particularly grateful to Mr  Kumar  for  having  taken  the  time  and
      trouble to attend and give evidence before us.

48.   We are satisfied that the appellant's full name is Ram Basant  Talwar.
      We were supplied with a statement from Mr  Sami  Aziz,  a  coordinator
      from Afghan Association of London.  For some reason, he believed  that
      since that organisation had been registered with the OISC, he was  not
      permitted to attend and give evidence before us. He is and of  course,
      he could, be served with a witness summons.  Mr Aziz explains that the
      appellant's  national  identity  card  has  been  shown  to  him   for
      verification. It has been found to be genuine.  He explained that  the
      bearer's surname is not normally included on a national identity card.
      We accept this explanation.  We are  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
      full names are Ram Basant Talwar and note that he gave his  full  name
      to the registrar of births when he was married.

49.   We are also  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  father  was  a  senior
      Afghani army officer. The evidence of Mr Kumar it was very impressive.
      He described having met the appellant's father in Afghanistan when  he
      went to Jalalabad with his father who knew the appellant's father.  Mr
      Kumar was told by his father  that  this  gentleman  (the  appellant's
      father)  was  a  senior  army  officer.  Mr  Kumar   remembered   that
      conversation because it was almost unique for a Hindu to be a  soldier
      in the Afghani army. We are satisfied with the appellant's explanation
      for his father being described  as  an  army  clerk  in  his  marriage
      certificate.  We believe that  was  an  error  in  interpretation.  We
      accept the appellant's evidence that  his  father  was  taken  by  the
      Taliban and that sometime later his father's body was returned.

50.   We have to make an assessment as to whether, on return to  Afghanistan
      today, this appellant will be at real risk of facing persecutory  harm
      for a  Convention  reason  or  that  his  rights  under  the  European
      Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
      will be breached.

51.   We have carefully considered the objective evidence before  us.  While
      counsel did not refer us to it, we have had regard to the  bundles  of
      objective evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant for a  hearing
      before the Adjudicator.  Unfortunately the Country  Assessment is  out
      of date (it was published in October 2002 and we have  a  more  up-to-
      date Assessment in the form of the April 2003 edition)  but  we  found
      the US State Department Report, published on 1 March 2003,  to  be  of
      assistance. We noted that the government made significant progress  in
      establishing democracy  and good governance during its first full year
      of democratic government  after  prolonged  civil  war  and  political
      instability.  The remnants of the Taliban and rogue warlords were said
      sometimes to have threatened, robbed, attacked and occasionally killed
      local villagers, political opponents and prisoners.  During  the  year
      some efforts were made to bring justice ot those  persons  responsible
      for serious abuses and one Taliban commander  was  convicted  of  mass
      murder and sentenced to twenty years imprisonment.  We noted that  85%
      of the population were   described  as  being  Sunni  Muslim  and  the
      remaining 15% were Shi'a. There was said to be a small number of  non-
      Muslim residents remaining in the country who were  free  to  practice
      their faith. The April 2003 CIPU Report  reported  that  Afghanistan's
      Deputy Minister of Transport, during a visit to  India  in  May  2002,
      said that the interim administration had decided to  grant  protection
      to Afghan Sikhs and Hindus who fled from the country, most of whom had
      migrated to Pakistan or India. In  a  June  2002  report,  there  were
      estimated to be 30,000 Afghan Hindus and Sikhs who were said  to  have
      become united in adversity.   They share the same temples as  well  as
      many religious ceremonies. In October 2002  the  US  State  Department
      estimated that the number of non-Muslims, including Sikhs and  Hindus,
      were only in the hundreds. Four Hindu and Sikh delegates attended  the
      Loya Jerga in June 2002. They  reported  that  there  were  no  longer
      repressed and felt free to practice their religions. In September 2002
      the UNHCR/Kabul and Cooperation Centre for Afghanistan confirmed  that
      the situation for Hindus and Sikhs is generally good and that there is
      religious tolerance for these  groups  and  they  have  the  right  to
      practice their religions.

52.   The Religioscope article referred to by counsel, spoke of some  Hindus
      and Sikhs seeking to return to Afghanistan, many being put off by  the
      lack of housing and problems with education. It  is  clear  that  much
      work still has to  be  done  be  authorities  in  Afghanistan,  as  is
      highlighted by the Amnesty International  Report.  This  describes  as
      having interviewed several of the twenty-one rejected  asylum  seekers
      who were returned from the United Kingdom on the first flight in April
      2003. They reported their return to be chaotic and said the  returning
      authorities  had  paid   insufficient   attention   to   reintegration
      assistance and post-return monitoring.

53.   We noted from the CIPU Report that  in  February  2002  UNHCR  advised
      that certain groups or individuals  could  face  serious  problems  on
      return and amongst these groups were identified persons associated  or
      deemed to be associated with the communist regime overthrown in  1992.
      In May 2002 UNHCR confirmed that conditions were  not  safe   for  the
      return of former members of the Communist Central Committee and  their
      families and members of the Communist Committee Structures at Province
      level. However, we noted that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
      Afghanistan and Oxfam in Afghanistan believed that there would  be  no
      problems for low profile  former  members  of  PDPA  in  returning  to
      Afghanistan and Dacaar confirmed that the situation in  May  2002  was
      unchanged from that under the  Taliban,  when  there  was  hardly  any
      persecution of those at a low  level  whilst  higher  profile  members
      faced problems.  In July 2002 a UNHCR report identified those at  risk
      including high ranking members of the PDPA and this  includes  members
      of the Central Provincial Cities and District Committees of PDPA  with
      their  families  and  heads  and  high-ranking   members   of   social
      organisations  such  as  the  Democratic   Youth   Organisation,   the
      Democratic Women's Organisation at the level of country province, city
      and districts.

54.   Our consideration of the objective evidence  before  us  leads  us  to
      conclude that, simply because the appellant's grandfather was a  civil
      servant and his own father was a senior officer in the army under  the
      communist regime, will not put the appellant at any risk. As Mr  Bilbe
      pointed out, if he had managed to live without difficulty  for  almost
      four years after his father's death under the Taliban, it  cannot  now
      be said that there is a serious risk to him  now  on  account  of  the
      activities of his father and grandfather. Neither do we  believe  that
      there is any risk to the appellant upon return  as  a  result  of  him
      being  a  Hindu.  There  is  no    credible  evidence  before  us   to
      substantiate the claim that they now face ill-treatment or persecutory
      harm in Afghanistan.

55.   We noted from a CIPU Report that during 2002  more  than  1.8  million
      refugees returned home assisted by UNHCR and the  Afghan  Ministry  of
      Refugees and Repatriation.  During 2003 UNHCR is  planning  to  assist
      1.2 million refugees  and  300,000  internally  displaced  persons  ot
      return to their homes. The Country Information  report  describes  the
      situation in Kabul as having generally improved and news  reports  for
      June 2002 suggested the return of normal life to  the  city  of  Kabul
      with the reconstruction under way in many districts and new businesses
      opening.

56.   We have concluded there is simply no credible evidence  before  us  to
      support the contention that  this  appellant's  return  will  cause  a
      breach of Article 2.  We accept  that  the  conditions  to  which  the
      appellant will return in Afghanistan are not as  favourable  as  those
      enjoyed by him in the United Kingdom, but find that there is  no  real
      risk that he will suffer ill-treatment or harm  such  as  will  engage
      either the 1951 United Nations Convention on the Status of Refugees or
      the appellant's rights under Article 3.

57.   We now turn to the appellant's claim under Article 8.   This  was  not
      pursued before us with any great vigour by counsel who only  addressed
      us after we had prompted her.

58.   Article 8 provides that:

      (i)   Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.


      (ii)  There shall be no  interference by a public authority  with  the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           security,  public  safety  or  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
           country, for the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.

59.   As the Tribunal have  said  on  numerous  occasions  previously,   the
      correct approach to adopt is that used by the European  Court  and  to
      analyse the claim, using a logical step by step approach.   First,  it
      must be asked whether there is an existent  private  or  family  life?
      Second,  it  needs  to  be  established  whether  there  will  be   an
      interference with that family or private life?  Third, it needs to  be
      decided whether that interference pursues a legitimate aim, and if  it
      does, fourthly, whether it is in accordance with the law?  Finally, it
      must be decided whether that such interference is proportionate?

60.   We were impressed by the appellant's wife. She is clearly  devoted  to
      her husband. She indicated to us that were her husband to be  returned
      to Afghanistan, she would go with him since she believes  that  it  is
      her duty to stay with her husband. In answer to the first question, we
      find that the appellant does enjoy a family life with his wife in  the
      United Kingdom who  has indefinite leave to remain.  According to  the
      Home Office letter which he produced, dated 7  June  2002  (H.O.   ref
      P397727), she was not granted indefinite leave to remain after  having
      been recognised as a refugee. However, we find  that  the  appellant's
      wife will return to Afghanistan with him. Given the objective evidence
      (which refers to shortages of food, water,  shelter  etc.)  we  accept
      that the conditions they would face in  Afghanistan  on  their  return
      would be grim indeed. However, we also take into account the fact that
      there is no obligation on the United Kingdom to respect the  residence
      of choice of the couple had the fact that  the  marriage  was  entered
      into when both parties were fully aware of the  precarious  nature  of
      the  appellant's  immigration   status.   We   are   satisfied   that,
      notwithstanding conditions in Afghanistan, there are no insurmountable
      obstacles to his wife establish a family life there.  The  appellant's
      wife confirmed that she would accompany the appellant and accordingly,
      his removal would not be an interference  with  his  right  to  family
      life.

61.   For all these, we dismiss this appeal.



                                                            RICHARD CHALKLEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



-----------------------
      1


