
Heard at Field House on 18 September 2003

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date determination notified


                                                                   1.12.2003
                                   Before:
                                 Mr D Allen
                                 (Chairman)
                                Mr J Perkins

Between
                                ELENA MURAEVA
                                LENA MURAEVA

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us Mr M Jackson of counsel, instructed by White  Ryland,  solicitors,
appeared for the appellants and  Mr  J  Morris,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer appeared for the respondent.

The appellant in case HX 57771 2002, Elena Muraeva, was born on 10  November
1976 and so is now 27 years old. She is described as "the First  Appellant".
The appellant in case HX 57769 2002, Lena Muraeva, was born  on  8  November
1979 and  so  is  now  24  years  old.  She  is  described  as  "the  Second
Appellant". They are citizens of Russia and are sisters. They each appeal  a
determination of an adjudicator, Mr J R Devittie, who,  in  a  determination
promulgated on 23 January 2003, dismissed their appeals against  a  decision
of the Secretary of State that they were not entitled to refugee status  and
that their removal from the United Kingdom would  not  be  contrary  to  the
United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appellants were settled in Chechnya and suffered  considerable  problems
when conflict broke out between Chechen rebels and the Russian  authorities.
 They were together when they were raped by Russian soldiers.

The adjudicator believed their evidence.  He  noted  "the  bleak  conditions
the civilian population has had to ensure in  Chechnya.   The  rebel  forces
and the Russian army had committed gross  human  rights  violations  against
civilians.  Women and  children  have  suffered  particularly  badly."   The
adjudicator clearly believed that they could not be expected  to  return  to
Chechnya and live safely there.  However he found that as  Russian  citizens
they could reasonably be expected to  relocate  and  live  safely.  Although
they had been displaced in the war he did not  accept  that  they  had  been
persecuted for a convention reason or that there was a real risk  that  they
would be in the event of their return.

With respect to the adjudicator the  suggestion  that  ethnic  Russians  who
were at risk in Chechnya could be expected  to  find  safety  amongst  other
ethnic Russians away from Chechnya might seem eminently attractive but  they
were given permission to appeal because it was  arguable  that  it  was  not
open to the adjudicator to find  that  they  could  be  expected  to  settle
elsewhere in Russia away from Chechnya. Having considered  the  evidence  we
find in these cases that it is not.

Mr Jackson referred to the case of Archakov v Secretary of  State  01TH03277
decided by Mr Freeman's tribunal in a determination notified  on  3  January
2002. That case concerned  a  Chechen  citizen  who  unsuccessfully  claimed
asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of  State  gave   removal
directions including the words "by scheduled  airline  to  RUSSIA".  Similar
directions have been given here. Certainly there is no suggestion  that  the
Secretary of State has undertaken not to return the  appellants  to  Moscow.
The Tribunal allowed the appeal in Archakov because  it  was  not  persuaded
that the appellant could live safely in Moscow  or  get  back  to  Chechnya.
Archakov does not mean that no Chechen can ever be returned. It was  decided
at a time of heightened tension in the aftermath of bombings of  two  Moscow
apartment buildings in September 1999. However, at the very least, it  shows
that the  evidence  in  any  particular  case  needs  to  be  assessed  very
carefully. It is also a significant feature of that case that the  appellant
was Chechen.  These  appellants  have  each  described  their  ethnicity  as
Russian and have expressly distinguished themselves from Chechens. At  least
nominally they follow the Christian religion.

We have an advantage  over  the  adjudicator.  We  have  a  report  dated  5
September 2003 prepared for the hearing by Robert Chenciner. He is a  Senior
Associate Member of St Antony's College Oxford and  an  Honorary  Member  of
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Dahgestan Filial. Mr Morris took  no  point
on the late production of the report. It is thoroughly sourced  and  written
without obvious bias. Points similar to those made by Mr Chenciner are  made
in other material before us. We accept that the report sets out an  informed
opinion honestly held concerning the risks that these appellants would  face
in the event of their return to Moscow. However Mr Chenciner  has  not  seen
the appellants and we are surprised to see that the  appellants'  solicitors
told him that the appellants' father is ethnically Chechen.  The  appellants
described themselves as  ethnically  Russian  and  distinguished  themselves
from Chechens. According to the adjudicator the  Second  Appellant  said  in
her oral evidence that her features showed her Chechen ancestry. Her  mother
is half Chechen. They also each claimed to follow  the  Christian  religion.
Mr Chenciner's report is less helpful than  it  might  otherwise  have  been
because he seems  to  have  been  given  wrong  information  concerning  the
appellant's ethnicity.

The adjudicator accepted the appellants' evidence. They said that  they  had
lost contact with their mother. Their father, an army  officer,  was  killed
by Chechen rebels in September 1998. The First Appellant's husband,  also  a
soldier, was killed by the Chechen rebels in  February  1999.  Their  mother
escaped from Chechnya with the  First  Appellant's  child  at  a  time  when
elderly  women  and  young  children  were  allowed  to  leave.  The  Second
Appellant had not married. Their mother was half Chechen  and  half  Russian
and the Second Appellant had inherited distinctly Chechen features.

  The adjudicator was aware of the large number of ethnic Russians  who  had
left Chechnya because of the conflicts there.  According to the CIPU  report
something in excess of 250,000 people including almost the  entire  Russian,
Armenian, and Jewish population have  left  Chechnya  as  a  result  of  the
conflicts there.  It was accepted that  the  second  appellant's  appearance
suggests a Chechen origin and it is the  appellants'  case  that  they  each
have significant problems in Chechnya because  they  were  perceived  to  be
Russian.  The horror of their being raped is, perhaps, made  even  worse  by
the irony of their being  victims  of  Russian  soldiers.   The  adjudicator
found the appellants  had  been  victims  of  war.   However  dreadful  this
incident was it does not show that these appellants risk being  raped  every
time they meet Russian soldiers.

The expert report explains the difficulties they would have in the event  of
their return to Russia.

Firstly they have to get into the country.  To do this  would  reveal  their
links with Chechnya.  They would attract attention for  two  reasons.  Their
name is "recognisably Islamic" rather  than  Russian  and  they  would  have
temporary travel documents issued by  the  United  Kingdom.  They  would  be
questioned. If they said they came from Chechnya it would  be  assumed  that
they were returned asylum seekers and they would  be  treated  as  suspected
Chechen collaborators and terrorists.  They are nothing of the sort.  Indeed
it is precisely because they are not Chechen that they  cannot  live  safely
in Chechnya.  However  Mr  Chenciner  explains  that  ethnic  Russians  from
Chechnya are treated with great  suspicion  and  contempt.  The  appellants'
have  already  experienced  something  of  that.  At  paragraph   2.2.2   he
emphasises  that  the  ongoing  Russian  Chechnya  conflict   has   hardened
attitudes towards ethnic Russians from Chechnya and  they  tend  to  be  ill
treated. By way of illustration at paragraph 2.1 he explains that  when  the
Russians bombed Grozny they made no attempt to release ethnic  Russians  and
regarded any ethnic Russian who survived Grozny as  a  Chechen  collaborator
and terrorist.

They could, of course, lie but there is no reason to think that  they  would
be able to deceive the border guards and their  Islamic  name  would  arouse
suspicions. The risk would be particularly great in the case of  the  Second
Appellant who, it seems, has Chechen features.

The contempt and suspicion of society is particularly apparent in  the  case
of people of mixed ethnicity. Marriage between people of  mixed  descent  is
very rare and is seen as a sign of being anti-Russian.

It is important for us to remember that Russia is not  a  free  country.  To
travel within it people need an internal passport and this will  show  their
names (Islamic) and the nationality of their parents. Every time  that  they
had dealings with officials they would risk opprobrium  or  worse  and  they
would have to meet many officials.

The expert recognises that many displaced people  from  Chechnya  have  been
given refuge in Ingushetia.  He also says that it is now  policy  to  return
these people to Chechnya.  Nevertheless according to  the  April  2003  CIPU
report 110,000 or so displaced people continue to live  there.   The  expert
makes the point that the refugee camps there are controlled by  the  Russian
military forces.

Concerning the present situation in Chechnya the  expert  opines  that  they
would be going back to conditions at least as bad as when they left.

Whilst the appellants' rape by Russian soldiers may  have  been  a  dreadful
consequence of the disorder that tends to follow  military  activity  we  do
not understand the adjudicator's apparent  conclusion  that  the  appellants
were not persecuted whilst they lived in Chechnya.   Being  made  to  remain
there because they were Russian when children and old  people  were  allowed
to leave, and so be subjected to very harsh living  conditions,  was  surely
persecution.  They are not wanted there by the remaining Chechen  population
and they have experienced great cruelty.  We find there must be a real  risk
of their being persecuted because of their ethnic origin  in  the  event  of
their return to Chechnya.

The expert's conclusions in his summary are concerning.  He notes  that  the
appellants have an Islamic rather than a  Russian  name.   This  will  cause
them to be seen as "non-Russian".  The  case  of  the  second  appellant  is
worse because of her Chechen appearance.  At the point of entry there  is  a
risk of their detention and transfer  to  a  filtration  camp  because  they
would be assumed to be Chechen.  There there is a risk of torture or  death.
 There is nowhere obvious for them to go in Russia.   The  other  internally
displaced persons are not well treated. Rather they  are  resented  and  the
authorities are trying to return them to Chechnya although conditions  there
are not yet  ready  for  people  to  return  safely.   The  uncertainty  and
difficulties  that  they  face  are  considerable.   With  respect  to   the
adjudicator the proper finding here should have been that there  is  a  risk
of persecution in Chechnya.  In all the circumstances we are persuaded  that
it will be unduly harsh for these two women to be  returned  to  Russia  and
left to find somewhere to live.  The deprivations that  they  face  are  too
severe and the risks of very, very serious ill-treatment too great.

It follows that we allow the appeal.

In fairness to the adjudicator although the grounds of appeal  disclosed  an
arguable error we have reached this conclusion  because  of  the  additional
evidence that we had rather  than  because  of  fundamental  errors  in  the
adjudicator's approach and conclusions.


Jonathan Perkins
Vice President

25 November 2003
