
ar                       HA (Low Level ELF) Eritrea [2003] UKIAT 00206


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing:  7 March 2003
                                        Date Determination notified:18.06.03
                                      .

                                   Before:

                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby






                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr D. Suldhana of Howe & Co.
For the respondent : Mr D. Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Miss M.J. Pirotta) allowing the appeal of Mrs H. Abraham,  a  citizen
      of Eritrea, hereinafter for convenience referred to as the  appellant,
      from a decision of Secretary of State to refuse  her  application  for
      asylum.  The Adjudicator allowed her appeal on  human  rights  grounds
      also.

2.    Mr G. Saunders appeared for Secretary of State while Miss G. Brown  of
      counsel, instructed by Moody & Woolley, appeared for the appellant.

3.    Before turning to the  submissions,  we  should  reproduce  the  facts
      helpfully summarised by the Adjudicator in paragraphs 13 to 18 of  the
      determination which read as follows:

             'The appellant's account


             13. The appellant's father was an  official  of  the  Mengistu
                 regime during the Ethiopian  colonisation  of  Eritrea  and
                 critic of the Eritrean government. The family fled in  1990
                 when the Eritrean People's Liberation  Front  gained  power
                 and her father  was  later  arrested.  When  the  Ethiopian
                 authorities deported all Ethiopians with Eritrean  origins,
                 her father was released and deported. She had not  had  any
                 news of his whereabouts since 1993.


             14. The appellant was herself  a  supporter  of  the  Eritrean
                 Liberation Front Revolutionary Council and actively  worked
                 to spread information.   She  said  in  evidence  that  the
                 members were  not  known  to  each  other  for  reasons  of
                 security, that they should not be  able  to  identify  each
                 other to the authorities, which did  not  explain  how  she
                 could communicate  information  to  the  members  from  the
                 officials.


             15. The appellant feared arrest by the  authorities  when  she
                 was told her home was to be raided and fled  in  1995  with
                 her husband and daughter to Shuma Nejs Tahaty, hiding for a
                 week, then to Addis Ababa later to Shashiment.  In 1999 the
                 appellant's husband was arrested by the EPRDF and  deported
                 to Eritrea. She knew nothing of him  since.  The  appellant
                 went with her daughter to Yemen, then came  to  the  United
                 Kingdom on 8 January 2001.


             16. The appellant asserted that she was afraid  to  return  to
                 Eritrea because of her father's political history, her  own
                 involvement with the Eritrean  Liberation  Front  which  is
                 opposed to the  Eritrean  People's  Liberation  Front,  and
                 racism as a result of her mother's Tigran ethnicity.


             17. The appellant also said that she would refuse to serve the
                 Eritrean government by way of  national  service  which  is
                 compulsory, and draft evasion punishable  by  imprisonment.
                 Further, as she had not paid taxes in her  absence  aboard,
                 the government would refuse her services on her return.


             18. In the interview the appellant said she  had  remained  in
                 Ethiopia with her husband for  5 years,  leaving  when  she
                 feared deportation because of her ethnicity.  She had spent
                 three days in Yemen. She had joined  the  ELF  seven  years
                 before. She had not been arrested or detained.  She  feared
                 persecution  still  despite  the  passage  of   time.   The
                 government in power was repressive and political opposition
                 was not permitted.'

4.    The Adjudicator found the appellant's case  account  to  be  credible.
      She found that the appellant was a member of a social group.  In  this
      respect it is clear that the Adjudicator misdirected herself  but  she
      did go on to find that the Convention reason  was  political  opinion.
      There had been a claim that the appellant would suffer because of  her
      ethnicity but this  the  Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied  about.  The
      Adjudicator makes a reference to  the  fact  that  objective  evidence
      showed that 'as a draft evader she would be persecuted, likely  to  be
      detained'. The Adjudicator felt that Article  3  was  engaged  as  the
      treatment of other political activists and threats to the  appellant's
      safety reached the minimum level of severity required to constitute  a
      breach of Article 3.

5.    Mr Saunders questioned where the Adjudicator had had the  material  to
      find that the appellant had any fear of military service and indeed in
      her self completed evidence form  it  had  been  written  against  the
      questions relating to military service 'N/A' -  i.e.  not  applicable.
      There was no evidence about military service in either the form or the
      statement or the subsequent interview. Reference was made to Sepet and
      Bulbul [2001] ImmAR 452. The draft evasion point had been  dealt  with
      utterly inadequately by the Adjudicator.

6.    The appellant had claimed that she had undertaken activities  for  the
      Eritrean Liberation Front - Revolutionary Counsel  (ELF-RC)  and  this
      was dealt with in paragraphs 6.62 to 6.67 of the October 2002  Country
      Assessment.  Mr  Saunders  drew  particular  attention  to   the  last
      sentence of paragraph 6.67          which reads 'Those  who  had  been
      responsible for anything that could be  interpreted  as  terrorism  or
      violence may be likely to come to the attention of the authorities.'

7.    The appellant had only carried out low level activities, nothing  akin
      to terrorism or violence. It was not enough simply to be a  member  of
      the ELF-RC.  Reference was made to Ibrahim [2002] UKIAT02628.  We were
      also referred  to  Ghedle  [2002]  UKIAT01112.   The  Adjudicator  had
      correctly dismissed the appeal on the grounds of ethnicity.

8.    Miss Brown submitted that the appeal of Secretary of State  should  be
      dismissed, alternatively the matter should be  remitted  for  a  fresh
      hearing.  It had been acknowledged that the Adjudicator's treatment of
      the military service issue had  been  inadequate.   Although  military
      service had not been mentioned by the appellant in her interview,  the
      position was that she did not fear military service at the time of her
      departure.  It was not the reason  she  left.   It  was  suggested  to
      counsel  that  in  paragraph  23  the  Adjudicator  had  recorded  the
      appellant as stating in evidence that she had avoided military service
      because  of  her  political  opinions  and  ethnic  persecution.  This
      suggested that it was part  and  parcel  of  her  claim,  contrary  to
      counsel's submissions. Counsel submitted  that  she  had  not  brought
      herself to the attention  of  the  authorities  by  her  avoidance  of
      military service.  It had been her political opinion which had  caused
      her problems.  That was what was operating on her  mind,  rather  than
      military service. The case of Ghedle (which we have cited above)  made
      it clear that it depended on the position held what  the  consequences
      would be on return.  There was a sliding  scale.   The  appellant  had
      said that she had been distributing leaflets which was on one hand low
      level but might be integral to the organisation as a whole. The appeal
      should be dismissed or remitted for a fresh hearing. Mr  Saunders  had
      no submissions in reply.

9.    The question of military service did not feature  in  the  appellant's
      account in her self completed form, in her statement or at  interview.
      The form is a detailed one, giving three main reasons for  her  claim,
      none of which mention an aversion to military service.  The  appellant
      had the assistance of legal representatives at the time of  completing
      this form. The form makes it quite clear that all relevant information
      should be given. As we have already observed, it  was  indicated  that
      military service was  not  applicable  in  the  circumstances  of  the
      application on page 11 of the form.  At her interview,  the  appellant
      was asked whether there was anything to add to what she  had  said  or
      what was included in her statement (see question 51) and  she  replied
      in the negative. There was nothing about military service mentioned at
      the interview and nothing about military service  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal which followed the respondent's refusal letter. The Adjudicator
      states that the appellant's evidence closely  followed  her  interview
      and statement in paragraph 22 of her determination but does not appear
      to have observed that there was no mention whatsoever of the  question
      of military service.  Counsel submitted that the matter  had  surfaced
      in paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument lodged before the Adjudicator.
       We should observe that no  material  was  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant before us. The only material before us  was  lodged  by  the
      Secretary of State.  On the court file we note that the  Adjudicator's
      bundle starts  with  the  appellant's  statement  and  this  makes  no
      reference to the question of military service - indeed  the  statement
      is simply a reproduction of the statement previously submitted to  the
      respondent, giving the four  heads  of  claim  which  do  not  mention
      military service.  It  is  simply  asserted  in  paragraph  9  of  the
      skeleton argument that the appellant  would  be  required  to  perform
      military service under conditions which amount to a breach of  Article
      3.  It is not clear whether the evidential foundation  came  for  this
      submission. The case of Sepet and  Bulbul  makes  it  clear  that  the
      appellant cannot make out a claim as a  conscientious  objector  under
      the 1951 Convention and  the  Adjudicator  does  not  appear  to  have
      explored this aspect at all.  On  12  December  2000  a  comprehensive
      peace agreement was signed between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  (paragraph
      4.18 of the Home Office Country Assessment) and on 13 April  2002  the
      International Tribunal at the Hague  announced  its  decision  on  the
      border dispute which was welcomed publicly by the two  governments  of
      Eritrea and Ethiopia.  In July 2002 the pilot  phase  of  the  planned
      Eritrean demobilisation plan was  reported  as  being  completed  (see
      paragraph 5.41 of the Assessment).  The  National  Demobilisation  and
      Reintegration Process  (DRP)  aims  to  demobilise  200,000  from  the
      Eritrean armed forces, with the pilot scheme demobilising 5000.  Those
      demobilised are reintegrated into civilian life. It is  recorded  that
      since the beginning of  the  border  war  in  1998  more  than  6%  of
      Eritrea's population has served in the armed forces and  as  a  result
      both the civil service and private  companies  have  suffered  serious
      staff shortages.  Paragraph  5.43 continues:

             'In  order  to  meet  the  urgent  demand  for  manpower,  the
             government plans to employ  soldiers  in  local  public  works
             programmes - such as building dams, repairing roads and public
             buildings - while they awaiting  demobilisation.   Since  this
             move, however, reports claimed that soldiers in  Eritrea  have
             been mounting checks on young men  and  women  to  track  down
             those that have dodged the draft.'

10.   Despite the last sentence in this paragraph,  it  does  appear  to  be
      clear on the evidence that the army  is,  so  to  speak,  turning  its
      swords into ploughshares to a considerable extent.  We would  consider
      it would be speculative to assume that the appellant, who was born  in
      1967, would be exposed to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.   Counsel
      directed  our  attention  to  no  material  that  would  support   the
      Adjudicator's conclusions. As we have observed, none was lodged before
      us.

11.   It is quite clear on the evidence that the  appellant  gave  that  she
      was involved with the ELF-RC at  a low level,  undertaking  leafleting
      activities and distribution of literature. At her  interview  she  was
      asked (question 17) 'Did  you  do  anything  else  besides  delivering
      leaflets?' and the appellant is recorded as  replying  'No'.   Counsel
      submits that the case of Ghedle establishes that there  is  a  sliding
      scale and that treatment on return depends on the role and activity of
      a person who claims to be involved with the ELF.  The appellant is, in
      our view, and indeed on any sensible view of the evidence, a low level
      supporter of the ELF-R.  She is not someone who has  been  responsible
      'for anything that could be interpreted as terrorism  or  violence'  -
      see paragraph 6.67 of the Country Assessment and Ibrahim at  paragraph
      7 of the determination.

12.   We conclude that the Adjudicator misdirected herself on the  objective
      evidence and the  authorities  and  insofar  as  she  found  that  the
      appellant was not low level but a 'dissident political  activist'  her
      findings are unsustainable. We find no reason to remit this matter for
      a fresh hearing. The material lodged before  us  and  the  authorities
      which we have referred to establish  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
      grounds of appeal are  made  out  and  it  is  right  to  reverse  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions both under the 1951 Convention  and  on  her
      findings under Article 3.

13.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed and  the  decision  of
      the Adjudicator is reversed.


                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      2


