
Ar  MC (Reliance on Unidentified Sources) Sierra Leone [2003] UKIAT00068

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing :13 August 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 8TH September 2003

                                   Before:


                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                               Mr N Kumar, JP


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
      M. Goldmeier, who allowed the appeal of a citizen of Sierra Leone, for
      convenience  hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  appellant,  from  the
      decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  his  application   for
      asylum.


   2. Mr D. Saville appeared for the Secretary of State. Mr  N.  Garrod,  of
      counsel, instructed by S. Osman Solicitors, represented the appellant.
      The  appellant  had  also  been  represented  by  Mr  Garrod  in   the
      proceedings before the Adjudicator.

   3. The appellant's evidence  as  summarised  by  the  Adjudicator  is  as
      follows:

             '8. On 25 February 1998 rebel soldiers from the Budis  faction
                 of the Revolutionary  United  Front  ("RUF")  came  to  the
                 appellant's home in Pendema  which  is  in  eastern  Sierra
                 Leone over 300km from Freetown. Atrocities  were  committed
                 against the villagers. The appellant's mother  was  killed.
                 The appellant was abducted as was his two year old brother.
                 The  appellant's  home  was  burnt.   The  next   day   the
                 appellant's younger brother was killed by an RUF solider.


             9.  The appellant had the presence of  mind  however  to  take
                 with him his birth certificate as he thought he might  need
                 it one day as an aid to escaping from   Sierra  Leone.  The
                 appellant also  explains  that  in  Sierra  Leone  a  birth
                 certificate is used as a formal form of identification. The
                 birth certificate was in evidence before me.


             10. In his witness statement the appellant states  that  while
                 in captivity he was required to carry  out  tasks  for  his
                 captors  including  washing  clothes   and   cooking.   The
                 appellant together  with  other  captives  accompanied  the
                 rebels on a number of raids. They were  required  to  carry
                 looted property. The appellant told me that under duress he
                 had participated in the  burning of homes  and  looting  of
                 property. He told me in the course  of  his  oral  evidence
                 that he had hit resisting villagers and  that  had  he  not
                 done so he would have been shot. The appellant told me that
                 he had been with the  rebel forces in the Kenema, Kono  and
                 Kambui areas. During the appellant's oral evidence,  a  map
                 of Sierra Leone was reviewed. From  that  map  it  appeared
                 that the appellant's activities with the  RUF  forces  took
                 place over a  wide  geographical  area  in  eastern  Sierra
                 Leone.


             11. After six months the appellant attempted to escape. He was
                 caught by rebels and tortured. The appellant  said  in  his
                 witness statement that he had deportation  wound  marks  on
                 both legs which were caused by  a  machete.  The  appellant
                 showed me his legs. There was clear scarring on a number of
                 areas on both legs. The record of the  interview  with  the
                 Home Office on 7 August 2002 indicates  that  scarring  was
                 also evident to the  Interviewing  Officer  (question  30).
                 The appellant was  kept  in  a  cave  for  two  months  and
                 released on condition that he henceforth followed orders.


             12. On or about 28 March 2000 an armed group raided the  rebel
                 camp. The appellant is unsure whether  or  not  that  group
                 were government forces. In  any  event  the  appellant  and
                 other captives were able to make their escape as the rebels
                 had fled. They  were  however  shortly  after  captured  by
                 another armed group but managed to  flee  from  them.   The
                 appellant crossed into Liberia and went to a village called
                 Munu.  The appellant  there  met  and  an  American  pastor
                 called Farther Elliott. It  appears  from  the  appellant's
                 witness statement  dated  11  November  20002  that  Father
                 Elliott was a Catholic Minister, but  had  a  wife  in  the
                 United States.  Father Elliott gave the appellant food  and
                 shelter. The appellant remained  with  Father  Elliott.  He
                 provided domestic services for him and became a  member  of
                 the Pastor's church.  The appellant stayed in Munu for  two
                 years.


             13. At the beginning of June 2000 rebel soldiers crossed  from
                 Sierra Leone and captured a village adjacent to Munu.   The
                 appellant recognised two  rebel  soldiers.  Father  Elliott
                 believed that the appellant would be killed if he  remained
                 in the area.  The  villagers,  fearing  the  rebels,  left.
                 Father Elliott said that  he  would  be  returning  to  the
                 United States and that the appellant could travel with him.
                  Father Elliott paid for the appellant's travel.


             14. On 1 July 2002 together with Father Elliott the  appellant
                 fled to an African country.  On 3 July 2002 they  continued
                 their journey using travel  documents  supplied  by  Father
                 Elliott. Father  Elliott  and  the  appellant   arrived  at
                 Heathrow. Father Elliott told the appellant to  wait  while
                 he  sorted  out  some  paperwork.  However  after  half  an
                 hour/one hour Father Elliott did not appear. At that  point
                 the appellant approached an Immigration Officer and  sought
                 asylum.  He told the Immigration Officer that he wished  to
                 wait  for  Father  Elliott  a  little   longer,   but   the
                 Immigration Officer insisted that the appellant  went  with
                 him.'

   4. The Adjudicator had in mind background evidence that had  been  placed
      before him. However, since the  hearing  the  Adjudicator  records  in
      paragraph 17 of his determination, that since  the   hearing  'I  have
      also investigated from Internet sources further  and  more  up-to-date
      material concerning Sierra Leone.   I  also  make  reference  in  this
      determination to some of those sources.'

   5. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had been abducted  by  the
      RUF and forced to collaborate with them in the way described, and  the
      medical evidence was  consistent  with  the  ill-treatment  which  the
      appellant  had  suffered   following   his   attempted   escape.   The
      Adjudicator, however, rejected the evidence concerning Father  Elliott
      and what had occurred at Heathrow Airport. The  Adjudicator  expresses
      his conclusions for finding that the appellant would  be  at  risk  on
      return  to  Sierra  Leone  in  the  concluding   paragraphs   of   the
      determination which read as follows:

             '41.      I find that on  his  return  to  Sierra  Leone,  the
                 appellant would be at risk from the three sources which  he
                 says he fears. Those sources are the  victims  of  the  RUF
                 raids in which the appellant  participated, the  government
                 forces and their associates and lastly members of the  RUF.
                 I now propose to consider  the  severity  of  those  risks.
                 Before doing so, I observe that nowhere in  the  background
                 evidence is any guidance given concerning the treatment  of
                 returned asylum seekers.


             42. Dealing with  the  risk  from  government  and  associated
                 forces,  although  the  position  in   Sierra   Leone   has
                 stabilised to a considerable degree, particularly with  the
                 introduction of  UNAMSIL,  I  find  having  regard  to  the
                 background  evidence,  that  Government  associated  forces
                 particularly the CDF may  persecute  ex-collaborators  with
                 the RUF. I consider that the appellant   will  be  at  real
                 risk of being identified to the CDF or associated forces as
                 an ex RUF collaborator. The  reasons for this appear  later
                 in my determination.    Although  there  have  been  recent
                 attempts to control the CDF, it appears that they are still
                 functioning, at least  where  local  command  centres  have
                 remained intact.  I  find  that  the  CDF  and  other  para
                 military forces associated with the government are unlikely
                 to  make  too   fine   a   distinction   between   freewill
                 collaborators  with the RUF and those who have carried  out
                 activities on their behalf, albeit  under  duress.  I  find
                 that the appellant would be at real  risk  because  of  the
                 political opinion which the CDF, or other allied government
                 forces would impute to the appellant.  I find having regard
                 to the background evidence that the CDF and  allied  forces
                 act with impunity. If the  appellant  is  identified  as  a
                 collaborator,  he  can  having  regard  to  the  background
                 evidence including evidence of prison  conditions  which  I
                 accept expect harsh treatment.  I  am  not  persuaded  that
                 former RUF collaborators will be easily  reintegrated  into
                 Sierra Leone society. The background evidence  for  example
                 shows that even children who have worked with the  RUF  are
                 rejected by their families  and  local  children  on  their
                 release.


             43. In broad terms I find that the appellant is  not  at  real
                 risk from  the RUF. Although there is evidence that the RUF
                 have targeted deserters, it appears that they probably  are
                 now something of a spent military force in a large part  of
                 Sierra Leone. However, I find that the appellant will be at
                 real risk from  individual  member  of  the  RUF  or  their
                 sympathisers and associates whom the appellant is  able  to
                 identify. This is particularly  so  within  eastern  Sierra
                 Leone where the appellant will have come into contact  with
                 those individuals. This particular threat does not  however
                 disclose an Asylum Convention reason, but the   finding  is
                 relevant  to  my  determination  under  the  Human   Rights
                 Convention.


             44.  I  am  conscious  that  the  appellant  appears  to  have
                 accompanied the RUF forces  on  a  considerable  number  of
                 raids and it is possible that a good number of  people  who
                 will be hostile to the RUF can now identify him. It will be
                 by no means clear to the victims or observers of the  raids
                 that the appellant  was collaborating with  the  RUF  under
                 duress. I find that these victims or observers  are  likely
                 to ascribe the  appellant's  activities  to  his  perceived
                 connections with the RUF. I find that the appellant  is  at
                 real risk from  the victims  of  the  RUF  raids  or  other
                 observers  of  those  raids.  If  identified  as   an   RUF
                 collaborator he is then at  real  risk  from  a  large  and
                 hostile  section  of  the  Sierra   Leone   population   in
                 particular those who have suffered at the RUF's hands.  The
                 January 2002 report of Physicians for Human Rights suggests
                 that there may be a good number of such families in  Sierra
                 Leone who have so suffered.


             45. I therefore conclude from my findings that  the  appellant
                 will be at  real  risk  from  pro-government  forces,  from
                 victims of the RUF and their families and friends and  from
                 individual RUF members or sympathisers who the appellant is
                 able to identify. This risk will be both in his  home  area
                 and indeed over a large section of eastern  Sierra Leone.


             46. I need to consider, however, whether the  appellant  would
                 be  at  risk  in  other  parts  of  Sierra  Leone  and,  in
                 particular, the Freetown area where the  respondent  argued
                 that he could relocate.  In examining whether the appellant
                 would be at risk in areas of Sierra Leone  other  than  the
                 east, I take into account the small geographical  area   of
                 Sierra Leone and that its population is only just in excess
                 of 5 million. These factors, in my determination,  increase
                 significantly the risk of the  appellant  being  identified
                 anywhere in Sierra Leone. I  find,  having  regard  to  the
                 background evidence, that large sections of the  population
                 have been displaced.   Although some will have returned  to
                 their home areas, it is likely that a good many  will  have
                 ended up in the Freetown  area.   The  background  evidence
                 shows that  many  of  these  displaced  persons  will  have
                 suffered in one form or another at the hands of the RUF.  I
                 find that  the  appellant  has  no  family  or  friends  in
                 Freetown and this lack of support will tend to increase the
                  hazards he faces because it is more likely  to  bring  him
                 into contact with displaced persons and perhaps also  raise
                 questions as to why the appellant is not returning  to  his
                 home area which will prompt further investigation into  his
                 past. Taking all  these  circumstances    into  account,  I
                 therefore conclude that the appellant   would  be  at  real
                 risk  throughout  Sierra  Leone  and  that  it   would   be
                 unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect him to relocate  to
                 Freetown or elsewhere.


             47. Having regard to the real risks identified by me  I  allow
                 the appeal under the Asylum Convention.


             The Human Rights Convention
             48. Since the hearing  I  have  seen  the  report  in  Owen  v
                 Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2002]  UKIAT
                 03285.  In that case the Tribunal suggest that the internal
                 protection alternative was not available  in  Freetown  for
                 someone  whose human rights were at  risk in his home area.
                 In coming  to that decision, the  Tribunal  had  before  it
                 background  evidence  which  showed  that   conditions   in
                 displaced persons camps were "subhuman"  and  that  medical
                 conditions in those camps were described  as  some  of  the
                 worst in the world. They went on  to  observe  that  beyond
                 this, the possibility of being  relocated  to  other  camps
                 outside  Freetown did not on the current  information  look
                 to be a viable alternative. However having  regard  to  the
                 latest background evidence  and in particular reports  that
                 the Sierra Leone  Government  aims  to  have  finished  the
                 resettlement programme by  October 2002,  after  which  the
                 IDP camps will be closed, I do not consider, on  the  basis
                 of  the  latest  available  background  evidence,  that  he
                 conditions described by the Tribunal in Owen still subsist.
                 For that reason, I reject the  appellant's  claim  that  he
                 would be subject to an infringement  of  his  rights  under
                 this particular aspect of Article 3  if  he  were  returned
                 to Sierra Leone by reason of the conditions  subsisting  in
                 the IDP camps at Freetown.


             49. Having regard to the facts as found by  me  concering  the
                 real risks which the appellant will face on his return  and
                 the conseuqneces of such risks, I allow  the  appeal  under
                 Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.'
   6. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had misinterpreted the objective evidence as to the  level
      of influence of the Civil Defence Force (CDF) in  Sierra  Leone.   The
      CDF had disarmed.  If  the  Adjudicator  had  found  evidence  to  the
      contrary having investigated the internet, he had  failed  to  mention
      specifically where.  The Adjudicator's approach was speculative  given
      the large numbers  of  people  displaced  in  Sierra  Leone.   It  was
      insufficiently reasoned why the appellant  would  be  investigated  or
      sought.

7.    The only background material placed  before  us  was  the  April  2003
      Sierra Leone  Country Assessment.  No bundles had been lodged  by  the
      appellant. Counsel seemed to be under the impression that the material
      before the Adjudicator would be available to the Tribunal.  The notice
      of hearing makes it clear on  its  face  that  the  Tribunal  must  be
      furnished with a full, paginated bundle of all the material relied  on
      even if such material was available to  the  Adjudicator.   There  are
      Practice Directions dealing with this point - i.e. Practice  Direction
      no. 4 [2001] ImmAR 172, paragraph 6.  It is particularly important  in
      a case such as this where  it  is  not  clear  to  what  material  the
      Adjudicator had regard.


8.    Mr Saville in his submissions pointed out  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      accepted  that  the  CDF  had  disarmed  in  paragraph   24   of   his
      determination.  There was no reason why the appellant would be at risk
      from the disarmed militia. The Adjudicator's reasoning in paragraph 42
      of his determination was unsustainable.  The Adjudicator had  recorded
      in paragraph 33 of his determination that there had  been  no  reports
      that government troops had committed human rights abuses  against  RUF
      collaborators and suspected rebels. There was  no  evidence  that  the
      appellant would be sought several years after he had left the country.
      There was no evidence he was being looked for.

9.    In paragraph 44 of the determination, the Adjudicator had referred  to
      the possibility of the appellant being recognised.  It  was  wrong  to
      equate such a possibility with a real risk.  It was  pure  speculation
      that he would be identified.  In  paragraph  46  the  Adjudicator  had
      accepted that a lot of people would end up in Freetown and it was self-
      contradictory to find that he would be at risk  of  being  picked  on.
      The appellant's fears were not well-founded and the  approach  of  the
      Adjudicator had been purely speculative.

10.   Mr Garrod submitted that the appellant had not come from Freetown  and
      it would be unduly harsh for him to be returned there. The  background
      information referred to lawlessness outside Freetown.   Reference  was
      made  to  paragraph  6.2  of  the  April  2003  Home  Office   Country
      Assessment. That referred to the government's inability to extend  its
      rule to all parts of the country. The present conditions  were  harsh.
      The appellant had no family or home.  The appellant could  be  subject
      to attack at any time by any party in the conflict.  The reference  in
      paragraph 6.2 to sustained  improvements  was  merely  an  aspiration.
      Counsel referred to paragraph 6.63 of the Assessment  -  the  CDF  had
      disarmed. However, the group would still  have  influence  within  the
      community and it was the same  situation  as  Northern  Ireland.  They
      still represented a threat.

11.   Although the Adjudicator had referred to the  Internet,  the  findings
      were based on objective evidence and the appellant would be at risk of
      identification in Freetown.  He would be perceived as a  collaborator.
      The appellant was not on a list of any kind but he would be vulnerable
      and of interest to the authorities.   He  had  no  community  ties  in
      Freetown. He had come from a small village  and  he  would  be  easily
      identified on that account.

12.   Mr Saville submitted that there had been,  according  to  the  Country
      Assessment, no recent reports of systematic CDF involvement  in  human
      rights abuses.  Prison conditions were irrelevant  to  the  case.  The
      Adjudicator had brought into the  picture  the  question  of  internal
      relocation in paragraph 46 of the determination. It  was  quite  clear
      that the Adjudicator had rejected the appellant's claim that he  would
      be subject to an infringement of his rights under Article 3 on  return
      to Sierra Leone by reason of  the  conditions  in  the  IDP  camps  at
      Freetown. It would not be unduly harsh for him to   reside  there.  He
      might not have community ties in Freetown but he had none in the UK or
      in Liberia where he had spent two years.  The civil war had ended. The
      government generally respected human rights and had attempted to abide
      by the safeguards within the Constitution - see paragraph 6.1  of  the
      Country Assessment.  The appellant's collaboration was insufficient to
      support the Adjudicator's conclusion  that  he  would  be  recognised.
      There were many people in his position.

13.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We have carefully considered all the material  before  us.  We  should
      firstly make it clear that an Adjudicator should not  have  regard  to
      material which has not been made  available  to  the  parties  at  the
      hearing.  An  Adjudicator  should  not  have  regard  to  unidentified
      sources when making his determination. In the vast majority  of  cases
      an Adjudicator  should  confine  himself  to  the  material  to  which
      reference was made  at  the  hearing.  Where  material  comes  to  his
      attention afterwards which has a material bearing on his reasoning  he
      should send it to the parties for their comments or even reconvene the
      hearing. In this case both the parties were represented and it  should
      not be lightly assumed by an  Adjudicator  that  they  had  not  acted
      advisedly in putting  the  objective  material  before  him.   It  was
      certainly not necessary or desirable for the  Adjudicator  to  conduct
      his own research after the hearing, compounding  the  difficulties  by
      failing to make it clear which particular sources he had looked at and
      how they had informed his decision-making process.

14.   It is recorded in paragraph 6.1 of the  Country  Assessment  that  the
      government generally respected human rights and attempted to abide  by
      the safeguards within the Constitution. Any curtailment of rights  had
      usually been because of security considerations or because of  a  lack
      of funds or trained personnel to ensure that they were respected.  The
      government appeared to be responsive to representations made to it and
      had attempted to address the issue of human  rights  and  abuses  when
      these had been reported to it.  Paragraph 6.2 reads:

             'In the past, both groups backing  the  government  and  rebel
             groups have failed  to  respect  human  rights.   The  CDF,  a
             militia that supported the government, were involved in  human
             rights abuses during the civil conflict, but there  have  been
             no recent  reports  of  systematic  CDF  involvement  in  such
             crimes. The Sierra  Leone  government  was  also  hampered  in
             addressing human rights abuses, by its inability to extend its
             rule to all parts of the country.  However, with the  improved
             security situation, there are grounds to  believe  that  there
             may now  be  a  sustained  improvement  in  the  human  rights
             situation.'

15.   Paragraph 6.63 of the Assessment, in reference to the  CDF,  reads  as
      follows:

             'Prior to the elections in May 2002,  all  militia  and  rebel
             groups were to disarm. The UN reported that this was  achieved
             in January 2002, with over 40,000 rebel and government  forces
             being  disarmed.  Funds  have  been  provided  to  reintegrate
             members of such groups into society.  However, this  does  not
             mean that such groups no  longer  have  influence  within  the
             community and it is  likely  that  all  groups  have  retained
             caches of weapons. Sam Hinga Norman, former leader of CDF,  is
             to face charges at  the  Special  Court.  This  has  not  been
             popular, as there is still widespread support for  him  within
             the country.'

16.    The  appellant  is  an  individual  whose  experiences  are,  as  the
      Adjudicator himself acknowledges  in  paragraph  39,  typical  of  the
      population in Sierra Leone.  The  situation  of  internally  displaced
      persons is referred to in paragraphs  6.29  to  6.30  of  the  Country
      Assessment:

             'Approximately 247,000  internally  displaced  persons  (IDPs)
             remained at the end of 2002, with 220,000 returning  to  their
             place of origin in the same period. Some IDPs were  housed  in
             camps, but many lived in Freetown or other urban centres,  and
             many of these are not registered. Residents  who  feared  that
             their homes would not be  safe  strongly  resisted  government
             attempts to close IDP camps. The large influx of IDPs and  the
             lack of resources caused tension between local  residents  and
             IDPs;  however, there were no reported incidents  of  violence
             during 2002.  There were numerous reports  that  refugees  and
             IDPs returned to find their homes occupied.

             Approximately 135,000 refugees repatriated  during  2002.   An
             estimated 70,000 persons remained in refugee camps  in  Guinea
             and Liberia; smaller numbers remained in  Cote  d'Ivoire,  the
             Gambia,  Ghana,  and  other  countries  and  were  likely   to
             integrate locally in those countries.'

17.   It is to be recalled that, while the Adjudicator did  not  accept  the
      circumstances of the appellant's  departure  from  Sierra  Leone,  the
      appellant did apparently spend two  years  in  Liberia.  He  would  be
      accordingly returned to Sierra Leone at a time when the  country  has,
      on the Adjudicator's findings, stabilised to  a  considerable  degree.
      There are enormous numbers of internally displaced persons,  nearly  a
      quarter of a million at the end of 2002,  with  220,000  returning  to
      their place of origin in the same  period.  Many  of  these  lived  in
      Freetown  or  other  urban  centres.  As  we  have  observed,  on  the
      Adjudicator's findings the appellant's experiences would by  no  means
      be unique.  Sections of the population had  encountered  very  similar
      experiences, as the Adjudicator records.  Counsel attempted to draw an
      analogy with Northern Ireland  but  we  really  do  not  think  it  is
      comparable. The appellant would be  one  of  many  returning  after  a
      passage of time and it was purely speculative for the  Adjudicator  to
      find that he would be picked on by the authorities  or  ex-members  of
      the RUF or CDF, or indeed anyone  else.  The  Adjudicator  records  in
      paragraph 30 of his determination that the background evidence did not
      provide any information on the treatment of returned  asylum  seekers.
      We do not believe that it is established to the required standard that
      the appellant would be identified or face a  real  risk  of  harm.  We
      disagree with counsel when he observed that the improvements in Sierra
      Leone were illusory or based on an aspiration.  The  appellant  has  a
      lack of community  ties  in  Freetown  but  we  do  not  believe  that
      returning him there would breach his  human  rights,  and  indeed  the
      Adjudicator rejected the claim that he would have his rights infringed
      by being returned to Sierra Leone and living in inhuman conditions  in
      the IDP camps in Freetown.  The  appellant  would  be  returned  to  a
      country where large sections of the population  have  been  displaced,
      but where large sections of the  population  are  returning  to  their
      places of origin and where the situation appears to be stabilising and
      improving.

18.   The Adjudicator erred in allowing this  appeal  on  either  asylum  or
      human rights grounds. His approach was speculative and to some  extent
      based on material not made available to the  parties.  The  criticisms
      made of the determination by Mr Saville are, in our view,  made  good.
      We find that it would  not  be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
      international obligations to  require  this  appellant's  return.  The
      appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed and the  decision  of  the
      Adjudicator is reversed.





                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      1


