
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |VK (Risk - Release - Escapes|
|                           |        |- LTTE) Sri Lanka [2003]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00096                 |
|On 16 September 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17/10/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Bilbe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Ali,  of  counsel  instructed  by  Siva  &  Co.
                       Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The respondent is citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity born on 12th
      February 1982. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd September 1999
      and applied for asylum on the same  day.  A  Self  Evidence  Form  was
      submitted in support of that application  which  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State for the reasons  set  out  in  a  letter  dated  17
      February 2001.  On  12  March  2001  the  Secretary  of  State  issued
      directions for the removal of the respondent to  Sri  Lanka  following
      refusal of leave to enter after refusal of his asylum application.  He
      appealed against  that  decision  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds. His appeal was heard on 24th March 2003  by  an  Adjudicator,
      Miss S Henderson, who allowed his appeal. The Secretary of  State  now
      appeals with leave to the Tribunal against that decision.


   2. The Adjudicator found the respondent to be credible in his account  of
      his own history in Sri Lanka. We set it out briefly. The appellant had
      lived at home  with  his  family  and  his  father  was  a  relatively
      prominent local business man who was in a  position  to,  and  did  in
      fact, give significant help to LTTE  through  financial  contribution.
      This became known to the Sri Lankan Army and was a probable reason for
      the detention of the father and brother of the respondent on 25th July
      1999. She accepts that the respondent has no further knowledge of them
      since their arrest. The respondent was detained by the army on 5  July
      1999 because he was mistaken for another boy who was  an  LTTE  member
      whom he resembled. He was detained for one and a half  months  and  in
      the course of that detention he was severely ill-treated and forced to
      sign a document written in Sinhala, which he did  not  understand  but
      was told was a confession to being a member of the  LTTE  and  helping
      the LTTE. In late August 1999 he was released on payment  of  a  large
      bribe by his  mother  and  told  that  if  found  again  he  would  be
      rearrested. The Adjudicator found that he had  in  the  past  received
      treatment amounting to persecution by  reason  of  his  ethnicity  and
      perceived  political  opinion.  The  respondent  left  Sri  Lanka   in
      September 1999 and travelled to the United Kingdom. At that  time  his
      mother, his two younger brothers and  older  sister  remained  at  the
      family home but he does not now know where they are because he has had
      no contact with them.


   3. The Adjudicator rightly poses the  question  at  paragraph  8  of  the
      determination that she has to decide whether  or  not  the  respondent
      would be at real risk of persecution or of  being  subjected  to  ill-
      treatment in breach of his protected human rights, particularly  under
      Article 3, on his return. She says this at paragraph 8:

           "I am not prepared to  assume  that  the  appellant  was  of  no
           continuing interest simply because he was released. In a country
           where bribery is prevalent (the  CIPU  report  speaks  of  "wide
           spread corruption" in the police force). It is quite possible in
           my view for a person who is a real suspect  to  be  released  on
           payment of a bribe, particularly a large bribe. The  appellant's
           captors clearly had an interest in  him  which  is  why  he  was
           treated in the appalling manner described. The fact that he  was
           released by means of a bribe does not indicate in my  view  that
           the attitude of his captors towards him necessarily changed."


      She went on to say at paragraph 9 that she believed that the appellant
      was indeed told to leave the country and that he would  be  rearrested
      if found.


   4. It is unfortunate that there was no representation for  the  Secretary
      of State before the Adjudicator and that the Sri Lanka  bundle,  which
      includes a number of important decisions  of  the  Tribunal,  was  not
      filed on behalf of the Secretary of State either. Indeed, no  relevant
      case law was filed although the respondent's representative sought  to
      rely on the Tribunal decision in Somasundram [2002] UKIAT 03117  -  an
      appeal heard on 8 May 2002 - and  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
      Selvaratnam [2003] EWCA Civ 121.


   5. At paragraph 9 of her determination the Adjudicator quoted an  extract
      from the UNHCR letter of 15  April  2002,  noting  that  it  had  been
      repeated in identical terms in  January  2003.  Whilst  she  noted  at
      paragraphs 10 and 11 of the determination the information provided  to
      the Home Office Delegation in  March  2002  she  also  noted  that  in
      Somasundram the Tribunal had paid attention to a report by a Dr  Good,
      which again was  not  produced  to  her  and  the  date  of  which  is
      unrecorded, saying that assurances given to the Home Office delegation
      that only "wanted" persons are stopped at the airport had to  be  read
      in the light of his observations which she quoted from Somasundram  as
      follows:

           "After routine arrests at the airport or in  round  ups,  police
           practice is to consult the NIB (National Intelligence Bureau) as
           to whether the person appears in their  database.  It  does  not
           follow that the police have information on every case, but  they
           are likely to do so if a person has previously been arrested  or
           informed upon. If there are grounds for  suspicion,  the  police
           can also obtain information from the police in another district"


      She then concluded as follows at paragraph 13:

           "Taking into account all the above, I am of the view that  there
           is a real risk that the  appellant  will  not  simply  be  waved
           through the airport if returned. It may be that the position has
           improved in that not all returnees are routinely  screened,  but
           the fact remains that same are waved through and some  are  not.
           There is a risk which could not be said to be fanciful that this
           appellant will not be waved through. If the appellant's  details
           are checked against the NIB database I  am  satisfied  that  the
           fact of and the reason for his previous detention will  come  to
           light. There is a real risk in my view that the appellant  would
           be seen as a person with serious LTTE links  by  virtue  of  his
           assistance  for  the  LTTE,  his  signed  confession   to   LTTE
           membership and  his  known  relationship  with  his  father  and
           brother."


   6. At paragraph 14, she went on to consider the effect of his release  by
      bribery, saying:


           "I am not prepared to assume that the officer  or  officers  who
           released him from custody would necessarily have  altered  their
           records to show either that he had never been detained  or  that
           he had been released in the normal way as being no longer of any
           interest. There is in my view no  evidence  to  support  such  a
           conclusion and it is not the only inference which can be  drawn.
           Even if the paper based records in Vavuniya were altered, it  is
           unlikely that the computerised records in  the  South  could  be
           similarly tampered with unless  the  officers  had  considerable
           influence. I am therefore satisfied that there is a real risk of
           the appellant's details remain on the NIB database as a "wanted"
           person."


   7. At paragraph 17 of the determination, she went on to say this:


           "I am well aware of course of the ceasefire in Sri  Lanka  which
           appears to be holding. There is evidence of ceasefire violations
           and of apparent recruitment by the LTTE which gives  some  cause
           for concern. There is a history  of  failed  ceasefires  in  Sri
           Lanka. In my view a climate of  suspicion  is  likely  still  to
           persist and the risk to  this  particular  appellant  to  remain
           notwithstanding the advances made in peace talks."


   8. In the grounds of appeal, the Secretary of  State  observes  that  the
      adverse attention  to  the  respondent  and  his  father  and  brother
      occurred in 1999 at the height  of  the  troubles,  resulting  in  his
      release on payment of a  bribe  from  detention.  The  thrust  of  the
      grounds of appeal is that  the  Adjudicator's  finding  of  continuing
      interest was not based on an objective  assessment  of  the  objective
      evidence current at the date of the hearing before her, and  that  she
      had failed to take into account the terms of the truce of 22  February
      2002, giving insufficient weight to the specific passages in the  CIPU
      assessment of April 2003. It was his submission that  the  Adjudicator
      had placed too much weight on the Tribunal decision in Somasundram and
      the UNHCR letter of 15 April 2002, and he relied particularly  on  two
      later Tribunal determinations. The first was Kamaleswaran [2002] UKIAT
      07032 where the Tribunal had accepted that  even  where  a  claimant's
      escape was on record, given the current state of the peace process  he
      was not likely to be wanted, submitting that in the case of  someone's
      release on payment of a bribe this must apply with greater force.  The
      second was the decision in Tharmapalan [2003] UKIAT 07346 in which the
      Tribunal had concluded that Dr Good's report relied on in  Somasundram
      was now based on out of date information. It was  noted  further  that
      the Adjudicator's references to the  United  States  State  Department
      report as to the likelihood of torture in detention was based  on  the
      situation in 2001 prior to the coming into force of the ceasefire.  It
      was also submitted that the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  the  current
      ceasefire  was  unsustainable  and  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
      Adjudicator's reasoning to show why this respondent should be  treated
      as one of the exceptional cases referred  to  in  Jeyachandran  [2002]
      UKIAT 01869.


   9. For the respondent Mr Ali accepted  that  the  Tribunal  jurisprudence
      supported the view of the stability of the current ceasefire and  that
      the  Adjudicator  had  adopted  views  which  were  contrary  to  that
      jurisprudence. It was his submission that the respondent did fall into
      the exceptional category envisaged in Jeyachandran  having  regard  to
      the interest because of his family connection and the fact that he had
      signed what he believed to be a  confession  written  in  Sinhala.  He
      submitted that the situation in  Sri  Lanka  was  not  necessarily  as
      stable as it appears to be, and pointed to the  fact  that  there  had
      been outbreaks of sporadic violence  so  that  the  stability  of  the
      present situation was a relevant issue for consideration. He accepted,
      however, that there was nothing in the April 2003 CIPU  assessment  to
      suggest that the peace process was anything but positive and  although
      the respondent's advisors had put in a substantial  background  bundle
      making it clear that there was some apprehension in Sri  Lanka  as  to
      the peace process, there was no specific reference in it to  which  he
      sought to draw our attention, accepting that this was largely material
      which was customarily produced to the Tribunal in Sri  Lankan  appeals
      and that the Tribunal had in recent determinations expressed its views
      as to the continuing stability of the current  peace  process  in  the
      light of such material as was included in the respondent's bundle.


  10. The respondent's factual history which we have set out  above  is  not
      the subject of  challenge  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  we  have
      proceeded on the basis that  the  respondent  is  to  be  regarded  as
      credible in his personal history, as was accepted by the Adjudicator.

  11. The first issue for our consideration  is  whether  the  Adjudicator's
      findings are sustainable in the light of the challenges raised in  the
      grounds  of  appeal  before  us.  Whilst  we  do  not   minimise   the
      difficulties  which  an  Adjudicator   faces   where   there   is   no
      representation on the part of the Secretary of State and a failure  to
      put in relevant current material, it is clear that the Adjudicator did
      have before her the current CIPU assessment of April 2003 and  clearly
      has paid insufficient regard  to  its  contents  in  arriving  at  her
      conclusions. Moreover she has been led to place considerable  reliance
      on an appeal heard by the Tribunal at the very  early  stages  of  the
      peace process and to rely on an extract from an undated expert  report
      which can clearly take no account at all of what has happened  in  Sri
      Lanka subsequent to  early  May  2002  if,  indeed,  it  reflects  the
      position even at that date. The Secretary of  State  is  also  clearly
      right in drawing our attention to the fact that  the  Adjudicator  has
      also sought to rely on what is  said  in  a  State  Department  report
      relating to the period prior to the  ceasefire.  It  is  difficult  to
      believe that any Adjudicator can be unaware that it is  a  fundamental
      error to rely a year later on such material dating from or even  ante-
      dating  the  February  2002  ceasefire.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in law in so doing and that she should have paid far
      greater regard to the position as recorded  in  the  April  2003  CIPU
      assessment, taking  Jeyachandran  and  the  question  of  whether  the
      respondent could be regarded as falling into an  exceptional  category
      as her starting point based  on  a  consideration  of  later  Tribunal
      determinations.   Given   that   the   Adjudicator's   findings    are
      unsustainable as to the risk current at the date of the hearing before
      her for  those  reasons,  but  that  there  is  no  issue  as  to  the
      credibility of the respondent in  his  personal  history,  the  proper
      course is for us to consider whether at today's  date  a  person  with
      such an accepted history is able to discharge the burden upon  him  to
      show to the lower standard of proof that  there  is  a  real  risk  on
      return that he will be treated in  breach  of  his  rights  under  the
      Refugee Convention of 1951 or of his protected human rights under  the
      1950  European  Convention,  and  specifically  article  3   of   that
      Convention.


  12. Dealing with the specific situation of the respondent, we note that he
      is not connected with LTTE activists but is part of a family who  like
      many others in Northern Sri Lanka, gave some assistance to  the  LTTE.
      That applies to the vast majority of the Tamil population in  Northern
      Sri Lanka. So far as the question of continuing interest  by  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities of those who have been released from  detention  is
      concerned,  there  are  numerous  Tribunal  decisions  prior  to   the
      ceasefire coming into force which held that generally release showed a
      lack of continuing interest on the part of the authorities.  This  was
      held to apply even in cases of release through bribery as there was no
      reasonable likelihood that those who had effected such a release would
      have done so other than on a basis which would reveal regular release,
      so as not to expose themselves  to  any  risk,  and  that,  given  the
      prevalence of  bribery  in  that  society  which  would  increase  the
      likelihood that money for  release  would  be  accepted,  there  still
      remained no reasonable likelihood that it would be  effective  in  the
      case of those  who  were  of  real  and  continuing  interest  to  the
      authorities. We note that the respondent was arrested because  he  was
      mistaken for an LTTE member who looked  similar  to  him  and,  whilst
      there can be no excuse for the ill-treatment which he suffered  during
      his detention, he makes no suggestion that the  authorities  continued
      under their original misapprehension. There is,  of  course,  Tribunal
      authority, as noted above, for the proposition  that  in  the  changed
      circumstances even someone who has escaped from custody is unlikely to
      be of continuing interest absent clear evidence that he  is  currently
      wanted by the authorities.


  13. The Adjudicator placed some reliance  on  the  UNHCR  letter  to  A  J
      Paterson Solicitors, of 15 April 2002. What it says is this:


           "Although steps towards peace  have  been  taken  in  Sri  Lanka
           recently, it is still premature to advocate that  the  situation
           has reached a satisfactory level of safety to warrant the return
           of all unsuccessful asylum applicants  to  Sri  Lanka.  In  this
           regard  UNHCR  has  been  aware  that   returning   Tamils   are
           potentially open to  risk  of  serious  harm  similar  to  those
           generally  encountered  by  young   male   Tamils   in   certain
           circumstances. This risk may be triggered by suspicions  on  the
           part of the security forces founded on various factual  elements
           relating to the individual  concerned,  including  the  lack  of
           proper authorisation for residence and travel, the fact that the
           individual concerned is a young Tamil male  from  an  un-cleared
           area or the fact that the person has close  family  members  who
           are or have been involved with the LTTE."

  14. Although that letter was reproduced  in  identical  terms  in  January
      2003, there is nothing to show that the UNHCR have taken  any  account
      of the developments which have occurred in the meantime.  It  will  be
      immediately apparent that the general assertion is hedged about with a
      number of cautionary words and it has  to  be  seen  in  its  historic
      context of being made in April 2002 at a very early time in the  peace
      process. A similar caution was expressed by the Tribunal  in  Brinston
      [2002] UKIAT 01547 and Jeyachandran. Indeed Brinston  deals  in  terms
      with the need to look carefully at such situations as suggested by the
      UNHCR but that,  having  done  so,  it  is  open  to  the  Immigration
      Appellate Authority to make their own  assessment  of  the  particular
      appellant's accepted position on the basis of the  country  background
      evidence.


  15. By the time that this appeal came  before  Miss  Henderson  the  peace
      process had been  well-established  and  was  proceeding,  in  general
      terms, in a way which has greatly changed the situation in  Sri  Lanka
      and the risk to members of the  Tamil  population.  These  are  partly
      reflected even  in  the  earlier  determination  of  the  Tribunal  in
      Jeyachandran where at paragraph 5 it was said:


           "The situation  has  changed  in  recent  months.  There  was  a
           ceasefire in February of this year [that is 2002] and  the  most
           recent  CIPU  report  for  April  2002  reports  some   of   the
           relaxations which have occurred since that ceasefire.  Paragraph
           3.67notes that in April 2002 the LTTE opened a political  office
           in the government held area in the North of the country and that
           that had been inaugurated under the ceasefire  agreement.  There
           had been permission for LTTE cadres wearing cyanide capsules  to
           move back to an LTTE controlled area and those who were  clearly
           recognised as being LTTE  activists  there  permitted  to  moved
           around unmolested. On 13 April the LTTE signed a pact  with  the
           Sri Lankan Muslim Congress and agreed that  nearly  one  hundred
           thousand Muslims expelled from the North  by  the  Tamil  Tigers
           would be allowed to return. All this indicates a change  of  the
           situation and gives hope that the situation  will  stabilise  to
           such an extent that the persecution which  had  existed  in  the
           past and  the  havoc  created  by  civil  war  will  cease.  The
           likelihood  of  any  difficulties  on  return  has   also   been
           considered by a fact finding mission to Sri Lanka which  visited
           that country at the end of March of this year and those involved
           discussed the situation with, among others, the Director and the
           Senior Superintendent in the Criminal Investigations Department.
           The report records that if a returnee were not wanted  he  would
           not be stopped at the airport.  ...  The  police  purely  go  on
           records, scars would not make a difference and  the  authorities
           would not make a decision on this basis."

  16. We have carefully considered the current CIPU assessment.  As  Mr  Ali
      properly conceded this  shows  nothing  but  that  there  has  been  a
      continuing improvement and does not suggest that the peace process  is
      in jeopardy. Put at its highest, the case for the respondent  is  that
      before release he signed a paper which he believes to be a  confession
      to LTTE membership, but there is no current evidence that LTTE members
      as  such  are  at  risk  of  arrest  or  adverse  attention  from  the
      authorities unless they are currently engaged in criminal or terrorist
      activity. We are aware that this applies to a small minority  of  LTTE
      activists and that those who are  acting  in  what  is  undoubtedly  a
      criminal and unlawful way are sought by the police, but it is  equally
      clear that the Sri Lankan government  insists  on  observance  of  the
      terms of  the  ceasefire  agreement  which  specifically  states  that
      "arrests under the Prevention of Terrorism Act shall not be made,  and
      that arrests shall be conducted under due process of law in accordance
      with the criminal procedure code." We  are  aware  of  the  background
      evidence that Sri  Lankan  police  have  recently  been  investigating
      current claimed covert operations in Colombo and its suburbs, but even
      the reports from Tamil websites make it  clear  that  the  police  are
      observing the terms of the ceasefire  agreement  and  that  under  the
      application of normal criminal law procedures the police are  required
      to produce those arrested before magistrates even before they may have
      had the opportunity to interrogate them. That  evidence  seems  to  us
      simply to underline the fact that the nature  of  the  security  force
      operations in Sri Lanka has changed dramatically since  the  ceasefire
      in February 2002, and that any investigations  currently  carried  out
      are based on an observance of normal policing methods  in  respect  of
      which any breach of the law or  discipline  is  likely  to  result  in
      prosecution by the authorities of those responsible. It  removes  even
      further to our mind the likelihood of any treatment  in  violation  of
      the respondent's human rights on return to Sri Lanka simply by  reason
      of his past history. His identity will be  known  in  advance  of  his
      return because there will be arrangements for the issue of appropriate
      travel documents with the Sri Lankan authorities. That is,  no  doubt,
      the reason that the vast majority of  returnees  are  currently  waved
      through at the airport as being on no interest to the authorities, who
      have been able to check their identities in advance of their arrival.


  17. In reaching this assessment, we are not unmindful of the  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal in Selvaratanam but it is  in  our  view  doubtful
      whether that case would now be decided on the same basis having regard
      to the continuing evidence of improvement of the situation and of  the
      observance of the ceasefire conditions on the part of the  authorities
      in Sri Lanka. It is possible that the fact of  escape  in  that  case,
      coupled with the signing of a purported confession and a further blank
      piece of paper, may have led the  court  then  to  consider  that  the
      claimant there fell into a special category who remained at  potential
      risk.


  18. Had there been any evidence, however, of the sort of conduct which the
      UNHCR refer to in their letter of 15 April 2002, or  that  there  were
      regular arrests and detentions of returnees for the  reason  given  by
      the Adjudicator, it would be most surprising if that were  not  now  a
      matter of record available to be put before the Immigration  Appellate
      Authority by asylum claimants. There is, to  our  knowledge,  no  such
      evidence and, indeed, that available to us is to the  contrary.  There
      is a lengthy section in the current CIPU assessment as  to  the  peace
      process at paragraphs 4.49 to 4.84. We note  at  paragraph  4.63  that
      during 2002 the Ministry of Defence reported  capturing  several  LTTE
      cadres  with  weapons  in  government-controlled   areas   in   direct
      contradiction of the terms of the ceasefire  agreement,  but  returned
      most LTTE personnel directly to the closest LTTE checkpoint,  although
      some were detained for longer periods. Key roadways to the  North  had
      been reopened throughout 2002. In April 2002  the  LTTE  cultural  and
      social wing leader addressed a public gathering in Jaffna,  the  first
      time such an event had taken place in seven years and which led a  BBC
      correspondent to comment how  much  freedom  the  rebels  now  had  to
      operate in areas under government control. In July 2002 the Sri Lankan
      monitoring mission issued a statement  expressing  their  satisfaction
      about the progress saying that both parties had successfully refrained
      from  military  operations  during   the   ceasefire,   most   fishing
      restrictions had been removed and freedom of movement for both parties
      and public had been greatly enhanced, among other benefits  (paragraph
      4.71). In September 2002 the government lifted its  ban  on  the  LTTE
      (paragraph 4.74). On such occasions as there had been any clashes,  as
      in early October 2002 when ten people  where  killed  in  Eastern  Sri
      Lanka, the ceasefire monitors blamed "irresponsible" and  "destructive
      elements who are trying to destabilise the peace  process"  (paragraph
      4.76). But this did not prevent the continuation of peace  talks.  The
      SLMM had investigated 556 ceasefire violations during 2002,  of  which
      only 56 were on the part of the  authorities  and  mainly  related  to
      harassment, extortion and restriction of movement by the military.


  19. We accept that in April 2003 the LTTE suspended participation  in  the
      peace talks and that, as in any such negotiating process,  there  will
      be setbacks from time to time. Nevertheless there is  nothing  in  the
      most recent documentation produced on behalf of the respondent to show
      that what is currently happening is any more than  the  jockeying  for
      position which may be expected from parties to such negotiations. What
      seems to us most important and  relevant  to  a  continuation  of  the
      present improving situation is that there has been no major breach  of
      the ceasefire agreement, and that the senior  members  of  both  sides
      have made it clear that there is no intention on their part to  return
      to the  situation  of  armed  conflict  which  applied  prior  to  the
      ceasefire.


  20. On the totality of the evidence before us,  former  membership  of  or
      connection with the LTTE is no longer  reasonably  likely  to  led  to
      adverse interest on the part of the authorities  save  in  exceptional
      cases.  There  is  nothing  exceptional  in  the  situation   of   the
      respondent, who does not succeed in discharging the  burden  of  proof
      upon him that someone with his history and profile  is  at  real  risk
      either of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason, or of treatment
      in breach of his  protected  human  rights  under  article  3  of  the
      European Convention.


  21. For the above reasons the appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President


