
Jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |AJ (Risk- Christian Convert)|
|                           |        |Pakistan CG [2003] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00040                       |
|On 21 July 2003            |        |                            |
|Dictated 21 July 2003                                             |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|15.08.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane (Chairman)                                            |
|Mrs S Hussain, JP                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr F Khan of HSK Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J Wyatt, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, Ahmed Jan, a citizen of Pakistan,  appeals  with  leave
      against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr K Heynes,  sitting  at
      Salford, in which he dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds  the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to
      refuse to vary his leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 April 2001  and  was
      granted 6 months leave to enter.  He claimed asylum on 11  July  2001.
      His wife and two children are his dependants.

3.    The basis of the appellant's claim was that he had become a  Christian
      in Pakistan in January 2001, having previously been a Muslim.  He  had
      studied Christianity, prior to his conversion.  He went to  church  in
      Kasur (near Lahore) secretly.  His parents and friends  came  to  know
      about his conversion and  he  was  beaten  by  Muslims.   In  February
      militants from Sipah-I-Sahaba-I-Pakistan (SSP), having learned of  his
      conversion, attacked him with guns, knives and sticks.  He managed  to
      escape.  Since his parents would not allow him to stay in their house,
      the appellant hid in a remote location.  He feared that if he reported
      the matter of the attack to the police, they  might  charge  him  with
      blasphemy.  He therefore decided to come to the  United  Kingdom.   He
      was baptised at Holy Trinity Church, Rusholme on 16 July 2001.

4.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator, the respondent  challenged  the
      genuineness of the appellant's conversion to Christianity.

5.    Having heard the appellant give evidence, the Adjudicator  found  that
      the appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity  was  not  genuine  but,
      rather, "a vehicle to secure  the  right  to  stay  in  this  country"
      (determination, paragraph 13).

6.    The Adjudicator noted that, although the appellant claimed to  have  a
      long-standing  concern  about  Islam,  and  a  wish  to  study   other
      religions, and though in his early thirties, he did not take an active
      interest in Christianity until November or December 2000, a matter  of
      months before his departure to the United Kingdom.  At  paragraph  15,
      the Adjudicator recorded that the appellant's

           "evidence in relation to the study that he had undertaken before
           making  this  profound   religious   journey   from   Islam   to
           Christianity was conspicuously vague.  Asked what books  he  had
           studied, he could only mention one and made no reference to  the
           Holy Bible."

7.    The Adjudicator was  concerned  about  a  "To  Whom  It  May  Concern"
      document of 20  January  2001  from  the  Minority  Rights  Commission
      Pakistan, concerning the appellant:

           "The appellant was unable to provide me at the hearing with  any
           satisfactory explanation as to why he had obtained this document
           from this organisation".

      The Adjudicator noted that the appellant said he  had  approached  the
      organisation and that the person to whom he spoke said that  he  might
      have to leave Pakistan "and  that  the  letter  would  give  him  some
      protection".

8.    The Adjudicator  noted  that  the  appellant  was  asked  why  he  had
      obtained a document from this organisation, rather than the church  he
      claimed to have attended.  The appellant "explained that the  Minority
      Rights Commission offered protection" (determination, paragraph 17).

9.    If, as the document claimed, the appellant had been advised  to  leave
      Pakistan in January 2001, the Adjudicator did not consider  it  to  be
      consistent  for  the  appellant  to  have  remained  there  until  the
      following April. The Adjudicator did not find  the  document  reliable
      and drew

           "an adverse conclusion from the fact that the appellant had gone
           to the trouble of obtaining it but had produced nothing from the
           church that he claimed to  have  been  attending  on  a  regular
           basis."

10.   The other document before the Adjudicator was a photocopy of a
      baptismal certificate from the United Kingdom.

11.   On the  basis  of  Dorodian  (01/TH/1537)  the  Adjudicator  commented
      adversely on the fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  put  forward  a
      Minister of a Christian church, to give oral evidence on  his  behalf,
      nor was there a statement or letter from the Minister, which had  been
      produced in advance to the Home Office, so that they could  check  the
      existence and standing of the person making the statement.

12.   The Adjudicator concluded that the appellant  had  not  shown  to  the
      requisite standard that he holds and had been converted  to  Christian
      beliefs.

13.   The Vice President who granted leave said that at the very  least  the
      appellant would

           "have to produce a much more detailed  and  reasoned  letter  of
           support from the  church,  than  the  extremely  short  document
           submitted with the baptismal certificate."

      The Vice President went on to say that, even if  the  appellant  could
      establish the genuineness of his conversion,

           "he will still have to be prepared to argue that there is a real
           risk of persecution or serious ill treatment in Pakistan."
14.   Before the Tribunal, there was a letter dated  6  February  2003  from
      the Reverend Daniel Clark of Holy  Trinity  Platt  in  Rusholme  which
      states that the appellant:

           has been a believing Christian since 16 July 2001, the  date  on
           which he was baptised by me.  He has been a regular part of  our
           fellowship since then, worshipping with  us  most  Sundays,  and
           praying daily.  In conversation with him, I am persuaded that he
           has revoked Islam and has embraced Christianity."

15.   The Reverend Clark was not present before the Tribunal,  in  order  to
      answer any questions arising from this letter.

16.   Mr Khan was asked by the Tribunal what evidence there was  to  confirm
      the claim in  the  letter  from  the  Minority  Rights  Commission  in
      Pakistan that the appellant had changed his religion to  Christianity.
      Mr Khan referred to the appellant's attending a church in  Kasur.   Mr
      Khan confirmed that the appellant's wife and children  were  happy  to
      live with the appellant, notwithstanding that the wife had not herself
      converted from Islam.  She had not "got any major issue with this".

17.   As to why the appellant, if he  did  indeed  intend  to  behave  as  a
      Christian in Pakistan, could not live elsewhere, Mr Khan said that his
      family were Muslims and, if he relocated, he would become known to the
      family members and would suffer ill treatment.  If  he  relocated,  he
      could not practise his religion.

18.   In answer to a question from the  Tribunal,  Mr  Khan  confirmed  that
      there was no evidence that the family of the appellant's wife put  any
      pressure on her to cease to have  anything  further  to  do  with  her
      husband, given that he had converted.

19.   Mr Khan said that there was a "penalty"  for  conversion  although  he
      agreed that there was no actual law against it in Pakistan.   However,
      vigilantes abounded.  There were specific instances in  the  US  State
      Department report of severe difficulties encountered by Christians  in
      Pakistan.  The appellant was  also  known  to  the  SSP,  a  notorious
      fundamentalist group in Pakistan.

20.   Mr Khan drew the Tribunal's attention  to  the  determination  of  the
      Tribunal in Alizadh [2002] UKIAT 02650, where  the  Tribunal  did  not
      consider it necessary for an Adjudicator to follow the  guidelines  in
      Dorodian.

21.   The Adjudicator in the  present  case  did  not  believe  any  salient
      feature of the appellant's story about his  experiences  in  Pakistan.
      The Tribunal considers that the Adjudicator was entirely justified  in
      reaching this conclusion.

22.   The Adjudicator was justified in finding  that  a  man  in  his  early
      thirties, who claimed from a young  age  to  have  detected  something
      wrong with Islam, would be unlikely to wait so long  before  embarking
      on a study of Christianity.  In any event, the appellant's evidence in
      relation  to  that  study  was  "conspicuously  vague"  and   made  no
      reference to the Bible.  Such an omission is frankly  damning  of  the
      appellant's claim to have become a Christian in January 2001.

23.   Despite being asked to do so by the Tribunal, Mr Khan  was  unable  to
      say what had actually happened in January 2001 to make the appellant a
      Christian.  All he could point to was the interview record, where,  at
      the answer to question 33, he said:  "I occasionally  used  to  go  to
      church in Pakistan".

24.   The Adjudicator was,  in  the  Tribunal's  view,  correct  to  form  a
      negative  assessment  of  the  document  from  the   Minority   Rights
      Commission Pakistan.  This  brief  document  merely  states  that  the
      appellant in January 2001

           "changed  his  religion  from  Islam  to  Christianity.   Muslim
           fundamentalists reacted very sharply and tried to eliminate  him
           along with his family on a number of occasions.   Our  community
           advised him to leave the country for his safety."

25.   No evidence  at  all  has  been  given  as  to  what  Minority  Rights
      Commission Pakistan is.  Nor has there been any explanation as to  why
      the appellant thought it right to go to them, rather  than  to  get  a
      letter from his church.  He  told  the  Adjudicator  (as  recorded  at
      paragraph 17 of the determination) that the Commission could offer him
      "protection" and that the writer of the letter said it "would give him
      some protection".  Such a claim, however, completely flies in the face
      of what the appellant says is the  situation  in  Pakistan,  regarding
      converted Christians.  Far from offering him protection, such a letter
      would, at least on the appellant's evidence, be  likely  to  have  the
      opposite result.

26.   The  Adjudicator  not  only  found  the  letter  to  be  incapable  of
      advancing the appellant's case;  he found that it  did  the  opposite.
      The Tribunal agrees.
27.   It is also, in the Tribunal's view, significant to  observe  that  the
      appellant's wife, who is said to  remain  a  Muslim,  take  a  relaxed
      attitude towards her  husband's  conversion.   Islamic  law,  however,
      would not permit a Muslim to continue to cohabit with someone who  had
      apostasised his faith.  Furthermore, the appellant's wife  appears  to
      have come  under  no  pressure  from  her  own  family  to  leave  the
      appellant, or otherwise disown him.

28.   The letter of 6 February 2003 from the Reverend  Clark  frankly  gives
      little support to the appellant, as regards the  core  of  his  claim.
      Reverend Clark sees fit to set out various claims about the  situation
      in Pakistan, of which he has no direct knowledge.  Whilst it may  well
      be the case that the appellant attends church  "most  Sundays"  it  is
      difficult to see, except on the appellant's  own  testimony,  how  the
      Reverend Clark knows that he has been  "praying  daily".   Whilst  the
      Reverend Clark may  be  "persuaded  that  he  has  revoked  Islam  and
      embraced Christianity" the Tribunal, looking at the  totality  of  the
      evidence, has to say that it has come to a contrary view.  This is  in
      no way to impugn the genuine views of Reverend Clark, merely  to  note
      that his appreciation of the position must necessarily be a restricted
      one.

29.   Looking at the totality of the evidence, the Tribunal,  as  previously
      stated, agrees with  the  Adjudicator  that  there  is  no  reasonable
      likelihood of anything about the appellant's story of his problems  in
      Pakistan being true.  He  never  took  an  interest  in  Christianity,
      whilst there.  He did not encounter any difficulties with anyone, as a
      result of his occasional church attendance, because there was no  such
      attendance.  Like the Adjudicator, the Tribunal  finds  it  remarkable
      that the appellant omitted to take the  obvious  step  of  asking  the
      supposed church,  rather  than  the  Minority  Rights  Commission,  to
      confirm his attendance in Pakistan.

30.   The inescapable conclusion from all  this  is  that,  if  returned  to
      Pakistan, the appellant is (to  put  matters  at  its  lowest)  highly
      unlikely  to  continue  any  form  of   Christian   observance.    His
      association with the church in Manchester is, it  has to  be  said,  a
      device in order to seek to remain  in  this  country.   Once  back  in
      Pakistan, the appellant would have  no  reason  whatsoever  to  attend
      church.

31.   However, even if there were a reasonable likelihood of  the  appellant
      continuing to wish to make  Christian  observance  in  Pakistan,  once
      returned, the evidence is far from showing that  this  would  as  such
      expose him to a real risk of persecution.

32.   Paragraph 6.74 of  the  April  2003  Country  Assessment  on  Pakistan
      records that "There are currently an estimated 4 million Christians in
      Pakistan".  They are to be found "in all main urban  areas,  but  they
      are mainly concentrated in Punjab".

33.   Paragraph 6.75 observes that the situation of Christians

           "is less dramatic than that of Ahmadis.  Although they may  well
           face  difficulties  and  resistance  from  local   Mullahs   and
           blasphemy charges, the authorities are nonetheless  willing  and
           usually able to  protect  them  from  harassment,  violence  and
           intimidation.  Some attacks however have not been prevented  and
           Christians still face many legal and social restrictions."

      Paragraph 6.77 notes that:

           "There  is  no  law  that  makes  conversion   from   Islam   to
           Christianity a  cognisable  offence.   However,  those  that  do
           convert may encounter problems from some elements of society who
           do not accept the practice."

34.   Mr Khan drew the Tribunal's  attention  to  the  US  State  Department
      report on Pakistan for 2001.  This records a number of instances where
      Christians have encountered problems.  At page 21  of  the  report  we
      note that

           "when blasphemy and other religious cases are brought to  court,
           extremists often pack the  courtroom  and  make  public  threats
           about the consequences of an acquittal.  As  a  result,  judges,
           magistrates and  even  defence  lawyers  often  continue  trials
           indefinitely, and the accused is  burdened  with  further  legal
           costs and court appearances."

35.   The fact is, however, that both the US  State  Department  report  and
      paragraphs 6.85 to 6.90 of the Country Assessment deal with individual
      instances where Christians have encountered problems for reasons  over
      and above merely going about the business of  religious  worship.   In
      particular,  those  who  seek  to  evangelise  may  encounter  serious
      difficulties with the community (e.g. paragraph 6.90).

36.   Other passages of the Report  and  the  Assessment  record  individual
      instances of attacks upon churches.  These  incidents,  whilst  highly
      deplorable, have to be seen against the background of there being,  as
      previously stated, some 4 million Christians in Pakistan.   Viewed  in
      this light, the instances of violence set out in  both  the  US  State
      Department report and the Country Assessment fall, in  the  Tribunal's
      view, far short of showing that a person who converts to  Christianity
      faces as such in Pakistan a  real  risk  of  treatment  which  can  be
      described as persecutory or otherwise inhuman or degrading treatment.

37.   There is, as the Tribunal has already indicated, no evidence  to  show
      that the family of the appellant would be hostile to  his  conversion,
      so as to cause him serious difficulties upon return (assuming that  he
      did continue Christian observances).  In any event,  however,  it  has
      not been shown in the circumstances of the present case to be  in  any
      way unreasonable for the appellant, his wife and child to relocate  to
      a neighbourhood of one of the major cities in Pakistan where there  is
      a significant (or, indeed, predominant) Christian population.

38.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President
