
                                                                   Appeal
No:
                                                                         | |
                 HO (Appeal Hearings - Fast Track) Turkey [2003] UKIAT 00006


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                         Date: 29th May 2003
                                              Date Determination notified:
                                                                 29 May 2003
                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr J Barnes

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals, with  permission  granted
     on Statutory Review by Maurice Kay J, against the determination of  an
     Adjudicator, Mr A J Olson, dismissing his appeal against the  decision
     of the Respondent on 14th April 2003 refusing him leave to  enter  the
     United Kingdom after refusing him asylum.

  2. We determine this appeal without  a  hearing.   Although  the  judge's
     Order makes passing reference to the "hearing" before the Tribunal, we
     do not interpret that as an order that a hearing be held and,  so  far
     as we are aware, the judge was not asked to make any decision on  this
     issue.  The question of whether to hold a hearing is a matter for  the
     Tribunal in this as in any other appeal.  In  this  appeal,  which  is
     governed by the provisions of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Fast
     Track Procedure) Rules 2003, the Tribunal is assisted  in  making  its
     decision by the obligation imposed on the Claimant by Rule 11(2)(a) of
     those Rules to give his reasons why he would seek  a  hearing  of  his
     appeal to the Tribunal and the obligation imposed on the Respondent by
     Rule 12(1)(a) similarly to give his reasons.  In the  present  appeal,
     the Respondent does not seek an oral  hearing.   The  Appellant  does:
     his reasons are "on the basis the issues of law are  complex  on  both
     limbs of the challenge to warrant such  an  oral  hearing".   We  have
     considered those reasons, such as they are.  We make further  comments
     on the second limb below.  The matters raised under  the  first  limb,
     although dealt with at inordinate length in the grounds of appeal, are
     not complex and do not merit an oral hearing.

  3. The conduct of the  Appellant's  solicitors  in  the  application  for
     Statutory Review gives considerable cause for  concern.   First,  they
     failed to serve a copy of  the  application  on  the  Tribunal  as  is
     required by the Civil Procedure Rules.  Secondly, they appear to  have
     failed to alert the judge to the fact that they had not complied  with
     the  provisions  of  the  Rules.   Thirdly,  following  the  grant  of
     permission to appeal they were  unable  to  respond  properly  to  the
     Appellate Authority's request for a copy of the grounds that they  had
     put before the judge, giving as their reason (we are told)  that  they
     had no copy on file.  Fourthly,  the  document  dated  6th  May  2003,
     eventually supplied  to  the  Appellate  Authority  on  23rd  May,  is
     evidently not that which was before the judge.  We say that because in
     his grant of permission the judge specifically refers to paragraphs  9
     a, b and c and 24, none of which appear in the document the solicitors
     have sent to the Authority.  In these circumstances, it is, to say the
     least, difficult for the Tribunal to make sense of the judge's Order.

  4. The fifth reason for concern is a matter of substance.  The second  of
     the "two limbs" raised in  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal was a challenge to the vires of the  Fast  Track  (Procedure)
     Rules.  As was observed by  the  Acting  Vice  President  who  refused
     permission to appeal, that challenge sounds in Judicial Review, not in
     Statutory Review.  Nevertheless, it was raised  again  (presumably  at
     public expense) in the  application  for  Statutory  Review.   In  the
     circumstances, the judge, of course,  made  no  decision  on  it.   We
     observe only that, in  view  of  the  order  which  we  make  in  this
     determination, it would appear to be clear  that  the  Appellant  will
     have had ample time to prepare and present his case for asylum,  which
     he  arrived in this country intending to make, on 8th April 2003,  now
     over seven weeks ago.

  5. The basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  at  risk  of
     persecution following his detention  on  21st  March  2003  for  HADEP
     activities.  The  Adjudicator  did  not  believe  his  story  and,  in
     particular, did not believe that he was associated with  HADEP  as  he
     claimed or that he had been detained in March 2003.  We are  persuaded
     by the matters raised in the grounds that  on  both  those  particular
     issues the Adjudicator's reasoning cannot be sustained.  On the first,
     the Adjudicator's view was that the Appellant's knowledge of HADEP had
     been sketchy from  the  very  beginning.   A  reading  of  his  asylum
     interview does not  support  that  assertion.   The  Adjudicator  also
     observed that he was unwilling to place weight on a  particular  HADEP
     document because it was a poor photocopy.  That reason of itself would
     clearly be insufficient for disbelieving the substantive contents of a
     document (particularly without any investigation  as  to  whether  the
     poorness of the photocopying was attributable to the Appellant or  his
     representatives).  In conjunction with the  error  to  which  we  have
     already made reference this particular  step  towards  the  conclusion
     that the Appellant's claim to be connected with HADEP was  not  worthy
     of belief was unsound.

  6. Turning now to the Adjudicator's conclusion that the Appellant had not
     been detained in March 2003 as he claimed, we are again persuaded that
     in reaching that  conclusion  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  take  into
     account the details of that matter as set out by the Appellant in  his
     asylum interview.  For these reasons (of  which  we  give  no  further
     detail here in order to avoid any risk of over-emphasising  individual
     aspects of the Appellant's claim, which will have to be considered  as
     a whole by another Adjudicator) we have  reached  the  view  that  the
     Adjudicator's determination cannot stand.   We  therefore  propose  to
     remit  the  Appellant's  appeal  for   re-determination   by   another
     Adjudicator.  We see no basis for removing this appeal from  the  Fast
     Track procedure.

  7. There is one other matter.  Photocopies of documents were appended  to
     the  original  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.   In   granting
     permission, the judge observed that it would be for  the  Tribunal  to
     decide whether to permit their use, because he found  no  good  reason
     why those documents were not produced earlier.  As the matter is going
     to be reheard, it does not seem right to us to make a  decision  about
     the use of the documents.  What is clear is that  the  Appellant  will
     need to have some compelling  explanation  for  his  decision  not  to
     produce them until after the Adjudicator had dismissed his  appeal  on
     the basis that he did.

  8. This appeal to  the  Tribunal  is  allowed  and  we  direct  that  the
     Appellant's appeal be considered afresh by an Adjudicator  other  than
     Mr Olson.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
