
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |   |CM (Detention - Article 3)        |
|                           |   |Mozambique [2003] UKIAT 00042     |
|On 6 June 2003             |   |                                  |
|Prepared: 10 June 2003     |   |                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19/08/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                     |         |                                  |
|                     |Before:  |                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs M L Roe                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
| SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                       |
|                                                                  |
|                         |     |APPELLANT                         |
|                         |     |                                  |
|                         |and  |                                  |
|                         |     |                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |   |RESPONDENT                        |

Appearances:

For the appellant:           Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms  N  Braganza  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Douglas
                       Simon, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Mrs V Woolf) who allowed the Respondent's appeal on
      human rights grounds against the decision issuing  removal  directions
      made on 29 March 2002.  In this determination the Tribunal will  refer
      to the Respondent to this appeal as the Applicant.

 2.   The Applicant is a citizen of Mozambique who first entered the United
      Kingdom on 30 July 1996 using her own passport with a diplomatic visa.
        At that time she had a contract  to  work  at  the  Mozambique  High
      Commission for five years as a housekeeper.  Her diplomatic  visa  was
      valid for six months but was renewed every six months  for  the  three
      years following her entry.  In February 1999 her  employer,  the  High
      Commissioners asked her  to  leave  her  job  and  sent  her  back  to
      Mozambique.  When  she  left  she  was  still  in  possession  of  her
      Mozambique service passport.  She  had  difficulty  adapting  to  life
      there and decided to return to the United Kingdom.  She says that  she
      obtained a typed agreement which stated that she was employed to  work
      at the Mozambique High Commission from  a  Mr  Tembe  at  the  Foreign
      Office in Maputo.

3.    The real reason for her returning to the United  Kingdom  was  because
      she had applied for and been accepted on a course of study  with  Open
      University.  She had been advised by friends  to  use  her  Mozambique
      service passport in order to pursue that course.  She arrived back  in
      the United Kingdom on 4 April 1999 using her  service  passport  which
      had not expired at that stage.  In May 1999 she sent  it  back  to  Mr
      Tembe in Mozambique because she did not want him to get into  trouble.
       She claims that the High Commissioner and his wife  then  started  to
      call her and ask her how she had returned to the United Kingdom.   She
      was reported to the Immigration Service by the Mozambique authorities.
       She was arrested on 20 October 2001.  She was taken to Chelsea police
      station and then into immigration detention.  She then claimed asylum.
       She claimed that she had been put in fear of her life by threats made
      by the High Commissioner and his wife and that  she  was  at  risk  of
      being killed or being put in jail in Mozambique  where  she  would  be
      subjected to inhuman treatment.

4.    The Secretary of State refused her application for the  reasons  which
      are fully set out in his decision  letter  dated  5  March  2002.   He
      considered that her fear of returning to  Mozambique  was  a  fear  of
      prosecution not persecution.   There was an independent  judiciary  in
      Mozambique.  He was not  satisfied  that  she  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution or any breach of her human rights such as  to  engage  the
      United Kingdom's obligations.

5.     The  Adjudicator  heard  the  appeal  against  this  decision  on  30
      September 2002.  At the hearing before her  it  was  conceded  to  all
      intents and purposes that the appeal had no  prospect  of  success  on
      asylum grounds but the appeal was pursued  on  human  rights  grounds.
      When considering the  evidence  the  Adjudicator  commented  that  the
      Applicant has shown herself capable of practising deception  in  order
      to gain entry to pursue a course of study.  This was  a  reference  to
      her use of a diplomatic passport and the fraudulent claim that she was
      employed to work at the High Commission.  The Adjudicator rejected the
      evidence which the Applicant gave that she had been threatened by  the
      High Commissioner and his wife or indeed anyone else.  The Adjudicator
      noted that when the Applicant  had  been  interviewed  at  the  police
      station in Chelsea she had signed an agreement to  return  voluntarily
      to Mozambique  but  had  reconsidered  her  position  after  receiving
      further advice.  The Adjudicator was satisfied that the government  of
      Mozambique had shown an interest in this Applicant and  pursued  their
      interest  sufficiently  to  notify  the  United  Kingdom   Immigration
      authorities  that  she  was  here  illegally.   The  Adjudicator   was
      satisfied that  the  Applicant  would  be  picked  up  on  return  and
      prosecuted.  She was someone who had abused diplomatic concessions  to
      gain entry into the United Kingdom.  Offences  of  this  nature  would
      inevitably lead to short periods of imprisonment in the United Kingdom
      and there was no reason to suppose that would not be the fate  of  the
      Applicant on return to Mozambique.  In  these  circumstances  she  was
      satisfied that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  upon
      return she would be detained either before trial or  as  a  result  of
      punishment for her offences.  In the light of the background  evidence
      she took the view that this would expose the Applicant to  inhuman  or
      degrading  treatment.   The  most  appalling  prison  conditions  were
      described  in  Section  1C  of  the  US   State   Department   Report.
      Accordingly the appeal was allowed under Article 3.

6.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator  was  wrong
      to find that there was a real risk of prosecution and imprisonment  in
      Mozambique.  The Adjudicator had been wrong to take the view  that  on
      the "agreed facts" there was any such risk.   Her  findings  were  not
      supported by the evidence.  There was  no  actual  evidence  that  the
      Mozambique government was adversely interested in the  Applicant.   It
      could not be shown that there was a real risk of  detention  nor  that
      the conditions would amount to inhuman or degrading treatment.

7.    At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr Sheikh  adopted  these  grounds.
      There was no evidence that the Mozambique authorities would  take  any
      proceedings against the Applicant nor was there any evidence as to the
      likely penalties.  Mr Sheikh referred the Tribunal  to  Krotov  [2002]
      UKIAT 01325 where prison conditions in Russia which were described  as
      extremely harsh and frequently life threatening were not  regarded  as
      raising any real  risk  of  torture  or  other  degrading  or  inhuman
      treatment contrary to Article 3.

8.    Ms Braganza submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  inferences  from  the
      facts were properly open to  her.   The  Secretary  of  State  in  his
      Reasons for Refusal  Letter  had  referred  to  a  fear  arising  from
      prosecution not persecution.   In  paragraph  9  of  that  letter  the
      Secretary of State asserted that any punishment received as  a  result
      of a conviction would not be disproportionate for a Convention reason.
       The Adjudicator's  finding  that  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
      prosecution on return  was  not  perverse.   The  background  evidence
      showed that prison conditions were extremely  poor.   The  Adjudicator
      was entitled to conclude that a  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  this
      Applicant would lead to a breach of Article 3.

9.    The first issue for the Tribunal to consider is  whether  there  is  a
      real risk of the Applicant being prosecuted with a consequent risk  of
      pre-trial  detention  or  post  conviction   imprisonment.    On   the
      Applicant's own admission she used a diplomatic passport to gain entry
      into the United Kingdom when she was not entitled to  do  so.   It  is
      common ground that the Mozambique authorities reported the  matter  to
      the Home Office.   This  is  only  to  be  expected.   The  Mozambique
      authorities  would  doubtless  wish  to  draw  the  host  government's
      attention to a misuse of diplomatic privileges.  The embellishments to
      this account made by the Applicant involving allegations that she  had
      received threats including death threats from  the  High  Commissioner
      were rejected by the Adjudicator.  The inference that there is a  real
      risk of prosecution arises from the simple  fact  that  the  Applicant
      admits the wrongful use of the diplomatic passport and the matter  has
      been reported to the British authorities by the Mozambique authorities
      who are aware of the situation.  There is no evidence of the  offences
      with which the Applicant might be charged or  the  likely  punishment.
      There is no evidence as to whether offences of this nature  are  dealt
      with by custodial or non-custodial sentences.  Although  the  Tribunal
      could not exclude the possibility of a prosecution, there are so  many
      imponderables that in our view it is not possible to be satisfied that
      there is a real risk of both prosecution and imprisonment.

10.   But even assuming that there is  a  real  risk  of  imprisonment,  the
      question remains whether  there  would  be  a  breach  of  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 by returning  the  Applicant  to
      face a prison sentence in Mozambique.  The Adjudicator has referred to
      the background materials in paragraph 23-27 of her determination.  She
      has cited from the US State Department Report of 2002.   This  records
      that the government's human rights record remains poor although  there
      have been improvements in a few areas  but  serious  problems  remain.
      Prison  conditions  are  described  as  extremely   harsh   and   life
      threatening  and  several  prisoners  have  died  due  to  the   harsh
      conditions.  This is dealt with further in Section1B.  it is  reported
      that most prisoners received only one meal per day consisting of beans
      and flour and that it has been customary for families to bring food to
      prisoners.  There are sporadic reports that guards demanded bribes  in
      return for allowing the delivery of food  to  prisoners.   The  prison
      facilities do  remain  severely  overcrowded.   There  is  a  national
      association for the  support  and  protection  of  prisoners.   It  is
      recorded there continue to be many deaths in prison, the vast majority
      due to illness and disease.  There are two  directorates  of  prisons.
      It is recorded that detainees who have not yet been charged were  held
      with prisoners held for serious offences in prisons under the  control
      of  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.   In  the  Ministry  of  Justice
      facilities detainees charged but not yet tried are held with prisoners
      who have been tried and  sentenced  to  prison  for  relatively  minor
      offences where moderate security imprisonment was deemed sufficient.

11.   Women are held in separate areas of prisons  from  men  and  at  times
      prisons house young children usually infants brought there by  mothers
      sentenced for long periods.  International as  well  as  human  rights
      groups may have access to prisoners at the discretion of the  Ministry
      of Justice and Ministry of the Interior.  The League of  Human  Rights
      Organisation has stated that while  prison  accessing  and  conditions
      have improved, the overall level of treatment was poor.

12.   The Tribunal were referred to the case of Krotov.  In paragraph 9  the
      Tribunal were not satisfied that  the  risk  of  imprisonment  in  the
      Russian Federation gave rise to a real risk of treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 in circumstances where according to the US State  Department
      Report  prison  conditions  were  described  as  extremely  harsh  and
      frequently life threatening.   The Tribunal took the view  that  there
      was  no  indication  of  deliberate  torture  or  ill-treatment  being
      prevalent and the defects in the system appeared to be the  result  of
      institutional incompetence and lack of resources.  It  commented  that
      there was no doubt a point when even unintended bad conditions reached
      the level of "inhuman or degrading treatment".   The  standard  was  a
      general one and if they were to be so  regarded  for  a  conscientious
      objector (the situation of the Applicant in that appeal) then the same
      judgment must apply in the case for example of a convicted murder:  no
      doubt the Appellate Authorities would not shrink for the  consequences
      of that decision but it was an indication of the serious nature of the
      considerations involved.

13.   Can it be said that the prison conditions in  Mozambique  are  so  bad
      that no one facing any period of imprisonment can be returned from the
      United Kingdom?  There are no particular features about the  Applicant
      which put her at risk of more severe treatment then any other prisoner
      in Mozambique.  The only suggestion made by Ms Braganza was  that  the
      Applicant was a woman and conditions for that  reason  would  be  more
      harsh but according to the  US  State  Department  Report,  which  the
      Tribunal accept, women are held in separate areas from men.

14.   In Fazilat when considering the issue of prison  conditions  in  Iran,
      the Tribunal commented as follows:

           "We do not doubt that prison conditions in  Iran  are  far  from
           ideal.  We do doubt that they may not  measure  up  to  what  is
           expected in this country or perhaps in any country  which  is  a
           signatory to the European Convention on Human  Rights.   As  the
           Court at Strasbourg has recognised, it is not for signatories of
           the Convention to impose the standards of the Convention on  all
           the world.  Recognition has  to  be  had  to  the  situation  in
           individual countries and to the standards that are accepted  and
           expected in those countries.  Of course in relation to Article 3
           there is a line below which the treatment cannot sink, if we may
           put it that way".


      Human rights deal with the dignity  of  each  individual  human  being
      whether they are citizens of Iran, Mozambique or the  United  Kingdom.
      Nonetheless the European Court has emphasised that the threshold for a
      breach of Article 3 is a high threshold.   If the inhuman or degrading
      treatment arises from the general situation or conditions applying  to
      all those living in or coming under the jurisdiction of the government
      of the country in question the evidence must be very compelling before
      a Tribunal could properly be satisfied that  the  high  threshold  has
      been met for a breach of Article 3 subject of course to  the  need  to
      consider the particular circumstances of the Applicant involved.


15.    The  Tribunal  are  not  satisfied  that  all  people  imprisoned  in
      Mozambique are the victims of inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.   The
      problems in the Mozambique prison system have  been  set  out  in  the
      documentary evidence.  Set against  the  fact  that  the  prisons  are
      overcrowded and the conditions are described  as  life-threatening  is
      the fact that families do bring food to prisoners  even  though  there
      are some reports that guards have  demanded  bribes  to  permit  this.
      There are local human rights organisations which taken an interest  in
      the welfare of prisoners.  It is clear that there are different  types
      of prison depending upon the seriousness of the  offence.   Women  are
      held in separate areas of the prison and infants are allowed  to  stay
      with mothers when no other care-givers are  available.   International
      as well as domestic human rights groups have access to the  prisoners.
      Looking at the situation overall, in our view it cannot be  said  that
      these  conditions  by  themselves  amount  to  degrading  or   inhuman
      treatment with the result that the United Kingdom would be  in  breach
      of its obligations by returning the Applicant  to  Mozambique  on  the
      basis that she would be at a real risk of a sentence of  imprisonment.



16.   For these reasons in our judgment the Adjudicator  was  wrong  in  her
      assessment of the Article 3 claim.

17.   It follows that the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.





                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President

