

HA (Remittal - Reading Previous Determination - Criteria) Turkey [2003]
UKIAT 00061



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                  Date heard:  7 August 2003
                                          Date notified..4TH September 2003.

                                  Before:-
                                                                           .


                          DR H H  STOREY (Chairman)
                               MR C H BENNETT

                                                               Between








                                                          Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Turkey,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  E  H   Woodcraft,
dismissing the appeal against the decision by  the  respondent  refusing  to
grant leave to enter on asylum grounds. Mr J Bruce of Counsel instructed  by
Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors represented  the  appellant.  Miss  C  Hanrahan
appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. This was an appeal which had previously been remitted by the Tribunal  in
the light of inadequacies in findings made by the previous adjudicator.   In
the determination written by the next adjudicator, Mr Woodcraft, he said  he
had read the original adjudicator's determination.

4. The grounds of appeal were threefold.  First,  they  contended  that  the
adjudicator had failed to decide the hearing afresh. Second, they  submitted
that the adjudicator had wrongly denied the  appellant  the  opportunity  to
comment on his decision to read the previous adjudicator's determination  or
to prepare submissions  on  the  contents  of  the  previous  determination.
Finally, they maintained that the adjudicator had erred in his rejection  of
the claimant's explanation of inconsistencies in his different  accounts  in
terms of loss of memory. That was contrary,  they  stated,  to  the  medical
evidence before the adjudicator.

5. Turning first to the question of whether the adjudicator dealt  with  the
appeal afresh, we can find no  reference  in  the  adjudicator`s  record  of
proceedings to the previous  adjudicator's  determination.  However,  we  do
have a note of proceedings taken  by  the  appellant's  representatives.  It
records, part-way through cross-examination, the following exchange:

      "Adj. Can  we  move  on,  I`m  conscious  of  the  ground  covered  on
      credibility by the first adjudicator.  I`m conscious of Devalseelan.
      HOPO: No sir, this is a de novo hearing. You don't  have  to  consider
      the other determination."

6. Mr Bruce`s contention was that this  demonstrated  that  the  adjudicator
adopted the wrong approach. We think that contention goes  too  far.  He  is
quite right to point out that the case required a  fresh  consideration  and
so  that  any  reference  by  the  adjudicator  to  Devaseelan  was   wholly
misconceived: the appeal before him was  not  a  human  rights  appeal  made
subsequent to a determination refusing  an  asylum  appeal  However,  it  is
necessary to consider this passage in the context of the hearing as a  whole
and  the  adjudicator's  subsequent   determination.   Even   assuming   the
representative's note of  proceedings  is  correct,  this  passage  at  most
demonstrates that  the  adjudicator,  at  this  point  in  the  proceedings,
wrongly considered the case as one in which the  findings  of  fact  of  the
previous adjudicator could be taken as  a  start-point.   However,  it  also
records the HOPO pointing out his error. If one takes what is  said  by  the
HOPO at this point and places it side by  side  with  what  the  adjudicator
said at paragraph 14 of his determination, it is reasonably clear that  from
this point on the adjudicator fully took on board that he had  to  determine
the appeal de novo. At paragraph 13 he set out what the  Tribunal  had  said
when remitting the case. At paragraph 14 he said:

      "The matter was accordingly remitted and  came  before  me  at  Taylor
      House on 18 March 2003. My approach in dealing with this appeal is  to
      consider matters afresh but  to  pay  particular  attention  to  those
      matters which the Tribunal have determined are important  in  deciding
      the case. To that end it is necessary for me to  have  read  both  the
      original adjudicator`s decision and the determination of the  Tribunal
      and I cannot therefore accept the  submission  made  that  it  is  not
      appropriate  for  me  to  read  the  determination  of  the   previous
      adjudicator in this case as quite apart  from  anything  else,  it  is
      necessary for me to avoid failing  into  any  errors  that  any  other
      adjudicator might have made".

7. This passage states very clearly that he considered the case afresh.

8. Mr Bruce argued that in  other  passages  the  adjudicator  set  out  his
intention to concentrate on  those  areas  identified  by  the  Tribunal  as
missing from the first determination, thereby limiting himself  to  specific
points  only  and  taking  as  a  basis  findings  made  by   the   previous
adjudicator. With respect, this misrepresents what the adjudicator said.  In
the first place, he talked about paying particular attention to points  made
by the Tribunal, not about paying particular attention  to  points  made  by
the first adjudicator.  And  secondly,  he  did  not  talk  about  confining
himself to the points made by the Tribunal.  Furthermore, it is  clear  from
the  representative's  note  of  proceedings  and  the   adjudicator's   own
determination that in the course of the hearing the appellant  was  able  to
present his  case  in  its  entirety  and  that  in  his  determination  the
adjudicator addressed the case taking all relevant aspects into account.  Mr
Bruce has been unable to point us  to  any  evidence  that  the  adjudicator
persisted with his initial error. Nor has he  been  able  to  point  to  any
evidence that, after this error was pointed out to him, he wrongly  fettered
his approach to the evidence by reference  to  the  findings  of  the  first
adjudicator.

9. That brings us to the contention that the adjudicator wrongly denied  the
parties an opportunity to make submissions concerning his intention to  read
the determination of the first adjudicator.

10. Mr Bruce conceded, with reference to the  case  of  Gashi  (01/TH/02902)
that  there  is  no  prohibition  on  an  adjudicator  reading  a   previous
determination. He submitted, however, that the adjudicator in this case  had
offended the second guideline set out in Gashi, which reads:

      "If  the  adjudicator   considers   it   appropriate   to   read   the
      Determination, he should not do so until he has told  the  parties  of
      his intention, and invited their comments".

11. However, we  do  not  see  that  this  guideline  was  breached  in  any
significant way by the adjudicator. Whilst it  may  be  that  he  failed  to
invite comments relating to this matter,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  he
received them. As already noted, he stated at paragraph 14 that:

        "I  cannot  therefore  accept  the  submission  made  that  is   not
      appropriate  for  me  to  read  the  determination  of  the   previous
      adjudicator ...".

12.  It  cannot  be  said,  therefore,  that  the  parties  were  denied  an
opportunity to make submissions upon this matter.

13.  Before  moving  on,  we  would  reiterate  the  point  that  the  Gashi
guidelines do not state that it is an error of law  for  an  adjudicator  to
read the determination of a previous adjudicators in an appeal  remitted  to
him. Rather they seek to lay down best practice as  to  when  it  should  be
done and how. The  underlying  principle  remains  that  set  out  in  Ahmed
Aissaoui [1997] Imm AR 184 in which Mr Justice Collins held that  there  was
no reason in  principle  why  a  second  adjudicator  should  not  read  the
determination of the first adjudicator on a hearing  de  novo,  provided  he
does not allow it in any way to influence the decision he had to make  on  a
fresh consideration of the whole case.

14. This case does, however, highlight the importance of not  confusing  the
situation which arises when a case is remitted to an  adjudicator  with  the
entirely different one arising in the case  of  free-standing  human  rights
appeals  where  an  adjudicator  typically  has  before   him   a   previous
determination by a fellow-adjudicator refusing an asylum appeal. The  latter
situation is subject to the principles set out in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
00702.  The former is not.

15. The third main point raised in the grounds  concerns  the  adjudicator`s
treatment of the medical evidence. In earlier statements and at the  hearing
the  appellant  had  sought  to  explain  inconsistencies  between  his  SEF
statement and later accounts in  terms  of  memory  loss.   The  adjudicator
rejected this explanation. He stated that the report from  Dr  Rundle  "does
not appear to refer to difficulties in memory at all". Mr  Bruce  says  this
was not correct, since Dr Rundle had found the appellant suffered from  PTSD
and had referred in his report  to  the  ICD-10  diagnostic  criteria  which
stated at F43 1 D that relevant symptoms of PTSD included in those  criteria
were:

      "Inability to recall, either partially or completely,  some  important
      aspects of the period of exposure to the stressor";
      [and]
      ...difficulty in concentrating".

16.  Similar  criteria  were  identified  in  Medical  Foundation  and   BMJ
literature before the adjudicator. Particular  reliance  was  placed  on  an
article by J Horlihy, P Scragg and  S.  Turner  entitled  "Discrepancies  in
autographical memoirs - implications for the assessment  of  asylum-seekers:
repeated interviews study.", BMJ Vol 324 9 February 2002.   Effectively,  Mr
Bruce  submitted,  the  adjudicator  had  sought  to  substitute   his   own
assessment for that of a reputable medical specialist.

17. We see no merit in these submissions.  It may be that  at  paragraph  78
of his report Dr Rundle did  identify  the  appellant  as  exhibiting  other
features of PTSD - and that  they  included  those  listed  at  F  43  1  D.
However, it was  significant  that  he  did  not  consider  this  to  be  an
important enough feature of the appellant's condition to mention in his  own
detailed description of this  man's  physical  and  psychological  symptoms.
Furthermore, he did not record the appellant as having had  any  significant
difficulty in recounting his experiences to him.

18. As the BMJ article makes clear, there is a great need  in  asylum  cases
to  take  account  of  any  psychological  difficulties  when  it  comes  to
assessing credibility. However, this requires examination of the  particular
circumstances obtaining in any individual case. It would be  absurd  if  the
ICD-10 criteria were to be read to mean that all  persons  who  suffer  from
PTSD have a memory loss which prevents them from giving a proper account  of
themselves in the context of an asylum claim.

19. We are  satisfied  that  the  adjudicator  in  this  case  gave  careful
consideration to the claimant's explanation of memory loss by  reference  to
the medical evidence. In our view, he was quite entitled  to  conclude  that
Dr Rundle`s report did not bear out that the appellant  had  been  prevented
by memory loss from giving a proper account of himself in  relation  to  his
asylum claim. At paragraphs 29 and 30 he stated:

      "The appellant also say he suffers from loss of memory since that time
      [ 1997]. I note his memory loss did not prevent him from making a  12-
      page statement shortly after he had arrived in  the  UK,  nor  did  it
      apparently  stop  him  from  making  a  17-page  statement  for  these
      proceedings. ...


      I did not accept the appellant's description of his difficulties  with
      his memory. It seems  to  me  from  having  observed  the  appellant's
      demeanour that he  finds  it  difficult  to  recall  things  when  the
      questions put to him are to do with inconsistencies in  his  accounts.
      He is unable to recall precisely  the  number  of  days  he  spent  in
      hospital or the number of days he spent in prison and  yet  he  cannot
      explain why he gave the date of 1978 in his SEF form. Dr  Rundle  does
      not say that the appellant's supposed  difficulties  with  memory  are
      related to his physical condition. Indeed Dr Rundle does not appear to
      refer to difficulties in memory at all"


20. In our view the  adjudicator,  having  carefully  assessed  the  medical
evidence, was quite entitled to make findings based on  his  own  assessment
of the appellant`s oral testimony.  The Tribunal will not lightly  interfere
with primary findings of fact made by an adjudicator who has seen and  heard
an  appellant.  Given  the  care  this  adjudicator  took  to  consider  the
appellant's evidence in the light of the medical evidence, we certainly  see
no basis for interfering in this case.

21. The grounds also raised concerns about a  number  of  points  which  the
adjudicator had  identified  as  "inconsistencies"  but  which  the  grounds
asserted  did not merit that description. These concerns were  not  repeated
by Mr Bruce and in our view rightly so. The adjudicator`s identification  of
a number of serious inconsistencies in material aspects of  the  appellant's
account  was  entirely  justified.  The  appellant  had   been   unable   to
satisfactorily explain them.

22. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
