
YL (Nationality-Statelessness-Eritrea-Ethiopia) Eritrea CG [2003] UKIAT
00016

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                            Dates heard:  25  June 2002 and 16 August   2002
                                                   Date notified: 30.06.2003
                                   Before:-


                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                               MRS J CHATWANI



                                                       Between


                                                       Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1. The appellant, who  claims  to  be  either  a  national  of  Ethiopia  or
stateless is of Eritrean ethnicity. She  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr   Andrew   Jordan,
dismissing the appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
refusing leave to enter on asylum grounds. Directions  were  given  for  her
removal  to  Eritrea  presumably  because  she  had  originally  stated  her
nationality to be Eritrean.  Ms K Cronin of Counsel  instructed  by  Gill  &
Co. Solicitors appeared for the appellant. Mr C Buckley   appeared  for  the
respondent.

2. The hearing of this appeal took place  on  two  separate  dates,  one  in
June 2002 and one in August 2002. The first hearing had  been  adjourned  in
order for the parties to seek further materials relating to the  nationality
issues. After the second hearing the parties were invited to address  issues
arising out of the case of Zaid Tecle [2002] EWCA  Civ  1358  (C/2002/1285).
In reply the appellant`s representatives sent further  submissions  together
with two statements relating to a visit by the  appellant  to  the  Eritrean
Embassy on 23 August 2002. These we admitted as evidence. We  apologise  for
the delay in promulgating this determination caused in part by  our  concern
to ensure that we had all relevant information  relating  to  the  issue  of
Eritrean nationality.

3. We have also had sight  of  one  further  item,  a  UNHCR  letter  of  18
December 2002 headed  Return  of  mixed  parentage  Ethiopian  and  Eritrean
individuals to Eritrea, to which we  shall  make  limited  reference.  Since
nothing significant relating to this appeal turned on this  letter,  we  did
not see any need to seek comments from the parties as to its contents.

4. The appellant`s evidence was that she  had been born in Asmara  which  is
now part of Eritrea. She had left there in  1988  and  thereafter  lived  in
Addis Ababa. The Ethiopian authorities had deported her  father  to  Eritrea
in 1998 and in early 1999 they had then detained her for  nearly  4  months.
In June 1999 she was released on condition that she report every week.  They
had told her they would be deporting her to Eritrea soon.  Being  averse  to
doing military service in Eritrea, she made arrangements to  leave  Ethiopia
and soon after arrived in the UK.

5. As regards Eritrea, the basis of  her  claim  was  that  she  was  not  a
national of that country and  if  sent  back  there  would  be  at  risk  of
persecution because she would be required to  perform  military  service  in
spite of her conscientious objections to  war.  Furthermore,  she  would  be
seen as a traitor and sent to prison. She had heard that  her  father,  whom
the Ethiopian authorities had deported to Eritrea in 1998, now  lived  there
in destitution.

6. As regards her situation in Ethiopia, she considered she was  a  national
of that country notwithstanding that at one point  they  had  threatened  to
strip her of Ethiopian nationality.  In her statement of additional  grounds
she said she would be  ill-treated  by  the  Ethiopian  security  forces  in
circumstances which would  amount  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
punishment.

7. The Secretary of State did not accept  the  appellant`s  account  of  her
experiences in Ethiopia, noting that on her own account she had obtained  an
Ethiopian passport  for  travel  purposes  and  had  left  Ethiopia  without
difficulties. He did not consider that, if her account were true, she  would
have been able to bypass stringent security checks  in  operation  at  Addis
Ababa airport. The Secretary of State also  found  it  difficult  to  accept
that, if the authorities were intent  on  deporting  her,  they  would  have
released her shortly beforehand.

8. He noted further that the border conflict between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea
had now ceased.

9. The first hearing before an adjudicator took place before Mrs M E  Austin
on 30 May 2001. That was confined to the preliminary issue  of  whether  the
appellant was a national of Eritrea or of Ethiopia or  stateless.  According
to the representatives` note, Mrs  Austin  decided  there  was  insufficient
evidence to show that the appellant was  a  national  of  Ethiopia  but,  by
virtue of the fact that her father was of Eritrean origin,  she  was  to  be
treated as a national of Eritrea "by operation of law".  With  agreement  of
the parties, she delivered an oral, not a  written  determination,  to  that
effect.  The appeal was then listed for hearing as a substantive  appeal  on
2 July 2001.

10.  At  the  hearing  before  Adjudicator  Mr  A  Jordan  the   appellant`s
representatives, relying  on  a  report  which  had  become  available  from
country expert Mr Gilkes, asked him to reverse Mrs Austin`s decision on  the
preliminary issue and determine the issue  of  the  appellant`s  nationality
afresh by making a finding that the appellant was a  national  of  Ethiopia.
He  refused  to  do  so.   He  considered  himself  bound  by  Mrs  Austin's
determination. Among the reasons he gave for taking that view was  that  Mrs
Austin's conclusion on nationality was a "final determination" of the  issue
and could not be re-opened except on appeal. He concluded:

      "It is an overriding interest of justice to achieve finality,  subject
      only to a right of appeal in an appropriate case. That goal is flouted
      if a determination fails to achieve that. There is  no  difference  in
      principle if the determination is restricted to a preliminary issue".

11. Having maintained the preliminary  ruling  (which  he  deemed  a  "final
determination")  that  the  appellant  was  a  citizen   of   Eritrea,   the
adjudicator then proceeded to consider whether in that  country  she  had  a
well-founded fear of persecution. So far as the  appellant`s  objections  to
military service were concerned, the adjudicator concluded, following  Sepet
and Bulbul [ 2001] Imm AR 452 (CA), that these could not  establish  a  real
risk of serious harm.

12. Alluding to the appellant`s further claimed fear based on UNHCR  sources
stating that there was an obstructive attitude on the part of  the  Eritrean
authorities to those returning, he  concluded  that  such  obstruction  fell
short of  a  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be  persecuted.  As  to  the
appellant`s claimed difficulties in gaining acceptance as Eritrean from  the
Eritrean authorities because she lacked documents dealing with her  identity
or the identity  of  her  parents,  the  adjudicator  concluded  that  these
difficulties did not amount to persecution: "the  most  that  is  likely  to
happen to her is that she will be  refused  entry  and  will  then  have  to
return to the United Kingdom".  The  adjudicator  saw  this  eventuality  as
fatal to both the appellant`s asylum and human rights grounds of appeal.

13. The grounds of appeal  contended  that  the  adjudicator  was  wrong  to
consider himself bound by the previous adjudicator's preliminary  ruling  to
the effect that the appellant was a national of  Eritrea.  He  should  also,
they submitted, have concluded she was either  a  national  of  Ethiopia  or
stateless. Even assuming the appellant were  considered  as  a  national  of
Eritrea, the adjudicator was wrong to conclude she would not  be  persecuted
upon return there; such a conclusion, the grounds  continued,  was  contrary
to the contents of the US State Department report of February 2001.

14. Further submissions by Mrs Cronin at  the  hearing  made  the  following
points.

15. Since in her 27 August 2002 submission  Mrs  Cronin  conceded  that  the
adjudicator's adverse findings regarding risks upon return to  Eritrea  were
open to him on the evidence, we omit recital of the points that were  raised
regarding these.

16. As regards the nationality issue, Mrs Cronin  contended  that  the  most
recent evidence indicated that there were concrete obstacles to  persons  in
the position of this appellant being recognised as a  national  of  Eritrea.
This was the view of country expert Mr Gilkes. The FCO  claim  that  only  a
"small number" would have difficulties was not reflective of the  background
sources.  The Washington Embassy  assessment  was  that  "many"  were  often
unable to obtain citizenship.  There was  a  loyalty  requirement  based  on
whether a person voted in  the  1993  referendum.  But  the  requirement  to
register to vote was in turn tied to verification of  Eritrean  nationality.
One had to produce evidence from 3 people of Eritrean  nationality.  Whereas
the appellant in this case had neither identity documents nor any  means  of
obtaining them. Even accepting that voting in the 1993 referendum was not  a
necessary  condition  which  had  to  be  fulfilled,  it  was  an  important
evidential factor. The principle set out in Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR  359  was
clearly not intended to establish that a person should be required  to  take
steps  to  establish  nationality  even  if  in  doing  so  he  would   meet
insuperable  obstacles.  And  even  to  require  insuperable  obstacles   or
manifest pointlessness would set the test too high. The criterion should  be
that there were concrete obstacles.

17. Accordingly, argued Mrs Cronin, the adjudicator  should  have  concluded
(in the absence  of  clear  evidence  of  Ethiopian  nationality)  that  the
appellant was stateless.  Applying the principles set out in Revenko  [2000]
Imm AR 610, the appellant's country of former habitual  residence  would  be
Ethiopia.  In  respect  of   the   latter   country,   the   appellant   had
satisfactorily shown that she had a well-founded fear of persecution  there.
She had been detained in circumstances close to persecutory  and  would   be
at risk of renewed detention of deportation  or  both.  There  was  evidence
that  expulsions  by  the  Ethiopian  authorities  of  persons  of  Eritrean
ethnicity were still taking  place  in  June  2001.   She  would  face  poor
facilities and confiscation of any property she acquired. But in  any  event
the adjudicator had plainly failed to consider risk  there  and  so  if  her
account were not accepted, the proper course would be to remit the appeal.

18. Mr Buckley accepted that the respondent had never considered  the  issue
of risk upon return to Eritrea. But there  was  sufficient  evidence  before
the adjudicator and the Tribunal to show that the appellant was  in  fact  a
national of Eritrea and that she would  not  face  serious  difficulties  in
that  country.  The  fact  that  some   persons   might   have   encountered
difficulties in securing Eritrean nationality did not  demonstrate  that  if
the appellant took genuine steps to avail herself  of  Eritrean  nationality
she would not obtain it.  It had also to be borne in mind that the  Eritrean
authorities  and  Eritrean  people  were  not  entirely   negative   towards
returnees, even if the initial jubilation at  the  returns  had  faded.  The
evidence did  not  establish  that  voting  in  the  1993  reference  was  a
necessary condition for obtaining nationality. The general attitude  of  the
government in Eritrea towards returnees was facilitative.

19. In a further written submission Mrs Cronin maintained that the  Tribunal
should not consider that the Court of  Appeal  in  the  case  of  Tecle  had
settled   that   Eritrean   nationality   was   obtainable   in   relatively
straightforward fashion. There was additional, less  sanguine,  evidence  in
this appeal consisting in the INS document. Furthermore,  whereas  Ms  Tecle
had lived in Eritrea after it achieved independence  in  1993  and  retained
ties there, the appellant in this case had left there in  1988  and  had  no
ties there. She added:


      "Subsequent to the hearing in  this  appeal,  the  Appellant  and  her
      instructing solicitor attended at the Eritrean embassy  to  apply  for
      citizenship papers for the Appellant. Their  evidence  concerning  the
      refusal of citizenship is set down in Statements of Truth sent to  the
      Tribunal by separate cover. This evidence was prepared for  submission
      to the Secretary of State, as it was assumed that it was obtained  too
      late for admission before the Tribunal....


      ...there is now fresh evidence that  the  Appellant  has  been  denied
      Eritrean citizenship for lack of proof of her status...the Appellant`s
      only proof of her Eritrean connection is her  language  facility,  and
      this does not meet the more exacting standards of  proof  set  by  the
      Eritrean authorities."


20. As already noted we decided to  admit  the  further  evidence  to  which
Counsel here refers.


  The  adjudicator's   treatment   of   the   previous   preliminary   issue
determination.
21. We consider the adjudicator was  wrong  to  conclude  he  was  bound  to
maintain the previous preliminary issue ruling made by  another  adjudicator
on the appellant`s  nationality,  even  though  further  evidence  had  been
produced before him regarding this issue in the form of an expert report.

22. Insofar as preliminary issues were regulated at  the  relevant  time  by
the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000,  Rule  12  headed
"Preliminary issues" is confined to cases in which there  is  an  allegation
by the respondent that an appellant is not entitled to appeal or the  notice
of appeal is out of time. It provides for the adjudicator to  determine  the
validity of the allegation as a preliminary issue and,  where  he  considers
it just by reason of special circumstances to do so, to allow the appeal  to
proceed.

23. Plainly that type of preliminary issue  is  not  raised  by  this  case.
However, Rule 30 headed "Conduct of appeals" provides at paragraph (4)  that
directions which may be given to regulate the procedure to  be  followed  in
relation to the conduct of any appeal may:

      "...(c) provide for -
        i) a particular matter to be dealt with as a preliminary issue".

24. Two features of Rule 30 are important here. One is that such  directions
are confined to the regulation of the conduct of an  appeal.  The  other  is
that there is no restriction on the subject-matter of such directions.

25. Also relevant are Rules 2 and 15.  Rule 2  defines  a  determination  as
the decision of the appellate authority to allow or dismiss  an  appeal  and
the reasons for that decision. Rule 15 requires that "Written notice of  the
adjudicator's  determination  shall  be  sent  to  every   party   and   the
appellant`s representative (if he has one)". The only  reference  to  "final
determination" is in Part IV of the Rules which deal with appeals  from  the
Tribunal (Rule 26).  There is no provision in these Rules for a purely  oral
determination.

26. Having regard to what is required by these Rules, it is  clear  that  Mr
Jordan was wrong on two counts: he was wrong  to  treat  Mrs  Austin`s  oral
preliminary ruling as a determination and wrong to treat it as being in  any
way final.

27. However, he was right to point to judicial policy considerations  making
it normally undesirable for preliminary issue rulings to  be  re-opened.  As
he rightly observed, there is a public interest in the finality of  judicial
decisions.  In the case of a preliminary issue ruling that an appeal is  out
of time it is arguable that that effectively  disposes  of  the  appeal  and
thus  that  a  decision  on  such  a  preliminary   issue   amounts   to   a
determination: see Jaayeola (14819). However, in the context  of  an  appeal
which is in time, it requires a  written  determination,  even  if  that  is
simply to the effect that in  view  of  the  preliminary  issue  ruling  the
appeal  for  briefly  stated  reasons  must  be  allowed  or  dismissed.   A
fortiori, in any asylum and human rights appeal, the essential task  of  the
adjudicator remains that of  giving  a  reasoned  judgment  on  whether  the
decision appealed against is contrary  to  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the
Human Rights Convention. Mrs  Austin's  preliminary  issue  ruling  did  not
undertake that task.

28. Furthermore, so long as there remains no "final determination"  of  that
appeal (which presupposes a determination at Tribunal level), it  cannot  be
in the interests of justice or of sound judicial policy that an  adjudicator
automatically refuses to reconsider a preliminary issue ruling  despite  the
submission of further relevant and compelling evidence.

29.  Mr  Jordan's  understandable  concerns  about  riding  roughshod   over
previous adjudicator rulings do,  however,  need  to  be  addressed  by  any
adjudicator confronted with the situation he faced. In this regard  we  find
useful guidance by analogy in the approach set out by the  Tribunal  in  the
starred determination of Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702.  Essentially  some
deference is due to the decision reached by the  previous  adjudicator.  The
start-point should be that the decision reached by the previous  adjudicator
was based on the evidence and  should  not  be  re-opened  unless  there  is
cogent evidence - which will normally have to be served in  accordance  with
IAA directions - pointing in a contrary direction.

30. In this  case  we  consider  there  was  certainly  sufficiently  cogent
evidence pointing in a  contrary  direction  for  the  adjudicator  to  have
assessed whether it justified him taking a different view.

31. However, we do not see this error on the  part  of  the  adjudicator  as
fatally flawing his determination. That  is  because,  having  reviewed  the
issue for ourselves, we consider that his finding that the appellant  was  a
national of Eritrea was correct. Furthermore, irrespective  of  the  correct
answer to the questions raised by this case as  to  nationality,  we  cannot
see that the appellant demonstrated that she faced a real  risk  of  serious
harm in the only two countries of possible relevance: Eritrea and  Ethiopia.
There was no basis, therefore, for allowing the appeal on either  asylum  or
human rights grounds.


The appellant`s nationality
32. As the parties agreed, there was a real issue  to  be  decided  in  this
case as to the appellant`s nationality or lack of it. Since the  adjudicator
did not assess that issue for himself and since we do not know  the  precise
reasons on which Mrs Austin relied, we must tackle it for ourselves  in  the
light of the evidence and submissions made to us.

33. Here we find ourselves confronted, as adjudicators  often  are,  with  a
situation where the claimant claims to be a national  of  one  country,  yet
removal directions are set for another. It is unwise to  seek  to  fix  hard
and fast rules for how to analyse such  cases.  In  some  cases  it  may  be
possible to go straight to the issue of whether the appellant is a  national
of the country to which removal directions are set, since, if  it  is  found
he is a national of that country but does not face a real  risk  of  serious
harm upon return there, that may be all that is necessary to  determine  the
appeal. The Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003  espouse
the need for judicial economy. However, in other cases  the  appeal  may  be
more effectively determined, given the nature and extent  of  the  arguments
about a person`s true nationality or  lack  of  it,  by  going  through  the
various permutations. This  can  particularly  assist  in  cases  where  the
nationality issues are  complex.  Adjudicators  cannot  be  expected  to  be
nationality law experts and  asylum  hearings  are  not  intended  to  be  a
judicial forum for determining nationality  in  the  abstract,  so  that  an
approach which covers the possibilities rather  than  opting  for  just  one
legal solution can sometimes ensure fairness to the  claimant  at  the  same
time as actually  aiding  speedy  resolution  of  relevant  issues.  Dealing
inclusively with all the  possibilities  may  also  help  avoid  unnecessary
future litigation, should an  adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  be  considered
wrong in the ruling made on one nationality. It is  the  inclusive  approach
which  we considered most appropriate in this case.

34. In the case of this appellant there are only  four  real  possibilities.
We use the phrase "real risk of serious harm"  to  cover  both  well-founded
fear of persecution under the  Refugee  Convention  and  real  risk  of  ill
treatment under Art 3 of the Human Rights Convention.


      a). If she is Ethiopian and not Eritrean, then it is only necessary to
      consider whether she faces a real risk of serious harm in relation  to
      Ethiopia;


      b) If she is Eritrean and not Ethiopian then it is only  necessary  to
      consider whether she whether she faces a real risk of serious harm  in
      relation to  Eritrea;




      c). If she is both Ethiopian and Eritrean, then it  is  necessary  for
      her to demonstrate that she faces a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in
      relation to  both countries;


      d). If she is neither Eritrean nor Ethiopian and is stateless, then on
      the evidence in this case it is  necessary  to  consider  whether  she
      faces a real risk of serious harm in relation to her country of former
      habitual residence. Since she has never lived in Eritrea, her  country
      of former habitual residence is plainly Ethiopia.



35. We shall address each of these possibilities in turn.


Ethiopia

36. The appellant has reiterated  her  claim  that  she  is  a  national  of
Ethiopia.

37. We think the adjudicator was right to conclude that  the  appellant  had
failed to discharge the burden of proof on her to show she  was  a  national
of Ethiopia. However, let us suppose she is  a  national  of  that  country.
What follows in terms of her appeal?

38. There is a preliminary difficulty here,  arising  from  the  possibility
that the Ethiopian authorities might not accept the appellant as a  national
or as a resident with a right to return. If they  would  not  then  arguably
she would not be at real risk of serious harm,  at  least  under  the  Human
Rights Convention. This is a matter we deal with below,  in  paragraphs  57-
65. But we may pass over it here by assuming for the moment difficulties  in
being accepted as returnable would not obviate risk to the appellant.

39. On the assumption, therefore, that the appellant would be accepted  back
by the Ethiopian authorities, would she face a real  risk  of  serious  harm
there? Mrs Cronin has submitted that since the adjudicator  failed  to  deal
with the issue  of  the  risk  the  appellant  would  face  upon  return  to
Ethiopia, if we found she was a national of Ethiopia  we  should  remit  the
case for an adjudicator to consider this issue.  Mrs  Cronin  did,  however,
make submissions as  to  why  the  appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  in
Ethiopia. Mr Buckley asked us, should we be minded to deal with  the  matter
ourselves, to uphold the reasoning of the Secretary of State.

40. Despite the fact that the adjudicator did not address risk in  Ethiopia,
we consider we are in a position to make a finding  on  this  issue  without
the need for remittal.  The appellant's claim to asylum  was  based  on  her
being Ethiopian  and  on  what  had  happened  to  her  there  and  why  she
considered she would face real risks there. We also know  the  Secretary  of
State`s assessment of risk  she  would  face  in  Ethiopia  since,  although
classifying her as "Eritrean", he in turn confined himself  largely  to  her
situation in Ethiopia. As already noted, he did  not  accept  that  she  had
been detained in that country nor did he accept she would be  faced  with  a
real risk of deportation from that country, since if they  had  intended  to
deport her they would not have released her shortly before  the  deportation
on condition she report. He  also  noted  that  she  had  managed  to  leave
Ethiopia on her own  passport  and  without  difficulty,  despite  stringent
controls at Addis Ababa airport.

41. In her grounds of appeal the appellant did refer to a risk of her  being
ill-treated by the Ethiopian security  forces;  but  she  wholly  failed  to
address the Secretary of  State`s  reasons  for  rejecting  her  account  of
having been detained and ordered to be deported from there to  Eritrea.  The
grounds of appeal to the Tribunal focussed  mainly  if  not  wholly  on  the
issue of Eritrean nationality. Neither in those grounds  nor  in  subsequent
submissions has there been any real attempt to  impugn  those  reasons.  Mrs
Cronin set out why the appellant would be at risk in Ethiopia but  in  doing
so she did  not  address  the  Secretary  of  State`s  reasons.  Apart  from
reiterating that the  claimant  would  be  at  risk  of  future  persecution
because she had been detained in circumstances  close  to  persecutory,  the
only point she added was that there was evidence that expulsions of  persons
of Eritrean ethnicity were still taking place in June 2001. However,  whilst
the latest objective country materials do not  contradict  that  contention,
the latter contains no indication that such expulsions continue to be  wide-
scale or routine. Bearing in mind that all that can be  accepted  about  the
appellant in this case is that if returned she would be known to  have  been
born in Asmara of an Eritrean father who was (or was said to  be)  deported,
we cannot see that this would place her at real risk  serious  harm  in  the
form  of  deportation  or  detention.  She   may   well   face   significant
discriminations, but these would not cross the threshold  of  serious  harm.


42. In such circumstances we are satisfied that the appellant has failed  to
establish that she would face a real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  Ethiopia,
either from the Ethiopian authorities or  from  non-state  actors.   Neither
the Refugee Convention nor the Human Rights Convention avails her.


Eritrea

43. That brings us to the  second  possibility,  that  the  appellant  is  a
national of Eritrea. As already noted, given that  removal  directions  were
set for Eritrea, this is obviously the central issue.

44. Since it is common ground that the appellant is not  as  yet  recognised
as a national of Eritrea, it may be asked, why  is  it  legitimate  to  even
consider whether she is a national of  Eritrea?   Fortunately  in  order  to
answer this question we do  not  need  to  embark  on  an  analysis  of  the
complexities of  nationality  law.  That  is  because,  following   Bradshaw
[1994] Imm AR 359, we consider it settled law that when a  person  does  not
accept that the Secretary of State is correct about his nationality,  it  is
incumbent on him to prove it, if need be by making an application  for  such
nationality. That is all the more necessary in the case of someone  claiming
to be a  refugee  under  the  Refugee  Convention.  Under  that  Convention,
establishing nationality (or statelessness)  cannot  be  left  as  something
that is optional for the claimant. The burden of proof is  on  the  claimant
to prove his nationality (or lack of it). To leave it as an optional  matter
would  also  make  it  possible  for  bogus  claimants   to   benefit   from
international protection even though  in  law  they  had  nationality  of  a
country where they would not be at risk  of  persecution  -  simply  by  not
applying for that  nationality.  Furthermore,  leaving  it  as  an  optional
matter would render unnecessary key provisions  of  the  definition  in  Art
1A(2) which require a person to be outside the country  of  his  nationality
or outside the country of his former  habitual  residence  and  which  place
special conditions on persons who have more than  one  nationality.  As  was
said by Rothstein J in the Canadian Federal Court case of Tatiana  Bouianova
v Minister of Employment and Immigration [1993] FCJ No 576, a  case  dealing
with statelessness, "[t]he definition should not be interpreted  in  such  a
manner as to render some of its words unnecessary or redundant."


45. Bearing in mind that the burden of proof rests on the  claimant,  it  is
always relevant to enquire in such cases whether a person  has  taken  steps
to apply for the nationality of the country in question  or,  if  they  have
taken steps, whether they have been successful or unsuccessful.

46. We would accept that in asylum cases the Bradshaw principle  has  to  be
qualified to take account of whether there are valid reasons for a  claimant
not approaching his or her embassy or consulate - or the authorities of  the
country direct -  about an application  for  citizenship  or  residence.  In
some cases such an approach could  place  the  claimant  or  the  claimant's
family at risk, because for example it would alert the  authorities  to  the
fact that the claimant has escaped pursuit by fleeing the country.  However,
by no means can there be a blanket assumption that for  all  claimants  such
approaches would create or increase risk. It is a matter to be  examined  on
the evidence in any particular  case.  The  1979  UNHCR  Handbook  does  not
require a different position to be taken: paragraph 93 clearly  contemplates
a case-by-case approach.

47. As noted earlier, we now have the judgment in the  Court  of  Appeal  in
Zaid Tecle [2002] EWCA iv 1358 published on 6 September 2002 as well as  Mrs
Cronin`s submissions on it. We note that what it says about  nationality  in
relation to a claimant who was also born in Asmara with an Eritrean  father,
supports the view we have taken here. Brooke, LJ stated at paragraph 23:

      "In my judgment, given the material from the British Embassy which was
      before the adjudicator and the Tribunal in this case, the Tribunal was
      entitled, having regard to that and having regard to the CIPU  report,
      to take an adverse view of the fact that the appellant,  on  whom  the
      burden of proof lay, had not contacted the Eritrean Embassy in  London
      and made an application, supported by three appropriate witnesses, for
      citizenship."

48. The only issue as we see it is therefore whether the appellant would  be
accepted as a national of Eritrea. We shall come back to the issue  of  what
follows if she would not.  But  if  she  would,  then  it  is  necessary  to
consider whether within Eritrea  itself  she  would  face  a  real  risk  of
serious harm.

49. Much effort has been spent  by  experts  and  others  in  analysing  the
nationality law and practice of Eritrea. In this  case  we  had  before  us,
inter alia, a report from Mr Gilkes and also an INS  document.  However,  we
now have the Court of Appeal assessment of this issue as  set  out  in  Zaid
Tecle which treats the latest position as being that as set out in a  letter
from the Embassy of the State of Eritrea in London  dated  29  August  2002.
This states:


      "1. A person who was born in Eritrea with an Eritrean father WOULD  BE
      ELIGIBLE for Eritrean nationality.


      2. The political views of 3 witnesses are NOT RELEVANT to establishing
      eligibility for nationality and obtaining an Eritrean passport.


      3. The political views  of  the  applicant  for  nationality  are  NOT
      RELEVANT to establishing eligibility for nationality and obtaining  an
      Eritrean passport.


      4. The voting in the 1993 Referendum is NOT A NECESSARY  CONDITION  to
      establishing nationality.


      5.Paying a 2% tax on nationals  overseas  is  NOT  A  PRECONDITION  to
      establishing eligibility for nationality  and  obtaining  an  Eritrean
      passport.


      6. Claiming refugee status overseas DOES NOT PRECLUDE ELIGIBILITY  for
      Eritrean nationality or obtaining an Eritrean passport.


      7. All application forms are filed in person by the applicant  at  the
      Embassy`s consular section. No application forms out of  the  standard
      provided by the Embassy are accepted."

50. Brooke, LJ went on to glean from this that:


       "What is required is the  signature  of  3  witnesses  who  know  the
      applicant and can testify that she was in fact born in Eritrea with an
      Eritrean father. Whatever might have  been  the  position  during  the
      unsettled period before the war, or during the war, there  is  now  no
      requirement that the political views of the three witnesses should  be
      looked at. It has got to be three witnesses  of  appropriate  standing
      who can simply testify that the appellant is who she says she is."

51. In our view Brooke LJ`s assessment based  on  very  recent  evidence  is
conclusive of this issue. Certainly we  do  not  see  the  INS  document  as
justifying the Tribunal taking a  different  view.  We  also  consider  that
Tribunal cases which pre-date Tecle (such as Kule and Seleba) or which post-
date it but did not have their attention  drawn  to  Tecle  (such  as  Yudit
Germany [2002] UKIAT 07099) should no longer be followed.

52. There has been no suggestion of asylum-related  concerns  in  this  case
about the claimant approaching the  Eritrean  Embassy  as  regards  Eritrean
nationality: indeed we have evidence the appellant  actually  visited.  Thus
the only relevant question is whether this appellant can  find  3  witnesses
of appropriate standing to say that she is who  she  says  she  is,  i.e.  a
person born in Eritrea with an Eritrean father.

53. We think  it  reasonably  likely  the  appellant  can  find  three  such
witnesses. We  appreciate  that  she  has  been  to  the  Eritrean  Embassy,
although it may or may not  be  significant  that  her  visit  predates  the
letter of 29 August already cited.  We also appreciate that it  appears  she
was asked a number of questions relating to whether she had a referendum  ID
card and whether she paid 2% of her earnings  to  the  Eritrean  Authorities
and whether  she  had  paid  �500  toward  border  defence  costs.  We  also
appreciate that she was told her application  could  not  succeed.  However,
there is nothing in these statements of truth to suggest that the  appellant
was told that possession of a referendum ID card and payment of  2%  of  her
earnings or �500 towards border defence costs were  necessary  preconditions
to be eligible for Eritrean nationality. And the reason she was refused  was
stated as being that she could not provide evidence which can vouch for  her
Eritrean identity regardless of whether she can speak Tigrigna. Plainly,  in
our view, refusal in these terms was entirely consistent with  the  position
as set out in the Embassy`s 29th August 2002 letter.  Not having  identified
3  witnesses, her application had to fail.

54. However it does not follow that it was not reasonable likely  she  could
find three witnesses and then re-apply. Having to do so would not amount  to
any kind of "concrete obstacle" (to  use  Mrs  Cronin`s  chosen  phrase  for
expressing the test of what should count as excusing a  person  from  having
to diligently apply for and obtain nationality). Given  that  the  appellant
was born in Asmara in 1973 and lived there with her mother and family  until
1988 (when the family moved to Addis Ababa to join her father), we  consider
that there must be persons of standing who would know from direct  knowledge
who the appellant was and where she was born and who her father was. On  the
appellant`s own evidence, her father (said to be now  in  Eritrea)  and  her
remaining family (said to be last seen in Addis Ababa) are still  alive  and
so in a position to help locate witnesses. She says  she  has  lost  contact
with her family. We find that difficult to accept.  But  even  if  for  some
reason she has not made  or  had  contact,  it  should  not  be  practically
difficult to find 3 witnesses either by causing  inquiries  to  be  made  in
Asmara or making inquiries amongst the (sizeable) community  of  persons  in
the UK who were born and lived for some  time  in  Asmara.  The  appellant`s
father ran a supermarket in Addis Ababa, so that  would  mean  he  would  be
known to more people who had moved from Amhara to live in Addis  Ababa  than
if he had lived and worked in relative isolation.

55. Accordingly we  consider  that  the  appellant  should  be  assessed  as
someone who is a national of Eritrea.

56. The question then arises, has the appellant demonstrated that she  faces
a real risk of persecution or serious harm in Eritrea?


The returnability issue

57. In the case of Eritrea the appellant had never  resided  there.  If  she
was to be able to return there, it would have to be on the  basis  that  she
had been accepted by the  Eritrean  authorities  as  either  a  national  of
Eritrea or as entitled to some type of identity document conferring a  right
of entry or residence. Our understanding is that even if  a  person  is  not
accepted as a national of Eritrea or as entitled to  an  Eritrean  passport,
there are arrangements in place whereby different  types  of  identity  card
can be issued resulting in them being legally permitted to return.  However,
we do not need to go into this aspect of  returnability  on  the  particular
facts of this case.

58.  Although we  have  just  decided  that  the  appellant,  armed  with  3
witnesses, should not have  particular  difficulties  in  applying  for  and
obtaining Eritrean nationality,  we  shall  for  the  sake  of  completeness
address Mrs Cronin`s other submission that the  difficulties  the  appellant
would face in being accepted as Eritrean or as entitled to live  in  Eritrea
were factors going directly to establish  the  severity  of  the  harms  she
would face and so either on their own or in combination with  other  factors
were demonstrative that she would face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in
Eritrea.

59. Mr Buckley, by contrast, contended that  difficulties  in  admission  to
the country would in practice be irrelevant in  the  UK  context.  That  was
because of the Home Office policy  in  relation  to  the  return  of  failed
asylum seekers. This was  clearly  set  out  in  the  text  of  Mr  Jordan's
determination as follows:

      "In his submissions to me Mr Buckley submitted that the appellant  had
      to show a well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea and referred  me
      to paragraph 101 of the Handbook. He told me that  the  procedure  for
      the return of a person to the country of  their  nationality  was  the
      same for every country. Eritrea was no exception. The process required
      the appellant to be documented. The nature of the documentation varies
      and some countries, for example, use a EU  letter.  The  documentation
      requires the consent of the receiving country. If there is no  consent
      there can be no removal. If the appellant feared that he might not  be
      given a  right  of  entry  into  Eritrea  because  she  had  not  made
      contributions to Eritrea in the past or had  not  taken  part  in  the
      referendum, that might lead to her being refused entry  but  it  would
      not result in her being persecuted. If she is not admitted to  Eritrea
      on arrival, she will be returned to the United Kingdom and given leave
      to enter here. However, she would not simply  arrive  and  find  these
      consequences are visited upon her".

60. Assuming for the moment the appellant would  face  serious  difficulties
in obtaining Eritrean nationality or some type of right of  entry/residence,
what effect do they have on  the  issue  of  real  risk  under  the  Refugee
Convention and the Human Rights Convention?

61. Here we think the answer will differ depending on  which  Convention  is
in issue.

62. Whilst in  relation  to  the  asylum  grounds  of  appeal  Mr  Buckley`s
approach was also that taken  by  the  Tribunal  in  a  number  of  previous
decisions, most notably Sensitev (01/TH/1351)  and  whilst  it  is  also  an
approach followed  in  a  leading  New  Zealand  case,  Refugee  Appeal  No.
72635/01[1], we have concluded after  reflection  that  it  is  incompatible
with the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Saad, Diriye and Osorio   [2001]
EWCA Civ 2008 [2002] INLR 34. The judgment in that case clearly  holds  that
the existing appeal structure governing appeals against  refusal  of  asylum
entitles appellants to a decision in relation to  refugee  status.  In  each
case the decision facing the appellate authority is the hypothetical one  of
whether removal would be contrary to the  Convention  at  the  time  of  the
hearing - i.e. on the basis of the refugee status of the appellant  at  that
time. Accordingly, even if there are practical obstacles in the  form  of  a
refusal by the authorities of the receiving state to re-admit an  appellant,
the   appeal   on   asylum   grounds   nevertheless   requires   substantive
consideration on the hypothetical basis  of  whether  -  if  returned  -  an
appellant would face a real risk of persecution.

63. However, we cannot see that the same principle  applies  in  respect  of
human rights grounds of appeal. The decision appealed  against  is  one  and
the same but,  in  contrast  the  position  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
success in a human rights appeal does not in itself result in any status  at
international law,  nor  indeed  in  domestic  law.  Furthermore  Strasbourg
jurisprudence considers that practicalities in relation  to  return  are  of
central importance. If the threat of removal is not imminent then there  can
be no violation of  the  Convention:  see  Vijayanathan  and  Pushparajah  v
France (1993) 15 EHRR 62. Plainly if Home Office policy  is  either  not  to
remove or to return to the UK persons whom destination  countries  will  not
accept as entitled to return, there is no meaningful sense  in  which  there
can be said to be an imminent threat of  removal  in  the  case  of  persons
falling under this policy.

64. Accordingly, in relation to the asylum grounds of appeal we must  decide
on risk in Eritrea irrespective of whether we thought she would not  be  re-
admitted. But in relation to the human rights grounds of appeal,  the  issue
of whether there would be serious  obstacles  to  re-admission  must  remain
central to the question of whether there is a real risk of serious harm.

65. We have already concluded that there would be  no  serious  or  concrete
obstacles to the  appellant  being  accepted  back  by  Eritrea.  Given  our
assessment of what steps the appellant could be expected to take  to  obtain
Eritrean nationality, we do not think it is arguable that such  difficulties
would significantly add anything to the level of difficulties posed  overall
to the appellant by return to Eritrea.

66. In relation to risk otherwise upon return to Eritrea,  we  can  be  very
brief. That is because Mrs Cronin conceded in her 27 August 2002  submission
that the conclusion that the appellant did not face a real  risk  there  was
open to the adjudicator. That was a realistic concession:  in  view  of  the
judgment in Sepet and Bulbul  (now  upheld  by  the  House  of  Lords),  the
claimant`s conscientious objections to conscription in  that  country  could
afford no proper basis for a claim  to  refugee  status.  Nor  on  the  same
reasoning could it put her at risk of serious harm since having  to  perform
military service despite conscientious reasons for not  doing  so  does  not
offend against any basic human rights.

67. As regards the appellant`s other concerns, that she would be seen  as  a
traitor and be sent to prison, although  the  adjudicator  did  not  address
these as such, we can find no evidence that this is how the  authorities  in
Eritrea routinely treat those who had lived in Ethiopia  albeit  being  born
in Asmara with an Eritrean father.

68. Hence the appellant has not established that she faces a  real  risk  of
serious harm if returned to Eritrea.


Dual nationality of Ethiopia and Eritrea

69. In relation to the third possibility outlined earlier, we can  be  quite
brief because, even if the appellant is both  Eritrean  and  Ethiopian,  she
cannot qualify under Art 1A(2) unless she can show a real  risk  of  serious
harm in both countries. As we have seen, she has failed to show a real  risk
in either.


Statelessness

70. That brings us to the fourth possibility, that she is stateless.

71. Since we have already found the appellant is a national of at least  one
country (Eritrea), it is not strictly necessary for us  to  deal  with  this
other possibility. However, we would note, as  the  parties  conceded,  that
even if she were accepted as stateless, she  would  still  not  be  able  to
succeed in her appeal unless she could show that she faces a  real  risk  of
serious harm in her  country  of  former  habitual  residence:  see  Revenko
[2000] Imm AR 610. In this case there is no  dispute  that  her  country  of
former habitual residence is Ethiopia, she having moved to  Addis  Ababa  in
1988. However, we have already found that in Ethiopia she does  not  face  a
real risk of serious harm.

72. From our analysis of the only four  nationality  possibilities  in  this
case, it is evident that the appellant`s appeal on asylum and Art 3  grounds
must fail because she has not established a real risk  of  serious  harm  in
either Ethiopia or Eritrea.

73. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.

                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT


-----------------------
[1] The NZ  Refugee  Status  Appeals  Authority  reasoned  that  Article  33
dictates that focus be placed on the act of expulsion or return and  so  the
issue of whether return is possible is a matter of fact,  not  a  matter  of
law. According to this approach, if there is a denial of entry, there is  no
risk of persecution: such a risk cannot exist where entry is,  as  a  matter
of fact, not going to happen.



