
JK (Procedure Rules 2000:Rules 30 and 33(2)) Kenya [2003] UKIAT 00117

                                                       Promulgated; 30.10.03
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On:  14 August 2003
Prepared:  15 August 2003

                                   Before

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                               Mr P. Rogers JP



Between:


                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the claimant: Mr F. Hammond, counsel
For the Secretary of State:  Mr J. Wyatt, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Kenya.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals
   against the decision of an adjudicator, Mr D.  P.  Herbert,  following  a
   hearing on 1 November 2002 allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
   decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  both  his  asylum  and  his
   human rights claims.

2. The claimant was born on 3 August 1968.  He claims to  have  entered  the
   United Kingdom on 11 September 2001 using a British  Passport.   He  only
   claimed asylum after he was apprehended when police raided the  house  in
   which he was staying on 18 December 2001.

3. The Adjudicator allowed the appeal under paragraph 33 of the  Immigration
   and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000.  The material part of the rule
   is in these terms:

        "(1) Where a party has failed-


                a) to comply with a direction given under these
               Rules...
          and the appellate authority is satisfied in all the circumstances,
          including the extent of the failure and any reasons for  it,  that
          it is necessary to have regard to the overriding objective in rule
          30(2), the appellate  authority  may  dispose  of  the  appeal  in
          accordance with paragraph (2).
         (2)  The appellate authority may
                 (a)   in the case of failure by the Respondent,  allow  the
          appeal, without considering its merits."

4. The reference to paragraph 30(2) incorporates  the  overriding  objective
   into the adjudicator's consideration in dealing  with  a  decision  under
   rule 33, namely the  need  to  secure  the  just,  timely  and  effective
   disposal of appeals.  It is rule 30 that  also  contains  the  direction-
   making jurisdiction of the adjudicator.  In order to put  the  overriding
   objective into effect, the adjudicator may give directions  that  control
   the conduct of any appeal.  It is thus apparent that the circumstances in
   which an Adjudicator can give directions are limited.  It is the  conduct
   of the appeal that  is  the  focus  of  the  power  to  make  directions.
   Directions cannot stray into areas outside that power and, in particular,
   cannot require the Home Office to perform its  decision-making  function.
   In broad terms, it is for the Home Office to decide  how  it  shall  deal
   with the application.  Once, however, a decision is  made  dismissing  an
   applicant's claim and the applicant has appealed against  that  decision,
   the Adjudicator has power to give directions regulating  the  conduct  of
   the appeal but not the decision-making process on the part  of  the  Home
   Office that lies behind it.

5. The appeal came before an Adjudicator, Ms Pitt, on  21  June  2002.   The
   claimant argued  that  the  Home  Office  interview  conducted  with  the
   claimant at Oakington  on  22  December  2001  was  unfair,  hostile  and
   oppressive.  A formal complaint had been made against the conduct of  the
   interview and there was a note on the Home Office file to the effect that
   the refusal letter should not be issued before  the  complaint  had  been
   considered and dealt with.  A  consideration  of  the  file  revealed  no
   evidence to suggest that the  complaint  had  been  dealt  with  or  even
   considered, although the Reasons for Refusal letter was dated 28 December
   2001.  Ms Pitt considered that it was in  the  interests  of  justice  to
   adjourn the  appeal  to  enable  the  claimant  to  provide  evidence  in
   substitution for the interview record and for the Home Office to  provide
   evidence of the outcome of the complaint and the effect on  its  decision
   to refuse the claimant's application.

6. Pausing there, the Tribunal considers that the  adjudicator  should  have
   examined the relevance of a complaint about the conduct of an  interview.
   It is possible for the conduct of an interview to have no bearing on  the
   asylum appeal.  If the claimant accepts that all the answers he gave  are
   true and should form part of his  evidence  in  the  appeal,  it  may  be
   irrelevant that the interviewer conducted the appeal in an unprofessional
   manner.  That would not, of course, prevent the claimant  from  making  a
   complaint about the conduct of the interview.  Indeed, if an interview is
   conducted in an unfair, hostile and aggressive manner,  the  claimant  is
   entitled to raise this with the  Home  Office,  if  only  to  receive  an
   apology.  On the other hand, if the unprofessional  manner  in  which  an
   interview was conducted leads  to  the  interviewee  being  confused  and
   prevented from giving his account in an orderly  and  convincing  manner,
   this may result in the interview record being treated by  an  Adjudicator
   as unreliable.  At the very least, it may amount to  an  explanation  for
   inconsistencies either within the interview record itself or between  the
   interview record and a subsequent statement.

7. We asked Mr Hammond, who appeared on behalf of the claimant, whether  his
   client was alleging that anything within  the  record  of  interview  had
   failed to do justice to the account that he wished to give.   Mr  Hammond
   frankly conceded that he could not point to any question or answer in the
   interview  that  the  claimant  said   was   incorrect   or   misleading.
   Furthermore, we considered  the  contents  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
   letter.  It appears to us that there was nothing in  the  refusal  letter
   that suggests the Secretary of State  relied  on  the  answers  given  in
   interview as undermining his  claim.   Indeed,  in  paragraph  7  of  the
   letter, for example,  the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  the  claimant's
   evidence  as  derived  from  answers  given  in  interview.    In   these
   circumstances, it is difficult to see what relevance the complaint  about
   the conduct of the interview might have had  on  the  appeal  before  the
   Adjudicator.  The complaint did not undermine the record of the interview
   or  render  its  contents  unreliable.   Further,  the  right  to  adduce
   additional evidence to cover any additional matters was unaffected.

8. The adjudicator, nevertheless, gave a direction that the Home Office  was
   to determine the complaint and inform the IAA and  the  claimant  if  the
   complaint was upheld and  a  new  interview  was  to  be  required.   The
   Tribunal considers that the Adjudicator had no power  to  make  an  order
   requiring the Home Office to determine the  complaint  made  against  it.
   This was not a direction aimed at controlling the conduct of the  appeal.
   Furthermore, if the Home Office wished to conduct a new  interview,  that
   was a matter for the Home Office to decide.  Having said that, given that
   the  claimant  was  going  to  serve  additional  evidence,  including  a
   comprehensive statement setting out his  claim  in  detail,  it  was  not
   obvious why the Home Office would have wished to interview  the  claimant
   again.

9. In addition, the adjudicator directed that the  case  should  proceed  on
   the basis of  the  evidence  that  the  adjudicator  directed  should  be
   adduced.  We are satisfied that the adjudicator  was  fully  entitled  to
   make this direction.

10. The matter came before another adjudicator, Mr  Herbert,  on  28  August
   2002.  We fully sympathise with the position of  an  adjudicator  who  is
   faced with directions made by another  adjudicator  that  have  not  been
   complied with.  No adjudicator likes to see directions made on a previous
   occasion disregarded by either side.   The  Home  Office  had  failed  to
   comply  with  the  directions  made  and  had  not  complained  that  the
   Adjudicator was in  error  in  making  them.   Mr  Herbert  repeated  the
   directions made on 21 June 2002 and directed  that  if  the  Home  Office
   upheld the complaint, consideration should be given  to  offering  a  new
   interview and issuing a fresh decision.  For the reasons we have  already
   stated, we do not consider that the adjudicator had the power to  require
   the Home Office to give consideration to the manner in which  it  decides
   to conduct an application.  Importantly, the adjudicator  made  it  clear
   that  a  second  failure  to  comply  might  result  in  the  adjudicator
   exercising his powers under rule 33.

11. Mr Herbert sensibly reserved the appeal to  himself  and  directed  that
   the matter be re-listed before him on 1 November 2002.  On that  occasion
   the adjudicator only had before him a fax dated late the day  before  and
   enclosing a fax dated 30  October  2002  from  the  interviewing  officer
   denying impropriety.  She was unable to say what action  had  been  taken
   about the complaint.  It was clear to the adjudicator that little  effort
   had been made by the Home Office to comply with the directions  and  what
   effort had been taken had been carried out  too  late.   The  adjudicator
   fairly described the delay as inordinate and inexcusable.   In  paragraph
   22 of the determination, the adjudicator considered that the  failure  to
   comply went to the heart  of  whether  the  complainant  was  interviewed
   fairly.  He went further.  He decided  that  it  undermined  whether  the
   asylum  appeal  was  in  accordance  with  the  law.   In  reaching  that
   conclusion, he could not have had in mind the information before us  that
   the claimant did not seek to resile from any of the answers  he  gave  in
   interview.  Furthermore, he  does  not  appear  to  have  considered  the
   refusal letter in which the contents of the interview did  not  form  the
   basis for any adverse credibility finding.

12. By that stage, the adjudicator had before him the  claimant's  statement
   and was in a position to decide the appeal on its merits.  If, during the
   course  of  the  hearing,  the  Home   Office   had   sought   to   raise
   inconsistencies between the  interview  and  the  oral  evidence  of  the
   claimant,  it  would  have  been  open  to  the  adjudicator  to  prevent
   questioning on these matters because of the  unresolved  complaint  about
   the conduct of the interview.  In that way  the  adjudicator  could  have
   permitted the claimant to rely upon the interview if he chose  to  do  so
   but could have prevented the Home Office from  prejudicing  the  claimant
   unfairly.  This was very much the point made by the Vice President, Mr DJ
   Parkes,  when  he  granted  permission  to  appeal.   He  stated:   "[The
   claimant] would have been capable, it might be thought, of explaining  to
   the adjudicator, if it was so, why what was recorded at interview  should
   have been rejected as unreliable and his evidence  and  statement  before
   the adjudicator relied upon."  The claimant could  have  been  put  in  a
   position where he was protected against prejudicial conduct by  the  Home
   Office.

13. The adjudicator decided that,  in  order  for  directions  to  have  any
   effect whatsoever, compliance  must  fall  equally.   He  quite  properly
   decided  that  the  claimant's  representatives  had  complied  with  the
   directions and that the respondent had signally  failed  to  do  so.   He
   found that the failure went to  the  heart  of  the  claimant's  case,  a
   finding with which we disagree for the reasons we have given.  He allowed
   the appeal.  In doing so, he stated that he allowed the appeal both under
   the 1951 Geneva Convention and under the Human Rights Convention.

14.  In  Mohammad  Ahmed  (01/TH/3484),  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,
   chaired by Mr D. K. Allen, considered a case where  the  adjudicator  had
   directed the Home Office to serve a typed copy of  the  interview  record
   and to provide a written response to the Notice  of  Additional  Grounds.
   At the resumed hearing, the adjudicator allowed the  appeal  because  the
   Home Office had failed  to  comply  with  the  earlier  directions.   The
   Tribunal considered that the adjudicator had acted beyond his  powers  in
   making  the  directions.   Nevertheless,  it  also  considered  how   the
   adjudicator should have dealt with the appeal.  In paragraph  14  of  the
   determination, referring to the decision  of  Muhamed  (01/TH/1233),  the
   Tribunal  considered  that  in  order  to  effect  a  just  disposal,  an
   adjudicator had to be persuaded that the right course was to dismiss  the
   appeal by reason of the failure  rather  than  to  adopt  the  preferable
   course and decide  the  appeal  on  the  material  before  him.   In  the
   circumstances of that case, the Tribunal  decided  that  the  adjudicator
   should have proceeded to hear the appeal on its merits.

15. In our judgment, there are two  significant  factors  with  the  present
   appeal that are similar to the circumstances in Mohammad  Ahmed.   First,
   the directions made by both adjudicators were not  directed  towards  the
   proper conduct of the appeal and were made  without  authority.   It  was
   submitted to us that this was not  a  point  raised  in  the  grounds  of
   appeal, nor was it submitted to either adjudicator before the  directions
   were made.  In the Tribunal's view, whether the adjudicator has power  to
   make a direction goes to the issue of  whether  he  has  jurisdiction  to
   allow or dismiss an appeal under rule 33.  If the parties  do  not  raise
   whether the adjudicator was acting within his powers, it is open  to  the
   Tribunal  to  raise  the  issue  as  we  have  done   in   this   appeal.
   Consideration of rule 33, as the case law reveals, almost  always  begins
   with a consideration  of  the  power  of  the  adjudicator  to  make  the
   direction that is the subject of the failure.  We do  not  consider  that
   the parties could have  been  prejudiced  by  the  Tribunal  raising  the
   matter.

16. For this reason, we consider that the adjudicator was in  error  in  not
   proceeding with the appeal on its  merits.   The  answers  given  by  the
   claimant in the interview were not central to his case.  The claimant had
   had a full opportunity to present his case  in  statement  form  and  was
   available to give evidence, had he wanted to do so.  The Tribunal accepts
   that this course of action would have relieved the  Home  Office  of  any
   adverse consequences of its own failure to comply.  It might even be said
   to  represent  a  green  light  for  further  default.   Furthermore,  it
   contrasts with the results that often flow in the case of default by  the
   claimant, where default may well result in real prejudice to the  chances
   of a successful appeal.  Nevertheless, we  believe  that  an  adjudicator
   should be reluctant to decide asylum or human rights appeals on the basis
   of procedural default and, in accordance with the  overriding  objective,
   should normally seek to decide them on the merits.

17. In the course of argument, an issue  arose  as  to  the  effect  of  the
   adjudicator's decision to allow the appeal.  It appears that it  was  the
   adjudicator's understanding that by allowing the appeal, he was reversing
   the Secretary of State's refusal to grant  the  claimant  asylum  or  the
   right to remain under the ECHR.  This  conclusion  is  derived  from  the
   words of the determination that the appeal was  allowed  both  under  the
   1951 Geneva Convention and the 1950 Convention.  It is also apparent,  of
   course that, in the case of a default by the claimant, the application of
   rule 33(2) prevents the claimant pursuing his appeal on the  merits  with
   the effect that his appeal is bound to fail.  Barring an appeal, this  is
   a final determination of his claims under both Conventions.

18. In the present appeal, the Secretary of State made a decision  to  issue
   removal directions and the claimant's right of  appeal  arose  under  the
   provisions of section 69(5) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   It
   was submitted to us by Mr Wyatt that when rule 33(2) is  applied  against
   the Home Office, the effect is to quash the Secretary of State's decision
   to issue removal  directions  and  no  more.   The  result  is  that  the
   claimant, far from succeeding  in  his  appeal  by  establishing  refugee
   status, merely finds that he is placed back into the limbo of awaiting  a
   valid  decision  on  his  claim.   The  practical  consequences  of  this
   situation were  highlighted  in  the  present  case.   The  claimant  is,
   arguably, better off with the Secretary of State's appeal allowed and the
   case remitted for hearing afresh on the merits  than  if  the  appeal  is
   refused in which event the claimant does not have the benefit of a  valid
   decision or the right of appeal attached  to  it.   Mr  Hammond,  on  the
   claimant's behalf, indicated the claimant's preference was  to  have  his
   appeal decided sooner rather than later and, ironically, this  result  is
   more likely to happen if the appeal before us  is  allowed  and  remitted
   rather than refused.

19. On its face, this is a curious result but  it  is  consistent  with  the
   scheme of the legislation.  The right of appeal does not  attach  to  the
   decision to refuse asylum or  the  claim  under  the  Human  Rights  Act.
   Rather, it attaches to the associated immigration decision; in this case,
   the decision to issue removal directions.  In any  appeal,  the  claimant
   argues that the immigration decision is contrary to either or both of the
   1950 or 1951 Conventions.  If the appeal is decided on  the  merits  then
   the adjudicator  decides  the  asylum  and  human  rights  issues.   That
   decision will determine whether the claimant has a right to  remain.   By
   contrast, if the appeal results in a decision under  rule  33(2)  arising
   out of a default by the Secretary of State to comply with directions, the
   immigration decision is quashed and there is no decision on the asylum or
   human rights  issues.   The  process  then  begins  again  from  scratch.
   Compare this with an appeal that results in a decision under  rule  33(2)
   arising out of a default by the claimant to comply with  directions.   In
   this case, the appeal is refused without considering the merits  and  the
   claimant has exhausted his right to a consideration of the issues  raised
   in his claims.

20. The position that we have set out above is consistent with the  decision
   of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Tekle [2002] UKIAT  00704,  (Mr  J.
   Freeman, chairman).  The appeal concerned the decision of an  adjudicator
   to allow the appeal because of non-compliance with directions by the Home
   Office.  The Secretary of State's decision had been made under  paragraph
   340 of HC 395.  Although  critical  of  the  Home  Office,  the  Tribunal
   allowed the appeal  with  these  words,  found  in  paragraph  7  of  the
   determination:

        "The Home Office have a public responsibility to deal  with  asylum
        cases in good time:  they have now wasted a whole  year  over  this
        one, and we very much hope no such thing will  ever  happen  again.
        This appeal is [allowed]:  that does not of course  mean  that  the
        asylum-seeker is entitled to  asylum,  but  that  the  decision  to
        remove her is in effect quashed.  The Home Office will now we  hope
        offer her an interview very shortly, and may  then  reach  a  fresh
        decision on the merits of her case."

21. We agree with that analysis.  For the reasons that  we  have  given,  we
   consider that the adjudicator was in error  in  allowing  the  appeal  by
   reason of the failure of the  Home  Office  to  comply  with  directions.
   Accordingly, the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal  for  hearing
   afresh before an adjudicator in order to decide the appeal on its merits.
    We set aside all directions made in relation to the complaint about  the
   conduct of the  interview.   This  has  the  fortunate  result  that  the
   decision of the Secretary of State to issue removal  directions  has  not
   been quashed.  The claimant is, therefore,  entitled  to  appeal  against
   that decision and have his  appeal  heard,  on  its  merits,  before  the
   adjudicator.  Had the adjudicator reached the right decision in  allowing
   the appeal by reason  of  the  default  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
   complying with directions, the  effect  would  have  been  to  quash  the
   removal directions and to place the claimant in  the  position  where  no
   valid decision has  yet  been  made.   The  adjudicator  could  not  have
   required the Home Office to make a valid decision because he has no power
   to do so in his direction-making function.  The claimant would then  have
   been dependant upon the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision  that
   would trigger the claimant's right of appeal if his claims were  refused.
   When consideration is given to the exercise of the power under rule 33(2)
   to allow an appeal by reason of the default of the Secretary of State, an
   adjudicator should pay close regard  to  the  practical  consequences  of
   quashing the immigration decision.

Decision:  The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent
that the  claimant's  appeal  is  remitted  for  hearing  afresh  before  an
adjudicator other than Ms S.V. Pitt or Mr D.P. Herbert.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
16 August 2003


