
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |AS (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection - Kabul)         |
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00088                       |
|On  3 September 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|30/09/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J R A Fox (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr R Baines, JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of  Afghanistan,  has  been  given  leave  to
      appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  C  J  Hanson,
      dismissing his appeal against the refusal of the respondent  to  grant
      him asylum and his claim under the Human Rights Act.

2.    At the hearing the  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  G  Knight  of
      Counsel and the respondent by Mr L Parker of the Home Office.
3.    The  history  of  the  matter  is  that  the  appellant  was  born  in
      Afghanistan on 14 October 1974.  He claims to have entered the  United
      Kingdom concealed in the back of  a  lorry  on  28  October  2002  and
      claimed asylum on that day.  He was interviewed on  9  November  2002.
      He completed an SEF form on 8 November 2002 and he was interviewed  on
      16 November 2002  and  made  a  statement  which  was  recorded.   The
      respondent then considered his claim and  refused  the  same  and  the
      reasons for refusal are set out in a letter dated  17  December  2002.
      The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by an Adjudicator who,
      in a determination promulgated on 3 April 2003, dismissed  his  asylum
      and human rights claims.  The  appellant  appealed.   Leave  was  only
      given in relation to one ground of appeal which was as follows:

           "The Adjudicator has erred in  upholding  the  decision  of  the
           Secretary of State  refusing  the  appellant's  application  for
           asylum. The Adjudicator, in paragraph 50(f) stated that the CIPU
           report corroborates that fact that many ex-Taliban members  were
           detained by the Northern Alliance and that some still remain  in
           captivity, especially Pashtuns.  They have been subjected to ill-
           treatment in questioning and kept in unpleasant conditions.   It
           is therefore acknowledged that despite the CIPU report  outlined
           by him, he upheld the Home Office refusal and  illustrated  that
           within his determination he was not being impartial."

4.    The basis of his claim was that he feared  to  return  to  Afghanistan
      because he feared the current government  and  the  Northern  Alliance
      because of his political  opinions.   He  claimed  that  he  would  be
      arrested, detained, ill-treated or killed by the current government as
      he was suspected of involvement with the  Taliban.   He  also  claimed
      that he was a member of HIzb-i-Islami Hikmatyar  Party  and  that  his
      father was a commander in that party and fought  for  the  party.   He
      also claimed that his father was forced to join the Taliban and made a
      commander and fought for five years in Tora  Bora.   He  also  claimed
      that he had been arrested, detained and  ill-treated  by  the  current
      government in Afghanistan for three months and 10 days in 2002  as  he
      was the son of a commander in the Taliban.  He also claimed  that  the
      current government came to arrest his father but he escaped  and  that
      he would be arrested,  detained  and  ill-treated  or  killed  by  the
      current government because he was a member of Hizb-i-Islami.

5.    The Adjudicator found that the appellant was of  no  interest  to  the
      authorities and that he could be  returned  to  Afghanistan  and  that
      there will be no breach of his human rights if he was so returned.  He
      also found that there was a sufficiency of state protection  in  Kabul
      that he would be able to live in the city free  from  the  instability
      that exists in the other parts of the country.

6.    At the hearing the Tribunal  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Knight  who
      produced an Amnesty International report entitled "Afghanistan Out  of
      Sight Out of Mind the Fate of the Afghan Returnees".  He directed  our
      attention to the relevant parts of that report  which  challenged  the
      Adjudicator's findings and the findings made in  the  CIPU.   He  also
      directed our attention to the UNHCR  report  which  does  not  promote
      forced returns.  He submitted that it was unsafe to  return  a  former
      member of the Taliban to  Kabul,  that  the  remaining  areas  of  the
      country were unsafe.

7.    Mr Parker submitted to us that the Adjudicator had doubted  the  level
      of importance of the appellant in the Taliban.  He had  no  one  under
      his command.

8.    He also directed our attention to  the  relevant  parts  of  the  CIPU
      report which deal with the submissions that had been made on behalf of
      the appellant.

9.    He requested that we dismiss the appeal.

10.   We heard a further submission  from  Mr  Knight  in  relation  to  the
      Adjudicator's finding relating to the status of the appellant's father
      as a commander.  He submitted that the Adjudicator's approach had been
      flawed.  We heard a brief submission from Mr Parker by way of reply.

11.   In this appeal the issue before us is whether it  is  safe  to  return
      this particular appellant,  whether  he  can  internally  relocate  in
      Kabul.  The test is whether it is unduly harsh.  The burden  of  proof
      whether it is reasonably likely, namely that the test as  set  out  in
      Sivakumaran and the majority decision in Kajac.

12.   The Amnesty International report  was  prepared  in  April  2003.   It
      states  that  urban  areas,  including  Kabul,  cannot  be  considered
      sufficiently secure or stable to satisfy  requirements  of  return  in
      safety and dignity.  It goes on to record that in  recent  months  the
      capital city has been witness to armed attacks  on  the  International
      Security Assistance Force (ISAF) soldiers and compounds, bomb attacks,
      rocket attacks  and  attacks  against  international  non-governmental
      organisations, and NGO personnel.  On 7 June  2003  four  German  ISAF
      soldiers and one Afghan civilian were killed and  a  large  number  of
      people were injured when a car bomb exploded near a  bus  transporting
      ISAF soldiers to Kabul airport.  It  also  states  that  the  criminal
      justice system  remains  extremely  weak  and  unable  to  effectively
      protect basic human rights, particularly in areas outside Kabul.   The
      police  lack  professional  skills  and  are  often  unable  to   work
      effectively due to the shortage of  resources  and  local  control  of
      armed groups.

13.   It does record the UNHCR  view;  it  promotes  voluntary  repatriation
      when a careful assessment of the situation shows that  the  conditions
      of safety and dignity can be met.  In other  words,  when  it  appears
      that objectively it is safe for most refugees to return and that  such
      returns have good prospects of being durable.

14.   At paragraph 7.21 the report states that it believes that  Afghanistan
      is not a country which has crossed over into a post-conflict situation
      and therefore is one to which most refugee and IDP returns  should  be
      considered unsustainable.

15.   The report later records that the security  situation  in  Afghanistan
      has steadily deteriorated in 2003 and gives examples.

16.   It goes on to state that the insecurity is as prevalent in  the  urban
      centres of Afghanistan as it is in the  countryside  as  the  pace  of
      reconstruction in Afghanistan slows and the living conditions of  most
      ordinary Afghans fail to improve, many returning to  extremist  forces
      such a revitalised Taliban now active in the south east  and  east  to
      express their disappointment in the  present  administration  and  its
      foreign backers.

17.   In particular states at paragraph 7.24:

           "While Kabul has achieved some measure of security in  the  last
           few months relative to the rest of the country, there are  still
           areas of the city such as in western  Kabul  where  security  is
           precarious.   ISAF   comprising   4,800   soldiers   and   based
           exclusively in Kabul is to provide some measure of  security  to
           Kabul's inhabitants, but this is largely the result of the  ISAF
           effect, where the mere presence  of  international  soldiers  is
           sufficient to deter some crime and  lawlessness.   The  ISAF  is
           mandated to intervene on behalf of the government  and  to  help
           the government ensure law and order in Kabul."

      It points out that ISAF  is  not  a  peacekeeping  force  and  has  no
      mandate to intervene in relation to human rights violations without  a
      request from  the  government.   Consequently  police  harassment  and
      excessive  use  of   force   against   civilians,   violence   against
      unaccompanied and destitute women and petty crimes do not come  within
      the ISAF's remit.

18.   The respondent challenges that view.  In the CIPU, at paragraph  5.42,
      it records that ISAF reported in late April  2002  that  the  security
      situation in Kabul had improved  significantly  since  their  arrival.
      According to the ISAF ongoing statistical analysis, crime  rates  have
      decreased across the city by as much as 70%.  ISAF reported  that  the
      general population of Kabul welcomes the security and confidence  that
      ISAF brings, with some 89% of respondents saying that they  are  happy
      with the presence of the force.  There were a few low level  incidents
      involving ISAF patrols which ISAF associated with increased patrolling
      activity, especially in the hours of  darkness  in  the  more  lawless
      areas of the  city.   ISAF  will  continue  to  improve  the  security
      situation in these areas.   In  late  May  2002  further  evidence  of
      improvement in the security situation in  Kabul  was  provided,  night
      time curfew hours were reduced so that the curfew only ran  from  2300
      hours until 0400 in the morning.

19.   At paragraph 5.43 the Danish Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Kabul  in  May
      2002 reported that the security situation in Kabul was generally good,
      although in certain areas (particularly districts 5, 6 and 7) civilian
      safety was poor.  Crime in these areas was mainly directed against the
      wealthy.  Some politically  motivated  crime  was  also  reported  but
      thought to be in connection with the selection process  for  the  Loya
      Jirga still under way at the time of the visit.  The Director  of  the
      Danish Committee for Aid to Refugees (DACAAR) did  not  believe  there
      was any ethnically motivated violence in Kabul.  The Deputy  Chief  of
      Police in Kabul stated there were no security problems in  Kabul.   He
      attributed the crime rate to economic  problems.   In  September  2002
      during a Danish Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Afghanistan  most  sources
      stated that the presence of International Peacekeeping Troops in Kabul
      had the effect of ensuring good security in the capital.   UNAMA  also
      finds that the presence of ISAF in Kabul  has  improved  security  and
      limited  intimidation.   According  to  the  Cooperation   Centre   of
      Afghanistan the situation in Kabul is  generally  good,  there  is  no
      harassment or political arrests.

20.   At paragraph 5.45 the  security  situation  is  also  covered  in  the
      Secretary General to the UN Security Council's report  dated  11  July
      2002 (covering the period from 18 March 2002).  He  reported  that  in
      Kabul the ISAF has  continued  to  have  a  very  positive  impact  on
      security in conjunction with the  Afghan  police  and  other  domestic
      security forces.  However, security in Afghanistan remains a cause for
      concern.  In addition to actions by ex-Taliban  and  Al  Qa'ida  armed
      factions nominally support the bomb process continue to pose a  threat
      to the consolidation of peace and civil governments  in  the  country.
      Particularly in the  north, rivalry between  the  Jumbesh  and  Jamiat
      factions has prevented the  establishment  of  effective  security  in
      Masar City.  The Secretary General also reported  that  in  the  weeks
      prior to the report a number of armed attacks and robberies took place
      against international agencies.  At the time of his report no credible
      measures had been taken to address the security problems.

21.   At paragraph 6.56 it states  that  Pashtuns  are  the  largest  single
      ethnic group constituting some 38% of the population.  They are  Sunni
      Muslims living mainly in the east and south of the country adjacent to
      Pakistan.

22.   It also records that there is a long tradition of mobility  among  the
      Pashtuns who live in the north and west of the province.  It  goes  on
      to record that others were merchants or businessmen with interests  in
      Kabul, Kandahar and Jelalabad, Afghanistan and  Peshawar  in  Pakistan
      who move regularly between the two countries.

23.   In a carefully prepared determination, the Adjudicator found that  the
      appellant was a farmer in Afghanistan.  He last lived in the  Province
      of Nangahar, which is a province in which the city of Jelalabad is  to
      be found.

24.   As already stated, he claimed that he and his  father  were  suspected
      supporters of the Taliban and claimed  that  they  had  been  made  to
      support them by force.  He  stated  that  he  had  been  arrested  and
      detained for three months and 10 days by the Northern  Alliance  as  a
      result of their suspicions he had assisted the Taliban.

25.   He also claimed that after he had been released  and  he  was  at  his
      aunt's house when four pick-up trucks full of people came to the house
      to arrest his father.  The appellant claimed that his  father  escaped
      and that a neighbour advised the appellant that  the  people  who  had
      come to arrest his father were also asking for the appellant,  and  he
      left.  He moved to his uncle's house where he remained for 16 days.

26.   He also claims to be a member of Hezb-i-Islami Hikmatar in 1990.

27.   Other matters that the appellant was that his father was a commander.

28.   The appellant gave confusing evidence in relation  to  his  arrest  by
      the Northern Alliance and  the  claimed  arrest  of  his  father.   In
      evidence to the Adjudicator he said his father had never been arrested
      by the Northern Alliance.  He also  claimed  that  his  father  was  a
      famous  commander.   At  paragraph  50  of   the   determination   the
      Adjudicator makes his findings in  relation  to  claims  made  by  the
      appellant.  He did not accept  the  appellant's  contention  that  his
      father was a high profile commander.

29.   The Adjudicator quite properly found  that  he  would  not  have  been
      released from detention if he was of interest to the authorities.   He
      made a clear finding that the appellant was  of  no  interest  to  the
      authorities.  He found that the appellant's claim at its highest point
      was that he was a former Taliban member who is also a Pashtun.

30.   He then set out the evidence in relation to the  treatment  of  former
      Taliban members, recorded the releases that had occurred in Kabul.  He
      also recorded that Hamid Karzai, leader of the interim  administration
      has stated his intention to free all  prisoners  who  held  no  senior
      position and that Taliban rank and file would not  be  punished.   The
      Adjudicator finds that the claimant held no  senior  position  in  the
      Taliban and was at most a member of the rank and file.  He also  found
      that the appellant had not been persecuted because of  his  ethnicity.
      He made a clear finding of fact  after  reviewing  all  the  objective
      evidence in some detail.   The appellant was of  no  interest  to  the
      authorities and that he could be returned  to  Afghanistan  and  there
      would be no breach of his human rights claim.

31.   It is clear from the objective evidence set out in the  CIPU  applying
      the Horvath test, it would not be unduly harsh to return the appellant
      to Kabul, that there is a sufficiency of protection and  there  is  no
      error of law in relation to that finding made by the Adjudicator.

32.   Accordingly, applying the guidance given by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Oleed, as there is no error of law in the determination and nor can it
      be said to be perverse, that this appeal must fail.

33.   The appeal is therefore dismissed.




                                                                   J R A Fox
                                                              Vice President

