
Heard at Field House                    JA (Fresh Evidence - Psychiatric
Treatment) Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT 00165
On     27 November   2003
Written                   1                 December                    2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             08 December 2003
Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                 Mr A Smith






                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


This determination contains assessments of an  Adjudicator's  discretion  to
refuse an adjournment request to obtain medical evidence, of the  Tribunal's
discretion to accept fresh evidence, and of the  inter-relationship  of  the
recent decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal   in  N  and  Djali  concerning
freestanding health claims under Articles 3 and 8.

  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appeals, with  leave,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  G  M  Perry,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 20  November  2002  to
     issue removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr B Hawkin represented the Appellant. Ms  J  Bracken,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims that he is a Pashtun from Logar province. He never
     attended school because of the war situation in Afghanistan. Two of his
     brothers fought for the Hizb-I-Islami  party  and  one  was  killed  by
     General Nasurullah of Jamiat-I-Islami, which  is  now  a  part  of  the
     Northern Alliance. The Appellant was also a member of Hizb-I-Islami. In
     2000 the Appellant was taken to fight for  the  Taliban.  At  first  he
     refused and was kept in detention for about one month without  food  or
     water.  He was badly beaten.  He was then transported to the north  and
     was forced to fight for two months.  At the end of  October  2001,  the
     Appellant and one of his brothers were on the front line when  many  of
     his friends were killed in fighting, including the Appellant's brother.
     At the end  of  February  2002,  after  the  Taliban  had  surrendered,
     Nasurullah came to the family home and damaged it and called the family
     traitors.  The Appellant's father was  arrested.   The  Appellant  went
     into hiding with an uncle and subsequently fled from Afghanistan.

  4. The only issue on which  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was
     granted, is whether the Adjudicator erred in refusing  to  adjourn  the
     hearing part heard to obtain a medical report.  No medical  report  had
     in fact even been commissioned prior  to  the  hearing,  but  part  way
     through that hearing Mr  Hawkin  had  requested  that  the  hearing  be
     adjourned  to  enable  a  psychiatric  report  to  be   obtained.   The
     Adjudicator refused that request on the following basis.
           "Mr Hawkin did make an application during  the  hearing  for  an
           adjournment to enable such a report to be prepared.  I  rejected
           the application on the grounds that the  alleged  condition  had
           been referred to in the statement of Hassan  Ahmadzi   dated  17
           April 2003, sufficient time for a report to have  been  obtained
           or an application to adjourn to have  been  made  prior  to  the
           hearing [on 2 May 2003].

  5. A medical  report  by  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  Dr  N  Savia,  was
     commissioned soon after the hearing was over  and  is  now  before  the
     Tribunal.  Dr Savia states that the symptoms displayed by the Appellant
     are compatible with post-traumatic stress disorder.  He opines that the
     prognosis for his symptoms is generally poor for two reasons.  First he
     has a poor educational background  and  a  poor  understanding  of  the
     concept of psychological symptoms and it would  require  a  sympathetic
     councillor and interpreter to help him overcome his  past  experiences.
     He may also benefit from antidepressant therapy.   The  treatments  are
     available in the UK but it would take between 6 and  12  months  before
     his condition would improve.  The  doctor  states  that  there  are  no
     treatment options in Afghanistan, though he does not state how he draws
     that  conclusion,  especially  in  relation  to  the  availability   of
     antidepressant therapy in the form of medication.

  6. Mr Hawkin first spoke to a request  made  by  him  in  writing  a  week
     earlier that in the light of the Court of  Appeal  judgment  in  Razgar
     [2003] EWCA Civ 840 the Appellant wished additionally to rely  upon  an
     Article 8 claim on the basis of a combination of his private and family
     life with his  cousin  in  United  Kingdom,  coupled  with  his  health
     problems. The Tribunal noted however that  the  Adjudicator  had  dealt
     with and dismissed an Article 8 claim on the  basis  of  the  Appellant
     having shared a life with his cousin for the  relatively  short  period
     from May 2002, and there was no good reason given to us why this should
     be revisited and we rejected this request.   As  to  the  wider  Razgar
     point, this had been overtaken by more recent Court of Appeal decisions
     in N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 and Djali [2003] EWCA Civ  1371.  However  as
     the terms  of  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  related  to  the
     sustainability of the decision not to adjourn for a medical opinion, we
     decided that they inherently embraced the related but  separate  issues
     of whether we should consider the medical report for ourselves as fresh
     evidence  concerning  both  the  sustainability  of  the  Adjudicator's
     findings of fact, and whether  there  are  viable  freestanding  health
     related claims under both Article 3 and Article 8  that  had  not  been
     raised with the Adjudicator. So we agreed to hear submissions on  these
     issues

  7. The first issue therefore is  whether  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
     refuse the adjournment request. Paragraph 40  of  the  Immigration  and
     Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003  deals  with  the  question  of
     adjournment. The material parts are as follows.
           (1) Subject to any provision of these  Rules  or  of  any  other
           enactment, an  Adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  may  adjourn  the
           hearing of any appeal or application.
           (2) An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not adjourn the  hearing
           on the application of a party, unless satisfied that the  appeal
           or application cannot otherwise be justly determined
            (3) where a party applies for an adjournment of  a  hearing,  he
must
                 (b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary.

  8. As was made very clear by Denning LJ in Yates Settlement Trusts [1954]1
     All ER 619 an adjournment is at all times a judicial act and  is  prima
     facie entirely within the discretion of the person charged with  making
     the decision, and any superior court is accordingly slow to  interfere.
     In Maxwell v Keun [1928] 1 KB 645, it was emphasised  that  a  superior
     court would be very slow to interfere with the exercise of a discretion
     on an adjournment and very seldom does unless the result is  to  defeat
     the rights of a party altogether.

  9. In this appeal, the Adjudicator had a  general  discretion  under  Rule
     40(1) as to whether to adjourn, but it was  subject  to  the  mandatory
     limitation in  paragraph  40(2)  and  to  the  condition  described  in
     paragraph 40(3). The reason the Adjudicator gave for not adjourning was
     that there had been ample opportunity prior to the hearing to obtain  a
     medical report or  to  make  a  written  adjournment  request  and  the
     Appellant's representatives were alerted well  before  the  hearing  to
     evidence that suggested medical evidence might  be  relevant.  That  is
     plainly correct.  The Appellant came to the UK  in  May  2002  and  was
     interviewed in the following month. If, as Mr Hawkin alleged,  some  of
     the answers given at his asylum interview was  flawed  because  of  his
     mental state, then action should have been taken by  the  Appellant  or
     his representatives very much earlier. The  only  explanation  that  Mr
     Hawkin could offer for this lack of action prior  to  the  hearing  was
     that the Appellant's solicitors had not identified a need  for  such  a
     medical report.  With great respect, that is not  a  good  reason  when
     those same solicitors prepared for the proceedings a witness  statement
     by the Appellant's cousin that was signed some  two  weeks  before  the
     hearing and  raised  mental  health  issues.  Moreover,  as  the  Vice-
     President who granted  permission  to  appeal  noted,  the  Appellant's
     solicitors had filed a certificate prior to the hearing to  the  effect
     that they were in all respects ready to proceed. Additionally  we  note
     that the Adjudicator's decision not to adjourn did not prevent  a  just
     hearing of the appeal on its  merits  and  there  was  nothing  in  the
     Appellant's demeanour at the hearing to suggest that he could not  give
     oral evidence safely.

 10. We therefore conclude that the Adjudicator  was  properly  entitled  to
     refuse the adjournment request. Indeed we go further and conclude  that
     he was required to do so, because the appeal could be justly determined
     without an adjournment and because the  Appellant  had  shown  no  good
     reason why the hearing should be adjourned. There is therefore  nothing
     in the Appellant's appeal against this decision.

 11. We have then, for the reasons stated previously  gone  on  to  consider
     whether, having regard to our  duty  of  anxious  scrutiny,  we  should
     consider the medical report as fresh evidence, even  though  a  medical
     report could have been produced at the hearing and no good  reason  for
     not doing so has been offered.

 12. The Court of Appeal, has long accepted, in cases such as  Altun  on  26
     June 1998  and  Basnet  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1893,  that  in  appropriate
     circumstances (for example where  directions  have  not  been  complied
     with) the Tribunal has discretion to accept  or  refuse  to  admit  new
     evidence in  appropriate  circumstances.  This  is  also  reflected  in
     paragraph 48 of the 2003 Procedure Rules.  As  to  the  scope  of  that
     discretion, the Court of Appeal in Mekeledge [2003] EWCA Civ 1665,  has
     held that its comments in Oleed EWCA  Civ  1906  -  that  new  evidence
     relating to a  change  of  circumstances  in  the  Appellant's  country
     occurring after the date  of  an  otherwise  sustainable  Adjudicator's
     decision should not be admitted on appeal to the Tribunal to  challenge
     that decision, though it might form the basis of a  new  claim  -  were
     only applicable to the issue of whether an appeal  should  be  remitted
     for rehearing by the Tribunal. It did not  affect  the  application  of
     section 77(3) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, and  consequently
     the Tribunal must always assess an appeal before it in the  context  of
     the up-to-date objective material. As the Court of Appeal in  paragraph
     19 of SK EWCA Civ 841 has held that expert opinions are in effect  part
     of the objective material, it follows that  a  report  from  a  country
     expert in an appeal on which permission to appeal to the  Tribunal  has
     been granted, would be admissible as part of the  up-to-date  objective
     material. However we would observe that if such a report merely  offers
     a  different  opinion  from  that  reached   by   an   Adjudicator   on
     substantially the same objective  evidence,  it  does  not  necessarily
     follow that the report in itself would justify the grant of  permission
     to appeal.

 13. The Tribunal's general practice is to accept that relevant and material
     evidence relating to the situation at the  time  of  the  Adjudicator's
     decision that was not, for a credible and valid  reason,  available  at
     the time of the hearing, should  be  admitted  as  fresh  evidence  and
     considered by the Tribunal. There is however substantial space  between
     these two positions and in assessing what is appropriate in  each  case
     we must be mindful of our duty of anxious scrutiny, which the Court  of
     Appeal has frequently stressed.

 14. But what does that mean in practice? We consider that if an  appellant,
     or his advisers on his behalf, reach a judgement  for  example  not  to
     call the appellant to give  oral  evidence  himself,  or  not  to  call
     otherwise available corroborative witnesses on his behalf,  or  not  to
     seek available  corroborative  medical  or  documentary  evidence,  and
     proceed to a hearing on that basis, then that appellant cannot,  having
     lost his appeal, change his mind and seek another hearing on the  basis
     that that evidence if called might have produced  a  different  result.
     That would be an abuse of process. A more difficult  assessment  arises
     when  there  is  no  premeditated  omission,   but   due   perhaps   to
     carelessness, inadvertence or neglect, in which the Appellant played no
     part, evidence that might be relevant and material is  not  sought.  In
     these circumstances, each case must inevitably be assessed on  its  own
     merits. We consider that the potential materiality and impact  of  that
     evidence, and whether it has at least an arguable prospect of  success,
     should be taken into account in deciding whether to admit it.

 15. In  this  appeal,  for  the  reasons  we  describe  later  that  relate
     essentially to authority established in the Court of Appeal authorities
     in N and Djali, we do not consider that the medical report  could  even
     arguably sustain viable freestanding Articles 3  or  8  health  related
     claims on the established facts. We asked Mr Hawkin to explain  how  he
     could address the principles raised in these two cases, but the most he
     could offer was an invitation to us to  consider  the  facts  on  their
     merits and to have regard  to  the  ECHR  decision  in  Re  D  and  the
     relevance of differential impact in terms of available treatment in the
     UK and Afghanistan. That plainly does not satisfy the requirements of N
     and Djali, and we would not therefore  have  admitted  this  report  as
     fresh evidence, if this were the sole basis on which it  was  advanced.
     However Mr Hawkin also submitted that the medical report undermined the
     Adjudicator's adverse credibility finding. We  could  not  assess  this
     submission without hearing full submissions and so, in pursuance of our
     duty of anxious scrutiny, we decided to admit  the  medical  report  as
     fresh evidence and to consider and decide all the issues raised  by  Mr
     Hawkin arising from it.

 16. We have therefore assessed the two distinct issues raised by Mr  Hawkin
     of whether the medical evidence could make any material  difference  to
     the Adjudicator's findings of fact and particularly his limited adverse
     credibility finding, and whether the  medical  evidence  could  sustain
     viable Articles 3 and 8 claims on medical grounds.

 17. We should mention at this point that the report by Dr Savia,  which  we
     summarised above, was written on 15 May 2003 and is now over six months
     old.  The Tribunal has repeatedly  stressed  the  need  for  up-to-date
     medical evidence.  This is especially true in this appeal as  Dr  Savia
     indicated that the Appellant's symptoms might  improve  with  treatment
     from after six months. However, the only recent medical evidence  is  a
     rather brief and unsatisfactory letter dated 25 November 2003 from  the
     Appellant's GP, to whom he was referred after Dr Savia made his report.
     The GP refers back, it would appear, to the report by Dr  Savia  though
     that is not clear, and confirms that the Appellant  has  severe  mental
     health issues, which are presently being addressed. She does not say in
     what way they are being addressed, other than by stating  that  he  has
     been prescribed Cicalopram, which is an antidepressant medication,  and
     this should be reviewed monthly.  Thus, six months on from  Dr  Savia's
     report and recommendations, there is no medical evidence to the  effect
     that the Appellant is receiving anything more in the way  of  treatment
     in the UK than antidepressant medication.

 18. Mr Hawkin first  argued  that  the  medical  report  reflected  on  the
     Adjudicator's  credibility  findings,  which  were  undermined  by  it.
     However when we assessed  the  detail  of  the  determination  and  the
     medical report and the Representatives' submissions, we  could  see  no
     viable basis for this proposition. We consider that Mr Hawkin initially
     promised much more than he was in the event able to deliver.

 19. The medical report did not suggest that the  Appellant  was  unable  to
     give  oral  evidence.  The  Adjudicator  noted  the  evidence  of   the
     Appellant's cousin, who gave oral evidence concerning  the  Appellant's
     mental state and low  IQ.  Although  he  rightly  did  not  regard  the
     cousin's evidence  as  an  acceptable  alternative  to  proper  medical
     evidence, he plainly took  what  was  said  into  account,  because  in
     paragraph 26 of the determination he expressly disregarded  credibility
     points raised against the Appellant relating to apparent  confusion  by
     him over his mode of travel to the UK and the date on which the killing
     of his brother occurred.

 20. We therefore sought to ascertain in what other way the medical evidence
     might  impinge  upon  the  Adjudicator's  findings.   The   Adjudicator
     certainly had regard to what the Appellant said in his asylum interview
     and did not accept the Appellant's claim that  he  was  either  ill  or
     confused or not  capable  of  understanding  the  questions  put.   The
     Adjudicator sensibly pointed out that he  had  observed  the  Appellant
     giving oral evidence at the hearing and  found  that  he  was  able  to
     answer questions properly. When we asked Mr Hawkin to refer us  to  any
     matter in the  asylum  interview  record  suggesting  confusion  or  an
     inaccurate answer based on confusion, the best he was able to do was to
     point us to question 29, where the Appellant asked for a question to be
     repeated because he had lost "his brain," by  which  he  plainly  meant
     that he had lost his thread of thought. That however is no evidence  of
     confusion undermining the viability of the answers he gave.  Mr  Hawkin
     could refer us to no other specific  answer  in  the  asylum  interview
     record to support his submission.

 21. We then looked at the Adjudicator's credibility findings to see whether
     there was something in this that might be  undermined  by  the  medical
     evidence. We could find nothing.  The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the
     Appellant's brothers were actively involved in fighting for the Hizb-I-
     Islami party and accepted the Appellant's evidence of their  activities
     during the war between  the  Taliban  and  the  Northern  Alliance.  He
     accepted that Commander Nasurullah did  kill  one  of  the  Appellant's
     brothers and as we have said disregarded  confusion  by  the  Appellant
     over  the  date  on  which  this  occurred.  He  accepted  clearly   by
     implication that the Appellant was himself a member  of  Hizb-I-Islami,
     though not as active or prominent as his two brothers. This is  a  fair
     reflection of the Appellant's own witness statement and if anything  is
     supported by  the  medical  report  which  identifies  the  Appellant's
     limitations, and by his cousin's evidence that the Appellant has a  low
     IQ. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant is of Pashtun ethnicity
     and also that he was conscripted into fighting for the Taliban and  was
     ill-treated by them.

 22. The only adverse credibility findings made by the Adjudicator were that
     he did not accept that the Appellant's  home  was  visited  by  General
     Nasurullah, or that it was ransacked and his father arrested,  or  that
     the Northern Alliance had a continuing and unabated adverse interest in
     the Appellant.  The reasons for this conclusion, which are set  out  in
     paragraph 30, were not based upon any inconsistency in the  Appellant's
     evidence,  but  upon  the  plausibility  of  the  account,  given   the
     Appellant's relatively low profile as compared to his brothers, and  in
     the context of the objective evidence. These conclusions were  properly
     open to him for the reasons stated and we could not see how the medical
     evidence impinged on them in any material sense.

 23. We therefore asked Mr Hawkin on several occasions to  identify  for  us
     any specific example of how the  medical  evidence  impinged  adversely
     upon the Adjudicator's findings.  He could not  identify  any  specific
     example, but  instead  offered  the  generalisation  that  because  the
     Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's claim that he was confused or  ill
     or not capable of understanding the asylum  interview  questions,  this
     must have coloured and rendered  unsound  all  his  findings  of  fact.
     Having analysed the findings for ourselves as described  above,  we  do
     not agree. We conclude that there is nothing in the  medical  evidence,
     which undermines the Adjudicator's findings of fact, which are properly
     sustainable and we reject this limb of attack  upon  the  Adjudicator's
     determination.

 24.  We  then  considered  for  ourselves  whether  the  medical   evidence
     established a freestanding claim on medical grounds under Articles 3 or
     8. As we have said, this issue was  obviously  not  considered  by  the
     Adjudicator because the relevant medical evidence upon which Mr  Hawkin
     now advances this claim was not put before him. Nor we must add had the
     cases of N and Djali then been decided.

 25. In N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369, the Court of  Appeal  undertook  a  thorough
     review of the state of the law in relation to Article  3  claims  based
     upon ill health. That particular appeal related  to  HIV/AIDS  but  the
     principles established were intended to be of  wider  application.  The
     Court carefully assessed the existing jurisprudence from  the  European
     Court of  Human  Rights  (including  D  v  UK)  and  its  own  previous
     decisions. Its material conclusions can be summarised as follows.
               38. I am bound to declare, with  great  respect,  that  as  a
               matter of principle I have much difficulty with the  case  of
               D. The contrast between the relative well-being  accorded  in
               a signatory state to a very sick  person  who  for  a  while,
               even a long while, is accommodated there, and the  scarcities
               and  grave  hardships  which  (without   any   violation   of
               international law) he drew would face  if  he  were  returned
               home, is to my mind - even if the contrast is  very  great  -
               an extremely fragile basis upon which to erect a  legal  duty
               upon the state to confirm or extend the right  to  remain  in
               its territory, a duty unsupported by any decision  or  policy
               adopted by the democratic arm, executive  or  legislature  of
               the state's government. The elaboration  of  the  immigration
               policy,  with  all  that  implies  for  the  constituency  of
               persons for whom within its territory a civilised state  will
               undertake many social  obligations,  is  a  paradigm  of  the
               responsibility   of   elected   government.    One    readily
               understands that such a responsibility may be qualified by  a
               supervening legal  obligation  arising  under  ECHR  where  a
               person in question claims to be  protected  from  torture  or
               other mistreatment in his home country in  violation  of  the
               Article 3 standards, especially if it would be meted  out  to
               him at the hands of the state.  But a claim to  be  protected
               from the harsh effects of a want of  resources,  albeit  made
               harsher by its contrast  with  facilities  available  in  the
               host country, is to my mind  is  something  else  altogether.
               The  idea  of  the  "living  instrument",  which  is  a  well
               accepted  characterisation  of  the  ECHR  (and  some   other
               international texts dealing with rights) no doubt  gives  the
               Convention  a  necessary  elastic  quality,   so   that   its
               application is never too  distant  from  the  spirit  of  the
               times.  I have difficulty in seeing that  it  should  stretch
               so far  as  to  impose  on  the  signatory  states  forms  of
               obligation   wholly   different   in   kind   from   anything
               contemplated in the scope of their agreement.
               39. In the circumstances it is with respect no surprise  that
               (as it appears to me) since  D  was  decided  the  Strasbourg
               Court has effectively being at pains,  in  decisions  I  have
               cited, to avoid any extension of the exceptional category  of
               case, which D represents.
               40. But I am no less clear that D  should  be  very  strictly
               confined. I do not say that its confinement  is  to  deathbed
               cases; that would be a coarse rule and an unwise  one:  there
               may be other instances, which press with  equal  force.  That
               said, in light of  the  considerations  I  have  described  I
               would hold that  the  application  of  Article  3  where  the
               complaint  in  essence  is  of  want  of  resources  in   the
               Applicant's home  country  (in  contrast  to  what  has  been
               available to him in the  country  from  which  he  is  to  be
               removed) is only justified where the humanitarian  appeal  of
               the case is so powerful that it  could  not  been  reasonably
               resisted by the authorities of a civilised state.
               42. I should acknowledge that there exists a  line  of  cases
               concerning Article 8 rights said to arise whether  person  in
               question claims that his mental health  will  be  compromised
               or damaged if he is returned by the Secretary of  State.  The
               position has recently been examined by this Court  in  Razgar
               and there are also material passages  in  Bensaid.   We  have
               not heard extended argument upon this appeal as to the  scope
               of Article 8 in such circumstances.  While I  apprehend  with
               respect that nothing I have said here  is  inconsistent  with
               the Court's reasoning in Razgar, it may be that the  position
               regarding Article 8 will want some  further  scrutiny  if  my
               view of this case were to prevail.

 26. Turning now to the Article 8 claim, the  Court  of  Appeal,  in  Razgar
     [2003] EWCA Civ 840,  assessed  the  application  of  its  decision  on
     territoriality in Ullah to other Articles. It concluded
               22. We suggest that, in order to determine whether an Article
               8 claim is capable of being  engaged  in  the  light  of  the
               territoriality principle, the claim should be  considered  in
               the following way.  First, the claimant's case in relation to
               his private life in the deporting state should  be  examined.
               In a case where the essence of the claim  is  that  expulsion
               will interfere with his private life by  harming  his  mental
               health, this will include consideration of what he says about
               his mental health in the deporting country, the treatment  he
               receives there and any relevant support that he says he  that
               he enjoys there. Secondly, it will be necessary  to  look  at
               what he says he is likely to happen to his mental  health  in
               the receiving  country,  what  treatment  he  can  expect  to
               receive there, and what support he can expect to enjoy.   The
               third step is to determine whether, on the  claimant's  case,
               serious  harm  to  his  mental  health  will  be  caused   or
               materially contributed  to  by  the  difference  between  the
               treatment and support that he is enjoying  in  the  deporting
               country and that which  will  be  available  to  him  in  the
               receiving country.  If so, then the territoriality  principle
               is not infringed, and the claim is capable of being engaged.
              23. The degree of harm must be sufficiently serious to engage
              Article 8.  There must be a sufficiently  adverse  effect  on
              physical and mental integrity, and not merely on health.
              25. Even if a removal case engages the Article 8  (1),  there
              is Article 8 (2) to consider.  As already noted, at paragraph
              48 of the judgment in Bensaid, the ECHR said that even if the
              dislocation caused to the Applicant by removal was considered
              by itself  as  affecting  the  claimant's  private  life  the
              interference was  justified  under  Article  8  (2).....   In
              Ullah, it was said that, where the European  Court  of  Human
              Rights finds that removal engages the Convention,  the  Court
              will "often treat the right to  control  immigration  as  one
              that outweighs, or trumps, the Convention right."
              41. When it comes to deciding how much weight to give to  the
              policy of maintaining an effective  immigration  policy,  the
              Adjudicator should pay very careful deference to the view  of
              the Secretary of State as to the  importance  of  maintaining
              such a policy.  There is  obviously  a  conceptual  deference
              between (a) deciding whether the decision of the Secretary of
              State was within the range of reasonable responses,  and  (b)
              deciding  whether  the  decision  was  proportionate  (paying
              deference to the Secretary of State so far as  is  possible).
              We hold that the correct approach is (a) in all cases  except
              where this is impossible because the  factual  basis  of  the
              decision of the Secretary of  State  has  been  substantially
              undermined by the findings of the Adjudicator.  Where (a)  is
              impossible, then the correct approach is (b).  But  we  doubt
              whether in practice the application  of  the  two  approaches
              will often lead to different outcomes."

 27. The Court of Appeal in Djali EWCA Civ 1371, having reviewed  the  cases
     of M and Razgar, assessed the inter-relationship between the Article  3
     claims [relating to physical illness] and Article 8 claims [relating to
     mental ill health] cases based upon  the  unavailability  of  forms  of
     treatment and support in the home country. Simon Brown LJ held
              "There appears to be one line of cases with regard to  Article
              3 claims and another with regard to Article 8. For my  part  I
              have some difficulty in understanding why a different and less
              stringent approach should be taken to claims based  on  mental
              health than say  claims  by  those  suffering  AIDS  or  other
              physical ailments."
              I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgments  to
              be handed down today in N, the case of an AIDS sufferer.  That
              case and others like it  fall  for  consideration  only  under
              Article 3 and will  succeed  only  in  the  most  extreme  and
              exceptional circumstances.  It would seem to be very odd if  a
              markedly more  generous  approach  were  brought  to  bear  in
              respect of those suffering mentally rather than physically.  I
              would echo what Laws LJ says in paragraph 42 of his  judgement
              in N as to possible need for further scrutiny, beyond that  in
              Razgar, of the true position regarding Article 8.

 28. We have applied these principles to the appeal before us. We accept the
     objective evidence that mental health care facilities  in  Afghanistan,
     and particularly in-patient facilities and supplies of free medication,
     are very limited.  However it appears that medication is available  for
     purchase by individuals who need it. Whether the precise antidepressant
     medication being taken by the Appellant in the UK will be available  in
     Afghanistan we do not know, but there are alternatives.  We  also  note
     that antidepressant medication is the only treatment of  the  Appellant
     is receiving in the UK and there is no suggestion in the medical report
     that the Appellant requires in-patient treatment. Thus whilst there  is
     a considerable disparity between the mental health facilities available
     in the UK and Afghanistan, there would not appear to be much difference
     between the actual treatment the Appellant is presently  receiving  her
     and  what  would  be  available  on  return  to  Afghanistan.   However
     differential treatment is not the applicable test described in N.

 29. We accept Ms Bracken's submission that there is nothing exceptional  in
     this appeal. We do not consider that the evidence establishes  anything
     that even approaches the test described in N, to the  effect  that  the
     application of Article 3 where the complaint in essence is of  want  of
     resources in the Appellant's home country (in contrast to what has been
     available to him in the country from which he is to be removed) is only
     justified where the humanitarian appeal of the case is so powerful that
     it could not been reasonably resisted by the authorities of a civilised
     state. We therefore reject the Article 3 claim.

 30. We consider that the observations of the Court of Appeal in Djali  mean
     that a claim on medical grounds relating to  the  disparity  of  mental
     health care treatment between the Appellant's home country and the  UK,
     cannot  succeed  under  Article  8,   due   to   the   requirement   of
     proportionality, if for success it requires a less  stringent  approach
     than is required than under Article 3.  The  mechanism  by  which  this
     desirable consistency can be achieved derives from the  view  expressed
     in Razgar in  relation  to  proportionality  that  "when  it  comes  to
     deciding how much weight to  give  to  the  policy  of  maintaining  an
     effective immigration policy, the Adjudicator should pay  very  careful
     deference to the view of the Secretary of State as to the importance of
     maintaining such a policy".  We therefore reject also  the  Appellant's
     appeal under Article 8.

 31. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.





                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
