
KH


|Heard at Field House       |        |AR (Visaginas               |
|                           |        |Church)Lithuania CG [2003]  |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00024                 |
|Date:   18 June 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|09.07.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Miss K Eshun                                                      |
|Dr H H Storey                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appeals  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  J
      Nicholson) who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to issue removal directions to Lithuania on 21 May
      2001.

2.    The appellant was represented by Ms F Webber of Counsel instructed  by
      A S Law, solicitors.  The Secretary of State was represented by  Mr  S
      Wilken, of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.

3.    The appellant is one of over a hundred members of the Church of  Jesus
      Christ of Visaginas, Lithuania, who are in the  United  Kingdom.   The
      congregation arrived in this country in a number of  small  groups  in
      2000.  The Adjudicator heard this appeal together  with  a  number  of
      others.  All were rejected. Permission to appeal was granted  in  this
      case but  refused  in  others.   There  are,  we  understand,  pending
      applications for judicial review  of  the  refusal  of  permission  to
      appeal to the Tribunal outstanding.  Although we  are  only  concerned
      with the appeal before us, it was agreed by Counsel that the  decision
      bound all the appellants who are clients of A S Law and also bound the
      Home Office.

4.    The Church of Jesus Christ is a small  Protestant  Evangelical  Church
      founded in Lithuania in 1993 by Pastor Teimuraz  Edzhibiya.   He  also
      founded a church in Latvia where he had applied for Latvian  residence
      on the basis of his marriage to a Latvian citizen.   That  application
      was refused and when  he  was  deported  he  and  his  wife  moved  to
      Visaginas.  Unfortunately in his absence the  church  in  Latvia  fell
      into decline and it closed in 1994 - a circumstance on which Ms Webber
      places reliance.  It is said that the presence of  the  Pastor  is  of
      extreme importance for the survival of the church.

5.    Apart from these two churches it is also right  to  mention  that  the
      appellant had founded a Pentecostal Church in  Georgia  in  1989-1990.
      He visited that church approximately  every  eighteen  months  to  two
      years staying for periods of about two months while he was running the
      church in Lithuania.

6.    During the periods of his absence the church  in  Lithuania  continued
      to function with services conducted by the Deacon.  In 1999 the Pastor
      was refused re-entry to Lithuania.  He went to Latvia for some  months
      and the congregation had to meet in a forest on the border between the
      two countries.  Eventually virtually the whole congregation  travelled
      to Poland and sought advice on resettlement in the UK, Canada and  the
      USA.  Poland was not considered suitable as  it  was  a  predominantly
      Roman Catholic  country.   An  application  was  made  in  Sweden  and
      rejected.  An application in Germany was also refused.  It proved  not
      economically practical to travel either  to  the  USA  or  Canada  and
      eventually the Pastor came to the United Kingdom at approximately  the
      same time as the appellant in 2000.

7.    The congregation is split into two groups in the United Kingdom.   The
      appellant before us and the other appellants who are clients  of  A  S
      Law live in Liverpool where the Pastor lives also.  Another  group  is
      based in the north east  where  the  Deacon  lives.   The  Adjudicator
      recorded that the Pastor saw  members  when  he  could  and  tapes  of
      services in Liverpool were sent to the group based in Newcastle.

8.    The Pastor applied for asylum in his own right  but  this  application
      was refused by an Adjudicator on 7 March  2002.   His  appeal  remains
      outstanding, we understand, before the Tribunal.  It was  and  remains
      the position that the congregation would leave the United  Kingdom  if
      the Pastor were to be deported.  They would not wish to remain in this
      country without him and would use their best endeavours  to  join  him
      wherever he went - see paragraph 14(xiii) of the  determination.   The
      Adjudicator set out his factual analysis as follows in paragraph 16 of
      the determination:

      "16.  My analysis of the evidence before me is as follows:


           (i)   I accept that pastor Edzhibiya  originates  from  Georgia;
                 that he founded  a  church  in  Djavare;  that  he  studied
                 theology from 1991 to 1992 in Latvia; that he  subsequently
                 founded  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Visaginas   in
                 Lithuania; and that after he was deported  from  Latvia  he
                 lived in Lithuania from  1993  to  1999.   I  accept  that,
                 during that time, the Church of Jesus Christ  of  Visaginas
                 expanded to about 125 members.  The evidence indicates that
                 Pastor Edzhibiya periodically went back to Georgia to visit
                 the Church of Djavare and in his absence  services  at  the
                 Church of Jesus Christ of  Visaginas  continued  under  the
                 auspices of the Deacon.  The same applied  after  September
                 1999 when the pastor was refused re-entry to Lithuania.


           (ii)  There is some question as to  what  the  Deacon  could  or
                 could not do in relation to the church.   The  evidence  of
                 Pastor Edzhibiya in June 2000 indicates that, in  practice,
                 he led prayers and gave sermons.  It appears that he  could
                 have been authorised by Pastor  Edzhibiya  to  marry,  bury
                 people or baptise them but there is  no  evidence  that  he
                 actually carried out these functions in practice. I  accept
                 that he did not perform Holy  Communion,  although  in  the
                 pastor's own words  'he  could  have  done  if  he  wished'
                 because the pastor 'let him do everything'.  I bear in mind
                 that, according to the  church's  charter,  the  Deacon  is
                 required to be 'full of the spirit and wisdom; honoured  by
                 other people; sincere and conscientious.' He  is  described
                 in that charter as a servant of the church whose job it  is
                 to help the pastor, to serve the needs of  church  members,
                 to teach the church members the truth of God  and  to  look
                 after the economic activities  of  the  church.   I  accept
                 that, in practice, the pastor does not perceive the  Deacon
                 to be a holy man 'touched by God' or a  suitable  successor
                 and I accept the evidence  of  the  congregation  that  the
                 Deacon's services are not particularly inspirational  -  at
                 least in relative terms when  compared  with  the  services
                 conducted by the pastor  himself.   I  accept  that  church
                 services held by the Deacon in the absence  of  the  pastor
                 are regarded as of "secondary value" by the congregation.


           (iii) I accept that the church in Visaginas  was  criticised  by
                 the press and TV. I do so because there are translations of
                 various TV programmes and documents into English which bear
                 this out. In particular,  there  appears  to  have  been  a
                 concern locally  that  a  number  of  church  members  were
                 employed at a nuclear reactor and, (as the IAT said in  the
                 cases of  Balickij  and  Litvinova)  that  'they  would  be
                 persuaded to  wreak  havoc.   A  charismatic  leader  whose
                 dictates are  followed  to  the  letter  could  cause  much
                 trouble particularly when the church is  fundamentalist  in
                 nature and expresses belief in hell and damnation  and  the
                 eschatological passages in the bible.'


           (iv)  I accept the evidence of Aleksandr Stepaniuk that  he  was
                 questioned by the Lithuanian authorities about  the  pastor
                 and  members  of  the  congregation.   There  is  a  slight
                 discrepancy in his use of words as  between  his  interview
                 and his written statement, in the latter, he describe  this
                 as an "interrogation".  I do not think that the differences
                 are material.  He, at least,  appears  to  have  found  the
                 experience intimidating.  I am not persuaded, however, that
                 there was anything 'malicious' or unduly  oppressive  about
                 this questioning.  I have little  doubt  that,  if  rumours
                 were abounding in and around Sellafield that members  of  a
                 small evangelical church might seek to destroy the  nuclear
                 processing plant there, then  the  British  Nuclear  Police
                 would undertake  some  sort  of  investigation  and  church
                 members would be similarly 'interrogated'.  The reality, of
                 course, is that none of the members  of  this  congregation
                 were actually arrested or charged in  connection  with  any
                 offence.


           (v)   I accept that, nonetheless, the  pastor  was  refused  re-
                 entry into Lithuania in 1999.  Although I acknowledge  that
                 members of the congregation believe that the motive  behind
                 this was to close their church, this is not  borne  out  by
                 the evidence.  The reality  is  that  the  church  was  not
                 closed.  It was a registered church and in practice  church
                 services continued to be held.  No action was taken by  the
                 Lithuanian  authorities  to  prevent  church  members  from
                 visiting the pastor in  Latvia  or  to  prevent  them  from
                 communicating with him altogether.  Whilst I am  not  bound
                 by the IAT decision in Balickij and Litvinova I nonetheless
                 endorse a number of their findings.  In particular I am not
                 persuaded that the exclusion of the pastor was  an  act  of
                 bad faith in terms of the continuance of this church.


           (vi)  I accept,  as  I  have  indicated,  that  members  of  the
                 congregation continued to meet the  pastor  in  Latvia  and
                 that they subsequently followed him to Poland and later  to
                 this country. The evidence indicates that their motives for
                 coming here are genuine - in as much as they have come here
                 to be with their pastor.  They are not  here  for  economic
                 purposes and I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that,  if  Pastor
                 Edzhibiya is removed from this country,  they  would  leave
                 the United Kingdom and seek to follow him wherever he goes.
                   Clearly  this  congregation  are  prepared   to   go   to
                 extraordinary lengths  to  be  with  him  and,  as  Special
                 Adjudicator Mr Frankland said in  Balickij  and  Litvinova,
                 this last piece of evidence revealing the 'strict adherence
                 of members to their pastor' suggests that the church  is  a
                 sect.   I  acknowledge  that  the   appellants   themselves
                 genuinely fear for the future  of  their  church  in  their
                 pastor's  absence  although  that  does  not,  of   course,
                 necessarily mean that  their  church  would  close  without
                 him."


9.    The Adjudicator dismissed the asylum appeal for reasons which are  set
      out in paragraphs 17 to 19 of the determination.  The  application  on
      asylum grounds is not pursued before us.

10.   It was again argued before the Adjudicator but not before us that  the
      appellant's removal would  involve  a  breach  of  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.  The Adjudicator concentrated  on
      Article 9 of the European Convention which is as follows:

      "Freedom of Thought, Conscience and Religion


      1.    Everyone has the right to freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
           religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion  or
           belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and
           in public or private, to manifest his  religion  or  belief,  in
           worship, teaching, practice and observance.


      2.    Freedom to manifest ones religion or beliefs  shall  be  subject
           only to such limitations  as  are  prescribed  by  law  and  are
           necessary in a democratic society  in  the  interest  of  public
           safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."


11.   In paragraph 26(ii) the Adjudicator concluded that the rights  of  the
      appellants to practice their religion with their  Pastor  and  receive
      guidance from him was part and parcel of the  manifestation  of  their
      religion as was their wish to manifest that religion  in  a  community
      with others who shared that faith.  The Adjudicator records  that  the
      Secretary of State's representative did not seek to dispute  this  and
      accordingly the Adjudicator concluded that a right under Article 9 was
      engaged.  He further accepted that removal from the United Kingdom was
      a limitation on the  appellant's  freedom  to  manifest  his  religion
      because the Pastor remained in the  United  Kingdom  and  because  the
      appellant would be removed to Lithuania where the Pastor could not go.
       The  Adjudicator  remarked  that  the  effect  of  removal  upon  the
      appellant's wish to worship in a community with others who shared that
      faith was less stark as many other members of  the  congregation  were
      likely to be removed at or about the same time as the appellant.

12.   The  Adjudicator  sets  out  his  conclusions  on  proportionality  in
      paragraph 26(iv) and (vi) of his determination.   Although  Ms Webber
      accepts that for  the  most  part  the  Adjudicator  directed  himself
      properly in all respects, she makes one criticism which we shall  come
      to about his approach and also she criticises the inferences drawn  by
      the Adjudicator from the facts found.  The relevant extract  from  the
      determination reads as follows:

      "(iv) Proportionality: The issues before me,  therefore,  are  whether
           that limitation is one prescribed by law and whether it  is  one
           that is necessary in a democratic society for the protection  of
           public order.  The decision to remove the appellant  is  clearly
           one that is prescribed by law and it pursues a legitimate aim in
           the control of public order  through  immigration.   I  have  to
           decide whether  it  is  one  that  is  proportionate.   In  this
           respect, I bear in mind from the outset that the European  Court
           of Human Rights has held that freedom of thought, conscience and
           religion is one of  the  foundations  of  a  democratic  society
           within the meaning of the Convention.  The pluralism,  which  is
           in dissociable from a democratic society (and)  which  has  been
           clearly won over centuries, depends upon it. (see Serif v Greece
           no.38178/97).  I also bear in  mind  section  13  of  the  Human
           Rights Act which requires me to have particular  regard  to  the
           affect of  the  decision  on  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
           Visaginas and I also bear in  mind  that  there  is  a  positive
           obligation on the State to  ensure  the  peaceful  enjoyment  of
           rights guaranteed by Article 9 (see  Otto-Preminger-Institute  v
           Austria (1994) 19EHRR 34).  Mr Simm argued that the Secretary of
           State's decision was  not  proportionate  because  the  Pastor's
           presence and guidance was so fundamental to the  spiritual  life
           of these appellants that without it that  spiritual  life  could
           not be fulfilled.  He argued that, if the appellants were to  be
           removed from their Pastor, their church would come  to  an  end.
           For my part, I accept that the Pastor's absence would be  keenly
           felt by each and every member  of  his  congregation.   It  will
           undoubtedly test their spiritual commitment.  It will affect the
           quality of their worship and the  richness  of  their  spiritual
           life.  However, notwithstanding the concerns of the  Pastor  and
           his congregation, i am not persuaded  that  it  will  eventually
           lead to the collapse of their church.  the reality is that  they
           have managed the trials and tribulations that have  beset  them.
           Mr Simm argued that the lengths to which members of  the  church
           have already gone to be with their Pastor  is  evidence  of  the
           fact that the church cannot survive as an  entity  without  him.
           However, I draw the very opposite conclusion from that evidence.
           It seems to  me  that  the  lengths  that  the  members  of  the
           congregation have gone to be with their Pastor are indicative of
           the strength of their bond  and  evidence  that,  in  the  final
           analysis, it is unlikely to be  extinguished  by  mere  physical
           separation.  At a more mundane  level,  the  evidence  indicates
           that church services continued  in  Lithuania  in  the  Pastor's
           absence with a  deacon  -  albeit  that  those  services  lacked
           inspiration when compared with services conducted by the  Pastor
           himself.  The US State Department Report on  Lithuania  and  the
           facts of this case do not suggest that any of  these  appellants
           will be prevented from worshipping together in that  country  or
           from travelling overseas  from  time  to  time  to  visit  their
           Pastor. (They have been able to meet together, with their Pastor
           as well, in other countries such as Poland  and  Latvia  in  the
           past and I see no reason why that should not be  possible  -  if
           not in those two countries then in others - in  the  future,  on
           occasions). The nature of the church may change in the  Pastor's
           absence but, in the end, it seems to me  that  removal  of  this
           appellant and indeed all these appellants and/or the Pastor - is
           something that affects the  quality  and  nature  of  the  their
           spiritual life, their church and the way in which their religion
           is manifested,  rather  than  it  existence.   This  has  to  be
           balanced against the undoubted importance of maintaining a sound
           immigration policy. Mr Simm argued that this  case  was  a  'one
           off'  and,  to  that  extent,  the  need  to  maintain  a  sound
           immigration policy was not 'threatened' by it. In fact  that  is
           not entirely the case.  I note that in Omkranada and the  Divine
           Light Zendrum  v  Switzerland  91981)  25  d  105  the  European
           Commission had to consider the effect of a decision to refuse an
           extension of stay to Mr Omkrananda, a monk  and  philosopher  of
           Indian nationality upon the Divine Light Zendrum a religious and
           philosophical  institution,  which   he   had   established   in
           Switzerland.  I was not referred to that case at the hearing and
           so I simply mention it in passing.   The facts of that case were
           essentially different to those in this  appeal,  but  there  are
           similarities which negate Mr Simm's argument that this appeal is
           inevitably a 'one off'. In any event  the  need  to  maintain  a
           sound immigration policy is not predicated on the  facts  of  an
           individual appeal.


      (v)   In  my  opinion,  although  removal  of  these  appellants  will
           undoubtedly have an effect on the quality of their worship, that
           is outweighed by the public interest and the needs  of  a  sound
           immigration policy.  The effect of removal upon these appellants
           has to be kept in perspective.  In practice they will be able to
           continue their Christian religion in Lithuania. The Deacon  will
           be able to take services.  They will be able to  receive  tapes,
           videos and literature from their pastor. Of course, the richness
           of their worship will, as I have indicated, suffer, but I am not
           persuaded that it will be extinguished.  The fact  is  that  the
           State in this country does have the right to control  the  entry
           of non-nationals.  I bear in mind that  the  evidence  indicates
           that the movement of this church to the UK was, to some  extent,
           part of a planned exercise.  The majority of church members  had
           already been to Poland and enquiries had been made of  a  number
           of countries to ascertain whether the church members could  gain
           admission en block.  I do not accept that their arrival here was
           the result of chance or that the Pastor  came  to  this  country
           without any thought as to whether his flock  would  follow.   To
           that extent, although most of the  appellants  are  not  illegal
           entrants, they must have known that their rights to remain  here
           were precarious.  In all the circumstances, it seems to that the
           decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove   them   was
           proportionate.


      (vi)  I would also  add  that  Lithuania  has  ratified  the  European
           Convention on Human Rights (pre decision).  It is therefore open
           to members of this church to take the  Pastor's  exclusion  from
           that country to the European Court of  Human  Rights  and  argue
           that the refusal of Lithuania to admit the Pastor breaches their
           human rights.  When this was raised  at  the  hearing,  Mr  Simm
           pointed out that the mere fact that an appellant had the ability
           in practice to take a  case  against  his  own  country  to  the
           European Court of Human Rights did not automatically entitle the
           United Kingdom government to remove him  to  that  country.   An
           analogy was drawn to Article 3 of the ECHR and,  in  particular,
           the plight of some Turkish 'refugees'  of  Kurdish  origin,  who
           face persecution or a breach of their Article 3 rights on return
           to Turkey.  It seems to me, however, that there is a distinction
           to be drawn between Article 3  and  Article  9  on  this  point.
           Article 3 is absolute.  There can be no  justification  for  its
           breach.  Article 9, on the other hand is not absolute.   In  the
           case  of  Article  9,  the  availability  of  a  remedy  in   an
           appellant's own country goes to the  issue  of  proportionality.
           It needs to be remembered that I am concerned with the  decision
           of the Secretary of State to remove this appellant and,  as  the
           IAT said in Kacaj, the extent to which that decision will expose
           "the individual to whatever violation of his human rights is  in
           issue".  Clearly, if that  is  a  violation  of  an  appellant's
           rights under Article 3, then, because  an  Article  3  right  is
           absolute, removal should not take place.  However, in  the  case
           of Article 9, if in fact the Lithuanian government has acted  in
           breach of the appellant's human rights by refusing entry to  the
           Pastor then there is a remedy for this.  it  may  take  time  to
           effect that remedy but, since the remedy is available, it  means
           that the effect of removal upon  the  appellant's  human  rights
           need  only  be  of  a  temporary  nature.   Conversely,  if  the
           Lithuanian government has not acted in breach of the appellant's
           human rights by refusing re-entry to the  Pastor,  it  would  be
           perverse to find that  the  United  Kingdom  government  was  in
           breach  of  the  appellant's  human  rights  by  returning   the
           appellant to Lithuania at this time."


13.   It is  also  right  to  add  that  the  Adjudicator  considered  other
      Articles that might be engaged and found that the appellant could  not
      succeed under any of them, whether taken separately or collectively.

14.   In the grounds of appeal complaint was made that the  Adjudicator  had
      referred to Omkaranda v Switzerland as that had not been  referred  to
      at the hearing.  The case had no bearing on the matter in issue  since
      no national security arguments had been deployed by the  Secretary  of
      State to support his decision and it was not relevant to  cite  it  to
      rebut the appellant's contention that the congregation's situation was
      unique in terms of UK immigration control.

15.   Complaint was also made about the last sentence in  paragraph  26(iv):
      "In any event the need to maintain a sound immigration policy  is  not
      predicated on the facts of an individual appeal."  The Adjudicator had
      erred in confusing the legitimacy of the aim pursued with  the  weight
      to be accorded to policy considerations in the individual case.

16.   The fourth ground of appeal was that  the  Adjudicator  had  drawn  an
      inference about the church surviving  which  was  wholly  against  the
      weight of the evidence and was impermissible.

17.   Ms Webber stated that the appellant had been  on  drugs  and  improved
      because of the support he had from the church.  There was a dependence
      on the Pastor.  One of the churches established by the Pastor had  not
      survived.  The Deacon was not as gifted an individual as  the  Pastor.
      The church could not survive if the congregation were  separated  from
      the Pastor.  Unlike the case of R (Farrakhan)  v  Secretary  of  State
      [2002] 3WLR 481 expulsion could destroy the  exercise  of  the  right.
      Reference was made to  paragraphs  53  and  54  of  the  judgment  and
      Ms Webber stressed the words in  paragraph  54  that  in  exceptional
      circumstances  the  obligation  to  protect  Convention  rights  could
      override the right of a state to control the entry into its  territory
      or the presence within its territory of aliens.

18.   The congregation were able to meet  every  other  Sunday  it  appeared
      from the evidence of the Pastor.  Miss Webber referred to her skeleton
      argument.  She reminded us that the Commonwealth Courts had emphasised
      the importance of the communal aspects of religious worship: see  Wang
      v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2000] FCA  1599,
      a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal  of  Australia.   There  was
      Section 13 of the Human Rights Act 1988 to consider.  Ms  Webber  also
      relied on Hasan and Chaush v Bulgaria 34EHRR55 p1339 at para 62.   The
      autonomous existence of religious communities  was  indispensable  for
      pluralism in a democratic society and was at the  very  heart  of  the
      protection afforded by Article 9.

19.   Counsel accepted that the Adjudicator had  properly  directed  himself
      on his approach it was the inferences he had drawn where she submitted
      he had erred.  He was wrong to draw the very opposite conclusion  from
      the evidence to which the appellant's  representative  had  drawn  his
      attention - i.e. the length to which members of the church had gone to
      be with their Pastor being, it was submitted,  evidence  of  the  fact
      that the church could not survive  as  an  entity  without  him.   The
      relationship was like a family relationship.  The case was unusual  if
      not unique.  The Adjudicator had failed to have regard to  a  relevant
      matter, namely that one of the churches established by the Pastor  had
      collapsed.   The  Adjudicator's  error  had  affected  the   balancing
      exercise.  Reference was made to paragraph 15  of  Counsel's  skeleton
      argument.  The Adjudicator  had  given  inappropriate  weight  to  the
      requirements of immigration control.  The interference with  religious
      rights must be justified by the prevention of disorder and  crime  and
      the protection of the rights and freedoms of others  rather  than  the
      economic wellbeing of society.  The  weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
      legitimate aims pursued varied from case to case depending on  whether
      the individual had been in flagrant breach of immigration controls  or
      had committed  criminal  offences  in  the  UK  or  whether  the  only
      considerations  were  general  ones.   Counsel  referred  us  to  R  v
      Immigration Officer ex parte Quaquah [2000] INLR 196.  The  individual
      had a reason for entry which was unique or nearly so in that case - he
      needed to sue agents of the Secretary  of  State.   The  decision  was
      calculated to interfere with the appellant's minimum  right.   It  was
      not obvious to see how a decision to grant exceptional leave to remain
      would imperil immigration policy.

20.   There was no danger in the instant appeal of  thousands  of  adherents
      coming forward.  The Adjudicator had erred in stating that immigration
      policy was not predicated on the facts of an individual  appeal.   The
      importance of policy would vary.  Although on its own the point  would
      not be determinative, it was argued that  the  Adjudicator's  optimism
      about the future of  the  church  was  misplaced.   The  Adjudicator's
      approach to other Articles was not impeachable once  it  was  accepted
      that Article 9 was engaged. The issue was a simple one.

21.   Mr Wilken submitted that asylum was no longer  sought  and  Article  3
      was not engaged.  It was not alleged that there would be any breach of
      human rights in Lithuania.  The appellants  had  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom to exercise their rights.  Reliance was placed on paragraph 53
      of Farrakhan:

           "The right under international law of a  state  to  control  the
           entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  is  one  that  is
           recognised by the Strasbourg Court.  Where entry is  refused  or
           an alien is expelled for reasons which are wholly independent of
           the exercise by the alien of Convention rights,  the  fact  that
           this carries the  consequence  that  he  cannot  exercise  those
           rights in the territory from  which  he  is  excluded  will  not
           constitute a violation of the Convention."


22.   Reference was made to Stedman v United Kingdom 23EHRR CD168 and  Kalac
      v Turkey [1999]  27EHRR  522.   The  findings  of  fact  made  by  the
      Adjudicator were properly open to him and he was correct to find  that
      the removal of the appellant was proportionate to the  legitimate  aim
      pursued.  On the standard of review in this area reference was made to
      R (Samaroo) v Secretary of State [2001] Imm A.R.  324.   The  case  of
      Quaquah was unique.  There was an absence of reasoning to support  the
      Secretary of State's decision.  Reference was made to Litvinova  where
      the Tribunal had been presided over by Mr Justice Collins.

23.   Ms Webber submitted that the arguments had developed  since  the  case
      of Litvinova.  The Adjudicator had recognised that.  The case was  not
      governed by Ullah [2002] EWCA Civ 1856 as the appellants were  in  the
      United Kingdom and enjoyed rights here.  In Stedman the appellant  had
      been penalised for observing her religious beliefs - in this  case  it
      was argued there was a prevention  of  the  manifestation  of  belief.
      Although the congregation was dispersed in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
      appellant and the other appellants who were the clients  of  A  S  Law
      were grouped together with the Pastor in Liverpool.

24.   On the standard of review and whether the approach of the  High  Court
      was applicable to the Appellate Authority  on  appeal,  the  Court  of
      Appeal was shortly to give a definitive ruling on the matter.  It  was
      not necessary for the Tribunal to go into the question.

25.   The Tribunal raised the point  about  the  congregation  returning  to
      Lithuania as a group.  Could other circumstances be taken into account
      in Lithuania?  It was accepted that what had happened to date was  not
      a substantial enough interference, putting aside the question  of  the
      expulsion of the Pastor from Lithuania.  Neither the  actions  of  the
      authorities  in  Lithuania  nor  the  actions  of  the  populace   had
      interfered with the appellant's rights - it was the expulsion  of  the
      Pastor.

26.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We are very grateful as we observed at the hearing to both Counsel for
      their helpful narrowing of the issues.

27.   It does appear to have been accepted below that Article 9 was  engaged
      - see paragraph 26(ii).  We intend to proceed on the footing that  the
      Adjudicator correctly directed himself in paragraph  26(i)  to  (iii).
      The key issue is the one of proportionality.  On  that  issue  too  Ms
      Webber accepts  that  for  the  most  part  the  Adjudicator  did  not
      misdirect himself.  Although she argued in the grounds of appeal  that
      the Adjudicator erred in making reference  to  Omkrananda  we  do  not
      believe that the criticism is a fair one -  the  Adjudicator  made  it
      clear he was just referring to  the  case  in  passing  to  rebut  the
      suggestion that the case was a one-off.  Miss Webber  focuses  on  the
      final sentence of sub-paragraph  (iv),  "In  any  event  the  need  to
      maintain a sound immigration policy is not predicated on the facts  of
      an individual appeal."

28.   We would like to make it clear that the determination as  a  whole  is
      extremely  thorough,  clear  and  comprehensive.   The   Adjudicator's
      approach is throughout logical and thoughtful.  It is  extremely  hard
      to find fault with it and Ms Webber conceded that for  the  most  part
      she cannot.  The point that the Adjudicator was  trying  to  make  was
      that the appeal was not necessarily a unique one.  It may be that  the
      particular sentence could have been more aptly phrased but we consider
      that it does not arguably undermine the otherwise  sound  approach  of
      the Adjudicator to the issues before him.

29.   The Adjudicator is criticised for not  having  taken  into  account  a
      relevant consideration, namely that one of the Pastor's  churches  had
      collapsed in his absence.  The Adjudicator refers to the  decline  and
      closure of the church in 1994 in paragraph 14 of his determination and
      we do not accept that he did not have the whole picture well  in  mind
      when he expressed his conclusions on proportionality in paragraph  26.



30.   In our view, the Adjudicator was entitled to draw the conclusion  from
      the evidence that the bond between the congregation and the Pastor was
      unlikely to be extinguished by mere physical  separation  and  further
      that church services continued in Lithuania in  the  Pastor's  absence
      albeit that those services lacked, it was said, the  inspiration  that
      the Pastor provided.

31.   The Adjudicator acknowledged that  the  nature  of  the  church  might
      change in the Pastor's absence but this had to be balanced against the
      importance of maintaining a sound immigration policy.

32.   Ms Webber submits that the Adjudicator placed  too  much  emphasis  on
      immigration control.  In our view  the  Adjudicator  did  not  err  in
      weighing up the relevant considerations.  He found that the effect  on
      the quality of the worship of the congregation was outweighed  by  the
      public interest and the need for  a  sound  immigration  policy.   The
      congregation would be removed, effectively, as a group and the  Deacon
      would be able to take  services.   In  effect,  the  church  would  be
      removed, without the Pastor - depending on the success or otherwise of
      his outstanding appeal.  The Adjudicator in our view gave  appropriate
      weight to the importance of the freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
      religion in the opening  part  of  paragraph  26(iv).   He  took  into
      account section 13 of the Human Rights Act. He took  full  account  of
      the existence within the United Kingdom of a vigorous religious  life.
      He accepted that the richness  of  the  congregation's  worship  would
      suffer but the right would not be extinguished.   He  noted  that  the
      movement of the church to the United Kingdom was  part  of  a  planned
      exercise and he did not accept that the arrival  of  the  congregation
      was the result of chance or that the Pastor had come to  this  country
      without any thought as  to  whether  the  congregation  would  follow.
      Although the appellants were not illegal entrants they must have  been
      conscious that their rights to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
      precarious.

33.   It appears  to  us  that  the  Adjudicator  weighed  up  properly  all
      relevant considerations when he concluded that  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to remove the appellants was proportionate.  We  do
      not believe that it can be argued that the fact that there are a small
      amount  of  individuals  involved  means  that  the  requirements   of
      immigration control can be brushed aside.  The case of Quaquah was one
      where it was said that an agent of the state - Group  4  custodians  -
      had breached duties that were owed to those  in  a  detention  centre.
      It was argued that the Secretary of State was  liable  for  the  torts
      committed by the Group  4  guards.   In  those  circumstances  we  can
      understand why the High Court felt that the  applicant's  reasons  for
      entry were unique or nearly  so.   Strong  reasons  were  required  to
      justify the Secretary of State's decision.  There  was  no  indication
      within the papers before the Court that when the discretion was  being
      exercised  the  appellant's  rights  were  recognised  or  taken  into
      account. The instant appeal is in our view clearly distinguishable.

34.   In Litvinova the Tribunal had not had the human  rights  claim  before
      it.  However, it made it clear in its conclusion that it  was  obvious
      from what had been said that the human rights claim would prima  facie
      have no chance of success.  At paragraph 11 the Tribunal had  referred
      to information technology  and  video  links.   Presence,  albeit  not
      physical presence, could be achieved through  information  technology.
      If the church really had life a new Pastor could be groomed under  the
      tutelage of the present Pastor.  The members could continue to worship
      together and to put their beliefs into practise.   Furthermore,  there
      was no evidence  to  justify  a  finding  even  on  the  low  standard
      applicable that the decision to exclude the Pastor was not justified.

35.   The Adjudicator  noted  the  Tribunal's  decision  but  made  his  own
      decision in the light of all the material  before  him.   He  did  not
      regard himself as bound by the remarks of the Tribunal which were,  as
      he recognised, obiter.

36.   Having heard all the arguments we are not persuaded that the  Tribunal
      in Litvinova erred in forecasting the difficulties that lay ahead  for
      appellants and their advisers in a human rights appeal.

37.   The Adjudicator did not underestimate the effect  of  the  absence  of
      the Pastor on the congregation.  His absence would be keenly  felt  by
      each and every one of them.  It would test their spiritual commitment.
       The Adjudicator cannot be criticised for giving too little weight  to
      the serious issues at stake for the future of the church.  Nor can  he
      be  criticised  for  giving  too  much  weight  to  the  question   of
      immigration control.  Neither side was avid for  us  to  go  into  the
      question of whether the approach of the High Court to  proportionality
      issues as set out in  Samaroo  was  the  appropriate  course  for  the
      appellate authority. That matter, Ms Webber told us, was shortly to be
      resolved by the Court of Appeal. We agree that it is not necessary  to
      go into the issue for the purposes of this appeal.

38.   The adjudicator balanced all relevant issues  correctly  and  did  not
      misdirect himself on any material point in our  view.  Every  argument
      that could be deployed on the appellant's behalf  has  been  deployed.
      This appeal must fail.

39.   The appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  is
      affirmed.




                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President
