

                                        SM (Persecution - Minors) Yugoslavia
                                                          [2003] UKIAT 00004



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                            Date heard:  25 February    2003
                                                      Date notified 29.05.03
                                  Before:-.


                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                              MRS S HUSSAIN JP



                                                               Between





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia  (FRY),  has
appealed with leave of the Tribunal against a determination of  Adjudicator,
Mr M Rush, dismissing the appeal against  the  decision  by  the  respondent
giving directions for removal following  refusal  to  grant  asylum.   Mr  S
Nigae of Counsel instructed by Brain Sinnot & Co Solicitors represented  the
appellant. Mr M Davidson appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The basis of the appellant's claim was that as an  ethnic  Albanian  from
Presevo whose family had been attacked by Serbian  soldiers  and  police  he
feared he would remain at  risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to  southern
Serbia. His father and brother had been  shot  and  killed  by  the  Serbian
police. He had been come under fire from Serbs following a  football  match.
His brother had been killed giving assistance to the UPCMB.

4. The adjudicator rejected this claim. He did not find  the  appellant  had
given a credible account of his  past  experiences.  Although  this  is  not
entirely clear from the somewhat cryptic wording of paragraph  28,  it  also
appears he considered that changes in the  government  of  FRY  and  in  the
administration of southern Serbia meant that there was no  longer  any  risk
of persecution to ethnic Albanian citizens from  the  Serb  authorities.  He
did not consider that  the  psychiatric  report  supported  the  appellant's
claim.

5.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are  essentially  threefold.  Firstly,  it  is
submitted that the adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings  evinced  a
failure to pay due regard to the fact that, when the appellant  applied  for
asylum, he was  still  an  unaccompanied  minor  and  should  have  had  his
evidence assessed by reference to  different  criteria  than  were  in  fact
applied. Secondly, it is submitted that given his young  age  and  the  fact
that he would be known to have a brother who  had  assisted  the  UPCMB,  he
would be in a continuing risk category. Thirdly, it is  submitted  that,  in
view of  the  medical  evidence  showing  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
adolescent suffering from PTSD, return to Kosovo would re-expose him to  his
original trauma.

6. As regards the first ground, we  are  prepared  to  accept  that  on  the
adjudicator's findings the appellant had arrived  in  the  UK  when  he  was
almost  17  years.  That  being  so,  he  should  have  been  considered  in
accordance with relevant provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraphs
350-352) and Home Office instructions relating to the assessment  of  claims
from minors and his evidence should also have been  evaluated  by  reference
to UNHCR guidelines set out  in  the  1979  UNHCR  Handbook  and  elsewhere.
However, we dot find it demonstrated that these procedural  errors  resulted
in the appellant being  prevented  as  a  result  from  giving  an  adequate
account of his asylum and human rights claims.

7.  We  are  also  prepared  to  accept  that  the   adjudicator`s   adverse
credibility findings are not  clearly  reasoned.   Given  his  status  as  a
minor, we do not see that the appellant's three  months  delay  in  claiming
asylum necessarily demonstrated his claim was not credible. Nor  do  we  see
why,  given  that  the  adjudicator  seemed  prepared  to  accept  that  the
appellant ran into trouble with Serbs in  February  2001,  he  should  doubt
that the appellant and others were jeered at and fired  at.  There  was,  as
the adjudicator noted elsewhere, medical evidence of  pellet  wounds.  Given
the adjudicator's apparent  awareness  of  the  medical  evidence  that  the
appellant  suffered  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  one  of  whose
symptoms is  emotional  numbness,  we  do  not  think  the  adjudicator  was
justified in counting against the appellant at paragraph 26 his  failure  at
the hearing to "show emotional  distress  when  the  traumatic  events  were
raised..." His comment at paragraph 27 about "stress, poor recollection  and
other features and similar phraseology [being]  invariably  associated  with
malingering" suggested that he effectively  chose  to  ignore  its  findings
about this particular individual. That was  an  error.  For  one  thing  his
generalised comments seem to us no more instructive  satisfactory  than  the
generalised  phraseology  they  castigate.  For  another  the  report   made
particular findings about the appellant's psychological state  which  needed
to be properly weighed.

8. This brings us to the only clear-cut  adverse  finding  at  paragraph  28
where the adjudicator says he believed the appellant's story  of  going  out
and finding his brother and father in  a  nearby  alleyway  when  they  were
coming home from work to be "concocted". He appears  to  have  reached  that
view because it was difficult to reconcile this story with  the  appellant's
claim elsewhere that he had been severely mistreated earlier that same  day.
However, the appellant was never asked  at  interview  to  comment  on  this
apparent discrepancy nor did the Secretary of State make any mention  of  it
in his Reasons for Refusal letter. Nor can we find  any  evidence  that  the
adjudicator asked the appellant  to  comment  on  this  matter.   Given  the
appellant's age at the time these events occurred,  we  consider  that  once
the adjudicator decided there was an apparent discrepancy,  he  should  have
given the appellant, who was 18 by the time of the hearing,  an  opportunity
to explain this apparent discrepancy. Certainly we are not persuaded in  the
absence  of  more  careful  reasoning  to  place  any  reliance  upon   this
discrepancy.

9. Thus we are prepared  to  approach  this  case  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant had given a credible account.

10. Can we conclude that the adjudicator should therefore have  allowed  the
appellant's appeal? We think not. Even accepting his account as credible  we
can see no proper basis for concluding  that  the  appellant  would  face  a
continuing risk of persecution or ill  treatment  upon  return  to  Southern
Serbia. Plainly on his own account he and his family had  been  targeted  at
the time by Serbian police and soldiers in the  context  of  the  continuing
troubles in  southern  Serbia  occurring  at  that  time.  However,  as  the
adjudicator correctly noted, there were  very  significant  changes  put  in
place in this region shortly after.

11.  The  ground  of  appeal  contend  that  notwithstanding  these  general
improvements the appellant would remain at risk because it  would  be  known
that his brother had  helped  the  UPCMB.  However,  the  objective  country
materials do not demonstrate that the Serb  authorities,  who  in  May  2001
declared an amnesty covering UCPMB members and put in place  a  multi-ethnic
police force, would  any  longer  have  an  interest  in  viewing  adversely
someone whose brother had been a UPCMB member.

12. This brings us to the third main ground of appeal which related  to  the
appellant's medical condition. The grounds noted  that  the  report  of  the
Consultant stated that the appellant had had to cope with the  loss  of  his
family and to adapt  culturally  to  a  new  country.  "In  my  opinion  his
recovery from his symptoms will be helped  by  his  perception  of  physical
safety and social support that  he  is  now  receiving.  The  importance  of
social support in improving mood in asylum seekers  has  been  confirmed  by
research findings". Mr Nigae very properly drew our attention  to  the  very
gloomy picture painted in  the  latest  CIPU  Assessment  of  the  state  of
medical services in Serbia. Mr Nigae  further  argued  that  return  of  the
appellant would make him vulnerable to  a  risk  of  self-harm,  of  symptom
reactivation and a lack of medical  assistance  or  treatment.  Thereby  the
appellant would face a real risk of  serious  harm  contrary  to  Art  3  or
significant detriment to his physical and moral integrity  contrary  to  his
right to respect for private life.

13. The task of assessing medical evidence which  refers  in  part  to  risk
upon return to another country is  never  an  easy  one  for  the  appellate
authority. On the one hand an adjudicator is not a medical  expert.  By  the
same token a medical expert is not normally  a  country  expert  and  cannot
expect his personal evaluation of the conditions a  patient  would  face  on
return to  another  country  to  carry  the  same  weight  as  his  clinical
assessment of the patient's physical and mental  well-being.  Thus  it  must
ultimately fall to the adjudicator, considering all the evidence,  including
of course the medical evidence, to assess whether in fact there  is  a  real
risk upon return.

14. We have already noted that the adjudicator  did  not  properly  consider
the medical evidence before him. Thus it falls to us  to  decide  whether  a
proper consideration of it would have made a difference to  the  outcome  of
the appeal.

15. We are not satisfied that the medical evidence  establishes  that  there
would be a real risk upon return to this appellant either  of  serious  harm
or significant detriment to his physical and moral integrity.

14. In the first place, whatever the Consultant may have presumed about  the
conditions the appellant would face in FRY  (he  noted  that  the  appellant
believed  that  his  life  would  be  in  serious  danger  from   the   Serb
authorities), the evidence viewed as a whole did not demonstrate that  there
would be any danger from the Serb authorities.

15. In the second place we are not persuaded that  the  appellant  would  in
fact be without  social  support  in  Serbia.  We  accept  the  Consultant's
opinion that a continuation of social support was and is  important  to  the
appellant's psychological well-being. But the evidence  viewed  as  a  whole
did not demonstrate that social support would  be  lacking  in  the  Presevo
Valley among fellow-members of the Albanian community.  Since  he  would  be
returning to his own country and culture, there would be no call for him  to
have to adapt all over again. The social support there may  not  be  of  the
same type as in the UK but it would not be radically different from it,  and
in cultural terms would be superior.

16. In the third place the Consultant did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be
suffering any symptoms or signs suggestive of a  psychotic  illness  and  he
noted that the appellant was oriented in time, place and person. And  whilst
he recommended that the appellant undertake therapy with  an  antidepressant
medication and a psychotherapeutic approach to  his  problems,  he  did  not
specify that denial of such treatment  to  the  appellant  would  cause  him
serious harm or significant detriment. In terms of his medical history,  the
appellant had no history of mental illness and  since  arrival  in  the  UK,
apart from taking analgesics for headaches, was not  undergoing  any  course
of medical treatment. Against this  background  it  was  not  decisive  that
medical facilities in Serbia were lacking.

17. In the light of  these  considerations,  we  consider  that  Mr  Nigae`s
assertions that return would cause the appellant a real  risk  of  self-harm
and  symptom  reactivation  went  well  beyond   the   parameters   of   the
Consultant's report and were unduly speculative.  Insofar  as  his  argument
depended on the view that  return  would  re-expose  the  appellant  to  his
original trauma, we do not see that this was entailed by return  to  Serbia.
Whether the appellant revisited the actual  physical  site  of  his  earlier
traumatic experiences was a matter for him; no one would compel  him  to  do
this.

For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




