
LD (Roma - Sufficiency of Protection) Czech Republic [2003] UKIAT 00188

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 29 October 2003
Prepared: 30 October 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                             Mr D.R. Bremmer JP




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Mr R. O'Bryan, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Miss N. Hough, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The claimant is a national of the Czech Republic.   The  Secretary  of
      State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  an  adjudicator,  Dr  A.E.
      Thorndike, following a  hearing  on  21  February  2003  allowing  the
      claimant's appeal both on asylum and human rights grounds against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to refuse both claims.


   2. The claimant is a Czech Roma born on 17 March 1963.  He married a non-
      Roma.  He arrived in the United Kingdom, alone, on 27 April  2002  and
      was given six months leave to enter as a visitor.  He  claimed  asylum
      on 8 May 2002.

   3. The adjudicator found that the claimant's problems  started  in  1996,
      some six years before his eventual departure, when he was attacked  by
      skinheads with a baseball bat which resulted in injuries, including  a
      broken spine, requiring his spending the next 11 months  in  hospital.
      In September 1998, whilst attending a meeting of a Roma  organisation,
      the SRCR, he was attacked again and lost two teeth in the assault.  In
      1999, the claimant was assaulted at the police station when he  sought
      to complain about an attack upon his wife.  On 1 May  2000,  an  event
      organised by the SRCR was disturbed by an attack carried out by  about
      30 skinheads.  In the summer of 2001, he and his  family  were  chased
      off by a  group  of  German  skinheads.   In  September  2001,  whilst
      complaining about  Roma  children  and  denied  access  to  the  local
      swimming pool, the claimant was arrested, and abused and refused food.
       Finally, in November 2001 he was arrested  again,  (with  his  wife),
      accused of stealing from a shop and assaulted in  his  cell.   On  the
      same day, he was abducted by the police and taken to  a  forest  where
      some skinheads were waiting to beat him up.

   4. In 1997, his daughter was attacked outside school and, later,  refused
      admission to a cinema in circumstances that suggest  there  was  clear
      racial discrimination.  In 1999, his wife, who  is  not  a  Roma,  was
      attacked and abused.

   5.  On  occasions  when  he  called  upon  the  police  to  pursue  those
      responsible for the attacks upon him, his efforts proved fruitless and
      he was not able to obtain any redress by approaching the SCRC.


   6. The position of Czech Roma  has  been  considered  on  the  number  of
      occasions in recent years by the Tribunal and  the  Court  of  Appeal.
      The first in point of time is the decision of the Tribunal in Havlicek
      (01/TH/01448) (Collins J., President), decided in  April  2000.   This
      was a case that concerned a young man who was  not  himself  Roma  but
      whose wife had a Roma  father.   The  adjudicator  accepted  that  the
      claimant might well have attracted a greater  degree  of  hatred  from
      skinheads and other racial elements in Czech society  because  he  had
      married someone who was  regarded  as  Roma.   The  Tribunal  did  not
      consider it a surprising conclusion of the adjudicator that those  who
      have racist tendencies often seem to regard a mixed marriage as beyond
      the pale.  In paragraph 13 of the decision, the Tribunal stated:

           "We did seriously consider whether, in the light  of  the  steps
           which had been taken by the authorities  in  Czech  Republic  to
           deal with violence against Roma, it would be  possible  for  any
           Roma, whatever has happened to him or her in the past, to  claim
           that he or she now had a well-founded fear of  persecution.   In
           saying this we recognise that  discrimination  will  undoubtedly
           continue, but  discrimination  is  not  persecution.   We  have,
           however, been persuaded that there may be individuals whose past
           sufferings  show  that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
           continuing attacks if they were to be returned so that they  can
           properly be said to have demonstrated  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution for a convention reason.  Such individuals  will  be
           few and it may be that as time passes and if the state can  show
           a  continuing  effort  to  deal  with   conduct   amounting   to
           persecution no Roma as  will  be  entitled  to  be  regarded  as
           refugees.  We do not think that that time has yet come."

   7. The  Tribunal,  therefore,  endorsed  the  adjudicator's  approach  to
      consider the case on its merits.  In particular, the Tribunal accepted
      that a mixed marriage might well make a claimant more of a  target  of
      the skinheads who would regard him as a  traitor  to  his  race.   See
      paragraph 14.  The Tribunal was not persuaded that  the  adjudicator's
      conclusions were wrong and emphasised that the case had  been  decided
      on its own facts and could not be used as any authority to  show  that
      Czech Roma are entitled to  be  regarded  as  refugees.   Indeed,  the
      contrary is so.  A successful claim for asylum by a  Czech  Roma  will
      very rarely be established.


   8. In the case of Puzova (01/TH/0416),  (Mr  J.  Barnes,  Chairman),  the
      Tribunal heard the appeals of  several  Czech  Roma  in  November  and
      December  2000.   In  a  judgment  of  some  61  pages,  the  Tribunal
      considered whether Czech Roma are entitled to international protection
      by reason of their ethnicity alone.  In paragraph  165,  the  Tribunal
      concluded:

           "In summary, we are satisfied that any claim that Czech Roma are
           by reason of their ethnicity alone entitled to refugee status is
           unsustainable and that each case must be looked at  on  its  own
           facts to see whether those facts show to the  relevant  standard
           that  the  specific  claimant  has  a  well  founded   fear   of
           persecution for a Convention reason.  Following  Horvath  it  is
           likely that those who can succeed in showing such  fear  on  the
           basis  of  feared  actions  of  non-state  actors  will  be  the
           exception since  there  is  currently  in  place  in  the  Czech
           Republic  a  system  of  criminal  law  which  offers  effective
           protection to Czech citizens generally,  including  Czech  Roma.
           Applying the appropriate test, none of the  appellants  succeeds
           in discharging the burden upon them  and  each  of  the  appeals
           before us is dismissed."


   9. In reaching its conclusions, the  Tribunal  considered  the  issue  of
      discrimination generally,  see  paragraphs  141  to  148  as  well  as
      skinhead violence.  In particular, consideration was given to  whether
      the state was unable or unwilling to provide the level  of  protection
      that it was its duty  to  provide.   Accordingly,  the  Tribunal  gave
      detailed consideration to the attitude  of  the  Czech  government  in
      combating abuse against Roma.


  10. In Hrbac [2002] UKIAT 01845, (Collins  J.,  President),  the  Tribunal
      considered the case of a Czech citizen who was not himself a Roma  but
      whose partner was.  It was  as  a  result  of  the  formation  of  the
      relationship in February 1998 that the appellant's problems arose.  He
      regularly suffered harassment from the police who made little  attempt
      conceal their identity with the skinheads.  A swastika  was  scratched
      on his car.  He was attacked by a  gang  of  perhaps  as  many  as  15
      skinheads and beaten with baseball bats and  knuckledusters.   He  and
      his partner were subjected to racial abuse and discrimination.  On one
      occasion, when he was stopped by the police, a  shaven  headed  police
      officer dragged him from his car and placed a pistol at his head.   On
      that occasion, he had been  accused  of  driving  a  stolen  car.   In
      paragraph 8 of the Tribunal's decision, it is said:

           "The position in the Czech Republic is such that it will in  our
           view be impossible for a Roma or anyone who has  suffered  as  a
           result of discrimination  against  Roma  to  establish  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution.  We recognise, of course, that  the
           situation may change for the worse; if it does, any such  change
           will be taken into account.


  11. In reaching that conclusion, the Tribunal took  into  account  the  US
      State Department  report  for  the  year  2001  which  suggested  that
      although, at times, police failed to take sufficient action  in  cases
      of threats or attacks against Roma, there was evidence that the police
      were treating cases of violence against Roma more  seriously  than  in
      the past.  Although Roma faced discrimination in areas  of  education,
      employment and housing, positive steps were being taken to  deal  with
      discrimination, although changing men's minds and  attitudes  rendered
      government actions less effective than they might otherwise have been.
       The Tribunal also noted the position of those  involved  in  a  mixed
      relationship (where one of the partners was non-Roma) as  giving  rise
      to a special difficulty because the non-Roma partner may  be  regarded
      as a traitor by white racists.  The Tribunal considered the actions of
      rogue police officers but, applying the Horvath  test,  decided  there
      was  no  reason  to  believe  such  harassment  was  condoned  by  the
      authorities.  Indeed, the  contrary  was  shown.   As  a  result,  the
      Tribunal concluded the claimant had failed to establish the  basis  of
      his claim under either Convention.


  12. The Court of Appeal revisited the issue of Czech Roma  in  ZL  and  VL
      [2003] EWCA Civ 25.  The evidence before the  adjudicator  included  a
      report by Dr Chirico, a recently called member of the English Bar  who
      has completed a three-year British Academy Post Doctoral Fellowship at
      University College London.  He has lived and worked  in  Prague.   The
      Court of Appeal noted that Dr  Chirico's  report  was,  in  effect,  a
      challenge to the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  Puzova.   His  report
      suggested (i) that attacks on and harassment of Roma by  skinheads  in
      the Czech Republic are growing (ii) that, at  local  level  at  least,
      skinheads  often  have  the  support  of  the  police  and  (iii)  the
      implementation of changes by the police and courts designed to  combat
      racism has been inadequate.  The Court of Appeal,  however,  concluded
      in paragraph 74 of the judgment  that  Dr  Chirico's  report  did  not
      undermine the conclusion of the IAT that the Czech Republic  provides,
      in general,  a  sufficiency  of  protection.   Having  considered  the
      appellant's case, the Court of Appeal concluded that  the  appellant's
      had failed to establish a claim under either Convention.


  13.  In  reaching  its  decision,  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
      observation of the Tribunal in Hrbac that we have  set  out  above  in
      paragraph 8 that it will "be impossible for a Roma or anyone  who  has
      suffered as a result of discrimination against  Roma  to  establish  a
      well-founded fear of persecution."  The Court warned that this  should
      not  be  treated  as  an  invitation  to  rubber-stamp   refusals   on
      applications made by Czech Roma:

           "Even if, in  general,  the  Czech  Republic  afford  sufficient
           protection,  there  must  remain  a  possibility  of   localised
           persecution  in  circumstances  where  there  may  be  arguments
           against relocation and, as Collins J. observed, there is  always
           a possibility that  the  position  in  the  Czech  Republic  may
           change."


  14. In paragraph 68 of the judgment, the  Court  of  Appeal  endorsed  the
      sentiment that:


           "...the stage has not been reached where it is said as a blanket
           rule of law or as an  irrebuttable  presumption  that  no  claim
           raising well-founded fear of persecution or Article 3 on  return
           could be made out."


  15.  We consider that the following principles may be derived  from  these
      cases:
        a. The Czech  republic  provides,  in  general,  a  sufficiency  of
           protection for Czech Roma.
        b. No Czech Roma is, by reason of his ethnicity alone, entitled  to
           refugee status.
        c. Each case must be looked at on its own facts.
        d.  It  will  be  the  exceptional  case  in  which  the   claimant
           establishes to the relevant  standard  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution for a Convention reason on the basis of  the  feared
           actions of non-state actors, but such cases will be few.
        e. The stage has not been reached where it is  can  be  said  as  a
           blanket rule of law or as an irrebuttable  presumption  that  no
           Roma claim can succeed.
        f. Whilst Roma faced with local discrimination or harassment may be
           able  to  re-locate  elsewhere  with  the  Czech  Republic,   an
           adjudicator  should  be  prepared  to  consider  arguments  that
           relocation is not possible in the circumstances of a  particular
           case.
        g. There is always a possibility that the  position  in  the  Czech
           Republic may change.
        h. Parties in a mixed relationship (that is where one party is Roma
           and the other is not) may be at greater risk.


  16. The adjudicator decided that the claimant in the  present  appeal  had
      two special characteristics: he was in a mixed race marriage and was a
      recognised Roma activist.


  17. It does not seem to us that the mere  fact  of  a  mixed  marriage  or
      relationship gives rise to a claim.  Although the adjudicator  allowed
      the claimant's appeal in Havlicek which was, indeed, a case where  his
      wife's father was Roma, the Tribunal, once again presided over by  the
      President, decided in Hrbac that the appellant,  also  involved  in  a
      mixed relationship, had failed to establish his claim.  Mr  Hrbac  had
      been discriminated against and subjected to an  attack  in  which  the
      police had placed a pistol at his head.  His ill-treatment  does  not,
      therefore, obviously fall into a category substantially different from
      that of the claimant in the instant appeal.  There  is  no  compelling
      evidence that the treatment meted out to the claimant was as a  result
      of his mixed marriage, rather than because he was perceived to be,  as
      the adjudicator found in paragraph 19 the determination, Roma  by  his
      appearance.

  18. The adjudicator also found that he was a well-known  local  member  of
      the SRCR.  The attack in 1996, however, was before he became  involved
      in the SRCR.  The attacks in September 1998 and May 2000 were  carried
      out by  skinheads  who  used  indiscriminate  violence  against  those
      attending the SRCR events.  The  police  were  not  complicit  in  the
      attacks. The events of September 2001 and November  2001  establish  a
      link between the claimant's ill-treatment and his involvement  with  a
      Roma organisation.  The first incident was when he took  the  case  of
      Roma children being denied entry to the local swimming pool  resulting
      in his arrest when the manager called the police.  The second incident
      followed  his  arrest  in  November  2001  when  he  was  accused   of
      shoplifting. He was released when no evidence was found and  the  SCRC
      complained to the police and the shop  manager.   In  each  case,  the
      events were only peripherally related to  his  SCRC  involvement.   In
      other words, it is not clear whether  being  a  Roma  activist  had  a
      significant effect on events.  We do not understand the claimant to be
      saying that he was an official in the organisation.


  19. Although the adjudicator identified his mixed marriage  and  the  fact
      that  he  was  a   recognised   Roma   activist   as   being   special
      characteristics, it is difficult to  see  how  these  factors  can  be
      considered exceptional.  He gave no reasons why he considered them  to
      be so:

           "The appellant has special characteristics.   He  was  in  mixed
           race marriage and a  recognised  Roma  activist.   He  had  been
           attacked three times by police, most  importantly  take  into  a
           forest for a thorough beating by skinheads in collusion with the
           police.  Anything more blatant was hard to  imagine:  there  was
           clearly a total failure of protection  for  him.   There  was  a
           pattern of persecution, leading him to desperation."


  20. Mr O'Bryan, who appeared on behalf of  the  claimant,  did  not  argue
      that, in paragraph 29 of the determination, there were any  additional
      special characteristics other than the fact that the claimant was in a
      mixed race marriage and was a recognised  Roma  activist.   The  other
      factors set out in that  paragraph  were,  he  submitted,  merely  the
      consequences of his special position.  We do  not  consider  that  the
      adjudicator gave proper consideration to whether the  claimant's  case
      was exceptional in accordance with the case law that we have  set  out
      above and the principles that can be derived from it.  Our  conclusion
      is that the appellant is not an exceptional case.


  21. Even if we are wrong on this  issue,  the  adjudicator  did  not  then
      consider whether this was a local problem faced by the  claimant  that
      might be resolved by his moving elsewhere.  In  paragraph  33  of  the
      determination, the adjudicator said:

           "Relocation is not practical as his reputation would follow him.
            The police were complicit."


  22. The adjudicator does not explain how the claimant's  reputation  would
      follow him if he were to move to another part of the  Czech  Republic.
      The fact that the local  police  were  complicit  in  the  attacks  in
      September and November  2001  does  not  mean  those  events  will  be
      replicated elsewhere or that information about this claimant  will  be
      circulated  to  other  police  forces  throughout  the  country.   The
      claimant's involvement with the SRCR was not of such high profile that
      the general public or, indeed, the skinheads, will  know  of  his  re-
      location elsewhere.  There is no credible evidence that  the  claimant
      will not be able to make use of the general sufficiency of  protection
      within the Czech Republic.


  23. In Hrbac, the Court of Appeal left open the possibility  of  localised
      persecution in circumstances where there might  be  arguments  against
      relocation.  The adjudicator did not consider  any  arguments  against
      relocation save that relocation was not practical  as  his  reputation
      would follow him.  In our judgment, this finding is unsustainable.  In
      the course of the hearing before us, no convincing arguments were  put
      forward that might  suggest  the  claimant  could  not  find  adequate
      security by moving elsewhere if the position  in  his  home  town  was
      untenable.  Indeed, Mr O'Bryan relied on paragraph 11 of Dr  Chirico's
      report (found at page 17 of the claimant's bundle) to the effect  that
      the claimant's home in Lovosice, in northern Bohemia, is the  location
      of serious problems with the skinheads since the early  1990s,  partly
      as a result of the general poverty in the area and partly as a  result
      of  neo-Nazi  groups  in  nearby  Germany.   If   North   Bohemia   is
      particularly difficult for Roma, it would suggest that there are other
      places where the situation is better.  Dr Chirico quotes  the  UNHCR's
      Prague liaison officer as suggesting that in  such  a  small  country,
      internal flight is irrelevant.  We do not understand how this  can  be
      so.  If a particular claimant  is  experiencing  difficulties  in  his
      local area and those difficulties are  not  reasonably  likely  to  be
      replicated elsewhere, relocation is both  possible  and  an  effective
      remedy.

  24. Mr O'Bryan did not suggest that relocation would be unduly  harsh  for
      this claimant.  He confined his submission to stating that a real risk
      exists throughout the country.  For the reasons that we have given, we
      do not agree.  In reply, Miss Hough drew  to  our  attention  that  Dr
      Chirico provided a report for the adjudicator in ZL and VL  and  that,
      notwithstanding the serious allegations of rape  committed  by  police
      officers in that case, the Court of Appeal in January 2003  considered
      that there was a sufficiency of protection in the Czech Republic.

  25. Mr O'Bryan did not argue that there has been a general change  in  the
      position of Roma within the Czech Republic, the possibility  of  which
      is mentioned in paragraph 15 and elsewhere of this determination.

  26. In the course of this appeal only  relatively  limited  reference  was
      made to the background material.  Miss Hough referred us to  paragraph
      5.23 of the October 2003 Country Report on the Czech Republic prepared
      by CIPU.  It is there recorded that the national  police  Academy  has
      introduced a  course  in  Romany  language  and  culture  designed  to
      facilitate police officers' improved  communication  and  response  to
      Roma communities within their jurisdiction.  The Ministry of  Interior
      has included the issue of extremism  in  the  teaching  programmes  of
      police schools at all levels.  There is an active effort  underway  to
      identify,  train  and  recruit  qualified  Roma  to   serve   in   law
      enforcement, including a bridging  course  for  those  without  formal
      educational qualifications.  At paragraph 6.108 of the CIPU Report, it
      is stated:

           "There have been reports of occasional violence or excessive use
           of force by the police.  The International  Helsinki  Federation
           report  states:  "Unwarranted  and  unindicted  police  violence
           against Roma continued in 2002"; the report quotes one  specific
           incident - the case of a Roma man who died  in  police  custody,
           apparently in suspicious  circumstances...  the  case  file  was
           apparently provided to lawyers only two months after  the  death
           and  is  suspected  to  have  been  manipulated.   An   official
           investigation into the case is in progress.  The  European  Roma
           Rights Centre has reported that, on 21 February 2002, a Roma man
           (Mr B) was physically abused by  police  officers  in  Litvinov.
           The police had been called after Mr B had  quarrelled  with  his
           daughter and had hit her several times.  Mr  B  was  treated  in
           hospital for his injuries which included leading around his neck
           and ears and his filed a criminal complaint against the police."


  27. The adjudicator concluded that the claimant had  established  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution by reason of his Roma ethnicity.  He  also
      found that the claimant was at risk of a violation of  his  Article  3
      rights in that he  was  at  risk  of  suffering  torture,  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment or punishment.   For  the  reasons  that  we  have
      given, we  do  not  consider  that  the  adjudicator's  conclusion  is
      sustainable.  Accordingly, the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.




   Decision: The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
30 October 2003
