
That Heard at Field House
                    AL (Article 3 - Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00076
On        11 June 2003
Written    11 June 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . .21/08/2003 . . .
. . . . . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                 Ms D K Gill






                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appeals, with  leave,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Ms  C  J  Wright,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 7  September  2002  to
     refuse leave to enter and refuse asylum

  2. Before us, Ms L Turnbull, instructed by Stanley & Co,  represented  the
     Appellant  and  Mr  G  Saunders,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
     represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant is a Shia Moslem from the S. Tribe, who lived  in  the  S
     District of W Province. His father was a wealthy  businessman  who  had
     troubles with the local Mojahedin after the fall of the  government  in
     1992.  A local Mojahedin Commander, confiscated his two lorries.   When
     the Taliban took over, his father regained control of his lorries,  and
     the Mojahedin Commander went  elsewhere.  In  November  2001  when  the
     Taliban were defeated, the Mojahedin Commander returned to the area and
     became a powerful person there.  In December 2001 the Appellant went to
     Kabul to get money from a businessman. Whilst he was staying there with
     his sister, he was informed that  his  parents  and  brother  had  been
     killed and the Mojahedin were looking for him and others connected with
     his family. Apparently the Commander had taken the family property  and
     the Appellant as the last surviving male in the  family  would  be  his
     father's heir, and hence a threat to the Commander. He  therefore  left
     Afghanistan and ultimately came to the United Kingdom where he  claimed
     asylum.

  4. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant account  was  credible  but
     concluded that his fear of Commander Z related  to  a  personal  family
     dispute over the ownership of  property  and  did  not  engage  a  1951
     Convention reason.  She therefore dismissed his asylum claim. She  then
     held that if he were returned to his home area of Afghanistan he  would
     face a real risk of a breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Connection
     and went on to consider  the  question  of  internal  relocation.   She
     discounted the credibility of a letter from a friend that Z  was  still
     seeking him and concluded that he could now return safely to Kabul, and
     that it would not be unduly harsh for him to live there.  She therefore
     dismissed his claim under Articles 2 and 3 as well.

  5. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal, though somewhat inchoate,  argue
     essentially that the Adjudicator did not give sufficient  consideration
     to the human rights claim when the risks to the Appellant were from non-
     Refugee Convention reasons and that it would be unduly harsh to  expect
     the Appellant to relocate to Kabul. Mackey V-P granted leave to  enable
     the Tribunal to consider whether  the  Robinson  tests  on  relocation,
     which are used in the refugee context, are applicable  when  relocation
     issues arise in a purely human rights context. In other  words  whether
     the Robinson tests or the normal Article 2 and Article 3  tests  should
     apply wherever an Applicant relocates in his country of origin.  Before
     us, these issues were argued in terms of whether the  Adjudicator  gave
     proper consideration to  the  Articles  2  and  3  claims  and  to  the
     viability of internal relocation, including  undue  harshness  and  the
     close geographical proximity of the Appellant's home area to Kabul.

  6. We turn first to the specific point of law arising from the grounds  of
     appeal, as to whether the Robinson tests on internal relocation,  which
     are used in the asylum context should be applied  to  consideration  of
     internal relocation under Articles 2 and 3.

  7. Brooke LJ, who delivered the judgment in Robinson  [1997]  Imm  AR  568
     stated at the outset that the scope of the internal flight  alternative
     was linked with the definition of a refugee in the 1951 Convention.  He
     said
           "The 1951  Convention  conferred  special  status  on  a  person
           recognised  as   a   refugee   within   the   meaning   of   the
           Convention....... In particular, so long as they are  recognised
           as refugees, they may not be expelled from the country in  which
           they are lawfully present save on grounds of  national  security
           or public order and even then only after due process of law  and
           in any event a refugee may not be expelled or returned  "in  any
           manner whatsoever" to the frontiers  of  territories  where  his
           life or freedom would be threatened  on  account  of  his  race,
           religion, nationality, membership of a particular social  group,
           or political opinion.......  It is therefore to Article  1  that
           we must turn to see who is entitled to the benefits conferred by
           the Convention. It provides so far  as  material  that  for  the
           purposes of the Convention the term refugee is to apply  to  any
           person who
                 "owing to a well  founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
                 reasons of race, religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
                 particular social group, or political opinion,  is  outside
                 the country of nationality and is unable or, owing to  such
                 fear, is unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of
                 the country."
           The Convention does not deal in express terms with  a  situation
           in which a person may technically be able to live in a part of a
           country free of fear but for one reason or  another  it  is  not
           reasonable to expect him to do so. Obvious examples are parts of
           countries, which are  uninhabitable,  and  other  examples  have
           cropped up over the years in which the terms of  the  Convention
           have  been  worked  out  in  practice.........   There   is   no
           international  court  charged  with   the   interpretation   and
           implementation  of  the  Convention  and  for  this  reason  the
           Handbook published in 1979 by UNHCR is particularly helpful as a
           guide  to  what  is  the  international  understanding  of   the
           Convention obligations, as worked out  in  practice.......  When
           the authors of this Handbook came  to  explain  the  phrase  "is
           outside the country of his nationality in Article 1A(2)  of  the
           Convention they said
                 "The fear of being persecuted need not always extend to the
                 whole   territory   of    the    refugee's    country    of
                 nationality....... In such situations, a person will not be
                 excluded from refugee status merely because he  could  have
                 sought refuge in another part of the same country, if under
                 all the circumstances it would not have been reasonable  to
                 expect him to do so."
           A similar concept is to be found in paragraph  8  of  the  Joint
           Position Paper of March 1996  defined  by  the  Council  of  the
           European Union on the harmonised application of  the  definition
           of the term refugee in Article 1 of the Geneva  Convention......
           It appears to  us  that  the  1996  Joint  Position  reflects  a
           contemporary understanding of the  obligations  created  by  the
           Convention, which is not confined to the member  states  of  the
           European Union...... It follows  that  if  the  home  state  can
           afford what has variously been  described  as  a  "safe  haven",
           "relocation", "internal  protection",  or  "an  internal  flight
           alternative" where the claimant would not have  a  well  founded
           fear of persecution for a Convention reason, then  international
           protection is not necessary, but it must be reasonable  for  him
           to go stay in that safe  haven........  As  a  majority  of  the
           Federal Court of Australia observed in Randhawa
                 "If it is not reasonable in the circumstances to  expect  a
                 person who has  a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  in
                 relation to the part of the country from which  he  or  she
                 has fled to relocate to another  part  of  the  country  of
                 nationality it may be said that, in the relevant sense, the
                 person's fear of persecution in relation to the country  as
                 a whole is well founded."

           In determining whether it would not be reasonable to expect  the
           claimant to relocate internally, a decision maker will  have  to
           consider  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  against   the
           backcloth that the issue is whether the claimant is entitled  to
           the status of refugee. Various tests have been suggested.

  8. Brooke LJ went  on  to  consider  the  various  tests  that  have  been
     formulated to assess reasonableness in asylum cases  but  it  is  clear
     from his judgement as a whole and in particular from the passage quoted
     from   Randhawa,   that   the   genesis   and    rationale    of    the
     reasonableness/undue  harshness  test   in   internal   relocation   is
     inherently bound up within the definition of a refugee in Article 1  of
     the 1951 Convention. The nature and extent of this reasonableness  test
     has been defined in various Tribunal decisions such as Sayandan (16312)
     as being whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  an  applicant  to
     relocate, having regard to the aggregate effect  of  a  wide  range  of
     factors. These tests expressly  relating  to  reasonableness  or  undue
     harshness,  inherently  refer  to  factors  that  are  insufficient  in
     themselves to cross the high severity threshold required to  constitute
     persecution. Otherwise, if the Applicant faced persecutory treatment in
     every part of his home country,  there  would  be  no  viable  internal
     relocation option open to him at all.

  9. Clearly  the  concept  of  the  viability  of  an  internal  relocation
     alternative to international protection has  been  extensively  applied
     when considering claims under Articles 2 and  3.  However  we  have  to
     consider  whether  the  refugee  related  considerations  relating   to
     reasonableness/undue harshness as described in Robinson, also apply.

 10. It is worth first recording that Articles 2 and 3 provide that
           "2. Everyone's right to life shall be protected by law.  No  one
           shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  intentionally  save  in  the
           execution of a sentence by a court following his conviction of a
           crime for which this penalty is provided by law.
           3. No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment or punishment."

 11. The ECHR in Hilal v The UK (Application No.  45276/99)  when  assessing
     the prospect of internal relocation within Tanzania, from  Zanzibar  to
     the mainland, set out the issues in the following terms
           "59. The Court recalls at the  outset  that  Contracting  States
           have the right, as a matter of  well  established  international
           law  and  subject  to  the  treaty  obligations  including   the
           Convention, to control the entry,  residence  and  expulsion  of
           aliens.  However in exercising their right to expel such aliens,
           Contracting  States  must  have  regard  to  Article  3  of  the
           Convention, which enshrines one of  the  fundamental  values  of
           democratic societies.  The expulsion of an alien may  give  rise
           to an issue under this provision where substantial grounds  have
           been shown  for  believing  that  the  person  in  question,  if
           expelled, would face a real risk of being subjected to treatment
           contrary to  Article  3  in  the  receiving  country.   In  such
           circumstances, Article 3 implies an obligation not to expel  the
           individual to that country.

 12. There is no suggestion here that any factors that  do  not  attain  the
     minimum level of severity required to engage Article 3 are material  to
     the consideration of internal relocation.  This approach  is  reflected
     and clarified in the approach taken by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Ullah
     [2002] EWCA Civ 1856.
           "22. The Convention was opened for signature in  November  1950.
           Most signatories to  that  Convention  also  subscribed  to  the
           Refugee Convention.  It is noticeable that Article 33 (2) of the
           latter Convention permitted a state to remove someone  convicted
           of a particularly serious crime, or constituting a danger to the
           community, notwithstanding that removal would be  to  a  country
           where that person's life would be threatened.  We do not believe
           that the signatures to the Convention conceived  that  it  would
           impact on their rights under international law to  refuse  entry
           to or to remove aliens from their territory.
           23. Our belief receives support from the terms of the Convention
           itself.  The right  of  immigration  control  is  recognised  by
           Article  5.1(f)  which  qualifies  the  right  to   liberty   by
           permitting arrest or detention  of  a  person  "to  prevent  his
           effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a  person
           against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or
           extradition."  Nowhere  else  in  the  qualifications  to  those
           Convention rights which are not absolute is any reference to the
           right of a state to control immigration.  We do not believe that
           this was because the right would, or would arguably, be  covered
           by express limitations,  such  as  "the  interests  of  national
           security, public  safety  or  the  economic  well-being  of  the
           country," which justify derogation from Article  8  rights.   We
           believe that it  was  because  the  Contracting  States  had  no
           intention of restricting their rights  of  immigration  control.
           The Convention was not designed  to  impact  on  the  rights  of
           States to refuse  entry  to  aliens  or  to  remove  them.   The
           Convention was designed to govern the treatment of those  living
           within t  9  he  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  contracting
           States.....
           65. This appeal is concerned with Article 9. Our reasoning  has,
           however, wider implications.  Where the Convention is invoked on
           the sole ground of the treatment to which an alien, refused  the
           right to enter or remain, is  likely  to  be  subjected  by  the
           receiving state, and that treatment is not  sufficiently  severe
           to engage Article 3,  the  English  Court  is  not  required  to
           recognise that any other Article of the Convention is, or maybe,
           engaged.  Where such treatment falls outside  Article  3,  there
           may be cases, which justify the grant of  exceptional  leave  to
           remain on humanitarian grounds.  The decision of  the  Secretary
           of  State  in  such  cases  will  be  subject  to  the  ordinary
           principles of judicial review but not to the constraints of  the
           Convention.

 13. The clear intention of Ullah is to import the high  severity  threshold
     of Article 3 into the consideration of other, non-absolute Articles. It
     would be wholly contradictory therefore to  conclude  when  considering
     any aspect of Article 3, that one should have regard, as per  Robinson,
     to factors that effectively by definition do not cross  the  Article  3
     severity threshold.

 14. To put it another way, when one is considering the specific  action  of
     the UK Government being challenged by an applicant as being  in  breach
     of Article 3 (usually in our jurisdiction removal to his  own  country)
     we may only take into account matters which relate  to  that  decision,
     and which individually or in aggregate are of  sufficient  severity  to
     engage Article 3, (and  also  Article  2  which  is  also  an  absolute
     obligation that may for practical purposes be  subsumed  within  this).
     Matters that  do  not  constitute  "torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
     treatment or punishment" as defined in human rights  jurisprudence  are
     not material. The Robinson derived tests of  reasonableness  and  undue
     harshness are part of  the  assessment  of  refugee  status.  They  are
     inappropriate to Article 3 consideration, which should be  assessed  on
     the basis of whether there is a real risk that the decision  or  action
     of the UK government complained about, would result in a breach of  the
     terms of that Article.

 15. Against this background we turn to the specific facts of  this  appeal.
     The Adjudicator held that the Appellant face a real risk of  breach  of
     his Article 2 and Article 3 rights in his home  area  by  Commander  Z.
     However the removal directions set by the UK government  when  refusing
     leave to enter are to Afghanistan, and Appellant will  in  practice  be
     returned to Kabul. If the Appellant, after return, chooses of  his  own
     volition to leave Kabul for another part  of  Afghanistan,  that  is  a
     matter for him and does not relate to the  Respondent's  decision.   We
     have to assess whether the conditions awaiting the Appellant on  return
     create a real risk of a breach of Article 3

 16. The Adjudicator came to the conclusion that the Appellant would not  be
     at any real risk of a breach of his Articles 2 or 3  rights  in  Kabul.
     Unless this decision can be shown to be unsound, that is an end to this
     appeal.

 17. Ms Turnbull first argued that return would be unduly harsh in the light
     of the situation in Kabul and the Appellant's religion  and  ethnicity.
     The Adjudicator in fact dismissed  this  aspect  of  the  claim  having
     undertaken a very thorough examination of the current situation in that
     city and the specific circumstances of the Appellant, and we can see no
     material error in her assessment, which fully accords with many  recent
     decisions by the Tribunal. Ms Turnbull submitted some evidence of crime
     in Kabul, as reported by a Pakistani newspaper, but this  does  not  in
     any material way undermine the validity of the Adjudicator's assessment
     In any event undue  harshness  is  not  relevant  to  consideration  of
     Article 3 for the reasons we have described and  none  of  the  factors
     mentioned in this context, even taken in  aggregate,  would  cross  the
     high severity threshold of inhuman or degrading treatment for a fit and
     healthy young man. There is nothing of substance in this argument.

 18. Ms Turnbull also submitted that return to Kabul  would  create  a  real
     risk of a breach of Articles 2 and 3  by  Commander  Z,  and  that  the
     Adjudicator's assessment of this was wrong because she  had  not  taken
     into account the proximity of the Appellant's home town and province to
     Kabul.

 19. It is not surprising that the Adjudicator did not take this matter into
     account, as it does not appear either  that  it  was  raised  with  her
     specifically at the hearing, or that there was anything in the evidence
     placed before her, which might have alerted her to it. Indeed  we  note
     that the Appellant himself submitted a statement to her in response  to
     paragraph 5 of the refusal letter dealing with internal flight in which
     he stated that
           "I am not from Kabul but from the S district, therefore I do not
           wish to be sent to Kabul, Afghanistan.  As  stated  above  there
           are very few people of my tribe living in Kabul  and  I  do  not
           know anyone in Kabul.  It is clear from recent news reports that
           the security situation in the Afghanistan is still weak and that
           there are no authorities that one could go to  seek  protection.
           There is no effective  police  force  anywhere  in  Afghanistan.
           Therefore my life will remain  in  danger.   Wherever  I  go  in
           Afghanistan, I would still be  in  a  minority.   The  Mojahedin
           dominate every area of Pakistan  so  I  would  not  be  able  to
           protect  myself  from  them  in  their  efforts  to  harass  and
           persecute me on account of my ethnicity, and also on the  orders
           of the Commander."

 20. It is curious that if the Appellant's home was close to  Kabul  he  did
     not say so in this statement. Indeed the implication of  his  statement
     that he was not from Kabul, is that he  came  from  a  quite  different
     area. It is also surprising that he said he knew no one in  Kabul  when
     it is acknowledged that he has a sister living there,  albeit  that  he
     has not spoken to her in some time. It is also rather inconsistent with
     his evidence that his father did business in Kabul and  he  himself  or
     was there on business when he learned of the death of his  parents  and
     brother. We therefore expected Ms Turnbull to produce some evidence  in
     support of this claim of proximity.  The only evidence, if that is  the
     right  word  for  it,  was  an  unsigned  statement  allegedly  by  the
     Appellant's nephew, dated 12  May  2003,  prepared  subsequent  to  the
     dismissal of the  appeal  by  the  Adjudicator.  Curiously  the  signed
     statement by the Appellant dated 9 May 2003 makes no  mention  of  this
     proximity point.

 21. We therefore asked Ms Turnbull whether there was any explanation as  to
     why this proximity point had not been raised before the Adjudicator and
     whether she had any document to demonstrate to  us  where  he  actually
     lived. She was unable to offer any explanation as to why this issue was
     not raised with the Adjudicator but acknowledged that  it  should  have
     been. She did not have any map or any alternative evidence  beyond  the
     unsigned statement. This is most unsatisfactory and after the  hearing,
     in fairness to the Appellant, we consulted the very  substantial  Times
     World Atlas. We could find no reference in it either to his  home  town
     or his province, but there was a reference to the district near  Kabul,
     mentioned by the Appellant's cousin.

 22. We do not know from our own knowledge,  nor  does  Mr  Saunders  or  Ms
     Turnbull, whether the Appellant's home town is close to Kabul  or  not.
     Small towns and  villages  are  often  not  included  in  international
     atlases.  It is somewhat more  surprising  that  his  province  is  not
     mentioned either, but perhaps there is an error in  transcription.  The
     burden of proof is of course upon the Appellant to establish this point
     and our first observation is that even on the  low  standard  of  proof
     applicable, he would be struggling to discharge it. It should not be  a
     difficult matter to produce conclusive evidence that his  hometown  and
     province actually exist and they are where he  says  they  are,  rather
     than relying on an unsigned statement by someone who has not previously
     given evidence, on a point  that  has  never  previously  been  raised.
     However Mr Saunders, with his customary fairness, was content to  argue
     his case on the basis that the Appellant home was relatively  close  to
     Kabul, and we proceeded on that basis.

 23. Mr Saunders submitted first that there was no  evidence  before  us  to
     show that the Commander is of any real authority within  the  Mojahedin
     outside his immediate area, or that his writ  would  run  outside  that
     area, still less  in  Kabul  where  the  central  government  maintains
     effective control. Nor was there any reason  why  the  Commander  would
     even become aware of the Appellant's return to Kabul. The Appellant had
     not thought fit to raise the proximity point before the Adjudicator, or
     even in his subsequent statement. The  evidence  therefore  before  the
     Tribunal falls far short of establishing any real risk to the Appellant
     in Kabul  of  a  breach  of  his  Articles  2  and  3  rights  and  the
     Adjudicator's conclusion that there was no real risk to  the  Appellant
     in Kabul was correct. Ms Turnbull argued that because  the  Appellant's
     father had businesses in both his home town and  Kabul,  the  Commander
     would seek him in both places and the proximity of  the  two  meant  he
     would be in danger in Kabul.

 24. We agree with the thrust of  Mr  Saunder's  submissions.  There  is  no
     evidence that the Commander's power extends outside his local  area  to
     Kabul. It may be relatively near but it is in a different province, and
     Kabul is under the effective control of  the  central  government.  The
     evidence before the Adjudicator was that the Commander, when he  killed
     the Appellant's parents, wanted also to kill not just the Appellant but
     others associated with his family. Yet  the  Appellant's  sister  still
     lives in Kabul. She may  not  be  the  legal  heir  but  her  continued
     presence shows that the Commander is not taking action  against  others
     associated with the family. If the  Commander  is  in  control  in  the
     Appellant's home area as claimed, and has control  of  the  Appellant's
     family assets, he has no reason to  fear  the  Appellant,  who  has  no
     influence or power of his own and was not  himself  a  witness  to  the
     murders. Moreover the Appellant has been in the UK for a year  now  and
     in Turkey for three months before that. Any threat from  a  search  for
     him that there may have been in  the  aftermath  of  the  murders,  has
     passed. There is no reason why the Commander should become aware of the
     Appellant's return unless the Appellant seeks  to  recover  his  family
     land by legal process. However by leaving Afghanistan the Appellant has
     shown no inclination to do this, and such action would run  counter  to
     the thrust of his claim that there is no protection available  for  him
     from the authorities in his home area. We therefore conclude  that  the
     Adjudicator was correct in her finding that the Appellant will be at no
     real risk of a breach of Articles 2 or 3 on return to Kabul.

 25. We would add, though it is not necessary in  the  light  of  the  above
     conclusion, that within Kabul and the effective area of control of  the
     central government, there would be a sufficiency of protection for  the
     Appellant were he to experience  difficulties  from  the  Commander  or
     anyone else. Ms Turnbull argued to the contrary, firstly on  the  basis
     of the newspaper articles from a Peshawar newspaper in  Pakistan  about
     crime in Kabul. Unfortunately we do not know the political viewpoint of
     this paper, The Daily Sahaar. However crime occurs in all countries and
     that is not the yardstick by which we  should  measure  sufficiency  of
     protection within the terms defined by the Court of Appeal and House of
     Lords in Horvath. Ms Turnbull also relied  upon  a  report  by  Amnesty
     International, which is opposed to forced returns to  Afghanistan,  but
     most of this related to the situation outside  Kabul.   Insofar  as  it
     referred to Kabul specifically it accepted on page A9 that the  central
     government had effective control in Kabul.

 26. We conclude that there  is  no  material  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
     dismissal of the claim both for asylum and in respect of Articles 2 and
     3.  For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
