

FP (Return- Cabinda -Non -Luandan) Angola CG [2003] UKIAT 00204
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 6th February 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                      ........16/07/2003....................

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                              Mrs S Hussain JP
                                Mr R Hamilton

Between:


                                               APPELLANT

                               Francisco Pinto


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:     Mr D Williams of Counsel, instructed by Roelens
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant, Mr Francisco Pinto, is a citizen  of  Angola  from  the
     Cabinda enclave where he was born in May 1962.  In June 2001  he  left
     Cabinda for Pointe Noir in the Congo from where he travelled to  Gabon
     and on to Paris. He travelled from Paris to London and the  next  day,
     he said, a passer-by suggested that he should claim asylum and  showed
     him where to go.   In August 2001 his asylum claim was refused and  he
     appealed against that refusal to an Adjudicator, Mr J S Brodwell.  The
     asylum claim was refused because the Secretary of State concluded that
     the Appellant was not an Angolan national, but was  from  Congo.   The
     Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant was an Angolan national, born
     in Cabinda.

  2. The Adjudicator was also satisfied that he had been a member  of  FLEC
     in 1999.  FLEC is an organisation dedicated to obtaining  independence
     for the enclave of Cabinda from  Angola.   The  Adjudicator  was  also
     satisfied that it was reasonably likely that  the  Appellant's  father
     had been a member of FLEC and had been killed.  The  circumstances  of
     the father's death are not, however, described by the Adjudicator  and
     no light could be shed on that  matter  before  us.   The  Adjudicator
     considered the basis upon which the Appellant said that he had a well-
     founded fear of persecution in Angola.  The Appellant had claimed that
     he had been accused of  embezzling  FLEC  funds  but,  notwithstanding
     that, the  political  section  of  FLEC  known  as  FLEC  RENOVAD  had
     nonetheless been prepared to send the Appellant to the  United  States
     to raise money for FLEC and would  pay  for  him,  his  wife  and  his
     children to travel to the United States.  The Appellant  claimed  that
     he was on his way to the United States but was let down in his  travel
     arrangements by the agent.  He was travelling separately from his wife
     and children.  The Adjudicator found it unlikely that if he  had  been
     accused of embezzling he would be funded with his  family  to  make  a
     fund raising trip to the United  States.   The  Adjudicator  found  it
     surprising  that,  if  the  story  were  true,   the   accusation   of
     embezzlement had not been mentioned in the  full  statement  which  he
     gave in connection with his  application  for  asylum.   Likewise,  he
     found it surprising that, if the story were true, the Appellant  would
     be dumped and left to his own devices in central London.
  3. Accordingly, the Adjudicator said that he was not satisfied  that  the
     Appellant had left Angola for the reasons he claimed or indeed that he
     had necessarily left Angola in the way in  which  he  described.   The
     Adjudicator then said that he was satisfied that the  Appellant  could
     safely return to  Cabinda  because  he  would  not  there  suffer  any
     problems from members of FLEC.  The Adjudicator  then  said  that  the
     Appellant had not suffered any problems with the  Angolan  authorities
     in the past and that there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that
     he would  do  so  in  the  future.   The  Adjudicator  also  expressed
     satisfaction that the Appellant could safely return to the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo.  He had a  house  in  Kinshasa  and  had  travelled
     freely to and from Congo and Angola over the years.

  4. The Adjudicator  concluded  as  there  was  no  reasonable  degree  of
     likelihood that the Appellant would be  persecuted  for  a  Convention
     reason if returned to Angola, a return to Angola  would  not  put  the
     country in breach of its obligations under Refugee Convention.  On the
     same basis, the Adjudicator concluded that there was no real  risk  or
     substantial grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  rights,  in
     particular under Article 3 of the ECHR, would be infringed upon such a
     return.

  5. The particular point upon which leave to appeal was granted and  which
     has been pursued before us is related to the return  to  Angola.   The
     removal directions are  to  Angola  proper  and  not  to  the  Cabinda
     enclave.  Return to Angola would be effected by return to Luanda,  its
     capital.  Cabinda is a small coastal enclave which lies  between  250-
     300 miles north of Luanda and is separated from Angola proper  by  the
     relatively narrow stretch of territory of the Democratic  Republic  of
     Congo reaching to the Atlantic Ocean.

  6. Mr Williams, for  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's
     decision had ignored the reality of the  Appellant's  connection  with
     Angola proper.  His evidence had been that he had never been to Angola
     proper and that his connections with Angola only existed  through  his
     being  a  Cabindan.   He  was  not  from  Luanda  and  did  not  speak
     Portuguese, the language normally spoken in  Angola.   He  spoke  only
     French and Kikongo and could understand only a little Portuguese.   In
     addition, the Angolan authorities at Luanda  Airport  would  recognise
     that he came from Cabinda where the conflict between the  independence
     movements and the Angolan government had flared up.  He, as  a  member
     of FLEC, would be at risk of being identified as a Cabindan  supporter
     of FLEC, and therefore at risk  of  torture.   Even  if  he  were  not
     regarded as a FLEC supporter, the objective evidence showed  that  the
     only people who could be returned to Angola were those  who  had  come
     from Luanda and had connections there, because of  the  conditions  of
     life in Luanda as the war between the  Angolan  government  and  UNITA
     ended.   Accordingly,  Mr  Williams  submitted  that  both  on  narrow
     personal  grounds  and  on  wider  grounds  related  to  the   general
     conditions for someone who had no connections with Angola proper,  let
     alone Luanda, there would be a breach of his Article 3  rights  and  a
     risk of persecution for political opinion were he to be returned.

  7. The comment by the Adjudicator that he had not suffered  any  problems
     with the Angolan authorities in the past was true, so far  as  Cabinda
     was concerned, but did not relate  to  the  problem  of  someone  from
     Cabinda, being returned to Luanda in circumstances  where  he  had  no
     connection  with  Luanda  and  would  be  identified  as  a  Cabindan.
     Effectively, the Adjudicator had failed to  consider  the  distinction
     between Angola and Cabinda from the point of view of  this  particular
     Appellant.

  8. The Appellant had left Cabinda at the age of twelve and had  lived  in
     the Congo and the Democratic Republic  of  Congo.   His  money-raising
     activities for FLEC had meant that  he  travelled  between  those  two
     countries and Cabinda on a number  of  occasions,  but  there  was  no
     evidence he had ever been to Angola proper at all.

  9. In our view, the real issue here is  how  the  authorities  in  Luanda
     might view the Appellant upon arrival in Luanda.  Might they  conclude
     that he was from Cabinda, and if from Cabinda infer that he  might  be
     involved with one of the organisations fighting and organising for the
     independence  of  the  Cabindan  enclave?   If   they   reached   that
     conclusion, how would they then react to him?  In any event, what sort
     of treatment and conditions of life would the Appellant face in Luanda
     upon his arrival and thereafter if he were not detained?  Would  that,
     even by itself, breach Article 3?  This turns upon an analysis of  the
     objective evidence.  The Adjudicator does not deal with the  available
     background evidence in relation to what it might show for someone  not
     from Luanda, or indeed Angola proper, being returned to Luanda.

 10. It is necessary to examine the background material from  two  aspects:
     first for what it shows is the position  in  Cabinda  itself,  because
     that will provide a guide as to how an Angolan from Cabinda  might  be
     received on arrival at Luanda, and second for what it shows as to  the
     general conditions in Luanda for returnees, especially those not  from
     Luanda.   Mr  Williams  submitted  that  both  aspects  supported  the
     Appellant's claims.

 11. The most useful background  document  for  the  first  aspect  is  the
     October 2002 CIPU Report.  It describes, in paragraph 6.40,  how  FLEC
     started in 1963 seeking a separate independence from Portugal, but had
     split into several competing factions;   though  retaining  widespread
     Cabindan support,  they  had  been  marginalised  and,  following  the
     independence of Angola, remained unrecognised by the Organisation  for
     African Unity as an independence movement.

 12. A low level intensity war, accompanied by atrocities on all sides, has
     endured for many years and is expected to continue.  Seemingly hopeful
     signs in 2001 came to nothing and the CIPU Report states in  paragraph
     6.48  that  in  August  2002   any   possibility   of   an   immediate
     reconciliation over the status of the province was ended  by  a  major
     offensive launched by the Angolan army.  The  status  of  Cabinda  has
     become an issue in the peace talks between the Angolan government  and
     UNITA.  Those are described in paragraph 4.19:   a  peace  accord  was
     signed in April 2002, the demobilisation of UNITA rebels was  complete
     by the end of July 2002 and a formal agreement on  the  timescale  for
     discussions on reconciliation and reintegration  of  UNITA  supporters
     and figures reached in September 2002.

 13. There is some later evidence in IRIN news reports of December 2002 and
     January 2003 that the Angolan army is attacking civilians  in  Cabinda
     and abusing their rights, as well  as  seriously  ill-treating  former
     UNITA rebels held in camps.  This view of the situation in Cabinda  is
     supported by an Amnesty International report  of  13th  December  2002
     detailing individual arbitrary arrests of civilians, and affirming  to
     an upsurge in fighting, with attacks on civilians, arrests, and rapes.
      FLEC factions have responded in kind.  It may be that the  developing
     peace with UNITA has freed the hands of  the  Angolan  government  and
     army to deal with the independence  movement  in  Cabinda,  so  as  to
     reinforce its control over the oil-rich enclave.

 14. The problems faced by those returning  to  Luanda,  at  the  point  of
     return, is dealt with in paragraph 6.55.  It comments that the Angolan
     authorities are well aware of the pressures which lead  to  emigration
     and that asylum claims are used to facilitate that;  the fact of being
     a failed asylum seeker, if discovered, would not be of any  particular
     interest.  However, the controls at Luanda Airport are thorough.   Any
     Angolans who have been deported from abroad, or who lived  abroad  for
     many years, would be questioned  by  immigration  and  police  at  the
     airport with a view to establishing their identities and whether  they
     were of interest to the authorities for political or criminal reasons.

 15. The Report describes prison conditions, should someone be arrested and
     detained, as constituting a serious threat to the health and lives  of
     prisoners;  paragraph 5.25 states:

           "There  is  widespread  and  generalised  abuse   of   suspects.
           Security service personnel regularly employ  torture  and  other
           forms  of  cruel  and  degrading   treatment   including   rape.
           Confessions are regularly obtained this way ... ."

 16. Turning to the second aspect of the background evidence,  Mr  Williams
     drew on paragraph 6.54 of the October 2002 CIPU  Report  to  show  how
     difficult internal movement in  Angola  is.   It  refers  to  all  the
     problems which existed during the conflict  with  UNITA,  and  to  the
     restriction of state control  but  even  if  the  illegal  roadblocks,
     checkpoints, and hatreds have diminished, landmines remain a prevalent
     hindrance to travel.  None of the background evidence deals  with  the
     availability of shipping between Luanda and Cabinda to civilians.   An
     overland journey would appear unlikely to be undertaken.

 17. The general conditions  of  life  in  Luanda  reflect  the  extent  of
     internal displacement caused by the civil war.  31% of the population,
     some 4.3 million, were estimated to  have  been  internally  displaced
     with some 435,000 having fled  to  neighbouring  countries.   Luanda's
     population itself has swollen to many times  its  normal  size;   some
     500,000 war-displaced people live in 20 camps in the Luanda area.   In
     July 2002,  the  UN's  emergency  relief  co-ordinator  described  the
     humanitarian situation in Luanda as critical.

 18. Mr Williams emphasised the current policy on removal  to  Angola.   It
     was only possible to remove people to Luanda and the UK government had
     agreed, in consultation with UNHCR "that nobody should be returned  to
     Angola who has not previously lived in Luanda or  who  does  not  have
     close current connections  there".   Other,  but  for  these  purposes
     immaterial, categories should also not be returned.

 19. Mr Sheikh for the Respondent pointed out correctly that there  was  no
     evidence anywhere that Cabindans as such were  persecuted  or  treated
     worse than any other group.  He submitted that the policy  on  return,
     which drew upon UNHCR advice, was related  to  the  need  for  careful
     phasing of returns to Luanda because  of  the  overload  of  displaced
     persons there currently.  It did not reflect any acceptance  that  the
     conditions of life in Luanda amounted to the  level  of  ill-treatment
     which would breach Article 3 ECHR.

 20. The UNHCR position as at April 2002 seems to us to be predicated on  a
     cautious approach to matters as they then  stood:   insecurity,  human
     rights violations and the dire living conditions in Angola generally.

 21. Mr Williams also referred us to a decision of the  Tribunal,  Monteiro
     [2002] UKIAT 01203, heard on 3rd April 2002.   This  did  not  concern
     Cabinda but rather someone who did not originate from Luanda  but  had
     lived there for one or two years:  he was from  Benguela  rather  than
     Luanda.  He had no well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention
     reason.  The Tribunal concluded that there was a real risk of a breach
     of Article 3 ECHR if he were returned to Luanda in the  light  of  the
     UNHCR advice, which the Tribunal referred to briefly as we have set it
     out above.  The Respondent submitted that those circumstances did  not
     meet the Article 3 threshold.

 22. The removal directions are not for Cabinda, or Democratic Republic  of
     Congo, or Congo, all three areas with which the Appellant has  or  had
     connections and in respect of none of which can it  be  said  that  he
     would be persecuted within them for a Convention reason.  Mr  Williams
     did not argue that Article 3 ECHR would be engaged by a return to  any
     of those areas.  The removal directions are for Angola and  for  these
     purposes that means Luanda which, as was pointed  out  when  leave  to
     appeal was granted, gives rise to the need for a  careful  examination
     of the Appellant's position.

 23. In our judgment, the background evidence  as  to  movement  in  Angola
     means that the Appellant would have real difficulty  reaching  Cabinda
     overland at present, or Kinshasa in Democratic Republic of Congo where
     he had a home.  There is no evidence either way about passage  by  sea
     from Luanda to Cabinda  for  civilians  with  limited  resources,  and
     although it would be surprising if there were no shipping  routes  for
     passengers  between  the  two,  we  cannot  speculate.   We  therefore
     approach the Appellant's future on return on the basis that  he  would
     stay, and would have to stay in Luanda.

 24. The background evidence also shows that  he  would  be  identified  as
     someone from Cabinda, both because of  the  languages  which  he  does
     speak and because of his lack of Portuguese.  He would  be  questioned
     to see if he was of political  or  criminal  interest:   his  Cabindan
     origin, with the current upsurge in fighting in  Cabinda,  would  make
     that inevitable.  Although it is only realistic  to  suppose  that  he
     would not reveal his FLEC membership voluntarily,  he  would  have  to
     have a story to explain his  departure  from  Cabinda  and  return  to
     Luanda which would stand up to thorough and at  least  suspicious,  if
     not downright hostile, questioning.  There is  an  unknown  degree  of
     risk that the Angolan authorities have some knowledge of  individuals,
     perhaps of families, who are FLEC members.  There is a risk that, even
     without such knowledge, they would suppose him to be a FLEC supporter.

 25. The abuse of the human rights of  those  suspected  of  the  political
     support for a warring independence movement is very probable,  whether
     through the general prison conditions in  which  a  suspect  might  be
     detained or the more active brutal attentions which he might attract.

 26. His lack of Portuguese and other local connections in  an  overcrowded
     city would mark him out as a Cabindan and mean that, even if he passed
     successfully through the airport, he would be at a rather greater risk
     than  most  Angolans  of  again  attracting  the  attentions  of   the
     authorities or of  being  unable  to  seek  their  assistance  in  the
     difficult living conditions, for fear of what they  might  ask.   This
     risk would endure until the position in Cabinda had been resolved.

 27. On that basis, we allow this appeal.  Taking all those factors in  the
     round, we consider that the enforcement of  these  particular  removal
     directions would involve a breach of the  Refugee  Convention  and  of
     Article 3 ECHR.

 28. We add that insofar as the decision in Monteiro is read as  expressing
     the view that the general situation in Luanda means that to return non-
     Luandans  would  necessarily  involve  a  breach  of  Article  3,   we
     respectfully consider that that goes too far.  Even if  the  situation
     is unchanged from April  2002,  which  would  not  fully  reflect  the
     encouraging political signs in the October 2002 assessment, the advice
     of the UNHCR is primarily, though  not  exclusively,  related  to  the
     living conditions in Angola generally, the security and  human  rights
     position generally.  Failed asylum seekers can be returned  to  Luanda
     if they came from there or have connections there.  That is  to  avoid
     increasing internal displacement.  The stay on the return of others to
     Luanda is to avoid increasing the already large number  of  internally
     displaced persons there.  This is to avoid worsening the position  and
     to make it more manageable;  as those displaced resettle,  others  can
     be returned.  This UNHCR statement does not suggest that the return of
     people to Luanda would breach their Article 3 rights if they came from
     Luanda or had relatives there, and would only do so if they  did  not.
     We do not in general accept that to return  someone  to  live  in  the
     conditions in Luanda, wretched though they are  for  many,  which  the
     Angolan government is struggling to improve rather  than  deliberately
     imposing, would involve a breach by the United Kingdom and its Article
     3 obligations.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

