
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |              |                    |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision      |_P (Risk - Failed   |
|                  |                      |number:       |Asylum Seekers)     |
|                  |                      |              |Cameroon [2003]     |
|                  |                      |              |UKIAT 00199         |
|Heard on:         |18th August 2003      |              |                    |
|Date typed:       |19th August 2003                                         |
|Date promulgated: |29th August 2003                                         |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                   |
|MR. P D BURNS                                                               |
|DR A U CHAUDHRY                                                             |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                                   |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:  Mr. A. Sheik,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.
For the Respondent:          Mr. N. Armstrong,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
                        Elder Rahimi Solicitors.

1.     The  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of Mrs. H S Coleman, an  Adjudicator,  who  (following  a
     hearing on 26th November 2002 at Taylor House) allowed  the  appeal  of
     Mr. P (a national of Cameroon,  aged  about  31  years,  who  we  shall
     hereafter refer to as the Claimant) on human rights grounds (Article 3)
     against the Secretary of State's decision of 21st December 2001 to give
     directions for his removal as an illegal entrant.

2.    The Claimant's asylum claim was certified by the  Secretary  of  State
     under paragraph 9(3)(a) of Schedule 4 of the 1999 Act. The  Adjudicator
     (who we shall hereafter refer to as the  Second  Adjudicator)  did  not
     agree with the opinion expressed in the certificate.





























8.2   Mr. Sheik then sought to vary the grounds of appeal and  to  challenge
     the Second Adjudicator's acceptance  of  the  Claimant's  detention  on
     arrival in Cameroon.  Mr. Armstrong strongly objected  to  leave  being
     granted for the grounds to be varied. We noted that the application  to
     vary the grounds of appeal was made at a very late, after  the  hearing
     had already commenced and, even then, only in response to a reminder by
     the bench that the Secretary of State had not challenged the finding at
     paragraph 28 of the Determination. Furthermore, as Mr. Armstrong noted,
     the refusal letter dated 21st December  2001  does  not  challenge  the
     Claimant's claim that he  was  arrested  and  detained  on  arrival  in
     Cameroon. Neither does the  letter  dated  11th  March  2002  from  the
     Immigration and Nationality Directorate to the  Claimant's  solicitors.
     In both this letter and the refusal  letter,  the  Secretary  of  State
     merely states that he does not condone any violations of  human  rights
     which may have been committed by the security forces  in  Cameroon  and
     that he considers that these actions arise from failures of  discipline
     and supervision rather than from any concerted policy on  the  part  of
     Cameroonian authorities.  In fairness to Mr. Sheik, he did not have the
     Home Office file on this appeal at the hearing. However, after  he  had
     had an opportunity to  read  the  letter  dated  11th  March  2002,  he
     withdrew his application to vary the grounds of appeal.

9.1   Mr. Sheik submitted that Ground 2 was academic, if the  Tribunal  were
     to agree with the Secretary of State on Ground 1. In other words, if we
     considered that the Claimant was not  at  risk  of  being  detained  on
     arrival in Cameroon, then the evidence as to the prison  conditions  in
     Cameroon becomes irrelevant.

9.2   In relation to Ground 1 of  the  grounds  of  application,  Mr.  Sheik
     relied on paragraph 5.35 of the CIPU  report  (quoted  at  paragraph  7
     above). The source for this information  was  the  Danish  fact-finding
     report of 2001. That document was in the Claimant's bundle at pages 251
     and 252 and referred to by the Second Adjudicator. There are  different
     views on the subject of the risk on return  to  Cameroon  .  Mr.  Sheik
     submitted that it was speculative to suggest that the Claimant would be
     forcibly deported and escorted. He could  depart  voluntarily.  In  any
     event, even if he was forcibly deported, his records would show that he
     had been previously arrested on  being  deported  as  a  failed  asylum
     seeker and that he was released without charge. The Second  Adjudicator
     did not accept that the Cameroonian authorities had  any  knowledge  of
     his  political  involvement  (which  she   described   as   "tangential
     involvement in some political activity"). In  Mr.  Sheik's  submission,
     there was no real risk that, on the facts as found  in  the  Claimant's
     case, he would be seen as anything other than someone  who  had  simply
     sought to better his economic position by applying for  asylum  abroad.
     This was especially the case, given that he had claimed  asylum  twice.
     The Claimant is not a wanted person and therefore the fourth  paragraph
     of Section 8.1.2 of the Danish Fact-finding report does  not  apply  to
     him.

9.3   With regard to the second ground on which the Second  Adjudicator  had
     allowed the Article 3 claim (that is, on medical  grounds),  Mr.  Sheik
     referred us to paragraph 30 of the Determination in  which  the  Second
     Adjudicator had stated that there was no evidence of medical facilities
     being available in Cameroon. However, paragraphs 4.24 to  4.27  of  the
     CIPU Extended Bulletin dated November 2002 deal with medical  services.
     Paragraph 4.24 shows that there is a wealth of  hospitals  and  medical
     centres in Cameroon. It could not therefore be said that there were  no
     facilities, although it is true that paragraph 4.24  does  not  make  a
     specific mention of psychiatric services or facilities. The  Article  3
     claim on medical grounds needs to be determined in  the  light  of  the
     judgement of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in  Bensaid  v.
     The United Kingdom [2002[ INLR 325, in particular, paragraph 40 of that
     judgement. The condition of the claimant in that case was more  serious
     (he was a schizophrenic) and therefore the consequences of his  removal
     on his health would have been more serious that someone who (as in  the
     case of the Claimant) is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress  Disorder
     (PTSD).

9.4   Mr. Sheik asked us to allow the appeal outright.

9.5   Mr. Armstrong referred us to Section 8.1.2 of the Danish  Fact-Finding
     Report. The objective evidence as to what  happens  to  a  returnee  is
     conflicting, as the Second Adjudicator had noted. At  paragraph  22  of
     the Determination, the Second Adjudicator had set out the  contents  of
     the CIPU report and Section 8.1.2 of the  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report.
     She carefully considered the conflict in the objective evidence.  There
     was nothing to suggest that  her  conclusions  were  plainly  wrong  or
     perverse. She came to the conclusion that the Claimant would be at risk
     of being detained on  arrival  in  Cameroon  because  it  had  happened
     before. That finding is one which  she  was  entitled  to  reach.  With
     regard to the assertion that the Claimant could depart voluntarily, Mr.
     Armstrong was not  able  to  say  whether  the  Claimant  would  depart
     voluntarily. However, the notice of the Secretary of  State's  decision
     states that directions for the Claimant's removal had  been  given.  He
     was forcibly returned to Cameroon previously.

9.6   With regard to the Article 3 claim on medical grounds,  Mr.  Armstrong
     referred us to a statement dated 22nd November 2002 from a Ms.  Annette
     Elder, partner in  Elder  Rahimi,  who  represent  the  Claimant.  This
     statement was before the Second Adjudicator. Ms. Elder  states  in  her
     statement that, despite having  made  attempts  to  obtain  information
     about the medical services in Cameroon, she could not obtain any,  save
     for the evidence at page 199 of the Claimant's  bundle.  This  was  the
     only piece  of  evidence  which  was  before  the  Second  Adjudicator,
     although the Second Adjudicator had not specifically  referred  to  it.
     The Second Adjudicator's finding that there was no evidence of  medical
     facilities being available  in  Cameroon   was  not  plainly  wrong  or
     perverse. In considering whether the consequences  of  removal  on  the
     Claimant's condition would reach the  high  Article  3  threshold,  Mr.
     Armstrong referred us to the fact that the evidence before  the  Second
     Adjudicator was that the Claimant was  a  suicide  risk.  He  is  still
     receiving counselling and taking drugs, as had been recommended by  Mr.
     Hughes. Page 222 of the  Claimant's  bundle  sets  out  the  prognosis.
     Pursuant to  the  judgement  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Soumahoro,
     Nadarajah and Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840, the Article 3 and  Article  8
     claims need to be assessed following  a  step  by  step  approach.  Mr.
     Hughes states that the Claimant is struggling to copes  in  the  United
     Kingdom anyway. The key point about Bensaid is  that  the  claimant  in
     that case was a  schizophrenic  and  was  going  to  suffer  a  relapse
     wherever  he  was.  Accordingly,  removal  was  not  going  to  make  a
     difference in his case to his condition. That is not the  situation  in
     the appeal before us. In the event that we were not with him on Article
     3, Mr. Armstrong asked us to remit the appeal for the Article  8  claim
     to be considered on medical grounds. Mr. Armstrong confirmed that there
     was no  medical  evidence  before  the  court  that  the  Claimant  was
     receiving counselling and taking medication. The only evidence on  this
     point was the Claimant's oral evidence before the Second Adjudicator.

9.7   In reply, Mr. Sheik asked us to note the lack of any medical  evidence
     that the Claimant is receiving counselling and taking medication.

10.   We reserved our determination.

11.   We have decided to dismiss the Secretary of  State's  appeal.  We  now
     give our reasons.

12.1  We must proceed on the basis of  accepting  the  Second  Adjudicator's
     assessment of the Claimant's  credibility  and  on  the  basis  of  her
     findings of fact as to the Claimant's history are not  before  us  (see
     paragraphs 8.1 and 8.2 above).

12.2   We  do,  however,  need  to  set  out  in  some  detail,  the  Second
     Adjudicator's  approach  to  the   hearing   (as   disclosed   by   the
     Determination) and her assessment of credibility since this is the only
     way of placing into its proper context her finding as to  the  risk  on
     return.

12.3  There was no Presenting Officer before  the  Second  Adjudicator.  She
     quite properly pointed out to Mr. Armstrong (who appeared  before  her)
     that she had concerns about the Claimant's credibility (paragraph 10 of
     the  Determination).  She  noted  the  Determination   of   the   First
     Adjudicator (paragraph 6 of the  Determination)  and  the  medical  and
     other documentary evidence which was before her (paragraphs 12  and  13
     of the Determination). At paragraph 16 of the Determination, she stated
     that Mr. Armstrong was correct to  say  there  are  problems  with  the
     assessment of credibility in this case.

12.4  The Determination of  the  Second  Adjudicator  shows  that  she  very
     carefully assessed the Claimant's credibility. We noted that:

      (i)   She began at paragraph 16 of the Determination  by  saying  that
           there were at least three major problems with the evidence which
           had never been successfully explained. She then dealt  with  her
           concerns about credibility at paragraphs 16, 17, 18 and 19.

      (ii)  She then stated that there were, however, "strong indicators  in
           favour of the Claimant and some of his account" (paragraph 20 of
           the  Determination).  She  went  on  to  deal  with  these,   in
           paragraphs 20, 21 and 22.

      (iii) These "strong factors" included the medical evidence  which  was
           before her and the objective evidence as to the fate of returned
           asylum seekers. At paragraph 21 of the Determination, she stated
           that she could not ignore the medical evidence which was  before
           her.  She  considered  that  there  was  some  support  for  the
           Claimant's claim that he was arrested when he  was  returned  to
           Cameroon in October 2000 (paragraph 22 of the Determination). In
           this connection, she noted paragraph 5.36 of the CIPU report and
           Section 8.1.2 of the Danish Immigration Report.

      (iv)  At paragraph 23, she stated that she balanced all  the  evidence
           and  considerations  together.  Even  taking  into  account  the
           Claimant's depressed state and diagnosis of PTSD,  she  did  not
           find that his  excuses  and  explanations  for  the  very  major
           discrepancies over his early detentions had been  satisfactorily
           explained. She considered that the discrepancies were  so  great
           that  it  seemed  impossible  for  him  to  have   given   lucid
           information in some aspects of his claim if he was  so  mistaken
           in others. She stated that she was not necessarily  saying  that
           he  was  lying  but  that,  at  best,  his   evidence   was   so
           unsatisfactory that it could not be accepted as evidence even at
           a lower standard.

12.5  The Second Adjudicator then made her findings of  fact,  beginning  at
     paragraph 24.  She accepted that there was a reasonable likelihood that
     he was arrested and detained in the 1990s as claimed.   She  considered
     that the medical evidence before her "very  strongly  pointed  to  some
     traumatic incident" having occurred to the Claimant after his return to
     Cameroon. On this basis, she made the following findings of fact:

            (a)  she gave some credence to the Claimant's claim that he  was
                politically active and involved with the SCNC. She  did  not
                give credence to the claim that  he  was  strongly  involved
                with any of the groups.

             (b)   she  did  not  accept  the  Claimant's  evidence  of  his
                detentions in 1993 or 1996.

            (c)  she accepted that,  on  being  returned  to  Cameroon,  the
                Claimant  was  arrested  by  Cameroonian  officials  at  the
                airport and  held  and  ill-treated  as  claimed.  She  also
                accepted that he was subjected to a male rape in  prison  by
                one of the prisoners.

            (d)  she gave some credence to the Claimant's claim that he  may
                have been involved in  the  demonstrations  on  1st  October
                2001. However, she did not accept his evidence that  he  was
                actively sought by the authorities after the demonstration.

12.6  The Second Adjudicator then considered  whether  the  Claimant  had  a
     current well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention
     reason. She had earlier made a finding that the Claimant  was  arrested
     in the past when he  was  returned  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  She
     considered  that  past  persecution  must  be   probative   of   future
     persecution. She therefore accepted that it is reasonably  likely  that
     he could be detained in the future. However, she did  not  accept  that
     this would be for political reasons. Although  she  accepted  that  the
     Claimant may have been tangentially involved in some political activity
     in Cameroon, there was no evidence that  Cameroonian  authorities  were
     aware of this or were targeting him for it. She found that there was no
     Refugee Convention reason and, accordingly, that his asylum claim  must
     fail (paragraph 27 of the Determination).

12.7  The Second Adjudicator then considered the  Article  3  claim  on  the
     first ground (paragraph 3 (i) above). She  again  reiterated  that  she
     found that his past history was probative of future risk.  Furthermore,
     she noted that those  detained  were  at  high  risk  of  ill-treatment
     (paragraph 28 of the Determination) and that prison conditions are dire
     (paragraph 29 of the Determination). At the end of  paragraph  29,  she
     stated: "In the light  of  such  evidence  it  is  clear  that  if  the
     [Claimant] were likely to be detained as before he would  face  a  high
     risk of inhuman or degrading treatment  contrary  to  Article  3".  She
     therefore found that the Claimant had established that  his  return  to
     Cameroon would be in breach of Article 3.

13.1  We now turn to consider the  challenge  to  the  Second  Adjudicator's
     assessment of the risk on return.

13.2  We first deal with the objective  evidence  as  to  the  treatment  of
     returned failed asylum seekers. Ground 1 of the grounds of  application
     relies on paragraph 5.35 of the CIPU report. This states:

            "Cameroonian authorities are not informed when a  failed  asylum
         seeker is returned  to  Cameroon  and  such  individuals  are  not
         routinely  stopped,  detained  and   questioned.   There   is   no
         legislation in Cameroon which  provides  for  the  prosecution  of
         individuals seeking asylum abroad even  if  the  authorities  were
         informed of the names of every returning failed asylum seeker".




      (i)   (first paragraph of Section  8.1.2)  According  to  one  western
           diplomatic source, a rejected asylum seeker forcibly returned to
           Cameroon would not be at risk. He did not know of cases where  a
           returned rejected asylum applicant had  had  problems  with  the
           authorities as a result of being deported. He pointed  out  that
           the authorities were not  informed  that  people  were  rejected
           asylum applicants.

            We emphasise this last  sentence.  It  would  seem  to  us  that
           whether or not Cameroonian authorities are informed that  people
           forcibly deported were  rejected  asylum  seekers  would  depend
           largely on whether the  authorities  of  the  deporting  country
           inform Cameroonian authorities of this fact.

      (ii)  Mr. Gemu Akuchu (Executive  Secretary,  National  Commission  on
           Human  Rights  and  Freedoms)  confirmed  that  rejected  asylum
           seekers who returned to Cameroon  voluntarily were not  at  risk
           of  being  detained  by  the  police  on  their  return  (second
           paragraph of Section 8.1.2).

            Mr. Akuchu's opinion as to what happens in the case of a  person
           forcibly deported and escorted is  set  out  in  the  third  and
           seventh paragraphs of Section 8.1.2. It would appear, from these
           two paragraphs, that, according to Mr.  Akuchu,  if  a  rejected
           asylum seeker is  escorted  by  policemen  dressed  in  civilian
           clothes as though they were travelling with any other person and
           if Cameroonian authorities are not informed that the  individual
           is a rejected asylum  seeker,  then  the  individual  would  not
           experience any problems. However, if the individual is  deported
           in handcuffs and accompanied by foreign policemen in uniform who
           hand him over to Cameroonian authorities,  then  the  individual
           risked detention by the police. This would be to investigate his
           background. If Cameroonian authorities were aware  that  he  had
           sought asylum abroad he would be suspected of having discredited
           Cameroon. If the authorities merely found  that  he  had  sought
           asylum for economic reasons, he would be  released.  The  report
           states that the editor of the  Messenger  believed  that  asylum
           applications abroad were seen as damaging Cameroon's image.

      (iii) Mr. T. Asonganyi (Secretary General,  Social  Democratic  Front)
           reported that  if  the  authorities  knew  that  someone  was  a
           rejected asylum applicant they would arrest him as, by  applying
           for  asylum,  he  would  be  suspected  of  harming   Cameroon's
           reputation abroad. He would also risk being ill-treated or  even
           tortured (sixth paragraph of Section 8.1.2).

            We considered that this was consistent with the opinion  of  Mr.
           Akuchu.

      (iv)  Another western diplomatic source stated that  his  country  had
           known  a  number  of  cases  of  rejected   Cameroonian   asylum
           applicants marrying nationals whilst their  asylum  claims  were
           pending, then returning voluntarily to  Cameroon   to  wait  for
           family reunification from there under existing rules. The source
           saw this as a sign that rejected Cameroonian  asylum  applicants
           were not persecuted when they returned home.  The  source  added
           that rejected asylum applicants were  not known to  be  such  in
           Cameroon. Cameroonian authorities would  not  be  able  to  tell
           whether deported Cameroonians were rejected asylum applicants or
           had, for example, been deported because their visas had  expired
           (ninth paragraph of Section 8.1.2)

            We considered that this was in line with  Mr.  Akuchu's  opinion
           and that there was nothing in the statements attributed to  this
           source which contradicts or is inconsistent  with  Mr.  Akuchu's
           opinion.

      (v)   Another western diplomatic source reported that  last  year  one
           European country returned nearly 200 people  to  Cameroon.  They
           were escorted by police, and none of them had reported  problems
           of a political nature in Cameroon.  Some  were  rejected  asylum
           applicants and others had committed other  minor  crimes  (tenth
           paragraph of Section 8.1.2).

            We noted that this does not say  whether  the  escorting  police
           were uniformed or in civilian clothes and whether the  deportees
           were handed over to Cameroonian authorities.

      (vi)  We have  noted  that  the  eighth  paragraph  of  Section  8.1.2
           states:

            "None  of  the  western  diplomatic  sources  consulted  by  the
           delegation were aware of  any  cases  in  which  the  return  of
           rejected asylum applicants had led to serious problems for those
           involved. Several sources stated that no  such  cases  had  been
           reported  by  Amnesty   International   or   by   human   rights
           organisations in the relevant western countries. They took  this
           as a sign that there were no cases of rejected asylum applicants
           having problems with Cameroonian authorities  because  of  their
           asylum applicants."

            However, there is no indication in this paragraph as to  whether
           the observations of  these  sources  were  in  relation  to  all
           rejected asylum seekers, whether they were forcibly deported and
           escorted  by  uniformed  policemen  and  then  handed  over   to
           Cameroonian  authorities)  or  whether  they  were  escorted  by
           policemen  in  civilian  clothes  or  whether  they  voluntarily
           returned to Cameroon.

            We have to weigh this information against the fact that:

            (a)   we  do  not  know  whether  the  opinion  of  the  western
                diplomatic source referred to in  (i)  above  was  based  on
                those cases where Cameroonian authorities are  not  informed
                that the deportees were rejected asylum applicants.  We  say
                this because  he  specifically  pointed  out  that  Cameroon
                authorities are  not  informed  that  people  were  rejected
                asylum applicants.

            (b)  there are two sources (Mr. Akuchu and  Mr.  Asonganyi)  who
                both refer to problems if the Cameroonian  authorities  know
                that a person is a rejected asylum seeker.

13.4  On the objective evidence before us, we conclude that:

      (a)   rejected asylum applicants who voluntarily  return  to  Cameroon
           are not at real risk of being detained on arrival  or  receiving
           serious harm (a term which we use to mean treatment amounting to
           persecution or in breach of Article 3).

      (b)   rejected asylum  seekers  who  are  forcibly  deported  but  not
           escorted to  Cameroon  or  who  are  escorted  by  officials  in
           civilian clothes would not face a real risk of being detained on
           arrival or receiving serious harm, provided  that  the  Cameroon
           authorities are not  informed  that  they  are  rejected  asylum
           seekers.

      (c)   if a rejected asylum seeker is escorted by  police  to  Cameroon
           and the Cameroonian authorities are informed that the person  is
           a rejected asylum seeker, such a person is at real risk of being
           detained.

            This does not,  however,  mean  that  the  individual  would  be
           subjected to  treatment  amounting  to  serious  harm.  In  this
           connection, we noted that  Mr.  Akuchu's  opinion  is  that  the
           detention by Cameroonian police  would  be  to  investigate  the
           deportee's background,  that  if  Cameroonian  authorities  were
           aware that he had sought asylum abroad he would be suspected  of
           having discredited Cameroon but if the authorities merely  found
           that he had sought asylum for  economic  reasons,  he  would  be
           released.

            The fourth paragraph of Section 8.1.2 refers  to  the  detention
           of a returning Cameroonian who was on a list of wanted  persons.
           He was released after 12 hours. This paragraph also states  that
           such detentions are short, usually a day or half a day.  On  the
           other hand, there is evidence (paragraphs 5.1 to 5.6 of the CIPU
           report) that the government's human rights record  is  generally
           poor, that government officials have  committed  numerous  human
           rights abuses,  that  security  forces  arrest  and  arbitrarily
           detain  various  opposition  politicians,  local  human   rights
           monitors and other citizens, holding them for prolonged periods,
           often without chance for trail, and at times, incommunicado.

            We  therefore  concluded  that  whether  an  individual  falling
           within this category (c) would be at real risk of  serious  harm
           on return to Cameroon would be a question of fact in each  case.
           Rejected asylum seekers are not,  simply  on  account  of  being
           rejected asylum seekers, at real risk of serious harm on  return
           to Cameroon.

13.5  The Claimant's claim that he was escorted to Cameroon and handed  over
     by the  United  Kingdom  immigration  officials  who  told  Cameroonian
     authorities that he was a failed asylum seeker from the United  Kingdom
     has never been challenged by the Secretary of State, despite  the  fact
     that the Claimant mentioned this at his  interview  in  December  2001.
     This is important. His claim that he was then  detained  is  consistent
     with the objective evidence. However, his claim that he  was  arrested,
     tortured and detained for a period of 2 months (from 9th  October  2000
     to 9th December 2000) is not consistent with  the  objective  evidence,
     bearing in mind that, according to the  Second  Adjudicator's  finding,
     his political activity in Cameroon was  at  best  tangential  and  that
     there was no evidence that Cameroonian authorities were  aware  of  his
     political involvement or were targeting him for it. His claim  that  he
     was detained for two months and tortured  is  therefore  not  credible.
     However, it is not open to  us  to  re-open  the  Second  Adjudicator's
     finding that the Claimant was detained for two  months  on  arrival  in
     Cameroon, for the reasons we have  given  in  paragraphs  8.1  and  8.2
     above.  We are therefore (in a manner of  speaking)  "stuck"  with  the
     Second Adjudicator's finding that he was detained for  two  months  and
     ill-treated as claimed. This is an important  point  to  bear  in  mind
     because the outcome of the appeal to the Tribunal may  well  have  been
     different.

13.6  Mr. Sheik submitted that there was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
     Claimant would be  forcibly  removed  and  that  he  could  voluntarily
     depart. However, the fact is that the Claimant was forcibly removed  on
     the last occasion and did not voluntarily depart. There is no basis for
     the Tribunal to suppose (or the Second Adjudicator  to  have  supposed)
     that he would not be forcibly  removed  again  (particularly  as,  this
     time, he would be someone who had entered the United Kingdom twice  and
     claimed asylum) or that he would voluntarily depart. Whilst we  do  not
     know whether any escorts would inform the Cameroonian authorities  that
     he was a failed asylum seeker, we do know (from the fourth paragraph of
     Section 8.1.2 of the Danish Report) that the Cameroonian airport police
     appear to have a list of wanted persons. Whether such a list  would  be
     extensive enough to include persons previously detained on  arrival  in
     Cameroon is something we do not know.  If  such  a  list  does  include
     these persons, we do not know whether  the  information  would  include
     information that the person was  previously  released  without  charge.
     Against these unknown factors, we have to weigh in the fact  that  this
     particular Claimant is someone who has been found to have been detained
     on arrival, tortured and held for two  months.  We  consider  that  the
     Second Adjudicator was perfectly entitled to find that his past history
     is probative of future risk. Her finding, in these circumstances,  that
     he was at real risk of receiving treatment amounting  to  serious  harm
     cannot be said to be plainly wrong or perverse.   Mr.  Sheik  submitted
     that the fact that the  Claimant  would  be  arriving  in  Cameroon  as
     someone who had claimed asylum abroad twice means that  he  is  someone
     who would be seen as an  economic  migrant.   There  is  no  reason  to
     suppose this. It would be pure speculation to make such an  assumption.
     The second attempt to claim asylum may equally be seen as indicative of
     a person who had some real reason to fear the Cameroonian authorities.

14.   We would stress that our assessment in  paragraph  13.6  above  should
     not be seen as setting some general principles for the determination of
     the risk on return for failed asylum seekers from Cameroon. As we  have
     stated above, we are constrained in this case  by  the  fact  that  the
     Second Adjudicator's finding as to the Claimant's claimed detention  in
     2000 is not before us, and that there is no  challenge  to  the  Second
     Adjudicator's finding that his past  history  is  probative  of  future
     risk.  This case therefore turns on its own particular facts, as  found
     by the Second Adjudicator.

15.   For all of the  above  reasons,  we  must  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
     State's appeal.
15.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that the  Adjudicator's
     credibility findings were open to her on the evidence which was  before
     her. Her finding that the Claimant would  be  at  risk  of  inhuman  or
     degrading  treatment  on  return  to  Cameroon  (paragraph  28  of  the
     Determination) was not plainly wrong, on the evidence which was  before
     her.  Her finding that if were likely to  be  detained  as  before,  he
     would face a  high  risk  of  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment
     contrary to Article 3 (paragraph 29 of the Determination) was one which
     was open to her. There is no error in her  approach  to  assessing  the
     risk on return. We are of the opinion that this is not  an  appropriate
     case for the Tribunal to interfere.

16.   Given our conclusion above, it is strictly speaking not necessary  for
     us to consider whether the Second Adjudicator was right  to  allow  the
     Article 3 claim on the second ground mentioned in paragraph 3 above. We
     would however say that we considered that the medical  evidence  before
     the Second Adjudicator as to  the  risk  of  suicide  was  speculative.
     Furthermore, whilst the medical opinion is  that  the  Claimant  "could
     suffer severe personality deterioration", this  is  not  sufficient  to
     sustain the Second Adjudicator's finding that the act of removal  would
     be in breach of his Article 3 rights, given the high  threshold  to  be
     reached for Article 3 cases.
     17.    For all of these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

      Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is DISMISSED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 19th August 2003
