

                              SC (HIV Positive - HR Breach) Zimbabwe [2003]
                                 UKIAT 00015



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date heard:  4 February 2003
                                                   Date notified: 25/06/2003
                                  Before:-.


                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                               MR A A LLOYD JP
                         RT HON THE COUNTESS OF MAR

                                                               Between





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Zimbabwe, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  G  W  Manchester,
dismissing the appeal against the decision by  the  respondent  refusing  to
grant leave to enter on asylum grounds. Mr A Russel  of  Counsel  instructed
by Purcell Brown & Co Solicitors represented the appellant. Miss  M  Banwait
appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. In view of serious inconsistencies in the account given by the  appellant
the adjudicator made adverse credibility  findings  against  the  appellant.
The grounds do not effectively challenge  those  findings.  They  relied  on
three different contentions.

4. One contention was that, having found the appellant had been  the  victim
of a violent assault and was a low level supporter or  member  of  the  MDC,
the adjudicator  should  have  accepted  she  would  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution at the hands of ZANU-PF or war veterans. However, Mr Russel  did
not seek to develop that ground before us and rightly  so.  The  adjudicator
did not consider the violent assault was shown  to  be  connected  with  any
attack by ZANU-PF or war veterans.  It is plain from the  objective  country
materials that the mere fact of being a low-level member of the MDC  is  not
enough to demonstrate a real risk of persecution or  treatment  contrary  to
one's human rights. Mr Russel certainly adduced no evidence to persuade  the
Tribunal to take a different view of this matter.

5. A second contention was that the  adjudicator  should  have  allowed  the
appeal in the light of  the  existence  of  a  Home  Office  policy  of  not
returning failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe. However,  this  contention  has
already been considered  and  rejected  by  the  Tribunal  in  a  number  of
decisions, the most recent being Ncube [2002] UKIAT  05806.  Mr  Russel  did
not raise any fresh arguments on this matter.

6. The third contention was that the adjudicator had  failed  to  take  into
consideration that the appellant suffered from HIV and, following  D  v  UK,
should therefore have been found to face a real risk of exposure to  inhuman
and degrading  treatment  upon  return  because  of  the  lack  of  adequate
treatment in Zimbabwe. In support he produced a letter from the  appellant's
GP dated  21  February  2002  confirming  she  had  been  diagnosed  as  HIV
positive.

7. The first thing we would observe about this letter is that,  despite  its
date, there is  no  record  of  it  being  placed  before  the  adjudicator.
Furthermore, the appellant made no mention of  being  HIV  positive  in  her
oral testimony and her Counsel appears to have been unaware at this fact.

8. The second thing we  would  observe  is  that  this  letter  on  its  own
established only that the appellant has been diagnosed as HIV positive,  was
currently anaemic has a recurrent cough and was currently under the care  of
Dr L M Short a Consultant in GU Medicine. It did not tell  us  how  advanced
her condition was or what regime of treatment she is receiving.  Given  that
the appellant's  representatives  had  had  ample  time  to  adduce  further
medical evidence, we told Mr Russel we were not  prepared  to  adjourn  this
case, although we would grant 10 days in which any  further  evidence  could
be adduced.

9.  Subsequently,  we  received  from  a  Consultant  in  GU-Medicine   from
Calderdale and Huddersfield NHS Trust dated  7  February  2003.  The  letter
explained that in February 2002 she was found to be HIV  positive.  In  view
of an abnormal chest x-ray she was checked for tuberculosis  but  there  was
no evidence of any and her chest x-ray has improved since  commencing  anti-
retroviral therapy. She had been  significantly  immuno-compromised  and  as
had a high viral load but both are said to have significantly lowered  since
she began anti-retroviral treatment. The letter concludes:

      "She is generally keeping much better and  is  currently  on  Trizivir
      which is a combination of Zidovudine, Lamivudine  and  Abacavir.  This
      she was required to take lifelong in order to remain in good health.


      It would be extremely unlikely that S would be able to continue on her
      current therapy if she was to return to Zimbabwe. This would obviously
      have a significant impact on her life expectancy and  likelihood  that
      she would develop and (sic) AIDES related illness."



10. From the above we are prepared to  accept  that  the  appellant  is  HIV
positive and has been since February 2002. However, the  adjudicator  cannot
be blamed for not considering this matter, as it was  not  put  before  him.
Nevertheless, it remains that we must consider  whether  this  fact  renders
the decision made against this appellant contrary to her  human  rights.  We
have jurisdiction to consider this matter under s. 65(3) of the 1999 Act.

11. Mr Russel sought to persuade us that there would be a breach  of  Art  3
because on return to  Zimbabwe  the  appellant  would  not  have  access  to
adequate treatment. We can now see  that  that  is  also  the  view  of  the
appellant's  Consultant.   However,  there  is  nothing  in  his  letter  to
indicate that he has any expertise about the medical situation in  Zimbabwe.
The only specific objective source directly  placed  before  us,  the  April
2001 CIPU Bulletin,  it  is  stated  that  basic  treatment  for  infections
related to HIV is available. But owing to the volume of cases, patients  are
often discharged early from hospital  and  antiretroviral  therapy  is  only
available privately and at high cost. On the basis of  this  information  we
infer that whilst tests for HIV are available  and  there  is  a  supply  of
antiretroviral drugs, their cost can make them inaccessible  to  numbers  of
people.

12. Mr Russel contended that the case of D v UK and the outline of case  law
contained in the latest edition of Macdonalds at  paragraphs  3.31  and  12.
179 supported the appellant's contention that the decision was in breach  of
her human rights.

13. In considering this issue we have to follow the guidance set out by  the
Court of Appeal in K v SSHD [2001] Imm AR 11 and by the Tribunal in  Chihota
(01/TH/3312) and Tawengwa [2002] UKIAT 05597. The latter  two  furnish  more
details of the nature and availability of treatment for HIV in Zimbabwe.  We
take from these decisions that problems of cost of treatment in the  country
of origin alone are not enough to establish a violation of Art 3 or  Art  8.
D v UK, being a case in which basic treatment was unavailable,  has  limited
application to situations where some level of treatment does exist.

14. In this case, there would  be  some  level  of  treatment  available  in
Zimbabwe. Furthermore, on the appellant's  own  account  she  would  not  be
entirely without family support upon return  to  Zimbabwe.  The  adjudicator
did not accept her own account of deaths in her family, but even on her  own
account she had an aunt living there. We note also that  the  appellant  had
been able in the past to travel in and out of Zimbabwe  and  that  when  she
came to the UK it was for a sightseeing visit. These facts in our view  were
an indication of some level of personal or family finances.  They  are  also
relevant when considering the issue of access to the  continuance  of  anti-
retroviral treatment, which this  appellant  plainly  needs.  Whilst  it  is
evident that the treatment the appellant is receiving in the United  Kingdom
is considerably better than in Zimbabwe, the  facts  of  this  case  do  not
establish that her return to Zimbabwe would place her at risk  of  treatment
contrary to her human rights.

15. For the above reason this appeal is dismissed.



                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




