
AJH (Minority group-Swahili speakers) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date heard:   13 June   2003
                                                   Date notified: 03/10/2003

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                  MR G WARR
                             MRS J A J C GLEESON

                                                       Between





                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.The appellants, who claimed to be  nationals  of  Somalia,  have  appealed
with leave of the Tribunal against determinations of  Adjudicators  Mr  W  F
Miles, Mr P G Farrell and Miss  A  Cheales  respectively,  dismissing  their
appeals against the  decision  refusing  asylum.  The  first  appellant  was
initially represented by Mr D Adams but the latter withdrew on  instructions
of solicitors Markandan & Co. Mr A Wilson of Counsel instructed by Norman  H
Barnet  &  Co  represented  the  second  appellant  Mr  G  Shaw  of  Counsel
instructed by Aaronsen & Co Solicitors appeared for the third appellant.  Mr
A Sheikh appeared for the respondent.

2. The Tribunal has decided to allow all three appeals.

3. The basic facts are these.

4. The first appellant, who gave evidence  through  a  Swahili  interpreter,
claimed he  was  a  Bajuni.  At  the  hearing  before  the  adjudicator  the
respondent did not dispute his  claim  to  be  a  Somali  national  and  the
adjudicator accepted he was a member  of  the  Bajuni  tribe  who  had  fled
Somalia after members of the Isaaq tribe had raped his wife and beaten  him.
However, he did not allow the appeal  because  he  considered  that  as  the
appellant and his wife  had  been  victims  of  indiscriminate  rather  than
targeted violence, he had not shown that he faced a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. He placed reliance on  paragraphs  5.25,5.26  and  5.28  of  the  CIPU
Somali Assessment 2002 which stated that persecution solely on the basis  of
clan membership or ethnicity is now very unlikely in most areas of  Somalia.
Even if he were mistaken about  risk  in  the  appellant`s  home  area,  the
adjudicator considered there was a viable  internal  relocation  alternative
in  Puntiland  and  Somaliland.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal   Vice
President Mr Freeman noted that the appellant had given evidence  through  a
Swahili interpreter and wrote: "It will be for him to satisfy  the  Tribunal
he can speak Kibajuni or explain why not [see Laila  Suleiman  [2002]  UKIAT
00416] if he wishes to have any reasonable prospect of success:  a  Kibajuni
interpreter will be provided if possible".

5. The basis of the second appellant`s claim was that he was  a  Barawan  of
Bravenese origin who claimed to speak Swahili and Arabic. His  father  spoke
Chimbalasi (the traditional language of the Barawan).  He  claimed  that  he
fled Somalia after his father and brother were killed in 1998  and  went  to
Kenya. The adjudicator considered he showed poor knowledge  of  the  Kismayo
region of Somalia where he claimed to come from. He was not  satisfied  with
the appellant`s explanation for why his mother and sister  had  remained  in
Kenya. The adjudicator concluded he was a Bajuni  (we  shall  come  back  to
this misdescription below) but that, because he did  not  speak  Somali,  he
could  not  be  a  national  of  Somalia.  He  considered  that  the   birth
certificate produced by the appellant was  forged.  The  grounds  of  appeal
maintained  that  the  adjudicator  misjudged  the  appellant`s  performance
whilst giving testimony and accorded undue weight to  the  interview  record
which had been based on a very small number of questions. The appellant  had
shown a detailed and accurate knowledge  of  Somalia.  The  adjudicator  was
wrong to find that the birth certificate was inauthentic and wrong  to  make
a negative finding of credibility based on the fact that the  appellant  had
left his mother and sister behind in Kenya. Centrally, the  adjudicator  had
erred, the grounds alleged, in assessing the appellant on the basis that  he
claimed to be a Bajuni. The appellant had in fact claimed  from  the  outset
to be a  Barawan of Bravenese clan origins.

6. Apparently overlooking the point made in  the  grounds  that  the  second
appellant had said he was  Bravanese  not  Bajuni,  the  Vice  President  Mr
Freeman in granting leave stated that: "...it will be for the appellant,  in
the light of Laila Suleiman [2002] UKIAT 00416, either to show the  Tribunal
he can speak Kibajuni (for which purpose  an  interpreter  in  the  language
will be provided, if possible) or explain why not".

7. The claim of the third appellant, Mr Hussein, was that he  was  a  Bajuni
from Kismayo in Somalia who had fled that  country  because  of  attacks  by
members of the Marehan. His family had been subjected to  violence  although
nothing had happened to him personally.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
accept he was Bajuni or that he was a national of Somalia.  At  the  hearing
before the adjudicator there was no appearance from  the  appellant.  Noting
that the appellant did not speak Somali and that he had  produced  a  Somali
birth certificate in poor condition, the adjudicator dismissed  the  appeal.
The grounds of appeal  contended  that  she  had  effectively  endorsed  the
assessment made by the Secretary of State without giving any reasons of  her
own and she had been wrong to reject the birth certificate just  because  it
was in poor condition. In granting leave  the  same  Vice  President,  Mr  J
Freeman, stated in similar terms that this appellant  "will need  either  to
satisfy the Tribunal he speaks Kibajuni, or that there is some  good  reason
why he does not".

8. These cases were joined in view of the fact that each concerned a  person
who claimed to be from Kismayo in Somalia  and  each  involved  someone  who
either claimed to be of the Bajuni tribe or  (in  the  case  of  the  second
appellant) was seen to be claiming to be Bajuni.  The  same  Vice  President
who granted leave in each case saw the central issue as  being  whether  the
appellants could speak Kibajuni or, if not, whether there were good  reasons
explaining why they did not.

9. In listing these  appeals  before  three  legal  chairmen  there  was  an
expectation that we would seek to clarify the general approach to  be  taken
in cases involving persons claiming to be Bajuni  from  Somalia.  Since  the
issues in these appeals turned largely on particular  facts,  we  have  only
seen fit to give limited guidance on how adjudicators should  approach  such
cases in future.

10. Plainly from the terms of Mr Freeman`s grant of permission to appeal  it
was envisaged that there would be a Kibajuni interpreter  available  at  the
hearing. In the event the  appellants`  representatives  did  not  pursue  a
request for such an interpreter and rightly or wrongly none  was  instructed
to attend. However, with permission from  Mr  Freeman  in  one  of  the  For
Mention hearings, a direction was made  that  oral  testimony  be  given  by
Professor I M Lewis, Emeritus Professor of Anthropology at  LSE  (University
of London) who was an Africanist specialising  in  the  social  institutions
and culture of the Somali people of the Horn of Africa, which  he  had  been
studying since the early  1950s.  His  credentials  bore  out  that  he  was
generally regarded as one of the leading international academic  authorities
on  Somali  issues  and  was  someone  who  was  frequently   consulted   by
governments and the media on Somali matters.

11. When giving evidence before us Professor  Lewis  spoke  to  two  written
reports he had completed on the second and third appellants.

12. Before summarising his evidence on the second and  third  appellants  we
should mention two observations of his on  more  general  matters.  One  was
that he considered that Kibajuni is just a dialect of  Swahili  with  a  few
local words and a few slightly different constructions.  It  was  "virtually
the same language as Swahili". He also mentioned, and this  is  relevant  to
the case of the second appellant, that another localised version of  Swahili
was Chimbalisi, which is  spoken  by  Bravanese.  The  other  concerned  the
relevance of knowledge of Somali. The Professor  disputed  the  accuracy  of
the view expressed in the Fact-Finding  Mission  report  that  all  or  most
Bajuni spoke Somali. He considered that the kind of Bajuni who  would  speak
Somali would be  those  who  had  the  most  interaction  with  Somalis,  in
particular those in local political or business roles or elders  or  leaders
of local communities.

13. Professor Lewis's report on the second appellant described an  interview
conducted by telephone. The Professor was satisfied that this appellant  was
familiar with some words of Somali and  that  he  demonstrated  considerable
familiarity with the region from which he claimed to originate. He  did  not
agree with the Home Office assessment that this appellant  showed  scant  or
no knowledge of the  Kismayo  region  or  of  the  political  structure  and
geography of Somalia. He knew sufficient words and expressions of Somali  to
suggest contact with Somalis. The Professor was  adamant  in  rejecting  the
suggestion that the appellant could have prepared for the  interview  so  as
to deceive him.  He did not find it odd that the  appellant  had  only  been
able to name the Hawiya and Darood as major clan families in Somalia.

14. The Professor's written report  on  the  third  appellant  described  an
interview in which the latter was able, although he spoke only a  few  words
of Somali, to give detailed esoteric information  about  local  customs  and
fishing activities and techniques.

15. We gave the first appellant an opportunity to add to the account of  his
claim as already before us in the papers. This  he  did  briefly.  In  their
submissions Mr Wilson and  Mr  Shaw  urged  us  to  accept  the  Professor`s
evidence in its entirety.

16. In his submission Mr Sheikh on behalf of  the  respondent  asked  us  to
find the Professor's  evidence  as  of  limited  value.  The  Professor  had
agreed, he reminded us, that he did not speak  either  Swahili  or  Kibajuni
and therefore was not in a position to assess whether  the  appellants  were
Bajuni (or, in the case of the second appellant,  Bravenese). Whilst he  did
not take issue with the interview methods used by  the  Professor  he  urged
the Tribunal to prefer the evidence of the tribal elders as reported in  the
FFM report who said that most Bajuni would speak Kibajuni. He  asked  us  to
find that the two  appellants  concerned  could  well  have  "boned  up"  on
matters to do with  Somali  society  prior  to  their  interviews  with  the
Professor.


Our assessment

17. In reaching our conclusions on these appeals we have considered all  the
available evidence and taken careful account of  what  the  first  appellant
told us and of the submissions  made  by  the  two  representatives  and  Mr
Sheikh. We have of course considered the FFM report as well as  that  by  Mr
Andrew Fleming who stated in November 2002  that  Somalia  is  an  extremely
oral society and that no one will be able to get along  in  Somalia  without
some knowledge of Somali.

Our evaluation of Professor Lewis's evidence.
18. We found Professor Lewis an impressive witness. He did not seek  in  any
way to exaggerate  the  extent  of  his  knowledge  and  he  demonstrated  a
comprehensive level of knowledge of southern Somalia. He was the  author  of
numerous books, including A Modern History of the Somali, with  an  expanded
u-dated fourth edition published in September 2002 and had  written  over  a
hundred articles in leading journals on various aspects of  Somali  society.
He was a former Director of the International African Institute  and  was  a
Fellow of the British Academy. In  preparation  for  his  interview  of  the
second and third appellants he  had  re-read  the  FFM  report  on  minority
groups in  Somali  which  deals  with  a  number  of  minority  communities,
including the Bajuni. He had also studied the ethnographic  account  of  the
Bajuni by the late Professor V L  Grotanelli  of  Rome  University  entitled
Pescatori dell Oceano Indiano, published  in  Rome  in  1955  which  is  the
standard study of the Bajuni.

19. We noted that the reports by the  Professor  on  the  second  and  third
appellant were tendered at an earlier  For  Mention  hearing  and  that  the
respondent did not take the opportunity of putting  in  his  own  report  or
offering a critical commentary on the Professor's.

20. We do not think that the Professor`s evidence on  the  interrelationship
between Kibajuni and Swahili (the main focus in  the  Tribunal  decision  in
Laila Suleiman) took matters very far since the two cases he  was  asked  to
look at did not concern appellants who said they only  spoke  Swahili.  What
he had to say about the relevance of knowledge of Somali was more  pertinent
and we shall come back  to  its  general  implications  later.  However,  in
relation to the two appellants he interviewed, what is manifest in our  view
from the interviews he conducted with them was that he  asked  them  nuanced
questions which could not  have  been  answered  as  they  were  unless  the
appellants had actually come from Kismayo and had the  clan  identity  which
they claimed. Very properly Mr Sheik cross-examined the Professor  robustly.
But in our view the principal effect was only to  reinforce  our  view  that
the Professor's assessment of the second and third appellants was  extremely
astute and established  beyond  peradventure  that  they  were  telling  the
truth.

21. In respect of the second appellant the Professor was able to satisfy  us
that this man was able to show close knowledge of  other  Somali  groups  of
Brava and  had  given  accurate  details  of  the  main  Somali  clan-family
divisions and clan affiliations surrounding towns  along  the  Somali  coast
between Kismayo and Mogadishu, the two main rivers, the local livestock  and
crops, the local pattern of  religious  life  and  the  clan  and  political
structure of the Somali world.

22. In respect of the third appellant, the Professor satisfied us  that  the
appellant spoke fluent Kibajuni and that his very limited ability  to  speak
Somali (he had only a few words in Somali) was entirely consistent with  the
account he had given of having attended an Islamic primary school  where  he
studied Arabic and not Somali and not having ever attended a Somali  school.
The Professor noted that the appellant was able to  correctly  identify  the
lack of any unifying Bajuni clan structure, to pinpoint  where  his  village
was on a map and to name the resident chief, to name all the Bajuni  islands
along the coast to the south and north of Kismayo  and  various  surrounding
local towns and to describe local religious practices used  by  the  Bajuni.
In particular the appellant was able to  describe  highly  esoteric  fishing
techniques used by fishermen in that region.

23. Mr Sheikh raised two main objections to the  Professor's  evidence.  One
was that since he did not speak Swahili or any dialect thereof, he  was  not
qualified to decide whether any of the appellants was a  Bajuni  or  whether
the second was a Bravanese. The other was that he was wrong to  assess  that
the two appellants he interviewed could not have simply  learnt  up  on  the
information they gave him when he interviewed them.

24. Dealing with the latter objection first, whilst answers to some  of  the
questions  put  by  the  Professor,  e.g.  those   about   geography,   were
realistically capable of being prepared  for,  others,  e.g.  about  fishing
techniques, were plainly not. Furthermore,  the  Professor's  questions  had
far more range and depth than those put to these  two  appellants  in  their
asylum interviews. Professor Lewis was quite right in our view  to  describe
the series of questions asked by Secretary of State officials in both  cases
as amateurish. Placing his interview  questions  side  by  side  with  those
asked by the Secretary of State representative during the asylum  interviews
we have  no  hesitation  in  finding  the  Professor's  better  designed  to
establish the true facts. Whilst it can be said that neither the  second  or
third appellants helped their own  cases  by  failing  at  interview  or  in
subsequent statements to furnish full particulars of their experiences,  the
evidence of the Professor is particularly strong in their favour.

25. Mr Sheikh contended that the Professor failed to adequately explain  why
the second and third appellants were not able to demonstrate the same  level
of knowledge at the interview stage. We would accept  that  the  second  and
third appellants answered more questions when interviewed by  the  Professor
than they had in their earlier interviews. However, we  would  observe  that
in the case of the second appellant the Reasons of Refusal letter was  wrong
to state he had failed to name any islands off the coast of Kismayo. And  in
any event we do not consider that questions about the name of the  community
of Asian families who own the best shops and a  mosque  in  Kismayo  or  the
name of the General in charge of the army  defending  Kismayo  at  the  time
were entirely apposite in the case of a person who  had  been  sent  by  his
father at the age of nine to an Islamic religious school and who had  little
to do with the surrounding  Somali  speaking  population.  The  Reasons  for
Refusal letter appears to attach little  or  no  weight  to  the  number  of
questions  the  appellant  did  accurately  answer.  As  regards  the  third
appellant, although the Secretary of  State  considered  he  was  unable  to
answer most of the common knowledge questions  satisfactorily,  we  note  he
was able to identify the principal languages spoken  in  Somali,  the  local
form of compensation, the faction that took power in Mogadishu in 1977,  the
two major clan families in Somalia, the  clan  of  mainly  Arab  descent  in
Mogadishu and the name of the President's palace. He rightly said there  was
no railway in Kismayo. The only specific question he was  unable  to  answer
related to the main  crop  export  and,  as  Professor  Lewis  pointed  out,
persons of a fishing background would not necessarily know that.  In  short,
we do not find  the  interviews  undertaken  by  the  Secretary  of  State`s
representatives in either of these cases at all conclusive on the extent  of
the appellant`s knowledge of relevant matters. In our view,  there  is  much
to be learnt  from  Professor  Lewis's  more  wide-ranging  and  individual-
specific series of questions.

26. Turning to Mr Sheikh`s first objection, we would  agree  that  generally
speaking an expert witness who does not  speak  language  X  (in  this  case
Kibajuni) will not be  as  well-placed  to  assess  whether  someone  speaks
language X (Kibajuni) as someone who does. Since it is not in  dispute  that
the main language spoken  by  Bajuni  is  Kibajuni,  that  is  an  important
consideration.  It was in the light of this type of consideration that  Vice
President Mr Freeman in granting leave saw the best way to resolve  disputes
about Bajuni identity for them to be  heard  with  the  use  of  a  Kibajuni
interpreter.

27. Professor Lewis`s credentials place  him  in  an  unusual  position.  He
professed no linguistic knowledge of Kibajuni  but  did  maintain  that  his
lengthy first-hand experience of Bajuni and other clans of southern  Somalia
enabled him to recognise a Kibajuni speaker when he heard one. He  was  also
adamant that, although he spoke neither  languages/dialects  he  could  tell
apart a Swahili from a Kibajuni speaker. We do  not  find  that  this  claim
offends common sense. A layperson may not be able to tell  apart  a  French-
speaking Frenchman from a  French-speaking  Belgian,  but  someone  who  had
studied both countries and their cultures in depth would.  And  in  view  of
the great depth of experience of Professor  Lewis  as  regards  people  from
southern Somalia we are quite  satisfied  that  he  was  in  a  position  to
identify someone as a Kibajuni speaker. His firm  evidence  that  the  third
appellant was a Kibajuni  speaker  carried  very  considerable  weight.  For
similar reasons we attach very considerable weight to his evidence that  the
second appellant was a Chimbalasi speaker.

28. Even if  we  were  wrong  to  make  this  finding,  however,  we  remain
satisfied that being able to speak Kibajuni (or Chimbalasi in  the  case  of
the second appellant) is not the only means by which Bajuni identity can  be
assessed.

29. What these appeals illustrate in our view is that  there  is  more  than
one way to establishing Bajuni identity. Apart from testing whether  someone
can speak Kibajuni, two other means are common. One is by testing  a  person
as to his knowledge of Somali. The other is by testing whether a person  has
knowledge of matters familiar to persons who are Bajuni (or  Bravanese)  and
who come from the region they say they do (in all  three  cases  before  us,
this area was Kismayo).

30. As regards knowledge of Somali language we have already noted  why  this
is pertinent. The Fact Finding Mission report and CIPU  sources  state  that
most Bajuni speak Somali. That is a very important indicator,  but  it  must
not be forgotten that it  states  "most",  not  all.  Hence  it  is  not  an
indicator which can be determinative of an appeal in itself.

31. Professor Lewis`s evidence demonstrates the importance of assessing  the
level of knowledge of  Somali  by  careful  reference  to  the  individual`s
personal history. It was his assessment as both a fluent Somali speaker  and
a country expert that in respect of both the second  and  third  appellants,
albeit they only had a few words of Somalia, that was  consistent  with  the
evidence they had given of having had limited contact with  the  surrounding
Somali-speaking population: the second appellant having  been  sent  by  his
father to an  Islamic  religious  school  and  the  third  appellant  having
attended an Islamic primary school where he studied Arabic  and  not  Somali
and never having attended a Somali school.

32. As regards knowledge of matters that would generally be known to  Bajuni
or Bravanese from Kismayo, it is important to emphasise  why  this  test  of
local knowledge is central in many cases brought by persons claiming  to  be
from Somalia. It is simply not possible  to  make  any  simple  equation  of
ability to speak Kibajuni and being a Bajuni from Somalia. That  is  because
we know from the objective materials that the Bajuni  are  a  highly  mobile
population and that a small but significant number reside in Kenya.  Insofar
as knowledge of matters to do with Bajuni in Somalia, we have  already  seen
that the Professor found both the second appellant (in respect  of  being  a
Bravanese) and the third appellants to show  extensive  knowledge  of  their
respective tribal geographies.

33. What is  needed  therefore  in  cases  in  which  claims  to  be  Somali
nationals of Bajuni  clan  identity  are  made  is  first  of  all:  (1)  an
assessment which examines at least three different factors:

   a) knowledge of  Kibajuni,
   b) knowledge  of  Somali  varying  depending  on  the  person`s  personal
      history; and
   c)   knowledge  of  matters  to  do  with  life  in  Somalia  for  Bajuni
      (geography, customs, occupations etc).

But what is also needed is (2) an assessment which does not  treat  any  one
of these three factors as decisive: as the Tribunal  noted  in  Mohamed  Ali
Omar [2002] UKIAT 06844, it is even possible albeit unusual  that  a  person
who does not speak Kibajuni or Somali could still be a Bajuni.


Conclusions

34. Our principal conclusions can now be set out  as follows.

35. It is not clear to us on what basis the adjudicator in the case  of  the
second appellant thought he was claiming to be Bajuni, since he  had  stated
he was Barawan. But in any event we are satisfied his claim should not  have
been considered as one from a person claiming to be a Bajuni  and  that  the
adjudicator erred in  this  respect.  We  find  that  he  is  a  Barawan  of
Bravenese tribal origin whose home area is Kismayo.

36. We are satisfied that  the  third  appellant  is  a  Bajuni,  also  from
Kismayo.

37. As for the first appellant, whilst we note that the Vice  President  who
granted leave appeared to consider the burden was on him  to  prove  he  was
Bajuni, the fact of the matter was that the respondent had conceded  at  the
hearing that he was from Somalia and the adjudicator had  then  given  sound
reasons for concluding that he had given a credible account as  someone  who
was a Bajuni. Mr Sheikh has advanced no reasons  before  us  as  to  why  we
should re-open the findings of the adjudicator in  this  case.  And  in  our
view it cannot be right to treat  demonstrated  ability  to  speak  Kibajuni
through a Kibajuni interpreter as the only  or  even  necessarily  the  best
means of establishing whether someone is a Bajuni from Somalia.

38. Having established tribal identities, it  remains  to  consider  whether
the appellants in these three cases have demonstrated that they  would  face
a real risk of serous harm upon return to Somalia.

39. In relation to the first appellant, his account of  adverse  experiences
was accepted as credible, but the adjudicator refused his asylum and  Art  3
grounds of appeal on the basis that the latest objective  country  materials
did not demonstrate that  persecution  on  account  of  clan  membership  or
ethnicity was likely. He also though that the first appellant would  have  a
viable internal relocation alternative in either Puntiland or Somaliland.

40. We are not persuaded that the adjudicator was  correct  to  assess  that
members of the Bajuni who come  from  Kismayo  are  no  longer  at  risk  on
account of their clan membership or ethnicity. It  is  true  that  the  CIPU
Assessment of October 2002 at 5.25 (6. 85  of  the  April  2003  Assessment)
states that  persecution  on  such  a  basis  was  now  unlikely.  But  that
statement was made in the context of a generalised  description  of  Somalia
as a whole. It is also true that the CIPU Assessment  in  its  latest  April
2003 version no longer states  (as did the October 2001 Assessment at  5.26)
that the future of the Bajuni is uncertain and that the Bajuni  continue  to
face very serious difficulties. At  paragraph  6.88  it  states:  "With  the
Bajuni, their position is more one of denial of economic  access  by  Somali
clans than outright  abuse".  However,  there  has  been  no  withdrawal  or
amendment  of  the  October  2002  Operational  Guidance   Note   concerning
Bravanese,  Benadiri  and  Bajuni  which  continues  to  describe  them   as
"persecuted minorities" in need  of  international  protection.  Bearing  in
mind that other background materials  have  continued  to  express  concerns
about the vulnerable position of the Bajuni,  we  think  that  it  would  be
premature to describe them as being no longer a persecuted minority  in  the
absence of clear-cut evidence saying so.

41. Nor were we persuaded that  the  adjudicator's  reasons  for  concluding
that  the  first  appellant  would  have  a   viable   internal   relocation
alternative in Somaliland or Puntland were sustainable. He  correctly  noted
that the International Organisation for  Migration  (IOM)  has  stated  that
political, economic and social  conditions  in  Puntland  are  suitable  for
return and reintegration and that UNHCR has facilitated the  return  of  one
tribe from southern  Somalia.  However  the  October  2002  IND  Operational
Guidance Note states that:

      "The authorities controlling Somaliland, Puntiland  and  the  Bay  and
      Bakol regions have each made it clear that they would  only  admit  to
      the territory they control those who are of the same clan and who were
      previously resident in that particular area. Internal flight for other
      Somali groups to these relatively safe areas is not therefore a viable
      option" (emphasis added).

42. Thus we conclude that the first appellant has established  a  real  risk
of serious harm upon return to Somalia. His appeal is accordingly allowed.

43. In relation to the second appellant  because  the  adjudicator  did  not
believe his account, he did not go on to consider whether  he  would  be  at
risk in view of his clan or tribal identify. Having found  that  the  second
appellant was a Barawan of Bravenese, we, however,  are  satisfied  that  he
would be at real risk of serious harm if returned to his home area.  Whether
the account he gave of his past experiences at the hands of  a  neighbouring
tribe is accepted or not, his clan identity would put him at risk.  We  base
this view on the latest objective country materials.

44. However, as with the first appellant,  we  do  not  consider  that  this
appellant could succeed in his  asylum  or  Art  3  claim  unless  he  could
demonstrate that he would not have a viable internal relocation  alternative
in Puntliand or Somaliland. For reasons already given we  think  the  second
appellant has demonstrated  this:  he  is  not  from  clans  making  up  the
authorities who control Somaliland, Puntland (or from  the  Bay  and  Bakool
areas). Accordingly we allow his appeal also.

45. That brings us to the third appellant. Whether or  not  his  account  of
adverse experiences at the hands of Marehan is accepted as credible or  not,
we find for reasons already given, that he will be at  risk  in  Kismayo  on
account of his tribal identity as a Bajuni.  However,  once  again,  he  can
only succeed in his asylum and Art 3 claims if he  can  establish  he  would
not have a viable internal relocation  alternative.  We  find  that  he  too
would  not  have  a  viable  internal  relocation  alternative   in   either
Puntliland or Somaliland. Accordingly his appeal too is allowed.


The relevance of Home Office policy regarding Bajuni and Bravenese

46. It is salient to say something about the relevance in  Somali  cases  of
issues to do with Home Office policy. Mid-way through the hearing  we  asked
Mr Sheikh to take instructions as to whether  there  was  any  current  Home
Office policy regarding persons who were accepted as Bajuni  and  Bravenese.
Due to a CIPU Policy Unit Officer being on leave, he was only able to  offer
limited information. We do not blame him for that, although we are  somewhat
surprised that  nothing  in  written  form  was  immediately  accessible  or
available to the court. On his description there was no  established  policy
but nevertheless, even though such cases were looked  at  in  the  light  of
their particular facts, persons accepted as Bajuni  or  Bravenese  would  be
"likely" to be given some sort of leave. All we had in written form was  the
IND Operational Guidance Note - Somalia dated 24 November 2002. It could  be
said that this supports his view that there is no policy as  such  since  it
states that the Home Secretary has announced an end to country specific  ELR
policies and thus that the country specific  policy  for  Somalia  in  place
since the early 1990s and last modified in July 2001 "has  now  ended".  But
this statement only applies to  cases  where  the  starting  point  is  that
refugee status is refused.

47. Mr Wilson and  Mr  Shaw  urged  us  to  consider  that  what  Mr  Sheikh
described was a de facto policy under which those who could  establish  they
were Bajuni or Bravanese or Benadiri would qualify as refugees or  at  least
for limited leave to remain. We have some sympathy with  their  submissions.
In recent years the Tribunal has been given to understand that subject  only
to proof of Bajuni (or Bravanese) or Benadiri  identity,  the  Secretary  of
State would accept such persons met the criteria for  refugee  status.  This
is confirmed by the wording found in the November 2002 Operational  Guidance
Note as follows:

      "Members of the minority Bravanese, Benadiri  and  Bajuni  groups  are
      likely to be able to establish a need  for  international  protection.
      The UN has assessed them as persecuted minorities and their  situation
      in Somalia remains, at best, uncertain".

48. Albeit the operative word in this passage is "likely", we think it  does
amount to recognition  that  being  a  member  of  the  minority  Bravanese,
Benadiri and Bajuni groups creates a strong presumption  that  one  will  be
considered as  a  member  of  a  persecuted  minority  and  so  in  need  of
protection under the Refugee Convention.

49. However, even if we are right and there is  therefore  a  continuing  de
facto policy, what has to be decided in  appeals  brought  under  s.  69  is
solely whether the decision is contrary to the Refugee Convention. We  could
only allow these appeals if satisfied that the  appellants  had  established
key elements of the refugee definition.  The  existence  of  a  Home  Office
policy is at best one source of evidence as  to  the  existence  of  a  real
risk. (We consider that under  Art  3  the  test  is  similarly  limited  to
whether a claimant can  establish  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  the
evidence). How important a source that  is  depends  on  the  state  of  the
overall evidence in relation to any particular country: in these appeals  we
have attached considerable weight to  the  IND  Operational  Guidance  as  a
source, since it is based on UN assessments and is not contradicted  by  any
conclusive CIPU entry or other evidence.

50. (It may be  that  under  Art  8  a  concessionary  policy  can  play  an
additional  role  in  establishing  whether  a  decision  was  or  was   not
proportionate since the existence of such a policy qualifies the  extent  to
which there can be said to  be  a  state  interest  in  enforcing  effective
immigration control in respect of categories covered by such a  policy:  see
Soleiman [2002] UKIAT 07140. But that is not an issue in any of these  three
appeals).

51. Mr Wilson and Mr Shaw also sought to argue  that  we  should  allow  the
appeals on the basis that there had been an  express  or  implied  agreement
between the parties at the hearing before the adjudicator  that  they  would
succeed so long as the  appellants  could  establish  they  were  Bajuni  or
Bravanese. However, such agreements, if made, were not on  issues  of  fact.
They concerned legal interpretation.   And  even  if  we  thought  that  the
adjudicator in these appeals had accepted such  agreements,  the  matter  is
now before us. We do not consider our  assessment  of  these  cases  can  be
predetermined by any type  of  agreement  between  the  parties  as  to  the
outstanding legal issues. Persons  are  not  entitled  to  protection  under
either the Refugee Convention  or  the  ECHR  unless  they  can  demonstrate
substantively, not by procedural means,  that  they  face  a  real  risk  of
serious harm in their country of origin.

52. We would make three other general observations raised by  the  cases  we
have considered.

53. Firstly, we do not consider that any evidence  we  have  heard  in  this
case displaces the conclusions  reached  in   Laila  Suleiman  [2002]  UKIAT
00416 regarding the interrelationship between  Kibajuni  and  Swahili.  That
decision stated:

      "...we think adjudicators should approach any [case] involving someone
      who claims to be a Bajuni resident of Somalia, but  who  cannot  speak
      Kibajuni (let alone Somali) with great caution."

54. Professor Lewis plainly did not think the  differences  between  Swahili
and Kibajuni were as great as claimed by the FFM  elders,  but  he  did  not
develop this at length and it was  not  a  critical  issue  in  the  appeals
before us.

55. Secondly, whilst we continue  to  view  Laila  Suleiman  as  correct  in
regard to the ability to speak Kibajuni and the ability to speak  Somali  as
two very important indicators of whether or not someone  is  a  Bajuni  from
Somalia, they are not necessarily determinative  in  every  case.  As  Laila
Suleiman itself pointed out, if  there  is  strong  evidence  based  on  the
appellant`s ability to show knowledge of such matters  as  clan,  geography,
politics, that can also be a very important indicator and, in some  case,  a
decisive one.

56.  Thirdly,  whilst  Professor  Lewis  rightly  identified  methodological
limitations to the findings set out in the FFM Report, we  do  not  consider
that his evidence  or  any  other  evidence  we  have  been  made  aware  of
undermines the accuracy of the conclusion reached by this report  that  most
Bajuni speak  Kibajuni  as  well  as  Somali.  However,  his  evidence  does
indicate that this test must always be  applied  in  an  individual-specific
way. As  already  noted,  in  cases  where  an  appellant  is  not  able  to
demonstrate any or much  knowledge  of  Somali,  it  will  be  necessary  to
consider whether there is a satisfactory explanation for this in terms,  for
example, of limited contact with  the  surrounding  community.  Furthermore,
particular note should be taken of Professor  Lewis`s  finding  that:  "Most
Bajuni do not speak Somali...The kind of Bajuni who would  [speak  Kibajuni]
are those who have most interaction with Somalis, minor local  political  or
business role or elders, leaders of local communities."

57. To summarise, therefore, we would reiterate what we said  earlier  about
the proper approach to be conducted in such cases.

      "What is needed therefore in  cases  in  which  claims  to  be  Somali
      nationals of Bajuni clan identity are made is first  of  all:  (1)  an
      assessment which  examines at least three different factors:


           a)   knowledge of  Kibajuni,
           b)  knowledge  of  Somali  varying  depending  on  the  person`s
           personal history; and
           c) knowledge of matters to do with life in  Somalia  for  Bajuni
              (geography, customs, occupations etc).


      But what is also needed is (2) an assessment which does not  treat any
      one of these three  factors as decisive:  as  the  Tribunal  noted  in
      Mohamed Ali Omar [2002]  UKIAT  06844,  it  is  even  possible  albeit
      unusual that a person who does not  speak  Kibajuni  or  Somali  could
      still be a Bajuni."

58. Finally, we would observe that our  findings  in  relation  to  internal
relocation in respect of the three appellants of  concern  to  us  in  these
appeals are to be  taken  as  demonstrative  that  Puntland  and  Somaliland
cannot be viable relocation options for appellants of Bajuni (or  Bravanese)
clan origin. Even if we were wrong about the basis on which we reached  this
conclusion (the insistence by those who control these areas that they  would
not admit  persons  from  clans  other  than  their  own)  and  so  internal
relocation was not  subject  to  any  such  general  restriction,  it  would
remains,  in  our  view,  that  much  would   depend   on   the   particular
circumstances, including the extent to which an appellant is a member  of  a
minority clan or sub-clan who continues  to  face  hostility  from  majority
clans. At the very least this factor may create real problems of  access  to
safe areas. Gender may also be a relevant factor in  view  of  the  evidence
that violence against women and girls, including  rape,  is  reportedly  not
uncommon in  Somalia,  particularly  in  camps  for  displaced  persons  and
against women and girls of rival clans and those  of  minority  groups:  see
[2003] UKIAT 00011 G [Somalia].

59. For the above reasons these appeals are allowed.

                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




