
Heard  at  Field  House      NS (Risk- Kurd-Mosal) Iraq CG [2003] UKIAT
00045
On        14 July 2003
Written    14 July 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             28/07/2003

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE






                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs J Weinberg, dismissing his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on  13 May 2002 to issue removal
     directions and refuse asylum

  2. Before us, Mr S Onigwe represented the Appellant and Mr G Elks, a  Home
     Office Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims to be a Kurdish shopkeeper from Makhmur in  Mosul,
     in the area of Iraq formerly controlled by the Saddam  regime  and  the
     Baath party.  He claimed that  he  left  Iraq  because  he  came  under
     pressure to join the Baath party, did not wish to do so, and feared the
     consequences.  He claimed that he could not relocate to the KAA because
     his father had been a member of the  Baath  party  and  accordingly  he
     would be at risk from anti-Saddam Kurds.

  4. The Adjudicator, who heard and decided the appeal before  the  fall  of
     the Saddam regime  and  the  changes  that  have  followed,  reached  a
     comprehensive adverse credibility finding concerning these  claims  and
     dismissed the appeal for lack of credibility. She did not however state
     specifically whether she accepted  that  the  claimant  was  a  Kurdish
     shopkeeper from Mosul. She did not assess whether he  could  safely  be
     returned there as a Kurd, because  she  noted  there  were  no  present
     returns being undertaken to Iraq at all.   She  did  not  alternatively
     consider the issue of internal relocation to the KAA.

  5. Permission to  appeal  against  the  adverse  credibility  finding  was
     refused, but permission was granted on the limited basis to enable  the
     Tribunal to consider the omissions by the Adjudicator described  above,
     and their significance. Mr Elks conceded that the  Adjudicator  was  in
     error in her omissions but argued that, given her sustainable  findings
     of fact concerning the rest of the claim, the Tribunal could now  reach
     its own decision on the risk on return to Mosul on  the  basis  of  the
     current objective material, in accordance  with  the  guidance  of  the
     Court of Appeal in Oleed. Mr Onigwe submitted  that  the  whole  appeal
     should be remitted to another Adjudicator to hear afresh.

  6.  The  Adjudicator's  adverse   credibility   finding   concerning   the
     Appellant's account of pressure to join the  Baath  party  and  of  his
     father's involvement with the Baath party are properly sustainable  and
     provide the basis of fact upon which the Tribunal  can  reach  its  own
     conclusions concerning the omissions.  The Adjudicator did not make any
     finding about whether the Appellant was a Kurd from Mosul, but, with Mr
     Elk's agreement,  we  are  prepared  to  decide  these  points  in  the
     Appellant's favour and to consider his appeal on that basis.  There  is
     no reason therefore why this appeal should be remitted for rehearing by
     another Adjudicator, as the Tribunal is able to  assess  the  facts  as
     established in context of the current objective evidence for itself. We
     should make clear that as we are curing a defect in  the  Adjudicator's
     determination, we must have regard to the objective evidence as  it  is
     today, as held by the Court of Appeal in Oleed.

  7. The Saddam regime has fallen.  The Baath party has fallen with  it.  Mr
     Onigwe has shown us reports that some people in Baghdad fear  that  the
     Baath party and Saddam might return.  However with the  continuing  and
     substantial presence of the Allied forces in Iraq and the hostility  to
     Saddan and the Baath party by the majority of people in Iraq, we do not
     consider on the evidence before us that there is  any  real  risk  that
     these fears will be realised. Accordingly there is no  real  risk  that
     the claimant will face either persecution or a breach of his Article  3
     rights on return to his home area of Mosul. Mr  Onigwe  pointed  us  to
     evidence that former members of the Baath regime were being rounded  up
     by the current administration and that this could put the  claimant  at
     risk because of his father's involvement with them. However this aspect
     of his claim was clearly included in the  adverse  credibility  finding
     and therefore the claimant would be at no real  risk  on  this  account
     either. Accordingly the need for internal relocation  does  not  arise,
     though of course the Appellant can now choose to live in other areas of
     Iraq if he wishes.  That however is a matter for him.

  8. Mr Onigwe then referred us to some recent objective evidence concerning
     the overall situation in humanitarian terms in Mosul  and  argued  that
     return would be in breach of Article  3  on  this  basis.  However  the
     objective evidence shows there have been recent elections that have had
     a stabilising effect. There is a  relaxed  atmosphere  in  the  central
     district of Mosul, with no apparent fears  of  looting.   The  city  is
     largely safe with joint patrols with local police. However  night  time
     looting still occurs and there  is  widespread  availability  of  guns,
     which remains a concern. According to an assessment by  UN  on  13  May
     2003, Mosul was found to be calm and stable with electricity, water and
     communications working well. The Tribunal considers on the basis of the
     evidence that any difficulties experienced by the claimant returning to
     his home area would not  remotely  be  sufficient  to  reach  the  high
     severity threshold required to engage Article 3.






  9. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
