

                 SA (No Risk in Removal Country) Ethiopia [2003] UKIAT 00113



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date heard: 16 October  2003

                             Date notified:.29 October 2003
                                   Before

                            DR H H STOREY (CHAIR)
                        HIS HONOUR JUDGE N HUSKINSON


                                                               Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And


                                                                  Respondent





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr  R  J  Pooler,  allowing
the appeal of the respondent, whom he found to be a  national  of  Ethiopia,
against the decision to refuse to grant leave to enter  on  asylum  grounds.
Mr D Ekagha appeared for the appellant. Miss J Onalo of IAS (Tribunal  Unit)
appeared for the respondent. To avoid confusion the respondent is  hereafter
referred to as the "claimant".


2. We have decided to allow this appeal.

3. Certain matters are usefully set out at this point.

4. Firstly, this was a s.69(1) appeal and one  in  which  the  Secretary  of
State had issued a notice which included the following:


      REMOVAL DIRECTIONS

      I have  given/propose  to  give  directions  for  your  removal  by  a
      scheduled  service  at  a  time   and   date   to   be   notified   to
      (country/territory) ERITREA.
      RIGHT OF APPEAL (ON ASYLUM GROUNDS)
      You are entitled  to  appeal  [under  s.  69(1)]  to  the  independent
      appellate authorities against the decision  to  refuse  you  leave  to
      enter on the ground that your removal in pursuance of these directions
      would be contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
      1951...Convention".


5. Section 69(1) states that:

      "A person who is refused leave to enter the United Kingdom  under  the
      1971 Act may appeal against the  refusal  to  an  adjudicator  on  the
      ground that his  removal  in  consequence  of  the  refusal  would  be
      contrary to the Convention."


6. Secondly it is important to record basic facts  about  the  adjudicator's
determination. The adjudicator in this case allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
grounds but refused it on human rights grounds. In  allowing  it  on  asylum
grounds he gave as his reason his finding that:

      "if the appellant were to be returned to Ethiopia, she  would  have  a
      well founded fear of persecution.  It  follows  that  removal  of  the
      appellant would place the United Kingdom in breach of its  obligations
      under the 1951 Refugee Convention and her asylum appeal must succeed".



7. In dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds  he  noted  that  whilst
the United Kingdom would be in breach of its obligations under Art 3 of  the
Human Rights  Convention  to  return  the  claimant  to  Ethiopia,  "[t]  he
respondent however proposes to  return  the  appellant  to  Eritrea.  He  is
entitled to do so if Eritrea is a  country  to  which  there  is  reason  to
believe that the appellant will be admitted".

8. Having gone on to find that  there  was  "reason  to  believe"  that  the
claimant would be admitted to Eritrea, the adjudicator concluded that:

      "...while  she  is  likely  to  end  up  in  a  condition  of  serious
      humanitarian need, I find (applying the reasoning in Ngandu) that  the
      treatment which the appellant would receive in Ethiopia would  not  be
      so harsh as to engage Art 3. Miss Walker did not pursue the grounds of
      appeal which argued that other Articles  of  the  European  Convention
      were engaged and in the light  of  the  decision  in  Ullah...,  I  am
      satisfied that she was correct not to  do  so.  It  follows  that  the
      appellant's appeal on human rights grounds fails."

9. We should note before going further that in  this  last  passage  it  was
accepted by both parties that the reference to Ethiopia was a  mistake:  the
adjudicator was plainly referring at this point to Eritrea.

10. Thirdly, the grounds of appeal lodged by the  Secretary  of  State  were
essentially confined  to  the  point  that  the  adjudicator  had  erred  in
allowing the claimant's appeal despite having  found  that  in  Eritrea  the
claimant would not face a real risk of treatment contrary to Art  3.  As  Mr
Ekagha explained in his submissions, the underlying  point  made  rested  on
the principle set out  by  the  Tribunal  in  Kacaj   (00/TH/  00634)  that,
subject to very limited exceptions, if there is no serious  harm  under  Art
3, there will be no persecution under the Refugee Convention.

11. We note that these  grounds  contained  no  challenge  as  such  to  the
adjudicator`s  finding  that  the  claimant  was  a  national  of  Ethiopia.
Arguably they should have, since the claimant herself had stated in  various
documents, including the statement of additional grounds document, that  her
nationality  was  Eritrean.  Be  that  as  it  may,  this  finding  was  not
challenged and we do not intend to go behind it at this stage.

12. We would next observe that there was no attempt at a  cross-appeal.  Nor
was there any filing of a Respondent`s notice. Rule 19  of  the  Immigration
and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003  (in  force  from  1  April  2003)
states:

   "19(1) A respondent who wishes to -
      a) apply for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
         adjudicator's determination; or
      b) ask the Tribunal to uphold  the  adjudicator's  determination  for
         reasons different  from  or  additional  to  those  given  by  the
         adjudicator,


   must file a respondent's notice with the appellate authority."

13. Rule 19(2) stipulates that the  notice  must  be  filed  within  10  day
"after the respondent is served with notice  that  the  appellant  has  been
granted permission to appeal."

14. How do these matters impact on this appeal?

15. In our view the adjudicator fell into clear  error  in  concluding  that
because he had found the appellant to be  a  national  of  Ethiopia  he  was
obliged to allow the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds. By  s.  69(1)  he
was only entitled to allow the appeal if he was satisfied  that  removal  in
consequence of the  refusal  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdon`s
obligations under the Refugee Convention. However, the refusal in this  case
included a notice that the removal directions  given  or  proposed  were  in
respect of Eritrea. The refusal plainly put the claimant on notice  that  it
was in respect of removal to Eritrea that she had to establish a  breach  of
the United Kingdom's obligations.

16. The point was not raised by Miss Onalo, but we  would  observe  that  in
reaching this decision we have taken into  account  the  argument  that  the
adjudicator's findings in effect amounted to a conclusion that the  claimant
satisfied the requirements of Art 1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  which
defines who is a refugee in respect of a person who is "outside the  country
of his nationality". However, even if the claimant did satisfy Art 1A(2)  by
virtue of being outside the country found  by  the  adjudicator  to  be  her
country of nationality,  the  obligations  of  the  contracting  state  (the
United Kingdom in this case) are created and governed  by  Art  33(1)  which
states:

      "No contracting state shall expel or return (`refouler`) a refugee  in
      any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where  his  life
      or freedom would be threatened  on  account  of  his  race,  religion,
      nationality, membership of a  particular  social  group  or  political
      opinion".

17. Plainly the Secretary of State has  never  indicated  any  intention  of
returning this claimant to Ethiopia. Accordingly there is  nothing  in  this
case to indicate any potential violation of Art 33.  Since  it  is  only  by
reference to Art 33 that a  finding  under  Art1A  (2)  that  someone  is  a
refugee gives rise  to  any  obligation  on  the  contracting  state  to  do
something in consequence, this is fatal to Miss Onalo`s  attempts  to  argue
that the adjudicator's approach offended s.69 (1).

 18. The only basis, therefore, on which the  adjudicator  was  entitled  to
allow the appeal on asylum grounds under s. 69(1) would have been if he  had
considered she would face a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
reason in Eritrea. Miss Onalo did not seek to submit to the contrary.

19. The adjudicator did not address that issue  as  such.  However,  he  did
address the closely-related issue of whether in Eritrea the  claimant  would
face a real risk of treatment contrary to Art 3. He made plain that  he  did
not consider the difficulties she would face there reached  that  level.  We
agree with Mr Ekagha that the principle set out in Kacaj applies  here.  The
adjudicator, having found there was no serious harm in  Eritrea,  could  not
logically have  concluded  that  was  persecution  (defined  in  Horvath  as
"serious harm + lack of state protection) in Eritrea.

20. Miss Onalo sought to argue that even if we  considered  the  adjudicator
was inconsistent in his treatment of the asylum and  human  rights  grounds,
we should go behind his findings on Art 3 and consider,  particularly  since
he gave scant reasons, that on the evidence the claimant would face  a  real
risk of serious harm in Eritrea.

21. We are not prepared to do this. The claimant had an opportunity to  seek
to cross-appeal or to otherwise make known his concerns about the  terms  in
which his appeal had been allowed.  Once  the  Vice  President  had  granted
leave in early April 2003, there was also an opportunity  under  Rule  19(b)
of the 2003 Procedure Rules to ask the Tribunal to uphold the  adjudicator's
determination for reasons different from or additional  to  those  given  by
the adjudicator. The claimant would have had  10  days  after  being  served
with notice that the appellant had been  granted  permission  to  appeal  in
which to do so (Rule 19(2).  None of these opportunities were  taken.  There
must  be  finality  in  litigation.  We  would   add   that   although   the
adjudicator's assessment of risk in Eritrea was not extensive, he took  care
to base it on a more detailed assessment of objective country  materials  as
set out in  the  case  of  Ngandu  (01/TH/1994).  Since  that  decision  the
Tribunal has looked at the general situation in  Eritrea  for  returnees  in
[2003] UKIAT 00091 G (Ethiopia) and in  [2003]  UKIAT  L  (Ethiopia)  00016.
Like the panels in those two cases, we see nothing to  indicate  significant
difficulties for returnees in general.

22. Miss Onalo initially sought to  argue  that  it  was  not  open  to  the
adjudicator to assess risk on return to Eritrea  since  the  claimant  would
not be admitted into Eritrea. Once again, we are not  prepared  to  consider
this argument, since there  was  no  cross  appeal  or  respondent's  notice
challenging the adjudicator`s findings that the claimant would  be  admitted
to Eritrea. Also Miss  Onalo  ultimately  accepted  that  (as  mentioned  in
paragraph above) the adjudicator was obliged for the purposes  of  s.69  (1)
to consider whether the claimant's removal to Eritrea would be  contrary  to
the Convention. Thus whether there might or might  not  be  difficulties  in
obtaining entry into Eritrea, it was necessary, by virtue  of  the  Statute,
to assess risk on return to Eritrea. We would observe in any event that  the
adjudicator`s findings were based on the objective evidence.


The Art 8 issue

23. In a letter received several days  before  the  Tribunal  hearing,  Miss
Onalo sought permission to adduce further documentary evidence in  the  form
of a social report and a statement prepared by a social worker. She  renewed
her application to adduce this evidence at the hearing.  Mr  Ekagha  opposed
this application, pointing out that he had only had sight of it on  the  day
of the hearing. We decided not to rule on the  matter  during  the  hearing,
but to consider it during our own deliberations. In case we were  minded  to
admit these documents we had also heard submissions from both parties  based
on this documentary evidence. Miss Onalo argued that  it  demonstrated  that
there was an Art 8 issue and that the  claimant's  was  a  case  which  came
under the "mixed case" category described in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840.  In
the light of the claimant's psychological and  social  difficulties,  return
as a young woman on her own with a child to  a  country  where  she  had  no
known relatives or any  means  of  social  or  medical  support  would,  she
argued, expose her to a real risk of serious detriment to her  physical  and
moral integrity. Mr Ekagha argued that in fact she would be able  to  locate
relatives in Asmara and, whilst she might face hardships, would not  face  a
real risk of serious detriment.

24.  Having  considered  the  matter,  we  have  decided  to  exclude   this
documentary evidence. It was not submitted in  accordance  with  directions.
Furthermore, despite  references  in  the  social  worker's  report  to  the
claimant's psychological difficulties existing for  some  time,  no  mention
was made of Art 8 in the grounds of appeal to the  adjudicator  nor  in  the
statement of additional grounds. Miss Onalo sought to  excuse  that  on  the
basis that when the  matter  came  before  the  adjudicator  the  claimant's
representatives had understood the effect of the Court  of  Appeal  judgment
in  Ullah  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1856,  [2003]  1  WLR  770  to   exclude   any
consideration of  Art  8.  She  pointed  out  (correctly)  that  it  was  by
reference to Ullah that the adjudicator had justified his  decision  not  to
consider the Art 8 issues. However, it remains that so far as the  Secretary
of State was concerned, this Art 8  argument  was  a  point  raised  at  the
hearing before the Tribunal for the first time on the basis of entirely  new
evidence (in documentary form from a social worker) which the  Secretary  of
State's representative at the hearing before the adjudicator  had  therefore
had no opportunity of challenging either. Leaving to one side the fact  that
Art 8 could have been raised before the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Ullah
was delivered, the claimant and her representatives  have  known  since  the
date in April 2003, when leave to appeal to the Tribunal  was  granted,  the
limited ambit of the appeal before the  Tribunal.  In  the  absence  of  any
formal steps to extend that ambit, we are not prepared to do so now.

25. We would add that we would not have found a breach of Art 8 even  if  we
had decided to consider Art 8 and even if we had concluded, in view  of  the
support and counselling the claimant has  been  receiving  from  her  social
worker, that her case was a "mixed case" raising an issue of  the  right  to
respect for her physical and moral integrity as an aspect of  her  right  to
respect for private life.  We  acknowledge  that  in  addition  to  her  own
medical problems there have been child protection concerns,  albeit  happily
limited. However, we do not consider that  the  evidence  placed  before  us
establishes that return to Eritrea would  cause  serious  detriment  to  her
physical  and  moral  integrity.  The  claimant  is  not  receiving  medical
treatment as such although she is on medication.  At  her  asylum  interview
she was adamant that she had relatives in  Asmara.  Although  she  has  said
that she has had no contact, we do not consider it  reasonably  likely  that
upon return she would not be able to locate relatives  and  receive  support
from them.

26. For the above reasons, the appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed.





                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




