
KH


|Heard at Field House       |        |SK (prostitution) Albania CG|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00023          |
|Date:   12 June 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|07/07/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge  Huskinson (Chairman)                            |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Ms J Nightingale (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr G Phillips (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 13  October  1971.   She
      appeals to the Tribunal, with leave, from the Determination  of  Mr  M
      Weisman OBE, Adjudicator, promulgated on 21 November 2002 whereby  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  and  human  rights
      grounds from the Respondent's decision to refuse  her  asylum  and  to
      issue directions for her removal to Albania.

2.    It is immediately appropriate to notice that there  was  no  challenge
      to the credibility of the Appellant's account of events and  that  the
      task for  the  Adjudicator  was  to  decide  whether  the  account  as
      presented to him justified the Appellant's claim  for  asylum  or  her
      claim under the ECHR (see paragraph 8 of the Determination).

3.    It is also not necessary to set out at any length the details  of  the
      Appellant's account because  the  Adjudicator  has  done  this  in  an
      admirably full and helpful way in  the  Determination.   The  position
      very much by way of summary is as follows.  The Appellant comes from a
      very poor family in the north eastern part  of  Albania.   Her  family
      made an arrangement whereby, in effect, they sold her for money  to  a
      man called Arton, ostensibly for marriage but in reality  so  that  he
      could sell her on for prostitution, probably in Italy.  Arton and  the
      Appellant took the first steps towards  marriage but they  never  were
      legally married. She soon discovered he was extremely violent to  her.
      Soon thereafter she discovered that, against her will, Arton wished to
      take her to Italy.  She was informed, and  believed,  that  Arton  had
      removed a previous "wife" into Italy and  used  her  as  a  prostitute
      there and may have sold her there.  The Appellant was  convinced  that
      Arton had married her in  order  to  sell  her.   In  due  course  the
      Appellant's maternal uncle visited  her  and  saw  her  situation  and
      arranged for her to  leave  Arton.   There  was  no  question  of  the
      Appellant looking to her immediate family for help because it was they
      who had sold her to Arton in the first place.  She claims (and this is
      a central point in the case to which we return below) that  there  was
      no point in complaining to the police because they  are  very  corrupt
      and would not have been of any assistance.

4.    She arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on  17  December  2001
      and claimed asylum on 19 December.  Soon thereafter she met a Mr Mehdi
      Xhavigi who comes from Yugoslavia  and  has   refugee  status  in  the
      United Kingdom.  He and the Appellant speak the same language and they
      soon married.  They have a  daughter  born  on  27  August  2002.   Mr
      Xhavigi says he has been in the United Kingdom since  April  1998  and
      that his home is now here.  The Appellant is expecting  another  child
      in about October of this year.

5.    The Adjudicator  reached  his  conclusions  in  paragraph  14  of  the
      Determination which is in the following terms:

           "I have every sympathy as a result with  the  Appellant.   What,
           however, seems to be the stumbling block, is that the  Appellant
           has decided off her own bat not to go and consult the police  or
           to attempt to find an  agency  that  could  help  her  with  her
           problem.  I note what she says about her parents  attitude,  but
           it seems to me that she has merely feared that she was not going
           to get any help.  In the light of  what  does  appear  to  be  a
           genuine  improvement  in  the  policing   and   social   welfare
           situation,   I  would  have  thought  it  appropriate  for   the
           Appellant to try these sources first.  If they had not  been  of
           any help, then it may well be  that  then  would  reinforce  her
           claim to asylum.  I have every sympathy with her in relation  to
           her new marriage and to her being the mother of a  young  child.
           I am  very  concerned  about  breaches  of  Articles  3  and  8.
           However, in all the circumstances, in the light of the evidence,
           I am not satisfied applying the appropriate standard  of  proof,
           that there would be a breach of 3.  As far as 8 is  concerned  I
           do think that she  can  return  to  Albania  and  then  make  an
           application, which, in all probability will  be  sympathetically
           considered by the authorities in the United Kingdom.  I  do  not
           feel that she can  jump  the  queue  by  virtue  of  making  the
           application from here.  For these reasons I feel  that  she  has
           only just failed to make out her case."


6.    On behalf of the Appellant Ms Nightingale submits:

      i)    The Adjudicator appears to have thought that it was  almost  (if
           not absolutely) a prerequisite that the Appellant  should  first
           seek police protection in Albania before  being  able  to  argue
           that she was entitled to succeed in  an  asylum  application  or
           Article 3 claim in the United  Kingdom.   She  argues  that  the
           Adjudicator appears to have taken this  view  without  examining
           the reasonableness or otherwise of seeking police protection and
           without examining the question of whether an appeal  for  police
           protection would in fact help and  bring  about  any  worthwhile
           protection.


      ii)   Ms Nightingale further submits  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
           sufficiently  take  into  account  the  background  evidence  on
           Albania and that, if he had done so, he would have come  to  the
           conclusion that there was indeed inadequate state protection for
           the Appellant and that  it  would  have   been  unreasonable  to
           expect her  to  have  sought  such  state  protection  from  the
           Albanian Police Force.


      iii)  She submits therefore that the Appellant has a well-founded fear
           of persecution by a non-state actor in circumstances where there
           is an insufficiency of state protection.


      iv)   She submits that this persecution is for  a  Convention  reason,
           namely because the Appellant is a young  woman  from  the  north
           eastern part of Albania.


      v)    She submits that in any event the Appellant  can  succeed  under
           Article 3 of the ECHR.


      vi)    She  further  submits  that  the  Adjudicator  gave  inadequate
           attention to the Article 8 case and that the Appellant's case is
           truly exceptional within the principles of Mahmood  [2002] ImmAR
           229 and that it would be disproportionate for  her  to  be  sent
           back to Albania and to make an application from there for  entry
           clearance to allow  her  to  join  her  husband  in  the  United
           Kingdom.


7.    The Tribunal is of the view that the learned  Adjudicator  did  indeed
      place too much weight on the question of whether or not the  Appellant
      had as a matter of fact sought state protection in  Albania  and  gave
      insufficient attention to the question of whether it was reasonable to
      expect the Appellant to do so and the related question of whether, had
      she done so, sufficient protection would have been available.

8.    Having regard to the  Appellant's  evidence  in  paragraph  8  of  her
      statement  and  questions  30,  38  and  42  of  her  interview   (see
      respectively pages 23-24 and pages 34-39 of the bundle)  the  Tribunal
      has no hesitation in  accepting  that,  viewed  from  the  Appellant's
      personal point of view, she acted entirely  reasonably  in  concluding
      that the police would not help her.  However, it is necessary also  to
      measure this approach against the  background  material  and  form  an
      objective view as to whether or not, supposing that the Appellant were
      to be returned  to  Albania,  there  exists  a  sufficiency  of  state
      protection for her.

9.    Before examining this question the Tribunal is  satisfied  that  Arton
      is , as was described in argument, a criminal thug who  will  be  much
      displeased at having been  deprived  of  his  investment  (namely  the
      Appellant) for which he paid a  substantial  sum  to  the  Appellant's
      family.  There is plainly a real risk (indeed more than a  real  risk)
      that if the Appellant is returned to Albania Arton will pursue her and
      will subject  her  to  treatment  sufficiently  severe  to  constitute
      persecution or Article  3  infringing  treatment  if  he  catches  her
      (namely  violence  and/or  sale  into  prostitution).   The   question
      therefore is whether the Albanian police  or  other  state  protection
      services can provide sufficient protection against Arton.

10.   Ms Nightingale took us to various  passages  in  the  CIPU  Report  of
      April 2003 on Albania which make clear that people  trafficking  is  a
      major problem and that there are grave problems with  the  sufficiency
      of the state's actions against such  trafficking.   In  particular  we
      refer to the following passages:

           "There are many cases in which  criminal  groups,  comprised  of
           Albanians and foreign criminals, send Albanian girls to Italy or
           Greece". (paragraph 6.37).


           "The 2002 US State Department Report on Human Trafficking around
           the world promoted Albania from a 'tier 3' country to a 'tier 2'
           country.  According to the US State Department,  the  Government
           of Albania does not yet fully comply with the minimum  standards
           for the  elimination  of  trafficking;  however,  it  is  making
           significant efforts to do so." (paragraph 6.38).


           "The absence of a witness protection programme also impeded  the
           government's ability to build strong cases against  traffickers,
           although co-operation from the international  community  led  to
           the relocation and protection of one witness outside of  Albania
           during the year.  Victims often did not identify  themselves  as
           trafficked persons and were unwilling to testify due to fear  of
           retribution from traffickers and distrust  of  the  police.  Co-
           operation between the police  and  prosecutors  remained  weak."
           (paragraph 6.38).


           "However, police corruption hinders anti-trafficking efforts....
           Ten per cent of foreign victims  trafficked  throughout  Albania
           reported that police were  directly  involved.   Few  police  or
           government officials are prosecuted." (paragraph 6.40)


           "Violence against  women  and  spousal  abuse  remained  serious
           problems.   In  the  country's  traditionally   male   dominated
           society, cultural acceptance and lax police response resulted in
           most abuse going unreported". (paragraph 6.49)


           "Many men, especially those from the north eastern part  of  the
           country, still follow the traditional code known as the 'kanun',
           in which women are considered and treated as chattel.  Under the
           kanun, a woman's duty  is  to  serve  her  husband,  and  to  be
           subordinate to him in all matters.  The  kanun  has  contributed
           significantly  to  attitudes  in  the   region   espousing   the
           subordination of women.  The kanun "law" which is not recognised
           by the Albanian Government, also states that it is acceptable to
           kidnap young women for brides.  This practice continues in  some
           areas of the north east." (paragraph 6.50)


           "Albania is a source and transit country primarily for women and
           girls trafficked for the  purposes  of  sexual  exploitation  to
           Italy and Greece and on to other  EU  countries.   Although  the
           number of Albanians subjected to trafficking to other  countries
           decreased, the country remained a significant point  of  origin.
           Most trafficked women and young girls were transported to Italy,
           Greece..." (paragraph 6.94)


           "By the end of 2002, the Ministry  of  Public  Order  had  fully
           staffed the Anti-trafficking Unit.   In  August  a  major  anti-
           trafficking  operation  effectively  closed   down   clandestine
           speedboat traffic  to  Italy.   Nevertheless,  the  Ministry  of
           Public Order failed to follow up on high-profile trafficking and
           corruption  investigations.   Local  police  often  tipped   off
           traffickers when raids  were  scheduled.   On  one  occasion,  a
           police  supervisor  checking  on  his  men  found  them  helping
           traffickers with their boats". (paragraph 6.101)


           "The police  often  were  involved  directly  or  indirectly  in
           trafficking... lawyers and judges may also  be  manipulated  and
           bribed,  permitting  traffickers  to  buy  their  way   out   of
           punishment if arrested". (paragraph 6.102)


           "In some cases, women are being returned to  Albania  to  family
           members who trafficked them in the first place, or to  the  very
           same situation from which  they  were  trafficked.   This  often
           simply leads to the re-trafficking of these  women."  (paragraph
           6.106)


11.    Ms  Nightingale  having  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the   foregoing
      passages, Mr Phillips sought to argue that sufficient comfort  was  to
      be found in paragraphs 6.114 and 6.116 of the CIPU  Report  under  the
      heading of "Human Rights - Other Issues" and under the sub-heading  of
      "Organised Crime and Corruption".  He referred to the following:

            "The Albanian Government had fulfilled all  the  recommendations
           of the international community included in  the  anti-corruption
           plan by September 2000.   Albania  had  taken  all  measures  to
           increase  the  security  in  all  parts  of  the  country,   has
           recognised the judicial system and the police, and  is  fighting
           against organised crime and corruption." (paragraph 6.114)


           "A new internal control  service  has  the  stated  purposes  of
           preventing, detecting and documenting the criminal  activity  of
           members of the state  police  and  other  divisions  within  the
           ministry.  Employees of the Internal Control Service,  which  is
           considered a separate police division, enjoy the same status  as
           members of the judicial police." (paragraph 6.116)


      Mr Phillips also referred to paragraph 6.38 already cited above.

12.   The Tribunal has no hesitation in accepting Ms Nightingale's  argument
      to the effect that the foregoing  background  objective  material,  of
      recent date, indicates that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
      protection for the Appellant in Albania.  The  passages  cited  by  Ms
      Nightingale are specifically dealing  with  people  trafficking.   The
      Tribunal finds these of more relevance and weight on the  question  of
      the Appellant's position (which involves a fear of people trafficking)
      rather than the more general text relied upon  by  Mr  Phillips.   The
      Tribunal finds of particular significance the  passages  in  paragraph
      6.50 regarding the "kanun".  It may also be noted that paragraph 6.38,
      which is one of the paragraphs relied upon by Mr  Phillips,  indicates
      that while there may be some improvement  the  government  of  Albania
      "does not  yet  fully  comply  with  the  minimum  standards  for  the
      elimination of trafficking."  It thus can be  said  that  the  present
      situation is sub-minimum.

14.   So far as concerns the question of a Convention  reason,  Mr Phillips
      did not seek to argue against  Ms  Nightingale's  formulation,  namely
      that the persecution which the Appellant fears is  by  reason  of  her
      membership of a social group, namely women  from  the  north  east  of
      Albania.  The Tribunal accepts Ms Nightingale's arguments on this and
      notes once again the objective background material in  paragraph  6.50
      of the CIPU Report regarding the north eastern part of the country.

15.   So far as concerns internal flight Mr  Phillips  refers  to  paragraph
      6.43 of the CIPU Report indicating there is freedom  of  movement  and
      6.51 which refers to a limited shelter for women in Tirana.   However,
      the Tribunal accepts Ms Nightingale's argument upon this point  namely
      that internal flight is not in any event available because Albania  is
      a small country and on the particular facts of the present case  there
      is no reason to believe  there  is  any  safe  place  in  it  for  the
      Appellant,  especially  bearing  in  mind  the  inadequacy  of   state
      protection as described above.  Also, it would in any event (and  even
      if some safe place could be found) be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  this
      Appellant with her young children to go back to a country in which she
      had suffered in such a serious way and where she would always have  to
      seek to avoid not only Arton but also her family.

15.   It follows from the foregoing that the  Tribunal  concludes  there  is
      (at lowest) a  real  risk  that  on  return  the  Appellant  would  be
      subjected to persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  and  would  face
      treatment  which  would  infringe  her  Article  3  rights.   In   the
      circumstances it is therefore not necessary to dwell upon the  Article
      8 claim.  However, the Tribunal also allows her appeal  under  Article
      8.  The  Tribunal  considers  that  this  present  case  is  truly  an
      exceptional case.  It was recognised in Mahmood [2001] Imm AR229  that
      it would only be in exceptional cases that  the  requirement  to  seek
      entry clearance from abroad would be waived.  The  Tribunal  considers
      that this is such a case.  The Appellant has a child  born  in  August
      2002 and is  expecting  another  child  in  about  four  months  time.
      Bearing in mind these facts and the appalling treatment she has had in
      Albania and the fact that if she did return to Albania she  could  not
      go near her family (because it was her family that  sold  her  in  the
      first place) the Tribunal considers it would  be  disproportionate  to
      require the Appellant to leave the country and  seek  entry  clearance
      from abroad.

16.   In the result therefore the Tribunal  allows  the  Appellant's  appeal
      under the Refugee Convention and under the ECHR Articles 3 and 8.





                                                  His Honour Judge Huskinson
                                                              Vice President
