
MB (Removal Directions to Wrong Destination) Pakistan [2003] UKIAT 00192

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 5 November 2003
Prepared: 8 November 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                               Mr R. Baines JP




Between:
      Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the appellant: Mr S. Cooper, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr M. Davidson, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant had claimed to be a national of  Pakistan.   He  appeals
      against the decision of an  adjudicator,  Mr  N.  Froom,  following  a
      hearing on 21 February 2003 dismissing his appeal against the decision
      of the Secretary of State to refuse both  his  asylum  and  his  human
      rights claims.


   2. The appellant was born on 1 January 1978.  He is now 25 years old.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 8  October  2000  from  Pakistan  and
      claimed asylum on arrival.  He had not then passed through Immigration
      Control. Accordingly, the Immigration Officer  refused  him  leave  to
      enter and his right to remain in the United Kingdom arose  solely  for
      the temporary purpose of  determining  his  asylum  and  human  rights
      claims.

   3. In his application, the SEF, completed by the appellant on or before 9
      November 2000, he stated that and he was  a  single  Muslim  Pakistani
      from Kashmir, see page A2.  In the interview conducted at  Croydon  in
      Urdu on 24 July 2002, the appellant repeated that he  was  a  Kashmiri
      Pakistani.  The Secretary of State made his decision on 31 July  2002,
      having previously prepared his Reasons for Refusal letter on  24  July
      2002.  Both the decision and the reasons underlying it were based upon
      the appellant's assertion that he was a national of Pakistan.

   4. The Notice of Decision formally refused the appellant leave  to  enter
      the United Kingdom.  The refusal gave rise to a right of appeal  under
      section 69 (1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  which  provides
      that a person who is refused leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  may
      appeal  to  an  adjudicator  on  the  grounds  that  his  removal   in
      consequence  of  the  refusal  would  be  contrary  to   the   Refugee
      Convention.  The Notice contains an indication of the place  to  which
      the Secretary of State intends to return the appellant.  On the  basis
      that he was a Pakistani national who had travelled from Pakistan,  the
      Secretary of State was entitled to indicate that it was intended  that
      this was to be his place of destination.

   5. The destination to which an appellant may be  removed  is  limited  by
      statute.  Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, paragraph 8 (1) (c),
      [Phelan pages 43-44]  requires  the  destination  to  be  one  of  the
      following:

           (i) a country of which he is a national or citizen; or
           (ii) a country or territory in which he has obtained passport or
           other document of identity; or
           (iii) a country or territory in which he embarked for the United
           Kingdom; or
           (iv) a country or territory to which there is reason to  believe
           that he will be admitted.


   6. Unlike the situation where a person has  entered  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully, the Secretary of  State  is  not  obliged  by  statute  to
      identify the place to which the appellant will be returned.   This  is
      the effect of Regulation 5(1)(b) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals
      (Notices) Regulations 2000 [Phelan page 510] which provides  that:  "A
      notice...if it relates to the giving of directions for the removal  of
      the person from the United Kingdom, [is to] include a statement of the
      country to which he is to be removed."  An appeal under section 69 (5)
      arising out of the decision of the Secretary of State to make  removal
      directions requires the destination to be identified.  An appeal under
      section 69 (1) arising out of the decision of the Secretary  of  State
      to refuse leave to enter does not.  As a matter of convention  and  no
      more, the Notice of Decision in cases involving a refusal of leave  to
      enter (and a right of appeal under section 69 (1)), the  Secretary  of
      State inserts what are misleadingly called  removal  directions.   The
      Tribunal has, however, sometimes referred to  these  directions  as  a
      removal destination to distinguish the situation from an appeal  under
      section 69 (5).


   7. About three weeks before the hearing in front of the adjudicator,  the
      appellant signed a witness statement in which he made out a  radically
      different claim to asylum.  He denied that  he  was  a  Pakistani  and
      claimed that he was an Indian national born in Rajouri in  the  Indian
      Kashmir.  He claimed that the Indian army accused him and  his  family
      of being Mujahedin spies and freedom fighters.  He claimed that he had
      been arrested by the Indian army and escaped to a refugee camp in  the
      Pakistani part of Kashmir before becoming a labourer in Rawalpindi.

   8. Importantly, he also stated that he was at risk in Pakistan because he
      had obtained a Pakistani identity card in order to enable him to study
      in Rawalpindi.  He claimed that the Pakistani Army  Intelligence  Unit
      arrested him and that he would now be in danger because  he  would  be
      perceived as an Indian spy by reason of his having  purchased  a  fake
      identity card.  In addition, he claimed he would be in danger in India
      because his father and mother had both gone missing  in  circumstances
      suggesting the Indian  authorities  would  treat  him  as  a  Kashmiri
      mojahid.

   9.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  not  represented  at   the   hearing.
      Consequently, we have no means of knowing what the Secretary of  State
      would have done faced with this very different claim.

  10. The adjudicator decided to hear and determine the appeal.  In reaching
      this decision, we consider the adjudicator  acted  entirely  properly.
      In paragraph 13 of the  determination,  he  accepted  the  appellant's
      story that he was an Indian national and not a national  of  Pakistan.
      He had properly applied the Surendran guidelines  and  avoided  cross-
      examining the appellant himself, although the fact that the  appellant
      had recently altered the basis of his claim for asylum might well have
      raised credibility issues had the Secretary of State been  represented
      at the hearing.  He accepted that the appellant had obtained a  forged
      identity card in Pakistan and that this had resulted in the  Pakistani
      authorities showing a legitimate interest in him as  a  person  making
      use  of  forged  identity  documents.   The  adjudicator  rejected  as
      implausible the appellant's allegation that he would be treated as  an
      Indian spy.  In paragraph 17 of the determination, he said:

           "I  accept  the  appellant  fell  into  difficulties  with   the
           Pakistani authorities over his holding a forged  ID.   He  might
           have faced prosecution or even deportation but I  do  not  think
           there is any basis for his fearing persecution.  This conclusion
           is based not only on what actually occurred when he was detained
           but also on the fact that I can find  no  support  in  the  CIPU
           document for the idea that ill-treatment would be meted  out  on
           such a person."
  11.  In paragraph 18 of the determination, the adjudicator also considered
      the separate issue as to  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  on  return  to
      Pakistan as an Indian national.  He said:


           "Given he is Indian the Pakistani authorities  are  unlikely  to
           admit him.  There is nothing in the CIPU report to suggest  that
           this scenario would lead to ill-treatment."


  12.  For these reasons, he rejected the appellant's allegation that he was
      at risk of persecution or a violation of his Article 3 rights  on  his
      return to Pakistan as an Indian national.


  13. The grounds of appeal challenge  the  adjudicator's  approach  to  the
      issues before him.  In paragraphs 1, 4  and  5  of  the  grounds,  the
      appellant makes essentially the same  point.   It  is  said  that  the
      adjudicator should have referred the case back to the Home  Office  so
      that fresh representations could be made on the basis that  he  is  an
      Indian national and therefore could not be removed  to  Pakistan.   In
      addition, it is said that the matter should have been referred back to
      the Home Office for further representations  because  the  adjudicator
      had not addressed the consequences of the appellant's return to India.
       Indeed, in paragraph 5 of the  grounds,  it  is  submitted  that  the
      appellant should be allowed  to  make  fresh  representations  to  the
      Tribunal or the Home Office so that one or the other should  determine
      the issue of the risk he faces on return to India.

  14. We can deal with these submissions together.   First,  although  there
      are no pleadings in asylum or human rights  appeals,  the  issues  are
      determined from the Notice of Decision and  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
      letter associated with it.  In this case, the issue that the appellant
      himself asked to be determined in his  application  was  the  risk  of
      adverse consequences on return to Pakistan.  The  Secretary  of  State
      accepted the appellant's invitation to deal with  this  issue.   As  a
      result of the appellant's claim to be a Pakistani national and to have
      travelled from Pakistan, the Secretary of  State  must  have  realised
      this was likely to be the only place to which  he  could  be  lawfully
      returned.  The Secretary of State determined the  application  on  the
      basis of the claim.

  15. The adjudicator had a somewhat different function to perform.  He  was
      still required to consider the issue of whether this appellant was  at
      risk on return to Pakistan.  This issue remains unaltered so  long  as
      the Notice of Decision and the Refusal letter identified  Pakistan  as
      being the receiving state. The Secretary of State had never  indicated
      he was intending to return the appellant to India.  Indeed, since  the
      appellant has travelled from Pakistan, the Secretary of State is still
      entitled to return him to Pakistan in spite of his Indian nationality.
      At the hearing before us, Mr Davidson who appeared on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State was invited to indicate  whether  it  was  now  the
      Secretary of State's intention to return the appellant to  India.   He
      declined to commit the Secretary of State to making a decision on that
      issue.  We consider the Secretary of State is entitled  to  adopt  and
      maintain that position because it is not an issue that arises  in  the
      present appeal proceedings.

  16.  There was a substantial difference, however, between the  adjudicator
      and the Secretary of State as to the basis on which he  performed  the
      risk assessment. The adjudicator is required to consider the  position
      on the facts presented  to  him  at  the  hearing.   He  is  expressly
      forbidden from limiting the inquiry to the facts as presented  to  the
      Secretary of State.  Consequently, whilst the Secretary of  State  had
      to deal with the application on the basis that  the  appellant  was  a
      Pakistani national, the adjudicator had  to  make  a  finding  on  the
      appellant's assertion that he was an Indian national.  If, as he  did,
      he decided the appellant was a citizen of India, he  nevertheless  had
      to consider the risk on return to Pakistan,  the  removal  destination
      identified in the  Notice  of  Decision.   He  was  not  concerned  to
      consider a return to India.  This  is  the  approach  adopted  by  the
      adjudicator and we consider that it is the correct one.

  17. In Kojic [2002] UKIAT 05113 (Mr CMG Ockelton, deputy  president),  the
      Tribunal was concerned with  a  section  69  (1)  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to refuse the  appellant  leave  to
      enter.  The asylum issues were concerned  solely  with  Croatia.   The
      removal destination was set for  Hungary,  whence  the  appellant  had
      travelled.  The Home Office was entitled to return  the  appellant  to
      Hungary and intended this to be the destination because Hungary was "a
      country of territory in which he embarked for the  United  Kingdom"  -
      see  paragraph  8(1)(c).   The  Tribunal  decided  that  the   removal
      destination was not an essential feature of a  notice  of  refusal  of
      leave to enter. It was said that, if the Secretary of State wishes  to
      alter the destination, he should issue  a  fresh  Notice  of  Decision
      refusing leave to enter, naming  the  new  destination.   Since  then,
      however, the Court of  Appeal  in  Zeqaj  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1919  has
      apparently reversed the decision of the Tribunal on this  issue.   The
      wrong country in  Removal  Directions  does  not  vitiate  the  appeal
      requiring everybody to start again.  Rather it is a mistake  that  can
      be rectified by amendment just like any other mistake.


  18. In the present case, the Secretary of State did not seek to amend  the
      removal destination. None of the cases cited by the  appellant  impose
      upon the Secretary of State an obligation requiring  him  to  consider
      the risk faced by the appellant in India. If, in the exercise  of  his
      discretion, the Secretary of State decides to return the appellant  to
      India, the consequences will have to be considered if  and  when  that
      occurs.  In particular, issues may arise as to whether such a decision
      will give rise to a fresh right of appeal.  Those  issues  are  of  no
      concern to the Tribunal now since no such decision has been made.

  19. If the Secretary of State seeks to return the  appellant  to  Pakistan
      but the Pakistan authorities refuse to admit  him  because,  like  the
      adjudicator, they consider him to be an Indian national, the appellant
      will be returned to the  United  Kingdom.   He  will  not,  therefore,
      suffer a violation of his human rights  by  reason  of  his  being  an
      Indian national returned to Pakistan.  However, in the decision of the
      Court of Appeal in Saad, Diriye and Osorio [2001] EWCA Civ  2008,  the
      Court decided that, in an asylum appeal, the appellant is entitled  to
      a decision in relation to his  refugee  status  at  the  time  of  the
      hearing,  even  if  it  is  not  intended  that  he   should   return.
      Accordingly, even if the authorities of the receiving state refuse  to
      re-admit the appellant, the adjudicator is  nevertheless  required  to
      give substantive consideration on the hypothetical basis  of  whether,
      if returned, an appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution.
      Accordingly, the adjudicator was  required  to  consider  whether  the
      appellant had  established  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
      Pakistan by reason of his being an Indian national who had  unlawfully
      obtained and made use of false Pakistani  identity  papers.   This  is
      exactly the course adopted by the adjudicator.   It  is  the  approach
      adopted by the Tribunal in Lemlen (CC/09693/2001) (Dr  H.  H.  Storey,
      chairman) - see paragraphs 62 and 63 of  that  determination.  Neither
      the adjudicator's approach in the present appeal, nor  his  conclusion
      that the appellant was not at risk, can be faulted.


  20. During the course of her submissions, Miss Cooper submitted  that  the
      appellant was at risk because the Pakistani  authorities  might  admit
      him and then forcibly  return  him  to  India.   Accordingly,  it  was
      necessary for the adjudicator  to  consider  the  risk  faced  by  the
      appellant in India.  This was not argued before the  adjudicator.   We
      have before us the skeleton argument placed before the adjudicator and
      nowhere is it asserted that the  appellant  is  at  risk  of  forcible
      repatriation from Pakistan to India.  Similarly, the grounds of appeal
      to the Tribunal, in paragraphs  2  and  3,  do  not  assert  that  the
      adjudicator was asked to consider this as an issue and refused  to  do
      so.  As far as we are aware, there was no evidence placed  before  the
      adjudicator to make out the factual basis that  Indian  nationals  are
      forcibly repatriated if they are returned as failed asylum-seekers  to
      Pakistan. Furthermore, it is not  an  issue  raised  in  the  skeleton
      argument placed before the  Tribunal  and  dated  as  recently  as  29
      October 2003. Accordingly, it is not open to the  appellant  to  argue
      this issue before the Tribunal.

  21. For these reasons, we are satisfied that  the  adjudicator  approached
      this appeal correctly.  He considered the material issues and  reached
      a sustainable conclusion.  He  gave  his  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      appellant's claim to be at risk in Pakistan.  The reasons he gave were
      adequate and intelligible.  Accordingly, the appellant's  appeal  must
      be dismissed.

Decision: The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Andrew Jordan
Vice President
9 November 2003
