

 GY (Adjudicator Response to Interpreter Problems) Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT
                                    00100



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date heard:  9 October  2003
                                           Date notified..24th October 2003.
                                                                   Before:-.


                          DR H H  STOREY (Chairman)
                                 MR P ROGERS


                                                               Between








                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, has appealed with leave of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator,Mr K O Adio, dismissing  the
appeal against the decision by the respondent giving directions for  removal
following refusal to grant asylum. Mr D Bazini of Counsel  instructed  by  S
Osman Solicitors represented the appellant. Mr  T  Greig  appeared  for  the
respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to remit this appeal.

3. In reaching adverse credibility findings the  adjudicator  relied  on  at
least three discrepancies between what the appellant had said  at  interview
and what he said at the hearing. These concerned whether he  identified  the
"amanal" as a collection of weapons to his brothers; when his brothers  were
arrested; and from whom he heard the news of their arrest.

4. As amplified by Mr Bazini who also appeared before  the  adjudicator  the
grounds of appeal  contended  that  the  adjudicator's  adverse  credibility
findings were unsafe because the interpreter at the hearing failed to  break
down questions being put to the appellant in a proper manner,  as  a  result
of which the appellant became confused.  They  stated  that  an  interpreter
employed by the appellant's solicitors had attended in court  and  during  a
break had made known to  Counsel  his  concerns  about  the  interpretation.
Although Counsel had  then  mentioned  these  concerns  to  the  adjudicator
before the end  of  examination-in-chief,  the  latter  had  failed  to  act
properly  on  this  information.  His  response,  which  was  to  leave  the
difficulties to be dealt with in cross-examination,  was,  said  Mr  Bazini,
inadequate.

5. The Tribunal will not lightly accept allegations of  lack  of  competence
on the part of an interpreter. There is an IAA system  in  place  to  ensure
that those who act as interpreters are of proven competence. The grounds  do
not contain an affidavit from the appellant's  interpreter  or  anything  to
assist the Tribunal in deciding whether his own  competence  is  recognised.
Nor from Mr Bazini`s own account did he in his capacity as  Counsel  specify
to the adjudicator  any  particular  aspects  of  the  evidence  which  were
causing the appellant confusion.

6. That being said, we do not consider that the adjudicator`s  response  was
adequate. He did not seek to address the complaint there and  then,  with  a
view  to  establishing  whether  and  in  what   respects,   if   any,   the
interpretation  being  made  was  leading  to  errors   in   interpretation.
Furthermore, despite saying (as is recorded at paragraphs 18  and  20)  that
he would give Mr Bazini an opportunity to clarify  issues  to  do  with  the
Presenting Officer's questioning on customs and with the  interpretation  in
re-examination, all that  he  then  records  as  to  what  happened  in  re-
examination is that "...the appellant clarified the issues  objected  to  by
Mr Bazini..." He did not clarify whether he meant  here  the  issues  to  do
with  the  Presenting  Officer  questioning  on  customs  or   Mr   Bazini`s
objections. The interpretation issue is simply glossed over.

7. Furthermore, the adjudicator was wrong in our view to consider  that  re-
examination was the proper  vehicle  for  dealing  with  the  interpretation
issue. If the interpreter was interpreting poorly, it  was  likely  that  he
would go on doing so.  Certainly  the  adjudicator  did  not  give  him  any
direction there and then as to how to ask the questions (e.g. "Please  break
the questions down into short form, but not  at  the  expense  of  confusing
their meaning and context"). He should have.

8. It does not appear Mr Bazini raised the matter  further  in  submissions.
Even if he had considered that the adjudicator had by then shut his mind  to
any point about interpreter problems, it was incumbent on him to  make  sure
that his continuing concerns were placed  on  record.  Had  there  not  been
failings on the part of the  adjudicator  also,  we  would  have  seen  this
failure as seriously undermining the grounds of appeal.

9. However, at the end of the day we have to ask  ourselves  whether,  given
the inadequate response by the adjudicator to  the  interpreter  issue,  the
appellant was afforded a fair hearing.  Having  already  noted  that  in  at
least three respects the adjudicator relied on  discrepancies  between  what
the appellant said at interview and what he said at  the  hearing,  we  have
decided that the adjudicator's adverse credibility findings are unsafe.

10. For the above reasons the appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  it  is
remitted in accordance with Rule 22 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 2003 to be heard by an  adjudicator  other  than  Mr  K  O
Adio.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
