
H-DML-V1
                                                   HN (Minors - Article 8) N
                                                  Vietnam [2003] UKIAT 00059

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Written Determination        |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on :  1 April 2003                            |                             |
|Determination given orally in Court           |...................03/09/03..|
|                                              |....................         |



                                   Before:


                           Mr J Barnes - Chairman
                              Mr C A N Edinboro


between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant was represented before us today  by  Mr  P  Richmond  of
    Counsel instructed by Ormerods Solicitors.  The Secretary of State  was
    represented by Mr J McGirr, Home Office  Presenting  Officer.   We  are
    indebted to both of them for their able submissions before us.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on  15  April  1987
    and so will be 16 years of age in a few weeks.  He claims to have  left
    Vietnam on 15 April 2002 and to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    10 May 2002 illegally.  He subsequently claimed asylum on 28  May  2002
    and his asylum application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  for
    the reasons set out in a letter dated 2 July 2002.   The  Secretary  of
    State issued directions for  his  removal  to  Vietnam  as  an  illegal
    entrant on 5 July 2002 and he appealed against that  decision  on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard  on  7  November
    2002 by Ms A Dhanji, an Adjudicator, who dismissed his appeal.  He  now
    appeals  to  us  with  limited  leave  against  the  decision  of   the
    Adjudicator.  In granting leave the Acting Vice President said this:-

            "I am unimpressed with the grounds of appeal. In particular,  I
           see nothing to support the assertions made in paragraphs 3 and 5
           of  the  grounds  nor  is  there  any  reason  to  disturb   the
           Adjudicator's findings in relation to credibility or the Refugee
           Convention.  It is, however,  possibly  arguable  that,  in  the
           particular circumstances of  this  case,  further  consideration
           should be given to the human rights appeal.  Leave to appeal  is
           granted pursuant to Rule 18(7)(b) of the Immigration and  Asylum
           Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000,  limited  to  the  human  rights
           appeal".


3.    Mr Richmond correctly understood this to be a grant limited to  issues
    with might arise under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  and  the
    question of proportionality of removal, which is a  matter  with  which
    the  Tribunal  has  rightly  to  be  concerned  in   cases   where   an
    unaccompanied minor is concerned.  The Adjudicator had found  that  the
    claimed reasons for the appellant's departure from his own country were
    not credible and there is no appeal before us  in  that  respect.   The
    position from which we approach  this  appeal  is  therefore  that  the
    appellant has  no  current  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  of
    treatment in breach of his Article 3 rights if now returned.   For  the
    Secretary of State Mr McGirr accepted that  the  appellant  had,  as  a
    minor, formed some family life in this country since his  arrival.   He
    is currently with foster carers under the care of  Social  Services  in
    the London Borough of Croydon.  The Adjudicator dealt with the  Article
    8 appeal at paragraphs 6.5 and 6.6 of her determination.  In  paragraph
    6.5 she dealt with the evidence before her, which is  similar  to  that
    before us, in the following terms:

                  "... I have taken into account  the  letter  from  his  GP
           indicating that after his asylum application  was  rejected  the
           appellant has, inter alia, been feeling low and has  experienced
           a loss of appetite.  I have also considered the report  prepared
           by the South London and Maudsley NHS Trust which  expresses  the
           opinion that these  symptoms  of  depression  displayed  by  the
           appellant are likely to have been triggered by  the  refusal  of
           his asylum application.  It also says that there is no  evidence
           that the appellant is suffering from any Post  Traumatic  Stress
           Disorder.  The appellant is a minor who has been separated  from
           his family and, given his pending asylum  appeal,  he  does  not
           know what his future holds.  I accept that  the  experience  has
           been difficult for the appellant and this is  reflected  in  the
           medical evidence before me.  However,  the  evidence  before  me
           does not indicate that his psychological  condition  is  of  the
           minimum level of severity that would breach  Article  3  if  the
           appellant is returned.   The  medical  evidence  also  does  not
           support a finding that  his  return  would  be  disproportionate
           under Article 8".

4.    Having dealt with the medical evidence, she then proceeded to deal  in
    more detail with Article 8 at paragraph 6.6 as follows:-


           "I note that the appellant is staying with a foster  family  and
           that he is attending a language course at Croydon  College.   No
           doubt,  his  relationship  with  his  foster  family  and  other
           relationships he may have formed here, as well as his course  of
           studies,  will  be  disrupted  if  the  appellant  is  returned.
           However, in the circumstances of this case I am unable  to  find
           that that makes his return disproportionate to the objectives of
           immigration control legitimately exercised by the  UK.   I  also
           note that at the very least his grandmother remains in  Vietnam.
           The appellant lived with his grandmother for a number  of  years
           after his mother passed away, and by his own evidence,  she  has
           been willing to care and accommodate him after  his  father  was
           detained, and I find it likely that she would be willing  to  do
           so again.  For the foregoing reasons I am unable  to  find  that
           returning the appellant to Vietnam would give  rise  to  a  real
           risk of Article 8 being breached".

5.    It is appropriate for us to  comment  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not
    accepted the claim that the appellant's father had  been  detained  but
    for the purposes of Article 8 she appears  to  have  been  prepared  to
    proceed on that assumption having regard to the other  evidence  as  to
    his past care in Vietnam.

 6. Mr Richmond in his able  submissions  to  us  sought  to  contrast  the
    appellant's present life in this country with what awaits  him  on  his
    return, and also to raise the question  of  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State  has  shown  sufficient  interest  in  the  inappropriateness  of
    removal, given his policy which relates to unaccompanied minors.


 7. It is perhaps appropriate that we deal first with the question of  that
    policy.  It is, in essence, that no unaccompanied child will be removed
    from the United Kingdom unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that
    adequate reception and care arrangements are in place in the country to
    which he or she is to be  removed.   Enquiries  will  be  made  by  the
    Secretary of State in the country of intended return to establish  this
    before removal for the purposes of identifying a potential  carer,  and
    checking that there is a realistic  prospect  of  setting  up  suitable
    arrangements for the child's return.  Those enquiries will initially be
    with family members, although  alternatively  the  Social  Services  or
    equivalent in the child's home country may be able to provide  for  the
    child but this will depend very much on the quality of  care  provision
    available.  If, following all those enquiries, the Secretary  of  State
    is not satisfied that such adequate  reception  and  care  arrangements
    will be in place on the return of  the  unaccompanied  minor  then  the
    general presumption is that he should be granted exceptional  leave  to
    enter or remain until he attains the age of 18 years.

 8. We accept that there is no reason to doubt that the Secretary of  State
    will follow his own detailed published  policy  in  this  respect.   He
    clearly cannot be expected to make these enquiries and put in hand such
    arrangements until the asylum appeal process has been exhausted, partly
    because this might breach  matters  of  confidentiality  which  he  has
    undertaken to preserve in dealing with the claimant's application,  and
    partly because it is self-evident that it would not be  practicable  to
    make such arrangements until a point in the  asylum  process  had  been
    reached when it was known whether or not the claimant was likely to  be
    returned.  That point has only just been reached in  the  present  case
    with the refusal of leave to appeal other than on  Article  8  grounds,
    and even then the asylum process will not  have  been  exhausted  until
    this determination is formally promulgated.   Insofar  as  Mr  Richmond
    sought to rely on any failure to have made enquiries in advance, we are
    satisfied that that cannot provide any valid basis for challenging  the
    proportionality of the intended removal under Article 8.

 9.  Mr  McGirr  has  properly  pointed  us  to  the  general  approach  to
    proportionality in removal  as  laid  down  in  the  Court  of  Appeals
    judgments in Mahmood  [2001] INLR 1, and also as applied in the case of
    Bakir [2002] UKIAT 01176 where, in a case  not  involving  husband  and
    wife but siblings, the view was taken that similar principles  were  to
    be applied to the question of proportionality.  Mahmood of course  sets
    a deliberately high standard and Mr McGirr  was  properly  entitled  to
    remind  us  that  the  issue  was  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to removal in both those cases.  In our  view,  although  the
    particular circumstances must of  course  be  carefully  considered,  a
    similar approach is appropriate in the  case  of  unaccompanied  minors
    because of the policy of the Secretary of State in  relation  to  their
    removal where that is his intention.

10. Mr Richmond sought to contrast the situation that the appellant  enjoys
    in this country, where we accept that he has made efforts to  integrate
    both with his foster carers and in the pursuit of his further education
    here, with the situation which would await him on his return.  He  said
    to us initially that there was an absence of family to receive him.  We
    cannot accept that that follows from the evidence because it  is  clear
    that, for whatever reason,  the  appellant  has  preferred  that  there
    should be no attempt to make contact with his family in  Vietnam  since
    his arrival here.  The Adjudicator was in our view  perfectly  entitled
    to look at the totality of the evidence before her as  to  the  way  in
    which the appellant had been cared for in Vietnam in the past,  and  to
    make the assumption that there was a reasonable  likelihood  that  such
    caring ability would continue to apply after  the  comparatively  short
    time  since  the  appellant's  departure  from  Vietnam.   The  medical
    evidence is aptly summarised by the Adjudicator in the passage which we
    have quoted above.  It is right to say that the report from  the  South
    London and Maudsley NHS Trust does include a passage to the effect that
    the appellant is, in their opinion, a vulnerable teenager whose current
    symptomatalogy suggests that if he removes to an environment  in  which
    he feels unsafe and under threat, "such as he is likely to encounter in
    Vietnam", he will be at risk of developing a clinical depression  which
    would require psychiatric treatment.  We would make these  comments  on
    that passage in the medical report.  First, it assumes that the account
    which the appellant has given to the  maker  of  the  report  is  true.
    There is, of course, no reason why the medical consultant  should  seek
    to challenge claims put forward as to past treatment by someone in  the
    appellant's situation but it is not the function of the maker  of  that
    report to make findings of fact on such matters; it is the function  of
    the Adjudicator.  She has done so in this appeal and has  not  believed
    what the appellant has claimed.  Secondly, the  prognosis  is  to  some
    extent speculative and, in any event, there is clear evidence from  the
    country background material that there  would  be  appropriate  medical
    facilities in Vietnam to deal with any such eventuality.   In  summary,
    the situation is that this appellant has no current basis on  which  he
    would, if he were over the age of 18, be able to suggest that he should
    not now be removed to his own country.  The fact of his  minority  does
    not in our view on the present facts  make  any  difference  given  the
    clear stated policy of the Home Office which we are satisfied  will  be
    followed.  If adequate arrangements for his reception  cannot  be  made
    then he is likely to be granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  he
    attains his majority. It is perfectly proper in our view for that to be
    a decision to be taken by the Secretary of State after he has  had  the
    opportunity of making appropriate enquiries as to care arrangements  in
    which we trust the appellant will see  fit  to  cooperate  in  his  own
    interests.  We had noted the passages in the country reports  to  which
    Mr Richmond has drawn our attention which suggest that  the  Vietnamese
    authorities do not make provision for orphans over 15 years of age  and
    it may therefore be that, if appropriate arrangements  cannot  be  made
    with the family, the Secretary of  State  will  need  to  give  further
    consideration to this  element  in  the  country  background  evidence.
    Since, however, they concern matters which are already covered  by  his
    stated policy we need do no more than simply refer to the point at this
    stage.

11. For the above reasons we find that the findings of the  Adjudicator  as
    we have set them out above in relation  to  the  Article  8  issue  are
    sustainable, despite all that Mr  Richmond  has  urged  upon  us,  and,
    taking into due account that the appellant is an  unaccompanied  minor,
    we are not persuaded that  there  is  any  basis  on  which  we  should
    interfere with that decision.  For the above  reasons  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.








                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
