
H-JA-V2 CC

|Heard at Field House       |        |AG (Christianity - Surendran|
|                           |        |Guidelines) Iran [2003]     |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00079                 |
|On 8 August 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|18th September 2003                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J A O'Brien Quinn QC (Chairman)                                |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,
    appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr J K H  Rintoul)
    who, in a determination re-promulgated on 17 March  2003,  allowed  the
    appeal of the Respondent, a citizen  of  Iran,  whose  application  for
    asylum under the Refugee Convention and under the  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom, had his application
    refused by the Secretary of State on 13 March 2002.

2.    The grounds of appeal in this matter submitted by  the  Secretary  of
    State read as follows:-

         "1. This appeal was heard on 5 September 2002 and dismissed on  20
            September 2002.  It was amended on  18  January  2003  and  re-
            promulgated on 17 March 2003.


            2.    Mr Ghassemi claims that he was arrested twice for selling
            satellite  equipment  (paragraph  5.1)  and  was  fined.     In
            paragraph 6.1 the Adjudicator does  not  accept  that  this  is
            prosecution for an ordinary crime but  finds  Mr  Ghassemi  was
            committing a political act challenging the Iranian regime.   It
            was submitted that Mr Ghassemi, who continued to  sell  illegal
            satellite equipment, did so solely to  "make  a  living"  (5.1)
            while he continued his studies and although he breached  strict
            censorship laws, this was not imputed political opinion nor  is
            this a Convention reason.


         3. The Home Office was prevented (paragraph 6.3) from  questioning
            Mr Ghassemi about his  military  service  because  it  was  not
            mentioned in the refusal letter.  However, his  signed  witness
            statement (page 80)  stated  that  he  had  not  completed  his
            military service and his  oral  evidence  was  that  he  was  a
            conscientious objector.  This was an unreasonable fettering  of
            cross-examination.


         4. The Home Office was  prevented  from  questioning  Mr  Ghassemi
            about Christianity in Iran because it was  not  raised  in  the
            refusal letter.  However, his signed  witness  statement  (page
            85) mentions he had attended church in Iran with his  Christian
            friends.  This  was  again  unreasonable  fettering  of  cross-
            examination.


         5. The Adjudicator found  Mr  Ghassemi  to  be  credible  and  the
            "doubts" raised in the refusal letter to be peripheral  to  the
            asylum claim (paragraph 8.16).   However,  the  refusal  letter
            raised significant credibility issues, which were not addressed
            by  the  Adjudicator.   The  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  the
            "inferences drawn in paragraph 9 and 10" but did not  give  any
            explanation.


         6. Mr Ghassemi's mother, who converted to Christianity in  the  UK
            and  received  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  March   2001,
            allegedly sent a Bible to him in Iran and  explained  that  she
            wanted him to convert to Christianity (5.2).  Mr  Ghassemi  and
            his mother both alleged that they had not discussed the  reason
            she and her daughter  had  been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
            Remain.  It was submitted that it was not credible that such an
            important matter was never discussed while  at  the  same  time
            urging her son to convert to Christianity.  When asked why  she
            had put both her son and the man who took the Bible to  him  at
            risk, Mr  Ghassemi's  mother  mentioned  there  was  a  lot  of
            corruption in Iran.  The Adjudicator did  not  explain  why  he
            found this credible.


         7. Mr Ghassemi allegedly kept the  Bible  in  his  house,  despite
            knowing that if his house were  searched  again  in  connection
            with satellite equipment, it would be discovered.  By  his  own
            admission a Bible found in  his  house  would  not  necessarily
            result in punishment (6.6) but he then fled the country when he
            feared it had been discovered (5.2).  His own evidence was thus
            contradictory and inconsistent.


         8. In early November 2001, just weeks after  the  arrival  of  the
            Bible, the house was searched  and  Mr  Ghassemi  fled  to  his
            Aunt's house a few streets away where he was able to  live  for
            at  least  month  without  coming  to  the  attention  of   the
            authorities (6.7).  The Adjudicator  did  not  explain  why  he
            found this credible.


         9. The Home Office submits that in the light  of  the  significant
            number of credibility issues, there is no clear explanation for
            Mr Ghassemi's evidence being accepted as credible."


3.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted by  the  Tribunal  (Mr  G
    Warr, Vice-President on 25 April 2003.

4.    When granting leave to appeal, the Tribunal stated as follows:-

         "The  grounds  raise  arguable  issues  about   the   conduct   of
         proceedings and whether  it  was  reasonable  to  restrict  cross-
         examination to issues raised in the refusal letter.  The  Tribunal
         has given guidance on the risks faced by converts to  Christianity
         and it is not clear to what extent the claimant would be  at  risk
         in the absence of Evangelical activities."


5.    When the appeal opened before the Tribunal  on  8  August  2003,  the
    Secretary of State was  represented  by  Miss  Jan  Webb,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, while Miss F Webber, of Counsel, instructed by  the
    Brighton Housing Trust, appeared for the Respondent.

6.    We had placed before us, the CIPU Report on Iran for  April  2003,  a
    bundle of authorities submitted by Miss Webber, as well as a bundle  of
    documents of objective  evidence  and  a  statement  by  the  appellant
    submitted by the Brighton Housing Trust.

7.    We were then addressed by both Miss Webb, on the lines of the grounds
    of appeal and the documents submitted, as well as a copy of the  Record
    of Proceedings  before  the  Adjudicator,  while,  in  reply,  we  were
    addressed by Miss Webber who relied on the documents which she had  put
    in, on the Record of Proceedings, and a skeleton argument which she had
    put in.

8.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the determination
    of an Adjudicator, who allowed the appeal of an Iranian  citizen,  born
    on 7 October 1981, whose application for political  asylum  on  imputed
    political opinion grounds, was refused by the Secretary of State, on  7
    March 2002, and a decision made on 13 March 2002 for the issue  to  him
    of directions for his removal and the allowance by the  Adjudicator  of
    the Respondent's appeal on religious grounds also.

9.    The claim of the Respondent, then the Appellant, was, initially, that
    he feared persecution by the Iranian authorities, on the basis  of  his
    evidence that he had been the owner of a  satellite  dish  installation
    business in Iran, installing satellite dishes in  people's  houses  and
    also video recording equipment in his house which  he  used  to  record
    videos of the son of the former Shah, which videos  he  sold  to  other
    people, but that, on two occasions, he had been arrested by the Iranian
    Security Forces, in June 1999, when he was  detained  and  beaten  with
    batons before being released after a week, and in December  2000,  when
    he had been beaten, again, and detained for two weeks, and was fined on
    each occasion before being sent  home.   He  claimed  that,  after  his
    second detention, during which he had not been seriously injured, apart
    from a claim that his eyesight had been affected  to  some  extent,  he
    continued with his business but, finally,  decided  to  leave  Iran  in
    December 2001, after the security forces had, again,  raided  his  home
    looking  to  arrest  him  for  continuing  to  sell  satellite   dishes
    illegally.

10.   At the time the Respondent made his claim for asylum,  that  was  the
    sole basis of his claim.  The only reference, at that stage,  to  there
    having been any religious aspect to his claim, was, at the end  of  his
    interview, when the Respondent had mentioned that his mother  had  sent
    him a Bible from England as a present, although, at that  stage,  while
    he had attended an Armenian Christian Church, with a girlfriend, he had
    had no intention of becoming a Christian as it  was  a  crime  and  was
    illegal.  He was asked if that could be another reason for  his  having
    left Iran, his reply was "yes and no.  The last  time  they  raided  my
    house and discovered the Bible it created more problems for me."

11.   Following that reply, in answer to a further question, he agreed that
    he did not want to return to Iran as he  may  also  be  persecuted  for
    being in possession of the Bible, and then went on to say that,  since,
    being in the UK, he had attended a Christian Church  and  was  studying
    towards becoming baptised.

12.   However, the Secretary of  State,  in  considering  the  Respondent's
    application for asylum, dealt with the imputed political asylum  aspect
    only, in finding that the Respondent had not established a well-founded
    fear of persecution  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  European
    Convention for Human Rights, but did not deal, specifically,  with  the
    religious conversion aspect.

13.   However, it must be noted that the Secretary of  State,  in  refusing
    the Respondent's asylum claim, did so on the basis that, in view of the
    claim by the Respondent that, on the two occasions upon  which  he  had
    been arrested, and the fact that the Respondent well knew  the  serious
    consequences of his carrying  on  the  business  of  selling  satellite
    dishes, he had continued to do so but that the Iranian authorities  had
    fined him only, the Secretary of State was  of  the  opinion  that  the
    Respondent had not been treated unfairly by the Iranian authorities and
    that the only interest shown in the Respondent by them  was  legitimate
    and an entirely understandable  course  of  action  taken  by  them  to
    maintain law and order in Iran.  The Secretary of State, also, was  not
    satisfied as to the credibility of the Respondent's evidence as to  how
    the Respondent had left Iran and had arrived in the UK.

14.   On appeal against that  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    Respondent appeared before an  Adjudicator,  was  legally  represented,
    gave evidence and was cross-examined by a Home  Office  representative.
    At the hearing before the Adjudicator, the question of the Respondent's
    conversion to Christianity was, for the first time, dealt with, and  it
    would appear that  he  had,  since  coming  to  the  UK,  converted  to
    Christianity and regularly  attended  a  Christian  Church,  which  was
    supported by a pastor of  that  Church.    During  the  course  of  the
    hearing, the Respondent's mother also gave evidence on the Respondent's
    behalf, but, on her having been asked questions and  although  she  had
    stated that she had had a close relationship with the  Respondent,  she
    did not know how he had earned his living in Iran, although she claimed
    to have been worried about how he was paying his rent and student fees.
     The Respondent's mother also said that she was  not  aware  about  his
    arrests and had not told him why she had been given refugee  status  in
    the UK, although she had told him of her  conversion  to  Christianity.
    In reply to a question or questions as to why she  had  risked  sending
    him a Bible, her reply was that she  felt  that  there  was  a  lot  of
    corruption in Iran and wanted him to find the right path.

15.   The Adjudicator, on that evidence, came to the following conclusion:-


         "Based on my careful consideration of all the evidence before  me,
         and taking into account the submissions of both representatives, I
         make the following findings of fact.  I accept that the  Appellant
         is a sincere convert to Christianity.  In making this  finding,  I
         take note of his evidence, corroborated by both his mother and his
         pastor, that he  attended  regular  classes  to  prepare  him  for
         baptism, the express  purpose  of  which  was,  according  to  his
         pastor, to ensure that his desire to convert to  Christianity  was
         genuine.  His baptism was  not  hurried  and  took  place  at  his
         church's annual conference when other  converts  from  across  the
         country were also baptised in to the church.  I do  not  find  the
         timing of his baptism to  be  "convenient"  or  "self-serving"  as
         suggested by Ms Pos.  I find  the  circumstances  surrounding  his
         baptism to be entirely consistent with a sincere  conversion  made
         after much thought.


         I find that the Appellant would be at risk of being discovered  as
         a convert to Christianity on return to Iran.  Even if he were able
         to pass through  the  airport  and  avoid  arrest  for  his  other
         activities, he would not be able to take part in Christian life in
         Iran.  In so finding, I note that the CIPU report makes  it  clear
         that Evangelical churches, such as the one to which the  Appellant
         belongs are closely monitored, and identity  cards  checked.   The
         purpose behind  this,  to  discover  converts  and  to  discourage
         conversion, is also clear.  I find that, in the circumstances, the
         Appellant  would  be  unable  to  practise  his  religion  in  any
         meaningful way without his conversion or  his  membership  of  the
         church coming to the attention of the authorities.   I  find  that
         either would lead to the Appellant being persecuted.  I note  that
         there is clear evidence that converts to Christianity face  death,
         or at the very least, as was found in Dorodian, other serious ill-
         treatment amounting to persecution.


         I also accept that the Appellant  was  arrested  on  two  separate
         occasions for being involved with the selling of satellite  dishes
         and also the dissemination of proscribed videos.  I do not  accept
         that this is prosecution for an ordinary crime.  The  restrictions
         on satellite dish ownership and the dissemination  of  videos  are
         without doubt a serious infringement of the right  to  freedom  of
         expression.  I find that the Iranian authorities are determined to
         control the access that their citizens have to information  coming
         from outside Iran.  I find that those who disobey these  laws  are
         committing a political act, and are perceived as being opposed  to
         the regime and to be challenging it.  In coming to this conclusion
         I have paid close attention to the decision of the  IAT  in  Gomez
         (00/TH/02257).  At paragraph 31 it is stated


             'in  the  context  of  state  agents  of  persecution,  it  is
             difficult to quarrel with the formulation given  by  Hathaway,
             Law of Refugee Status, 154:
                  'essentially any  action  which  is  perceived  to  be  a
                  challenge  to   governmental   authority   is   therefore
                  appropriately considered to  be  the  expression  of  the
                  political opinion.'
         Having made these findings of facts I must now consider whether or
         not they constitute grounds for a claim that the Appellant  has  a
         well-founded fear of persecution or other ill-treatment if he were
         now returned to Iran.  For the reasons set out above, and based on
         my findings of  facts,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  would  face
         persecution on return to Iran on account of his religion and  also
         on account of his perceived political opinions.  In coming to this
         conclusion  I  take  full  account  of  the  objective  background
         evidence, and the evidence of the Appellant's Pastor."


16.   Particularly, the Respondent's appeal was based on the grounds of
    appeal submitted and, in the course of her submissions, while Miss
    Webb relied upon all the grounds of appeal, the main thrust of her
    case was that the Adjudicator had fettered  the  cross-examination
    of the Respondent by the  Home  Office  representative,  that,  by
    doing so, the Adjudicator had not been able to appreciate all  the
    evidence available, as he had not considered the question or  give
    reasons  for  finding,  whether  or  not  the  Respondent  was  an
    Evangelical Christian who would face persecution on  that  account
    if returned to Iran, and would appear to have  accepted  that  the
    Respondent would face persecution on the  basis  of  his  apostasy
    alone, despite what has been stated in the CIPU Report on Iran for
    April 2003, and that, on the question of  credibility,  generally,
    the Adjudicator had not properly considered all the  evidence  and
    had misdirected himself.

17.   During the course of Miss Webb's submissions, the whole  question
    of the conduct of the Adjudicator in not allowing the Home  Office
    representative to cross-examine the Respondent on certain aspects,
    was gone into in detail, and the submissions of Miss Webb  on  the
    statement of the Respondent and orally were aired at some length.

18.   Miss Webb's submission was that the  Home  Office  representative
    had not been allowed to ask the Respondent questions  relating  to
    his military service, which matter, although not dealt within  the
    letter of refusal, had been mentioned by  the  Respondent  in  his
    signed witness statement.  Miss Webber, while she would appear  to
    have accepted that the Adjudicator had intervened on  the  subject
    of the Home Office representative's questioning of the  Respondent
    on the subject, argued that the Home Office representative had not
    been prevented from asking the questions, but had  agreed  not  to
    pursue that line of questioning, which, she submitted, if the Home
    Office representative considered that  it  was  important  to  her
    case, she should not have agreed, but should have sought a  ruling
    on the matter so that it could be used as a basis for appeal at  a
    later stage.  Miss Webber also submitted, that if the Home  Office
    representative did not know what course to  take  when  given  the
    view of the Adjudicator on her line  of  questioning,  she  should
    have sought an Adjournment to  take  instructions,  and  that  the
    actions of the Home Office representative in simply agreeing  with
    the view of the Adjudicator, and not taking  the  matter  further,
    showed a lack of training of Home Office representatives and ought
    not to be used as the basis for a ground of appeal.

19.   During the course of argument on the subject, the  Tribunal  drew
    the attention of the representatives to the Surendran  Guidelines,
    which, although they addressed only the situation where  the  Home
    Office is not represented,  certain  aspects  could  be  relevant.
    Miss Webb argued that the Surendran Guidelines could be  pertinent
    to the case, but Miss Webber disagreed.

20.   Further, Miss Webber  argued  that,  with  regard  to  the  clear
    intention of the Adjudicator on the questioning by the Home Office
    representative, nothing appeared  on  the  Record  of  Proceedings
    particularly  with  regard  to  the  claim  of  the  Home   Office
    representative that she had  not  been  allowed  to  question  the
    Respondent as to his relationship with Christianity while  he  was
    in Iran.  The Record of Proceedings was before the  Tribunal  and,
    having studied it, and having heard submissions on the matter,  it
    would appear that there is something in the Record of  Proceedings
    with regard to the Adjudicator  having  intervened  regarding  the
    questioning of the Respondent on his military service, as  it  had
    not been addressed in the letter of refusal, but there is  on  the
    Record of Proceedings, a note to the effect that the  Respondent's
    representative had stated that it would help her case if questions
    were put, but there the matter rested.  However,  with  regard  to
    the claim that the Adjudicator had intervened on  the  questioning
    of the Respondent  regarding  his  association  with  Christianity
    while in Iran, nothing appears on the Record of  Proceedings,  but
    it is to be noted that, while questions had been asked  about  the
    finding of the Bible among  his  belongings,  no  questions  would
    appear to have been asked about the relationship of the Respondent
    with Christianity while in Iran; this may have been  an  omission,
    or it may have been that the questions  were  not  allowed  to  be
    asked, but that question could not be resolved from the Record  of
    Proceedings.

21.   Miss Webber also submitted that, while the Secretary  of  State's
    submissions were that the Adjudicator had misdirected himself  and
    that the appeal should be allowed, the situation, as held in Oleed
    by the Court of Appeal, at paragraph 30,  was  that  the  Tribunal
    should not set aside a decision of an Adjudicator  who  had  heard
    evidence unless it was plainly wrong or  unsustainable,  and  that
    that had not been the situation here.

22.   The question of the conversion to Christianity of the  Respondent
    was also raised, and Miss Webber argued that the  Adjudicator  had
    come to  the  correct  conclusion  as  to  the  sincerity  of  the
    conversion of the Respondent.  She argued that  from  reading  the
    CIPU Report, from the views expressed by the Adjudicator and  from
    the authorities cited, as well as  the  submissions  by  her,  the
    question of the  difference  between  Evangelical  Christians  and
    Assyrian Christians  did  not  play  a  significant  part  in  the
    question of the safety of the return to Iran of  Muslims  who  had
    converted to Christianity.  She  submitted  that,  she  relied  on
    Ghodratzadeh, in particular, where  it  had  been  held  that  the
    return of a Muslim who had converted  to  Christianity  would  put
    such a person in serious danger of persecution on account  of  his
    conversion to Christianity.

23.    Miss  Webber's  submissions  were  that,  both  on  the  imputed
    political  opinion  aspect,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    seriousness of the use and sale of satellite dishes in  Iran,  the
    Respondent would be in  serious  danger  of  having  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood of being persecuted, and  that  that  coupled
    with  the  question  of  his  conversion  to   Christianity,   the
    Adjudicator had come  to  the  correct  conclusion  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.

24.   We then  considered  the  submissions  made  before  us  and  the
    authorities relied upon and directed ourselves that the burden  of
    proof lay upon the Secretary of State and  that  the  standard  of
    proof is on the balance of probabilities.

25.   The main points for consideration in this matter are  whether  or
    not the Adjudicator properly heard all the evidence in this  case,
    in that it was alleged that he restricted the cross-examination of
    the Respondent, whether or not he fully appreciated all the points
    for decision, whether or not he directed himself properly  on  all
    aspects, particularly on the question of the  credibility  of  the
    Respondent and the credibility of his mother, and whether  or  not
    the Adjudicator properly assessed the conversion  to  Christianity
    aspect.

26.   Where the  allegation  of  restriction  of  cross-examination  is
    concerned, we find that, while it is clear, both from  the  Record
    of Proceedings and the determination, at paragraph 6.3,  that  the
    Adjudicator had not allowed  the  Home  Office  representative  to
    cross-examine the Respondent  on  the  question  of  his  military
    service, as he was of the opinion that the issue had neither  been
    raised at the interview  nor  in  the  letter  of  refusal.   Miss
    Webber, in reply to the Home  Office  ground  of  appeal  on  that
    aspect, argued that, as the Home Office representative had  agreed
    not to proceed with that line of questioning,  this  was  not  the
    time to raise the issue, but that the Home  Office  representative
    should have sought a ruling on the matter at the time.

27.   We have considered this matter, and while we appreciate that what
    Miss Webber contends is a course that could have been applied  and
    probably would have been applied, if  the  Home  Office  had  been
    legally represented.  However, the Home Office representative,  as
    far as we can make out from the Record of  Proceedings,  may  have
    made some sort of objection but all that appears on the Record  of
    Proceedings is:-

         "Ms Easty said it will help me."


      Which would imply that, although the Home  Office  representative
    had  objected  to  the  Adjudicator  stopping  her   from   cross-
    examination, the then Appellant's representative had no  objection
    to that line of questioning.

28.   In looking at this matter, and taking account  of  the  Surendran
    Guidelines, which we appreciate, do not directly  apply  to  cases
    where the Home Office is represented, we are of the  opinion  that
    where, in the course of proceedings  before  an  Adjudicator,  the
    line of questioning by the Home Office representative is based  on
    evidence which was before the Adjudicator and would  appear,  from
    the  Respondent's  own  written  statement  and   to   which   the
    Appellant's representative, not alone, had no objection,  but  had
    stated that it would help her, the Adjudicator should  have  borne
    in mind what it stated in paragraph 6 of the Surendran Guidelines,
    namely:-

         "It is our view that it is  not  the  function  of  a  Special
         Adjudicator to adopt an inquisitorial role in  cases  of  this
         nature.  The system pertaining at present  is  essentially  an
         adversarial system and the Special Adjudicator is an impartial
         judge and assessor of the evidence before him,"  and,  further
         on in the same paragraph where it is stated:-


         "It is not the function of the Special Adjudicator  to  expand
         upon that document, nor is it his function  to  raise  matters
         which are not raised in it, unless these are matters which are
         apparent to him from a reading of the papers,  in  which  case
         these  matters  should  be  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
         Appellant's representative who should then be invited to  make
         submissions or call evidence in relation thereto."


29.   As we see this matter, while  the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
    object to a line of questioning which went outside the text of the
    letter of refusal, before he made a decision on whether or not  to
    exclude it, he should have heard the views of both representatives
    and, in fairness if both representatives considered that the  line
    of questioning was not objectionable, and would be  of  assistance
    to both of them, particularly as the matter  of  the  Respondent's
    military service was a matter of evidence before the Tribunal, the
    Adjudicator, as an impartial judge and assessor of  the  evidence,
    ought  to  have  taken  heed  of  the  spirit  of  the   Surendran
    Guidelines, and have allowed the line of questioning initiated  by
    the Home Office representative, to proceed.

30.   To that extent, we find that  the  Adjudicator  had  unreasonably
    restricted the conduct of the Home Office case  by  fettering  the
    cross-examination of the Respondent.

31.   With regard to the claim by Miss Webb that  the  Adjudicator  had
    restricted the cross-examination of the Respondent on the question
    of Christianity in Iran, we are unable to  find  anything  in  the
    Record of Proceedings to that effect, but, as part of  the  Record
    of Proceedings are illegible,  we  cannot  be  certain  about  it.
    However, giving the benefit of any doubt  to  the  Respondent,  we
    find that no such  restriction  had  been  placed  on  the  cross-
    examination of the Respondent on that aspect.

32.   With regard to the question of whether or not the Adjudicator had
    appreciated all the points for decision, we note that,  while  the
    Adjudicator considered the claim of the Respondent  that,  because
    he had been arrested on two occasions on  account  of  his  having
    been selling satellite dishes and been  distributing  videos,  and
    had found that that was without doubt a  serious  infringement  of
    the right of freedom of expression, that it was the commission  of
    a political act, as the  Iranian  authorities  are  determined  to
    control the access of their citizens to  information  coming  from
    outside Iran, the  Adjudicator  does  not  appear  to  have  taken
    account of the fact, contained in the Respondent's  own  evidence,
    that, although he had been arrested on two occasions, roughly  six
    months apart and had been detained, he had been fined only and had
    continued  to  carry  on  selling   the   satellite   dishes   and
    distributing the videos; his reasons for so doing  being  that  he
    wanted to earn money so that he could pay his rent and pay for his
    education fees.  In addition to  which,  the  Respondent  had  not
    informed his mother of his business activities  or  of  is  having
    been arrested and detained and fined, even though her evidence was
    that she was anxious about how the Respondent  maintained  himself
    and paid his student fees while in Iran.

33.   As we see that evidence, while we  appreciate  that  the  Iranian
    authorities do appear to consider the selling of satellite  dishes
    and the distribution  of  videos  of  a  political  nature  to  be
    serious, it is obvious,  from  the  evidence  of  the  Respondent,
    himself, that, in his case, at least, no serious action was  taken
    against him, and that he  had  flouted  the  law  in  the  matter,
    between 1999 and when he left Iran in 2001, with only two  arrests
    during that period, and that he had continued his business, not as
    a protest against the state or in the expression of any  political
    opinion, but merely in order to earn a living and pay his  student
    fees.

34.   If the Adjudicator had properly weighed up  that  aspect  of  the
    Respondent's evidence in assessing the Refugee  Convention  aspect
    of his claim and had noted the views expressed by the Secretary of
    State in his letter of refusal at paragraph  6  and  7,  that  the
    actions of the Iranian Government  were  legitimate  and  did  not
    amount to unfair treatment, he may well have come to  a  different
    conclusion.   However, the Adjudicator did not take  such  account
    of the evidence which we consider to be a serious omission.

35.   With regard to the Adjudicator's approach to the question of  the
    credibility of the Respondent and his mother,  as  we  have  found
    earlier, the cross-examination of the Respondent  on  one  aspect,
    that of his military service, had not  been  allowed  to  proceed,
    which, to some extent, could have affected the assessment  of  the
    Respondent's credibility, as the Adjudicator did not  address  his
    mind, in any meaningful way, to the opinion expressed  as  to  the
    Respondent's credibility in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the  letter  of
    refusal, beyond saying that they related to peripheral matters, he
    would appear to have  lost  sight  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    inference  that  the  Respondent  would  appear   to   have   been
    deliberately attempting to try to stop  the  Interviewing  Officer
    from enquiring further into the Respondent's journey  details,  to
    which, at least, some consideration ought to have been  given,  as
    it might have had an effect on his credibility  findings.  And  as
    for the Respondent's mother, who appealed, in her evidence, to say
    that she had a close relationship with her  son,  the  Respondent,
    and who was worried about his living alone in Iran and was worried
    as to how he was paying his rent and student  fees,  yet  did  not
    know anything about his business activities between 1999 and 2001,
    the fact that he had been arrested and detained on two  occasions,
    and yet, despite the fact that her son was a Muslim, she sent  him
    a Bible; her excuse for so doing being that there  was  a  lot  of
    corruption in Iran and that she wanted him to find the right path,
    are points on which,  although  the  Adjudicator  found  both  the
    Respondent and his mother to  be  credible,  nevertheless  do  not
    appear to have been taken  into  account  by  the  Adjudicator  in
    reaching that conclusion.  The fact that there is nothing  in  the
    determination to indicate what view the Adjudicator took on  those
    aspects and how he  assessed  them  in  reaching  his  conclusion,
    indicates at least a certain weakness  in  his  reasoning  on  the
    matter, which we consider could well detract from his findings  of
    credibility.

36.   With regard to the aspect of the Respondent's having converted to
    Christianity, while we must  accept  that,  on  the  face  of  the
    evidence, the Respondent was sincere in his  conversion,  we  must
    also take into  consideration  his  evidence  at  interview  that,
    although  he  attended  an  Armenian  Christian  Church  with  his
    Armenian girlfriend in  Iran,  he  had  stated  that  he  was  not
    planning to convert to Christianity while in Iran because,  as  he
    said  "...  it  is  seen  as  being  a  traitor  and   it   is   a
    crime/illegal," and as the discovery of  the  Bible  created  more
    problems for him.  Taking that evidence in  conjunction  with  the
    fact that, although he had arrived in the UK on 17  January  2002,
    he had converted to Christianity and had been baptised within  six
    to eight months of his arrival, he not having  had  any  intention
    previously of so converting, was a matter to which the Adjudicator
    ought at least, to have referred in coming, to his  conclusion  in
    the matter, beyond  merely  finding  that  his  baptism  "was  not
    hurried."

37.   By so omitting to give that aspect consideration, it  could  well
    be argued that there was a weakness in the Adjudicator's reasoning
    in the matter.  Further,  where  the  fate  that  would  meet  the
    Respondent on his  return  to  Iran,  as  a  Muslim  converted  to
    Christianity,  is  concerned,  while  it   is   clear   from   the
    determination that the Adjudicator had before him the CIPU  Report
    on Iran, where a distinction had been made between the attitude of
    the Iranian Government towards Evangelical  churches  as  distinct
    from mainstream churches, and the present attitude of the  Iranian
    Government to Muslim converts to  Christianity,  the  question  of
    whether or not the church to which the Respondent now  adheres  is
    Evangelical Pentecostal or mainstream was not  considered  by  the
    Adjudicator in his determination,  beyond  his  stating  that  the
    church was Evangelical, but there is nothing in  the  evidence  of
    the Respondent or of Pastor  Arian,  that  it  is  an  Evangelical
    Church, or that the Respondent would  be  required  to  or  would,
    evangelise on his return to Iran.  The Adjudicator would appear to
    have  come  to  the  conclusion,  in   paragraph   8.20   of   his
    determination, that the church which the  Respondent  adheres,  is
    Evangelical, but without any basis for such a finding.

38.   We have heard the submissions of Miss Webber in this  matter  and
    have noted the authorities to which she referred, and  have  noted
    her reliance on Ghodratzadeh, but we  are  of  the  opinion  that,
    looking at paragraph  15  of  that  determination  of  Mr  Justice
    Collins, the then President of the Tribunal, he did not wish  that
    decision to be used as  a  precedent  as  it  turned  on  its  own
    particular facts, which facts are very different from the facts in
    the   instant   appeal.    Nevertheless,   even   accepting   that
    Ghodratzadeh could be used as a precedent, the whole  question  of
    the different fate which would meet a returned converted Muslim to
    Iran, who was a member of an Evangelical Church, and one  who  was
    not, has not been  explored  by  the  Adjudicator,  and,  further,
    taking account of the latest CIPU Report for April 2003, it  would
    appear  that  the  situation  in  Iran,  where  such  persons  are
    concerned, is not as serious as was found by the Adjudicator,  and
    that it is very rare nowadays for a criminal case  to  be  brought
    against a convert.  However, although Miss Webber had pointed  out
    that it would appear that  there  are  some  reports  of  converts
    having been executed, the general view that that is not universal,
    but the Adjudicator, apart from  accepting  that  Muslim  converts
    would face the death sentence, never alluded to the evidence which
    pointed the other way, which, as we see it, is not a fair  way  of
    assessing the situation based on the objective evidence.

39.   In all these circumstances, while we have taken full  account  of
    what has been held in Oleed, at paragraph  29,  we  find  that  as
    explained above, the Adjudicator, in coming to his conclusions  on
    the political asylum aspect and  the  conversion  to  Christianity
    aspect, has not taken full account of all the evidence before him,
    has restricted the  cross-examination  of  the  Respondent,  which
    cross-examination was not objected to by either  the  Respondent's
    representative or the Home  Office  representative,  and  has  not
    properly  assessed  the  question  of  the  credibility   of   the
    Respondent and his mother, and has not fully assessed the question
    of the effect the Respondent's conversion  to  Christianity  would
    have on him if returned, in the light of there being no assessment
    of  the  difference  between  Evangelical  Christians   and   non-
    Evangelical Christians.  In these circumstances,  we  are  of  the
    opinion that the Adjudicator's determination is  not  sustainable,
    and we set it aside, subject to what we say below.

40.   However, if the evidence, as a whole, were properly  assessed  by
    another Adjudicator and all aspects considered, we consider that a
    full and reasoned determination could be reached, which  would  be
    fair and just. Accordingly  we  allow  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal, but only to the extent of directing that  this  appeal  be
    heard afresh before an Adjudicator other than Mr J K H Rintoul.

41.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is, accordingly, allowed but
    only to the extent as stated above.





                                                        J A O'Brien Quinn QC
                                                                    CHAIRMAN








