
    MT (Safe Third Country - HR- Germany) Germany CG [2003] UKIAT 00130
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 29th October 2003
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 .5 November 2003...........

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Ms D K Gill
                              Mr N H Goldstein

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals, with leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  C  B  Buckwell,  dismissing  his
     appeal which is based on human rights grounds only for  reasons  which
     will appear.   Before  us  today  he  is  represented  by  Mr  Harris,
     instructed by UK Solutions, and the Respondent is  represented  by  Mr
     Gulvin.

  2. The Appellant came from Turkey to Germany  and  whilst  there  made  a
     claim for asylum.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in due course  and
     was here subject to proceedings for his return to  Germany.   On  18th
     January 1999, the Respondent wrote a letter which is headed as follows
     "Asylum and  Immigration  Act  1996  Notice  of  Decision  to  Certify
     Application on Third Country Grounds".  The letter begins as follows:

           "You have applied for  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
           grounds that you have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
           Turkey for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of
           a particular social group or political opinion.


           However, Turkey is not the only country  to  which  you  can  be
           removed.  Under the provisions of the Convention for Determining
           the State Responsible  for  Examining  Applications  for  Asylum
           Lodged in One of the Member States  of  the  European  Community
           (the  Dublin  Convention),  the  authorities  in  Germany   have
           accepted that Germany is the  state  responsible  for  examining
           your application for asylum under Article  10(1)(e).   You  are,
           under paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2  of  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 returnable to Germany which is  a  signatory  to  the  1951
           United Nations Convention relating to the status of refugees."


      Either accompanying that  letter  or  later  produced  is  a  document
      apparently in German, which Mr Harris says he cannot understand.


  3. It  is  evident  that  the  letter  which  we  have  cited  refers  to
     legislation not now in force in respect of new appeals.  But,  in  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, sections 15 and 11 read,  so  far  as
     relevant, as follows:

           "15.  Protection of claimants from removal or deportation
           (1)   During the period beginning when a person  makes  a  claim
                 for asylum and ending when the Secretary of State gives him
                 notice of the decision on the claim, he may not be  removed
                 from or required to leave the United Kingdom.


                 ...


              4) This section is to be treated as having come into force  on
                 26th July 1993.


           11.   Removal of asylum claimants  under  standing  arrangements
                 with member States
           (2)   Nothing in section 15 prevents a person  who  has  made  a
                 claim for asylum (the Claimant) from being removed from the
                 United Kingdom to a member state if:
                    a) the Secretary of State has certified that:
                         i)  the  member  state  has  accepted  that  under
                            standing arrangements  it  is  the  responsible
                            state in relation to the Claimant's  claim  for
                            asylum;  and
                        ii) in his opinion the Claimant is not  a  national
                            or citizen of the member state to which he  has
                            been sent.
                 (b)   the certificate has not been set aside on  an  appeal
                       under section 65."

  4. Section 65 of the 1999 Act is, as is well  known,  the  section  which
     gives a right of appeal to the Appellate Authorities on  human  rights
     grounds and, for present purposes, it suffices  to  indicate  that  an
     appeal under that section is limited  to  the  ground  that  a  person
     alleges that,  in  taking  a  decision  relating  to  an  individual's
     entitlement to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom,  the  authority
     taking the decision has acted in breach  of  that  individual's  human
     rights.

  5. It is clear to us that the provisions in the 1999 Act to which we have
     referred apply to this Appellant, and indeed the contrary has not been
     suggested.

  6. The letter of 18th January 1999, to which we have also referred, makes
     it clear that the Secretary  of  State  regards  the  Appellant  as  a
     Turkish  national  and  certifies  that  Germany,  under  the   Dublin
     Convention (which amounts to "standing arrangements" for the  purposes
     of section 11(2)(a)(i)) will accept  him.   It  follows  from  section
     11(2) that the Appellant is not protected from removal, and  therefore
     can be removed, unless he succeeds in having the certificate set aside
     by an appeal under section 65.   It  follows  that  the  only  grounds
     available to him are human rights grounds.   He  must  show  that  the
     issuing of a certificate is an action by an authority  which  breaches
     his human rights.

  7. Two Articles of the European Convention have been cited  in  argument:
     Articles 3 and 8.  It is clear from  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Ullah that the Appellant cannot succeed in an  appeal  under
     section 65 by showing that he might be treated in breach of Article  8
     in another country.  So far as the Article 8 argument is concerned, he
     must show that it is the action of the public authority in the  United
     Kingdom which would amount to a breach  of  Article  8.   That  was  a
     matter considered by the Secretary of State at the time  he  made  his
     decision.  The Secretary of State noted that he proposed to remove the
     Appellant's close family, consisting of his wife and two  children  to
     Germany at the same time as the Appellant.  Although there are certain
     other issues in this case relating to other relatives  in  the  United
     Kingdom, we are not persuaded that any Article 8 ground  is  made  out
     here.

  8. So far as Article 3 is concerned, it is not suggested  that  the  very
     removal of the Appellant to Germany  would  breach  his  rights  under
     Article 3, nor it is suggested  that  the  Germany  authorities  would
     treat the Appellant other than in  accordance  with  Article  3.   The
     Appellant claims, however, to fear that the German  authorities  might
     return him to Turkey where he would, he says, be treated in breach  of
     Article 3:  and that therefore the removal of  him  to  Germany  would
     itself expose him in due course to a risk  of  breach  of  Article  3.
     That argument involves, of course, an allegation that Germany does not
     recognise its duty under Article 3 to protect individuals  within  its
     jurisdiction from treatment contrary to that Article.   As  Mr  Harris
     acknowledged, there is no evidence of that before us  and  indeed,  it
     seems to us extremely  unlikely  that  such  evidence  would  ever  be
     available.  The position is that there is simply no reason to  believe
     that Germany does not recognise its obligations under Article 3.   The
     Appellant's appeal on the limited grounds which we have  specified  is
     thus doomed to failure.

  9. Mr Harris argued one other point specifically.  The certificate  under
     section 11(2) of the 1999 Act is limited to a certificate relating  to
     "standing arrangements".   Mr  Harris  submitted  that  there  was  no
     material before us which could demonstrate that the  proposed  removal
     was indeed under standing arrangements.   That  was  why  we  referred
     earlier in this determination to the  document  apparently  in  German
     which Mr Harris says he cannot understand.  It appears to us that that
     document is in  fact  likely  to  be  the  evidence  of  the  standing
     arrangements, but that is not the point.   The  standing  arrangements
     themselves do not affect the treatment of the  Appellant  on  removal.
     Whether  the  certificate   was   properly   issued   under   standing
     arrangements or  not  is  therefore  not  a  matter  which  calls  for
     consideration under section 65, which is  the  only  right  of  appeal
     which the Appellant has.

 10. Further, it is clear from section 11 that there is no general right of
     appeal on "not in accordance with the law" grounds and  there  is  not
     even a right of appeal on refugee grounds in the circumstances of this
     appeal.  The appeal is limited to human rights grounds  and  on  those
     grounds it is dismissed.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

