
jh
|Heard at Field House with  |        |VL (Evidence not Received - |
|video link to Birmingham   |        |Article 8) Afghanistan      |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00074          |
|On  4 August 2003          |        |                            |
|Dictated 4 August 2003                                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|16/09/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)                                          |
|Mr D R Bremmer                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr M Uddin, Representative for Johar & Co
                       Solicitors, Leicester
For the respondent:    Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appeals  with  leave  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr Malcolm Rothwell,  promulgated
      20 February 2003 wherein he dismissed an appeal against  the  decision
      of the respondent who had issued removal directions and refused asylum
      and  human  rights  claims.   The  Adjudicator  had  however  made   a
      recommendation at paragraph 7 of the determination  in  the  following
      terms:

           "I am concerned that the appellant's in-laws have  been  granted
           ELR   at about the time that the appellant's claim was  refused.
           They entered the country together and claimed  asylum  together.
           I do not know whether  the  respondent  was  in  a  position  to
           connect these applicants as part of the same family.  I strongly
           recommend, therefore, that the respondent takes into account the
           decisions made in respect of the appellant's family members, the
           circumstances of the birth of the appellant's  two  children  in
           this country, and the poor humanitarian conditions that exist in
           Afghanistan before he makes any decision to remove the appellant
           to Afghanistan."

2.    At the outset we made enquiries as to whether the  recommendation  had
      been followed through by  the  appellant's  representatives  with  the
      respondent  or  whether  other  applications  had  been  made  to  the
      respondent that noted the apparent inconsistency between the grant  of
      ELR to the in-laws but not to this family, when  the  extended  family
      had lodged their applications for asylum at the  same  time.  We  were
      advised that in February 2003 the appellant's solicitors  had  written
      to the respondent following up on the recommendation  and  asking  for
      ELR to be granted to their clients.  Mr Singh reported that  this  had
      been received and was held in abeyance  pending  the  outcome  of  the
      application for leave and this appeal.

3.    The grant of leave was given by the Vice President  only  in  relation
      to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grounds submitted.  These relate  to  the
      possible breach of Article 8 of the ECHR,  the  determination  of  the
      Adjudicator particularly taking into account that the appellant's  in-
      laws had been granted exceptional leave to remain until early 2005.

      The Adjudicator's Determination
4.    The Adjudicator has noted in several places (paragraph 3.11,  5.2  and
      5.5) that counsel acting for the appellant did not present submissions
      in relation to Article 8 and no other Articles from ECHR were referred
      to at the hearing.  For this reason therefore the Adjudicator has  not
      given consideration to Article 8 issues in the determination.

      The Appellant's Submissions
5.    Mr Uddin submitted to us a skeleton argument which we received on  the
      day of hearing.  He claimed that  there  had  been  reference  in  the
      appellant's own statement to Article 8 issues and that the failure  by
      counsel representing him before the Adjudicator  to  argue  issues  of
      Article 8 was an oversight that should  not  be  counted  against  the
      appellant as he did wish these issues to be put forward.

6.    He offered to present his client, other family members  and  a  social
      worker to give evidence in support of the  existence  of  family  life
      between the appellant's nuclear family and the extended family of  his
      in-laws.  We decided that the matter should proceed before us  on  the
      issue of proportionality under Article 8(2) of  the  ECHR  and  if  we
      considered after hearing those submissions that it  was  necessary  to
      hear additional evidence on the establishment of family and/or  family
      life we would allow the evidence to be called.  In  the  circumstances
      we advised at the end of the submissions on  proportionality  that  it
      would not be necessary for evidence to be called.   We  thus  accepted
      that taking the matter at its highest family life had been established
      between the appellant's family and his extended in-laws while  in  the
      United Kingdom, and apparently before that while they lived in  Kabul.



7.    Mr Uddin submitted that the starting point for  this  appeal  was  the
      Tribunal determination in Nhundu  &  Chiwera  (01/TH00613)  where  the
      Tribunal set out the step-by-step approach that needed  to  be  taken.
      These steps are:

            "a)  Is there an existent private or family life?

            b)   Is there interference with that private or family life?

            c)   Does the interference pursue a legitimate aim?

            d)   Is it in accordance with the law?

            e)   Is the interference proportionate?

8.    It was submitted that the appellant and his  wife  had  established  a
      family life in the United Kingdom with his mother-in-law,  brother-in-
      law and sister-in-law.  In addition two young children have been  born
      while in the United Kingdom to the appellant and his  wife.   In  this
      situation he submitted that a decision  to  remove  the  family  would
      interfere with family and private life established  in  this  country.
      It was conceded that the  decision  by  the  respondent  would  be  in
      accordance with the law and did pursue a legitimate aim.   However  it
      was submitted that in all the circumstances the Secretary  of  State's
      decision would not be proportionate.

9.    We were referred to the Tribunal decision in Bakir [2002] UKIAT  01176
      where the former  President,  after  analysing  the  determination  in
      Mahmood [2001] INLR1 stated:

           "The test to be applied is whether in all the  circumstances  it
           is reasonable  to  require  the  family  members  to  leave  the
           country,  that  is  to  say,   whether   the   interference   is
           proportional."

10.   He went on to concede that it was established in Article 8 cases  that
      the Secretary of State had a "margin  of  discretion"  (Beqiri  [2002]
      UKIAT 00725) and  that  the  Tribunal  should,  when  considering  the
      balance of this type of case, take  into  account  the  provisions  of
      paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules (HC395).

11.   He submitted that  the  appellant  and  his  family  had  been  living
      together in the United Kingdom for over three and a half  years.   The
      appellant and his wife and children formed part  of  a  larger  family
      unit which comprised the mother-in-law, brother-in-law and  sister-in-
      law.  The ties were extremely strong and continuous  during  the  time
      the group had been in this country.  He asked us to note that they had
      lived close together and if it had not  been  for  the  in-laws  being
      granted ELR the family would most likely still be living in  the  same
      accommodation.

12.   We were also  asked  to  note  that  the  appellant's  wife  had  been
      attending college, although of late had been suffering  from  fainting
      fits.  The appellant's mother-in-law provided support and there was  a
      constant exchange of visits between the two households.

13.   Finally he asked us  to  note  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
      criminal record and given that the appellant's  wife  was  unwell  and
      there  were  two  children  based  in  this   country,   compassionate
      considerations  should  be  taken  into  account  particularly  noting
      conditions in Kabul which he submitted at  this  time  were  extremely
      bad.

14.   The major point that he presented to us  was  that  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to remove could be  seen  as  disproportionate  given
      that he had granted ELR to the appellant's mother-in-law,  brother-in-
      law and sister-in-law in an application  based  on  extremely  similar
      grounds in 2001.  The extended family  had  travelled  to  the  United
      Kingdom together and had lodged their applications for asylum  at  the
      same time. They had always desired that their applications  should  be
      kept together and determined as a whole.  The fact that this  had  not
      happened was, in his submission, the fault of the Secretary  of  State
      and has led to the anomalous situation where part of  the  family  had
      been given ELR and others had not.  In  this  situation  he  submitted
      that  it  was  inconsistent   and   unfair   and   impacted   on   the
      proportionality issues related to this  appellant  and  his  immediate
      family.

15.   He further submitted to us that the fact that  the  exceptional  leave
      to remain expired in some 18 months time could not be seen as an issue
      that counted against this appellant.  At that time  the  in-laws  will
      have been in the United Kingdom for  some  four  years  and,  although
      there is no Home Office policy in this regard,  he  submitted  it  was
      realistic to assume that they  would  be  given  indefinite  leave  to
      remain if an application was  made  by  them  at  the  time  when  the
      exceptional leave to remain was about to expire.

16.   Finally he submitted that this case could be considered in  a  similar
      fashion to the recent determination of the Court of  Appeal  in  Arben
      Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233.  The Court of Appeal there had noted a four
      year delay  in  the  processing  of  an  application  for  asylum  and
      considered that in the assessment of proportionality the delay by  the
      Secretary of State and the acceptance  that  the  appellant  had  been
      legitimately in the United Kingdom for that  lengthy  period  of  some
      four years as a putative refugee indicated  that  proportionality  had
      been wrongly concluded by the Tribunal where the applicant had married
      a British citizen.

17.   He agreed that the situation was not totally analogous  but  that  the
      delay factor in this case was an element that had  to  be  taken  into
      account along with the inconsistency in the ultimate treatment of  the
      appellant and his family with that of his in-laws.

      The Respondent's Submissions
18.   Mr Singh submitted to us that at the hearing  before  the  Adjudicator
      on 12 February 2003 counsel for the appellant had chosen not  to  make
      submissions on Article 8 and therefore the Adjudicator  had  correctly
      reached determinations on all matters that had been placed before him.
      There was thus no fault in his determination and thus no error of law.
       In the  alternative  he  submitted  that  the  proportionality  issue
      required consideration not only of the family unit in this country but
      also the appellant's family unit in Kabul.  He asked us to  note  that
      the appellant and his wife had lived with the appellant's  father  and
      brother in Kabul, and not with  their  in-laws,  although  they  lived
      close by.  Thus if the appellant returned to Kabul he would be in fact
      going back to the family life situation he enjoyed prior to coming  to
      this country.  In addition the two young children, together  with  the
      appellant and his wife, made up a  family  unit  of  their  own.   The
      children were very young and therefore  could  easily  adapt  if  they
      travelled with their parents to Kabul.

19.    He  also  asked  us  to  take  into  account  the  Court  of   Appeal
      determination in Mahmood and that in this case the parties  knew  that
      the in-laws had limited exceptional leave to remain at the  time  when
      they made their application and it is not a situation where they could
      reasonably expect that indefinite leave would be granted  to  the  in-
      laws.  He asked us to note that there was no policy by the  respondent
      to "upgrade" ELR to ILR.  In the  circumstances,  given  an  improving
      situation in Afghanistan there was every possibility that the "in-law"
      family could be removed.  In this situation he submitted that it would
      not be disproportionate to the legitimate aims of immigration  control
      for this appellant and his immediate family to be returned to Kabul.

20.   We reserved our determination.

      The Issues
21.   We found, after considering the proportionality  issue,  that  it  was
      unnecessary for us to hear evidence whether  family  or  private  life
      existed between the appellant, his wife and children and the  in-laws,
      who have ELR in this country.

22.   The first issue therefore was whether the decision of the  Adjudicator
      was clearly wrong given that no argument on Article 8 issues had  been
      put before him?  If the answer to that question was  in  the  positive
      and the determination was sustainable then, strictly  speaking,  there
      would be no  need  for  us  to  go  on  and  consider  Article  8  and
      proportionality issues ourselves.  However, we have  decided  that  an
      alternative assessment should be made of the Article 8 issues in  case
      we are wrong in our initial conclusion.

      Decision
23.   On the first issue of whether the  determination  of  the  Adjudicator
      was clearly wrong, given the failure of counsel for the  appellant  to
      present any arguments or submissions on Article 8,  we  are  satisfied
      that the submission  of  Mr  Singh  has  merit  in  this  regard.  The
      Adjudicator clearly could not make the appellant's case  for  him  and
      although there is brief mention of Article 8 rights in the appellant's
      statement that was before the Adjudicator, it is  clear  that  counsel
      acting for the appellant did not  make  any  submissions  relating  to
      Article 8.  As stated, the Adjudicator in fact refers to this in three
      places in the determination.  It is also clear that this has not meant
      the  Adjudicator  completely  ignored  the  family  situation  or  the
      anomalous situation that apparently existed between this appellant and
      his in-laws as he went on to make a recommendation at the end  of  the
      determination.   We  are  satisfied  that  the  determination  of  the
      Adjudicator was not clearly wrong or unsustainable as the  Adjudicator
      had listened to the arguments, assessed all the issues that  had  been
      placed before him and reached sustainable conclusions.

24.    Turning  to  the  second  issue,  assessment  of  Article  8  as   an
      alternative, we have initially accepted the family and/or private life
      has been established by this appellant in the  United  Kingdom  during
      the almost four years that he has been in the  country.   An  extended
      family unit existed for some time in Kabul before the  group  came  to
      this country and during the time that they have been here,  while  not
      living together the whole of the time, there is clearly a close family
      nexus in existence and no doubt this has strengthened during the  time
      the whole extended family has been in this country.  In this situation
      therefore the provisions of Article 8(2)  on  proportionality,  become
      relevant.  We have taken into account, at the outset, the findings  in
      Mahmood, Nhundu & Chiwera, and Bakir and have also noted carefully the
      determination of the Court of Appeal in Arben Shala.   We  have  taken
      into the balance the family life existing in the United  Kingdom,  the
      fact that the in-laws have extended leave to remain for  a  period  of
      some 18 months and at that  time(early  2005)  their  continuation  of
      leave to remain  in  this  country  is  speculative,  although  it  is
      possible that they could obtain indefinite leave.  We also noted  that
      the appellant and his family lived in Kabul with his father  and  that
      there was an existing family unit at that time.  Since  the  appellant
      has been in this country he and his wife have had two young  children.
      There is no evidence to suggest that the  appellant  and  his  nuclear
      family could not return to live with his father and brother  in  Kabul
      and resume the family life that existed in the past.

25.   Finally and importantly we have taken into account the fact that,  for
      whatever  reasons,  the  respondent  chose  to  process   the   asylum
      applications  for  these  two  families  separately.  The  appellant's
      application for asylum was initially rejected on the basis that he was
      not accepted as being a national of Afghanistan while however his  in-
      laws were accepted as Afghani citizens.  This alone  demonstrates  the
      problems and anomalous situations that can arise  through  failure  to
      process family units, particularly those who arrive at the same  time,
      all together.
26.   Even though that situation is regrettable, given the sheer  volume  of
      casework and the fact that clearly they have differing names there  is
      perhaps some explanation as to why they were not  processed  together.
      In addition we do not know whether those  representing  the  appellant
      and the in-laws took all steps to  ensure  that  they  were  processed
      together.

27.   The appellant's situation however differs from that set out  in  Arben
      Shala.  The Court of Appeal there noted that  the  application  was  a
      putative refugee at the time when he arrived from Kosovo in  1999  and
      the failure by the Home Office to process  his  application  for  some
      four years needed to be taken into account.This  was  particularly  so
      ,given refugee status is declaratory and, as at least in international
      law terms, he had been legitimately in  this  country  for  the  whole
      period of time and thus validly  exercised  his  rights  to  establish
      family and private life.  This situation  however  differs  from  that
      because neither family were in fact found to be refugees  and  whether
      or not they were putative refugees at the time when  they  arrived  in
      2001 is a matter of far greater conjecture than was the case in  Arben
      Shala, where it was quite clear cut.(At least in 1998 at the  time  of
      arrival, if not possibly soon thereafter following  the  Kosovan  war,
      when arguably, in international law terms, cessation under Article  1C
      was applicable ).

28.   This delay and the anomalous situation is a  factor  that  has  to  be
      taken into account, we consider, but has nowhere near the same  weight
      as was the case in the Arben Shala decision.

29.   We have thus balanced all of the items relating  to  this  family  and
      their extended in-laws both here and in Afghanistan  and  reached  the
      conclusion that it would not be disproportionate for this family to be
      removed to Kabul where family life can be  continued  by  the  nuclear
      family and there can be resumption of family life with the appellant's
      father and brother.  We have noted particularly the fact  the  in-laws
      in this country have extended leave to remain for  only  a  period  of
      another 18 months and that their predicament after that is speculative
      and that while the living conditions  in  Kabul  are  not  good,  this
      appellant will, it appears be returning to his  own  family  home  and
      appears to have come from a reasonably prosperous background.

  30. For these reasons therefore we consider that it would not be a  breach
      of Article 8 of the ECHR should  this  appellant  and  his  family  be
      returned to Afghanistan.
  31.   We agree however that a recommendation for ELR, as  put  forward  by
      the Adjudicator, has considerable logic.   In  the  current  situation
      however we would only recommend that exceptional leave  to  remain  be
      granted to coincide in its termination with that of the  in-laws.   At
      that time the total extended family would be in a position  to  return
      and there would be a minimisation of the disruption to the family.  We
      make  this  recommendation  principally  because  of   the   anomalous
      situation that has arisen in the past.

31.   The appeal however is dismissed.



                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President

