
      ar          HH (Risk-Failed Asylum Seekers) Libya CG [2003] UKIAT00202


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                           H                Date of Hearing: 9 December 2003
                                                 Date Determination notified
                                                            24 February 2004


                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey  (Chairman)
                               Mr M W Rapinet



                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a national of Libya, appeals with leave of the Tribunal
      against a decision to remove him having refused to grant asylum.  Miss
      R. Doughney  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Halliday  Reeves  solicitors
      represented the appellant. Ms R. Giltrow appeared for the respondent.

2.    In granting leave the Acting  Vice  President  limited  the  issue  to
      whether return of the claimant to Libya would give rise to a violation
      of Article 3. He saw no basis  in  the  challenges  made  against  the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings. Nor do we. The sole  issue
      concerned whether failed asylum seekers per se are at risk  on  return
      to Libya.

3.    The Adjudicator in this case had before him the Tribunal  decision  in
      Hassan [2002] UKIAT 00062.  In Hassan the Tribunal referred to  advice
      from the Foreign & Commonwealth Office that anyone returned  to  Libya
      after an absence in excess of six months is subject to interrogation b
      the security authorities. Such  people  are  routinely  imprisoned  by
      administrative order for "having shown disloyalty to the state".  That
      case was decided in February 2002.

4.    In deciding not to follow  Hassan,  the  Adjudicator  noted  that  the
      Foreign &  Commonwealth Office had issued a new report in October 2002
      which considered that failed asylum seekers were no longer at risk  of
      a violation of Article 3.

5.    The grounds of appeal contended that in view of the  contents  of  the
      US State Department Report for 2003, the Adjudicator should have found
      that there remained a real risk of serious  harm.   That  report  said
      that   security   personnel   routinely   torture   prisoners   during
      interrogation. Since the Adjudicator accepted  that  an  interrogation
      would take place, the appellant would be likely to face ill-treatment.

6.    In amplifying the grounds of  appeal  Miss  Doughney  highlighted  the
      fact that the appellant had been in the UK for five years. Both the US
      State  Department  Report  for  2003  and  the  recent  CIPU  Bulletin
      demonstrate that there was still  a real  risk  of  interrogation  and
      consequent ill-treatment.

7.    Miss Giltrow made reference to a Dutch government report  of  November
      2002 and maintained that the burden of the latest  objective  evidence
      was that only returnees known  to  have  been  involved  in  political
      activity opposed to the current regime would be at risk on return. The
      appellant's claim in this case to be involved in  sur plus  activities
      against  the  current  regime  had  been  found  totally  lacking   in
      credibility.  The appellant had no political profile. He had  returned
      to  Iraq  (from  Switzerland)  twice  before  without   any   credible
      difficulties.

8.    We  would  accept  that  there  is  objective  evidence  stating  that
      security  personnel  routinely   ill-treat  those  they   interrogate.
      However, the reference in  the US State Department  Report  2003  (and
      the CIPU reference  to similar effect) is  generalised  and  does  not
      specify whether failed asylum seekers are interrogated and ill-treated
      on return. That is particularly important in this case  because  there
      are recent objective sources which have specifically examined risk  to
      failed asylum seekers.  There is first of all  the   Dutch  report  of
      November 2002.  The report is translated in  the  Annex  to  the  CIPU
      Bulletin 01/2003 on Libya.  This report noted that since  autumn  2001
      the Libyan authorities have ceased to apply the six month  rule  under
      which all those abroad longer than six months faced interview  by  the
      Libyan security service on return. Furthermore, the report which  made
      reference to documented cases, concluded that whilst  rejected  asylum
      seekers were likely to be held for a few days  for  interview,   those
      who were involved in, or  suspected  of,  opposition  activities  were
      treated much less well than those who were  not.   Length  of  absence
      abroad, on its own, did not appear to be a determinative factor.

9.    In addition to the Dutch report there is also the latest  Foreign  and
      Commonwealth advice of 29 April 2003  and  recent  UNHCR  advice.  All
      three sources no longer advise a blanket ban on removals to Libya.
  10. In our view the latest objective evidence only continues to support  a
      finding of real risk in respect of returnees who are perceived by  the
      authorities to have a profile of political opposition.   Clearly  such
      persons upon return would continue to find that interrogation  at  the
      hands of security personnel  led on  to  ill-treatment.  However,  for
      those who have no political profile the evidence does not  demonstrate
      a real risk of ill-treatment.


11.   The appellant in this case was found to  have  no  political  profile.
      Accordingly, we conclude that the Adjudicator was  quite  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant would not on return face a  real  risk  of
      serious harm.

  12. We would add that the decision we have reached in  this  case  accords
      with that reached by a Tribunal chaired by the  President  sitting  in
      October 2003. In this case,  E (Libya) [2003] 00200, having  concluded
      the  Dutch report and the relevant  materials,  including  an  Amnesty
      International  letter of September 2003, the Tribunal  concluded  that
      it was only in relation to  returnees perceived to have been or to  be
      involved in, or at least seriously suspected  of  being  involved  in,
      oppositionist political activity  or  who  are  perceived  as  radical
      Islamic supporters, that there is a real risk of treatment contrary to
      Article 3.








                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      3


