
ar                                      SJ (Christian Apostates - Evidence)
Iran [2003] UKIAT 00158

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 11 April 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                   ..12Aug2003..............

                                   Before:


                          Mr M R Rapinet (Chairman)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant: Mr S. Hourigan, counsel, instructed by A.B. Law
For the respondent : Miss A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  who  appeals  by  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  W.L.  Grant)
      dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
      asylum and to give removal directions.

2.    The appellant arrived in  this  country  in  April  2000  and  claimed
      asylum on arrival. The basis of her claim is that  she  had  converted
      from Islam to Christianity and as a result had  been  detained  for  a
      period of about three hours by the Baseejis.  She was released because
      the  authorities  apparently  are  only  interested   in   those   who
      proselytise.  The Adjudicator has rejected her claim to have converted
      to Christianity and as such has  dismissed  the  whole  basis  of  the
      claim. He has similarly dismissed claims under Articles 3,  8,  9,  10
      and 14.

3.    This appeal originally came before us in September last  year  and  we
      adjourned as we felt it necessary to receive evidence  both  from  the
      appellant and from Mr Steer, who is a pastor in the Iranian  Christian
      Fellowship Church in Chiswick, in order that we  might  form  our  own
      view as to whether or not the appellant is a genuine Christian.

4.    We received evidence both from the appellant and from  Mr  Steer.   So
      far as the appellant is concerned, she was asked  extremely  searching
      questions by both Miss Holmes and by  ourselves  in  relation  to  her
      practice of the Christian faith and her knowledge of  it.  During  the
      course of evidence  the  appellant  informed  us  that  she  had  been
      baptised into an orthodox church in Coventry about  five  months  ago.
      She had at the  time been staying with a friend, she tells us, and had
      a dream during the course of which it was indicated to  her  that  she
      must be baptised. She and her friend, the following day,  walked  into
      an orthodox church (she was unable to tell us what orthodox church  it
      was) and  she was thereupon christened.  She showed us photographs  of
      this event taken by  her  friend.   These  photographs  quite  clearly
      indicate that she is in  a  Christian  church  and  is  the  principal
      participant in a ceremony conducted by a number of priests who  appear
      to be robed in a manner which would be commensurate with that  of  one
      or other of the orthodox churches.

5.    Our comment upon this aspect of her evidence is that we view  it  with
      a degree of scepticism.  We say this because, whilst we do  not  doubt
      that some form of ceremony took place five months ago in  a  Christian
      church, it does seem to us  quite  extraordinary  that  any  Christian
      religion would be prepared to baptise someone of the  appellant's  age
      into that church without any form of instruction, particularly someone
      who has walked into the  church  off  the  street.  We  also  find  it
      somewhat strange that the appellant should have been baptised  into  a
      church about which she knows nothing. She could not even tell us which
      orthodox church it was, merely that there was a  board  outside  which
      had on it the word 'orthodox'.  She could well have been baptised into
      the Greek orthodox church  or  the  Russian  orthodox  church  or  the
      various other minor orthodox churches that exist.  In  our  view  this
      act on her part was self-serving. However, in coming to our conclusion
      with regard to the appellant's Christianity, we are heartened  by  the
      evidence of Mr Steer who informed us  that  this  ceremony  that  took
      place in Coventry was not  recognised  by  his  church  and  that  the
      appellant would be baptised  into  the  Iranian  Christian  Fellowship
      church later this year when he was satisfied that  she  had  undergone
      sufficient instruction and was sufficiently conversant with  Christian
      tenets and beliefs.

6.    Having considered the appellant's evidence with great  care,  we  take
      the view that she is bona fide when she claims that she is a  believer
      in the Christian faith and  that  she  is  committed  to  the  Iranian
      Christina Fellowship church and that it is  her  intention,  following
      suitable instruction in that church, to be christened  into  it  later
      this year. We are also satisfied that since coming to this country she
      has attended that church and another church on a very  regular  basis.
      We  mention  another  church  because  the  appellant  first   started
      attending the Iranian Christian Church shortly after arrival and  then
      went to another church nearer to where she lived but returned  to  the
      Iranian Christian Fellowship church a few months later. This has  been
      confirmed to us by Mr Steer as well as by her  in  her  own  evidence.
      The reason why she left the church closer to where she lived  is,  not
      unreasonably, that the services were conducted entirely in English   a
      language which she does  not  understand  and  therefore  the  service
      became somewhat meaningless. The services  of  the  Iranian  Christian
      Fellowship church are conducted in Farsi.

7.    We were impressed by the evidence which was given by Mr Steer. He  has
      been connected with the Iranian  Christian  Fellowship  church  for  a
      considerable number of years and is a  pastor  in   that  church.   He
      informs us that it is a registered church and licensed for the conduct
      of marriages, funerals and baptisms.  He informs  us  that  it  has  a
      regular pastor and that Eucharist is administered to the  congregation
      regularly on Sundays although not on every Sunday.  He informs us  the
      appellant does receive the sacrament.  It would appear that his church
      is the only Iranian  Christian  Fellowship  in  the  world.   We  will
      comment upon this aspect later in the determination.

9.    Suffice it so say that for the purposes of this determination that  we
      accept that the appellant is now committed to the Christian faith  and
      we accept that she will shortly be baptised into the Iranian Christian
      Fellowship church.

10.   For the reasons which the  Adjudicator  gives  in  his  determination,
      however, we entirely reject her claim to have  been  baptised  into  a
      Christian church in Iran prior to coming to this country and with  the
      Adjudicator we would also reject the claim that she was persecuted  by
      reason thereof. The appellant therefore  did  not  leave  Iran  for  a
      Convention reason. However, we are satisfied for the reasons which are
      given hereunder that she has, by her  actions  since  coming  to  this
      country, become a refugee sur  place.   We  come  to  this  conclusion
      having considered with considerable care the oral  evidence  that  she
      has given us and the particularly helpful evidence of Mr  Steer.    We
      have expressed reservations  with  regard  to  her  motives  in  being
      baptised earlier  this  year  in  Coventry.   However,  following  the
      guidelines in Karanaratnam we take the view that there is a reasonable
      likelihood that this appellant has since coming this  country  entered
      into a commitment to the Christian faith and will later this  year  be
      baptised into the Iranian Christian Fellowship church.

11.   This then raises the issue of what is  the  likelihood  of  her  being
      persecuted by reason of the fact that on her  return  she  will  be  a
      committed Christian were she to be returned by the Home Secretary.  We
      bear in mind that we uphold the Adjudicator's findings  that  she  was
      not a Christian at the time she left the country.

12.   Miss Holmes in her submissions drew our attention    to    the  report
      of the Swedish Alien Appeals Board which is quoted in full in the  New
      Zealand case of Y v Refugee Status Appeal Authority.  The Board states
      (paragraph 20 of the judgment):

             'According to the Shari'a Law, applicable in Iran,  conversion
             from Islam to Christianity is officially punishable by  death.
             In one case during the  1990s  has  the  conversion  -  beyond
             other criminal accusations, been the basis for  the  execution
             of the death penalty in accordance with Shari'a law.  In  this
             case the death penalty was later revoked by the Supreme Court.
             In  a  few  cases  converts  had  been  killed  under  unknown
             circumstances.   All  such   cases   concerned   proselytising
             priests.


             It is rare that Iranian asylum seekers convert to Christianity
             in other countries but the Netherlands and  Sweden.  According
             to concerted information from Christian church in Iran,  there
             is no real evidence of persecution  upon  return  to  Iran  of
             persons who have claimed conversion as grounds for  asylum  in
             Sweden. Some three to four years ago converts  would  probably
             have been exposed to various kinds of punishment, in cases  of
             conversions had become to the knowledge of the authorities  in
             Iran - today there are persons in Iran who have converted from
             Islam to Christianity there, and who participate in  Christian
             activities  there  without   the   interference   of   Iranian
             authorities.


             Conversion from Islam to Christianity is according to  Iranian
             authorities  not  possible,  and  a   conversion   abroad   is
             considered by the authorities  as a 'technical'  act,  in  the
             purpose of obtaining of asylum, which therefore does not  mean
             that the person in question risks any serious harassment  upon
             return. The concept of 'Taqieh' which is  widely  accepted  in
             Iran, makes it legitimate to lie in order to  achieve  certain
             purposes. This means that there is a high level of  acceptance
             in Iran of the lie as a means to obtain  a  purpose,  such  as
             seeking  asylum  in  the  west.  Iranian  nationals  who  have
             converted from Islam to another religion, and  who  keeps  the
             conversion a personal matter, does not attract  the  attention
             of the authorities.'

13.   The Board concludes by stating:

             'An Iranian national,  who  converts  from  Islam  to  another
             religion, normally does  not  risk  the  kind  of  prosecution
             proscribed in the Shari'a law, whether  the  conversion  takes
             place in  the  home  country  or  abroad.  There  is  also  no
             significant chance that he or she would be the target  of  any
             actions from the authorities or  of  any  serious  harassment.
             This assessment is based on the assumption that the conversion
             has come to the knowledge of the Iranian authorities.'

14.   There are two  aspects of this report which cause us a certain  amount
      of concern. The first is the statement that those who  have  converted
      and 'who keeps the  conversion  a personal matter'  does  not  attract
      the attention  of the authorities.   This  implies  the  necessity  to
      remain what we would call a closet Christian.  We shall turn  to  this
      later.  The second matter for concern is that the summary states 'This
      assessment is based on the assumption that the conversion has come  to
      the knowledge of  the  Iranian  authorities.'  This  would  appear  to
      contradict the earlier statement that so long as a Christian remains a
      closet Christian and does not attract the attention of the authorities
      there is  no  element  of  risk.   Taking  the  reasonable  likelihood
      standard, this report is one of which we can take cognisance but which
      does not fill us with confidence that a convert who does  not  in  any
      way express his or her conversion upon return and  keeps  his  or  her
      Christianity as 'a personal matter'  is not at risk.

15.   It seems to us that Christianity is a faith which embraces  acceptance
      of a philosophy, and the teaching in  particular  of  Christ  and  the
      apostles as expressed in the New Testament.  This faith is  manifested
      overtly by membership of one or  other  of  the  very  many  Christina
      churches that exist.  But a common feature of all  Christians  is  the
      need to worship and to express  their  faith  in  a  tangible  way  by
      communication with those of a similar belief.   Indeed,  we  would  be
      inclined to say the same thing of most religions. We  do  not  believe
      that it is possible for a Christian, or indeed a Muslim, to  become  a
      member of that faith and remain a member in total isolation  from  all
      other members, attending no services and communicating with  no  other
      persons of  a  like  faith.   Early  Christians  were  persecuted  and
      perforce remained covert in the practice of their  religion  but  they
      continued to mix with their fellow Christians and whenever possible to
      hold services and, as we know from the various epistles of St Paul and
      the other apostles, there was a  constant  communication  between  the
      various Christian communities throughout the Mediterranean. For  these
      reasons, therefore, we have some reservations about accepting what  is
      stated by the Swedish Aliens Board.

16.   The position of Christians is set out helpfully in the CIPU Report  in
      paragraphs 5.49 to 5.53.  5.50 (incorrectly numbered 5.02) states:

             'Government officials have reacted to this perceived  activity
             by  closing  evangelical  churches  and  arresting   converts.
             Members of evangelical congregations  are  required  to  carry
             membership cards, photocopies of which must be provided to the
             authorities.  Worshipers are subject  to  identity  checks  by
             authorities posted outside congregation centres. Meetings  for
             evangelical services have been restricted by  the  authorities
             to Sundays and church officials have been  ordered  to  inform
             the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Islamic  Guidance  before
             admitting new members to their congregations.'

17.   The succeeding paragraphs  deal  with  the  treatment  of  evangelical
      Christians.   The  final  sentence  of  paragraph   5.50   causes   us
      considerable concern. If the appellant were to return  to  Tehran  and
      were to attend a service of one of the Christian  churches  which  are
      permitted to exist in Iran, church officials would have to inform  the
      Ministry of Information and Islamic Guidance of her  attendance  as  a
      new member of the congregation.  Her family are known in the  area  as
      Muslims and one can only assume that if such  statistical  information
      is fed through by the church authorities to the appropriate  ministry,
      the relevant bureaucrat would put two and two together and there is  a
      reasonable likelihood that he would come to the conclusion  that  here
      is a convert whose circumstances warrant investigation.

18.   We would entirely concur with what Mr Justice Collins  states  in  the
      case of Jhodratzdeh [2002] UKIAT01867 at paragraph 8 when he states:

             'It is suggested that there is no reasons why the  authorities
             should find that out. An individual  who  has  converted,  may
             practice his religion privately and provided he  does  not  do
             anything which shows that  he  has  converted,  he  should  be
             safe.'


             That is all very well, but if a person has genuinely converted
             to Christianity then it is unreasonable to expect  him not, at
             the very least, to try to contact other Christians in order to
             join them in some act of worship together.  The risk  then  is
             that there may be information given  against  him  by  someone
             who, for whatever reason, does not like him and if that matter
             comes to the attention of the authorities, then the risk would
             exist. Accordingly, merely to say there is no need to manifest
             does not necessary answer the problem that might arise.'

19.   We specifically asked Mr Steer  whether,  if  the  appellant  were  to
      return, she would be expected to proselytise  and  he  indicated  that
      this would not be so, though he did confirm that he would be  expected
      to remain evangelical. This does not necessarily mean propounding  the
      Christian faith in any public way. A  person  is  evangelical  who  is
      merely a member of the  evangelical tradition (we refer to the  Oxford
      English Dictionary).  She would be expected to continue  the  practice
      of her Christian faith in Iran and in so doing would probably have  to
      attend one or other of the two accepted Christian  churches.  For  the
      reasons which we have indicated above, we believe that this would  put
      her at risk.

20.   We have given consideration to whether or not she  can  be  considered
      to be a Christian if she belongs to what we may loosely term as a 'one-
      off' church as the Iranian Christian Fellowship church appears  to  be
      and, as Mr Steer admitted to us, it was.  We do  not  think  that  the
      fact that this is the only Christian church of its kind detracts  from
      its commitment and that of its members and its pastors  in  particular
      to the Christian faith.  Christianity  is  manifested  throughout  the
      world in innumerable variant churches of one sort of another and is in
      fact so manifested  in this country.  Provided that one  is  satisfied
      that the church is a bona fide church committed to the tenets  of  the
      Christian faith, then we do not think that the fact that this  is  the
      only church of its kind detracts from the nature  of  the  appellant's
      claim.

21.   For these reasons, therefore, we are satisfied that the appeal  should
      be allowed.

22.   In allowing this appeal, we would emphasise that  Adjudicators  should
      be satisfied completely as to the bona fide not only of the  appellant
      but of the church to which the appellant maintains he  adheres.   Were
      this not so, it would be very  easy  (and  appears  to  becoming  more
      common) for persons to claim that they would be persecuted  on  return
      because they have converted to  the  Christian  faith.   We  would  be
      inclined to say that the test as to the bona fide of the conversion is
      more than that of a reasonable  likelihood.   The  Adjudicator  should
      obtain evidence (and more than just a written  letter)  preferably  in
      oral form, from the pastor, priest  or  other  person  who  leads  the
      congregation of the particular church to which an appellant  maintains
      he or she belongs.  He needs to be satisfied  that  the  adherence  to
      that church's principles has been  continuous  throughout  the  period
      covered by the appellant's stay in this country;  in  other  words  he
      needs to satisfy himself that the claim to  adhere  to  the  Christian
      faith is not a transient claim brought into existence purely  for  the
      purposes of pursuing an asylum claim.

23.   For the reasons which we have indicated above this appeal is allowed.




                                M.W. RAPINET
                            ACTING VICE PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      7


