
   NG (Gurkas - Naturalisation - Human Rights) Nepal [2003] UKIAT 00184
                                                                         | |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 15th May 2003
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                              Date Determination notified:
                                                                  23/10/2003
                                                 ...........................

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr K Drabu
                                  Mr G Warr

Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   He
     appeals, with leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D
     N Wynn-Simpson, allowing, on human rights grounds only, the appeal  of
     the Respondent against his decision on 26th June  2001  to  refuse  to
     vary leave to enter.  The Respondent, whom we shall call the Claimant,
     is a citizen of Nepal.  Before us today  the  Secretary  of  State  is
     represented by Ms Sigley, and the Claimant by Ms Matheroo,  instructed
     by E J Winter & Son.

  2. The Claimant applied for asylum and was refused.  His  appeal  to  the
     Adjudicator was on asylum and human rights grounds.   The  Adjudicator
     dismissed the appeal insofar as it relied upon the asylum grounds, but
     allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.  We must deal firstly with
     matters relating to asylum.

  3. The determination of the Adjudicator was sent to the parties  on  15th
     May 2002, which happens  to  be  exactly  one  year  ago  today.   The
     Claimant and those representing him have at  no  stage  indicated  any
     dissatisfaction with that determination until this afternoon  when  Ms
     Matheroo placed before us a brief application to amend the  appeal  as
     it stood before us by way of applying out of time for leave to  appeal
     against the Adjudicator's findings on asylum.  Ms Matheroo was  unable
     to give us any reason why nobody had in the previous 364 days  thought
     it appropriate to challenge the Adjudicator's determination  from  the
     Claimant's point of view.  Ms Sigley told us she  had  come  to  court
     today prepared to deal with  the  matters  upon  which  she  had  been
     granted leave to appeal and was not  prepared  to  deal  with  matters
     relating generally to the Claimant's asylum claim.  She  resisted  the
     application made by Ms Matheroo.

  4. After consideration, we refused Ms Matheroo's  application.   We  take
     the view that if the Claimant sought to  challenge  the  Adjudicator's
     determination he should have done so in proper time, and in particular
     not at such a late stage that it took the other party by surprise.  We
     note that it is probably technically the case that this appeal  before
     us today is governed in this respect as in  all  others  by  the  2003
     Procedure Rules and as  Ms  Matheroo  readily  acknowledged,  she  has
     failed to comply with the provisions of those Rules in relation  to  a
     Respondent's notice.  It is fair to say that she could not comply with
     them in all respects because,  at  the  time  when  the  Adjudicator's
     determination was promulgated, those Rules had not yet  been  written,
     let alone come into force:  but in the six weeks since the Rules  came
     into force  she  and  those  instructing  her  have,  as  she  readily
     acknowledges, done nothing to bring  any  concerns  that  there  might
     properly have  been  about  the  Adjudicator's  determination  to  the
     attention of either the Secretary of State or of the Tribunal.  As  we
     say it is for those reasons that we declined to allow this  very  late
     amendment to the entire substratum of the appeal and confine ourselves
     now to the Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  which  are,  of
     course, solely concerned with the Adjudicator's findings on the  human
     rights aspects of the Claimant's claim.

  5. We do not need to set out the Claimant's history in any  detail.   The
     only fact which is of importance for the purposes of the discussion of
     his human rights claim is that as well as being a citizen of Nepal, he
     has served in the British Army as a Gurkha.  He was in  the  Army  for
     fifteen years from 9th February 1985 until  9th  February  2000.   The
     Claimant's claim on human rights grounds is summarised  in  the  final
     paragraph of the Adjudicator's determination, which reads as follows:

           "14.  With regard to the human rights appeal and  in  particular
                 with regard to the submissions put forward  in  respect  of
                 Article 1 of the first protocol, Mr Heaver submits  that  a
                 legal right is private property within the meaning of  that
                 Article, and that if that is the case it  can  be  combined
                 with a claim under Article 14 of ECHR.  He refers me to the
                 case of Van Mari v Netherlands (1986 8 EHRR 483)  which  he
                 regards as authority that a human right belongs to a person
                 in much the same way as an incorporeal property right, such
                 as the goodwill of a business.  If Mr Heaver  is  right  in
                 this submission it seems to me that following the  judgment
                 of the Court in Lithgow v United Kingdom (1986 EHRR 329) at
                 paragraph 106,  that  the  Appellant's  rights  not  to  be
                 discriminated against have  been  interfered  with  by  the
                 State.   Mr  Heaver's  case  is  that  all  other  overseas
                 nationals serving in the British Army are entitled to apply
                 for British passports and to seek naturalisation after five
                 or more years of service.  This does not  mean  that  their
                 applications will be accepted but simply that they  may  be
                 submitted for consideration.  In the case  of  the  Gurkhas
                 their standing orders prohibit this and would appear to  be
                 discrimination on the basis of their national  origin.   Ms
                 Hemmings in making her submissions said that this was not a
                 n appropriate point to be argued before an  Adjudicator  at
                 first instance and clearly needed to  be  determined  by  a
                 higher Court.  On the basis of the evidence before  me  and
                 in light of Mr Heaver's submissions, I am persuaded that he
                 is right and having  regard  to  Ms  Hemmings'  submissions
                 consider that the most likely way of achieving  the  thrust
                 of her submissions is to allow the appeal, which I do now."


      The Adjudicator therefore allowed  the  appeal.   That  comprises  the
      totality of his consideration of this difficult issue.


  6. The first comment which we must make is that that was, in our view, an
     entirely inappropriate way  for  the  Adjudicator  to  deal  with  the
     submissions which had  been  made  to  him.   An  Adjudicator  is  not
     entitled under the statute to allow an appeal unless he  is  satisfied
     that the  grounds  are  made  out.   It  is  right  to  say  that  the
     Adjudicator does formally say that,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
     before him, he is persuaded that the submissions made on behalf of the
     Claimant were, as he put it, right.  On the other hand, he appears  to
     take into account the proposal that the matter  should  be  considered
     elsewhere in order to reach the view that he did that he should  allow
     the appeal - apparently for pragmatic rather than for legal reasons.

  7. The Immigration Appeal Tribunal is a  Tribunal  which  hears  appeals.
     That should be apparent from its name.  An appeal can only be properly
     constituted when there is a proper decision at the lower level  to  be
     appealed.  The Adjudicator's failure to set out exactly his  reasoning
     process in his determination has put both parties before  us  in  very
     grave  difficulties.   Ms  Sigley  needed  almost  to  make   up   the
     Adjudicator's reasons for  him  in  order  to  challenge  him  in  her
     grounds, and, on the other hand, Ms Matheroo had  no  confidence  that
     the Adjudicator had decided anything specifically in her  favour.   It
     is vital that Adjudicators, whether allowing  or  dismissing  appeals,
     set out their reasons for doing so in a way which is both  justifiable
     in law and informative to the parties.

  8. We pass from those comments to consideration of the substantive  issue
     before us which is whether the Adjudicator  was  right  to  allow  the
     appeal on human rights grounds.  The claim, as we see it, is that  the
     Claimant, being a Gurkha,  is  not  permitted  to  apply  for  British
     citizenship on the basis of his service  in  the  Army  whereas  other
     foreign nationals serving in the British Army  are  entitled  to  make
     such  application.   It  is  said,  although  we  have  not  seen  the
     regulations  in  question,  that  the  prohibition  derives  from  the
     Standing Orders of the Gurkha Regiment.  Those orders, we must assume,
     are made by or with the consent of the Ministry of Defence.

  9. The first problem that the Claimant has, as it appears to us, is  that
     it is difficult to see why the refusal to vary the Claimant's leave is
     itself contrary to his human rights in the way in which his  claim  is
     put.  It cannot, we think, be said that  merely  to  refuse  an  alien
     leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  is  discriminatory.   Nor,  we
     think, can the Claimant show that other aliens in a  similar  position
     are not refused leave as he has been refused.  His  claim  relates  to
     events which have not yet taken place.  He says that he  cannot  apply
     for British citizenship or, by implication, that if he  did  apply  he
     would be refused.

 10. Our view is that the Claimant's present position  is  not  one  which,
     even if all his other arguments were to be accepted,  presently  gives
     rise to a claim that he has suffered discrimination.  It is  right  to
     say that under Section 7(1)(b) of the Human Rights Act 1998  a  person
     who alleges that his human rights are  infringed  may  rely  on  those
     rights in any legal proceedings.  He cannot be criticised  and  we  do
     not seek to criticise him for raising this issue during the course  of
     his asylum appeal.  Nevertheless, the provision allowing him  to  rely
     on human rights does not itself  establish  the  rights  nor  does  it
     establish the decision which is to be the subject of criticism.

 11. In the present case, we take the view that the Claimant would need  to
     show that he himself had either been the subject of discrimination  in
     that he had been prevented from applying for citizenship  or  that  he
     had been the subject of discrimination in that he had applied for  but
     wrongly been refused citizenship.  His current position,  that  is  to
     say that he has not yet made an application because he  believes  that
     he would not be able to, does not, in our view, show that he could yet
     have been the subject of discrimination himself.

 12. We must refer briefly to what the situation will be if in  due  course
     he chooses to  attempt  to  proceed  in  the  way  in  which  we  have
     suggested.  There are, we envisage, two possibilities.  One is that he
     will be prevented from making the application by  an  officer  at  the
     Ministry of Defence.  The other is that, having made the  application,
     he  might  be  refused  citizenship  by  an  officer  of  the  present
     Appellant.  If he is prevented from making the application  and  seeks
     to establish that the rules operated against him  are  discriminatory,
     he will need to challenge the Ministry of Defence's policy by  way  of
     Judicial  Review.   If  he  seeks  to  show  that,  having   made   an
     application, the refusal of citizenship was  discriminatory,  he  will
     need to challenge  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  by  Judicial
     Review.  We say "by Judicial  Review"  because  it  appears  that  the
     jurisdiction of the Immigration Appellate Authorities  in  such  cases
     has been removed by the 2002 Act.  Under the  Immigration  Acts  1971-
     1999, a person who was found by an officer of the Secretary  of  State
     to require leave to be in or to enter the  United  Kingdom  or  to  be
     subject to immigration control had a right of appeal to an Adjudicator
     and hence of course to the Tribunal.  The  most  recent  provision  to
     that effect is s 59(1)(a) of the 1999 Act which reads as follows:

           "A person who is refused leave to enter the United Kingdom under
           any provision of the 1971  Act  may  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator
           against the decision that he requires leave."


      Of course, a person entitled to citizenship is a person who  does  not
      require leave.  Under the 2002 Act, an appeal to an  Adjudicator  must
      be against an immigration decision listed in s  82(2),  (save  in  the
      special case covered by s 83 which is  not  relevant  to  the  present
      discussion).  Under s 82(2), the refusal of leave  to  enter  and  the
      refusal of entry clearance are both appealable immigration  decisions,
      but so far as we understand that section there is now no appeal to  an
      Adjudicator against the decision that  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
      enter is necessary.  It therefore follows that an  allegation  that  a
      decision to refuse a passport or citizenship was made contrary to  the
      Human Rights Act would need to be made in  the  appropriate  Court  or
      Tribunal under s 7(1)(a) of the Human Rights Act 1998 rather  than  to
      an Adjudicator.


 13. For those  reasons,  we  consider  that  the  proceedings  before  the
     Adjudicator challenging the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse
     leave to remain on the basis that the Claimant is a person who  cannot
     apply for citizenship are doomed to failure.  In  case  we  are  wrong
     about that we  propose  to  consider  briefly  the  situation  if  the
     arguments  put  by  the  Claimant  to  the  Adjudicator  were  to   be
     considered.

 14. As we observed  to  the  parties,  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of
     considering the judgment of Sullivan J in Purja and others v  Ministry
     of Defence [2003] EWHC 445 Admin.  That,  as  is  well  known,  was  a
     challenge by, and on behalf of, a number of Gurkha soldiers,  chiefly,
     though not entirely,  related  to  their  pensions.   As  Ms  Matheroo
     submitted, it was not a case in which the judge could be  expected  to
     have in mind issues relating to nationality or the right to apply  for
     nationality, but there are nevertheless a number of features  of  that
     judgment to which we think we should properly have regard.

 15. The first is the process of proving discrimination under Article 14 in
     which the learned judge adopts the process set out  by  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Wandsworth London Borough Council v Michalak [2002] EWCA Civ
     271.  In his judgment, Brooke LJ set  out  a  process  of  considering
     discrimination claims under Article 14.  It would be  presumptuous  of
     us to say that we entirely agree with it.  We set it out here for  the
     benefit of those who may read Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  decisions,
     but who do not have the advantage of seeing very many  non-immigration
     decisions of the Court of Appeal and other higher Courts.   Brooke  LJ
     sets out the process as follows:

           "If a court follows this model, it should ask  itself  the  four
           questions I set out below.  If the answer to  any  of  the  four
           questions is No, then the claim is likely to fail, and it is  in
           general unnecessary to proceed  to  the  next  question.   These
           questions are:


           (i)   Do the facts fall within the ambit of one or more  of  the
                 substantive  convention  provisions   (for   the   relevant
                 convention rights, see section 1(1) of the 1998 Act?
             ii) If so, was there different treatment as respects that right
                 between the complainant on the one hand and  other  persons
                 put forward for comparison ('the  chosen  comparators')  on
                 the other;
            iii) Were the chosen comparators in an  analogous  situation  to
                 the complainant's situation?
             iv) If so, did the difference in treatment  have  an  objective
                 and reasonable  justification:   in  other  words,  did  it
                 pursue a legitimate aim and did the differential  treatment
                 bear a reasonable relationship of  proportionality  to  the
                 aim sought to be achieved."

     As Sullivan J notes later in his judgment,  the  burden  of  proof  as
     regards the first three questions falls  typically  on  the  Claimant.
     Only if the Claimant is able to show that  the  answer  to  the  first
     three questions is yes, is there a duty upon the Respondent to justify
     the difference in treatment.


 16. If we apply that model to the situation deriving from the facts in the
     present appeal, the first question is  whether  the  Claimant's  claim
     falls within the ambit of one or more of  the  substantive  Convention
     provisions.  That, of itself, poses two very considerable difficulties
     for the Claimant.  The first is that in  order  to  raise  the  matter
     within the Convention, the Claimant is forced to allege, as indeed  he
     did before the Adjudicator,  that  the  right  to  apply  for  British
     citizenship is a property right.  Before the Adjudicator, as  we  have
     noted, the Claimant's representative pointed out that  rights  do  not
     have to be corporeal in order to be protected by the First Article  of
     the Protocol.  Nevertheless, there is, in  our  view,  a  considerable
     difference between a right to exercise a profession as was the subject
     of the litigation in Mari and the right to make an  application  to  a
     government as is the case here.   As  at  present  advised,  we  would
     decide that the right, if there be a right, to make an application for
     naturalisation as a citizen of a  country  is  not  a  property  right
     protected by the European Convention on Human Rights Protocol.

 17. The second problem is a technical one and we  approach  it  with  some
     hesitation because it does not appear to have been taken in any of the
     other cases on the First Protocol and indeed has  not  been  taken  in
     this case.  In order to explain the difficulty  we  need  to  set  out
     Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights which is in  the
     following terms:

           "The enjoyments of the rights and freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention should  be  secured  without  discrimination  on  any
           grounds such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political
           or other opinion, national or social origin, association with  a
           national minority, property, birth or other status."


      As we have said, the right upon which the Claimant bases his claim  is
      contained not in the Convention but in Article 1 of the First Protocol
      to the Convention.

 18. Both Article 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of the First  Protocol
     are contained in the Schedule to the Human Rights Act 1998 and  indeed
     section 1(1) of that Act reads as follows:

           "In this  Act,  the  Convention  rights  means  the  rights  and
           fundamental freedoms set out in:


           (a)   Articles 2 to 12 and 14 of the Convention;
           (b)   Articles 1 to 3 of the First Protocol, and
           (c)   Articles 1 and 2  of  the  Sixth  Protocol  as  read  with
                 Articles 16 to 18 of the Convention."


      And it is those rights which are Convention rights for the purposes of
      the United Kingdom's own law on human rights.


 19.  Looking  back  at  Article  14,  we  note  that  the  prohibition  of
     discrimination relates only to "the rights and freedoms set  forth  in
     this Convention".  The right to have property protected is not a right
     set forth in the Convention.  It is a right set forth in a Protocol to
     the Convention.  That difficulty was well appreciated by the draftsman
     of the Protocol and Article 5 of the Protocol is as follows:

           "Relationship to the Convention


           As between  the  High  Contracting  Parties  the  provisions  of
           Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Protocol  shall  be  regarded  as
           additional articles to the Convention and all the provisions  of
           the Convention shall apply accordingly."


 20. As is well known, the 1998 Act is subtly and carefully drafted and its
     text was  the  subject  of  considerable  discussion  in  and  outside
     Parliament before it was enacted.  It  is  particularly  notable  that
     Article 5 of the First Protocol is not incorporated into  English  law
     by the Act.  Although the position in international law  is  therefore
     that discrimination in relation to matters in the Protocol may  breach
     Article 14, in English law the  position  is  different.   The  rights
     secured by the Protocol are not rights set forth in the Convention and
     Parliament appears to have taken a deliberate  choice  to  avoid  them
     being so treated.

 21. We would therefore conclude that the first of the  Michalak  questions
     must be answered in the negative because the facts do not fall  within
     the ambit of Article 1 of the First  Protocol  and  discrimination  in
     relation to property is not a "Convention right" within the meaning of
     the Act.  Even if the answer to the first Michalak question  had  been
     affirmative, however, the Claimant would be in difficulties  with  the
     second.  That, it will be remembered, requires the Claimant to show  a
     different treatment between himself and chosen  comparators.   At  the
     hearing we enquired who precisely the chosen comparators were said  to
     be.  We have set out the claim in general terms in  our  extract  from
     the Adjudicator's determination in paragraph 5  above,  but  doubt  is
     cast on the bear assertion made there by paragraph 15 of  Purja  which
     reads as follows:

           "15.  The defendant accepts that it  does  discriminate  between
                 (not against) Gurkha soldiers and British soldiers  serving
                 in the British Army, but is most anxious to emphasise  that
                 this discrimination  is  based  upon  factors  relating  to
                 nationality  -  Gurkhas  are,  and  remain  at  all  times,
                 citizens of Nepal - and not race.  National armies commonly
                 discriminate on the ground of nationality.  Although  there
                 is no legal impediment to a non-British citizen joining the
                 British Army, as a matter of policy, aliens (which for this
                 purpose excludes Commonwealth citizens,  British  protected
                 persons and citizens of the Republic of  Ireland)  are  not
                 eligible  to  enlist  unless   they   also   have   British
                 citizenship  and  are  therefore  dual  nationals.   Unless
                 special arrangements were made, citizens of Nepal, who  are
                 not dual nationals, could not  in  practice  serve  in  the
                 British Army." (emphasis added)


 22. No doubt Sullivan J  expressed  himself  in  that  way  after  careful
     consideration and having had the benefit of well-informed  submissions
     from the Ministry of Defence, amongst others.  Nothing formally before
     us in this case throws any doubt upon  the  accuracy  of  the  judge's
     assessment of the situation.  We were told that there are a number  of
     soldiers in the British Army who are of Hungarian nationality, but  we
     have no information about the existence of  any  special  arrangements
     relating to them.  There  is  a  grave  disparity  between  the  broad
     assertion made to the Adjudicator and the more  considered  evaluation
     in  Purja.   In  these  circumstances,  our  view  would  be  that  no
     comparators have, in fact, been identified.  If  they  had  been,  one
     would then pass on to the third question, but that question cannot  be
     meaningfully answered without identified comparators.  All that we can
     say is that given that citizens of Nepal have, as such, no relation to
     the British Crown either as British citizens or Commonwealth  citizens
     or British protected persons, nor any close geographical  relationship
     to Britain, it is difficult to see  why  they  should  be  treated  as
     analogous to those who have.

 23. We summarise our conclusions as follows.

           i.    The Appellant has failed to  establish  that  an  act  has
             occurred  in  which  his  human  rights  have  been   arguably
             infringed.

           ii.   The act or acts which he envisages may occur are not  acts
             which, in the information before  us,  could  be  regarded  as
             infringing any Convention right of his to be  treated  without
             discrimination in the enjoyment of property.


 24. For the foregoing reasons the Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed.
     The effect of that is that his decision is restored  because  we  find
     that there is no reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  affected  by  any
     unlawful discrimination.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
