
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |                |_A (Macedonian    |
|                  |                      |                |Ethnic Group -    |
|                  |                      |                |Persecution)      |
|                  |                      |                |Serbia and        |
|                  |                      |                |Montenegro [2003] |
|                  |                      |                |UKIAT 00156       |
|Heard on:         |12th November 2003    |                |                  |
|Date typed:       |13th November 2003                                       |
|Date promulgated: | 21 November 2003-                                       |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS D K GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                      |
|............... (Vice President)                                            |
|MR. A SMITH                                                                 |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                                   |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:  Ms. J. Beach,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                          Officer.
For the  Respondent:           Ms.  E.  Shaw,  of  Turpin  Miller  &  Higgin
                          Solicitors.

1.1   The Secretary of State Appellant has  appealed,  with  leave,  against
     the determination of Mr. M B Hussain, an Adjudicator, who (following  a
     hearing on 5th November 2002 at Hatton Cross) dismissed his  appeal  on
     asylum and human rights grounds allowed the appeal of Mr. Stojkov  (who
     we shall hereinafter refer to as the Claimant) under Section 69(5)  and
     under Section 65 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals  Act  1999  (the
     1999 Act) against the Secretary of State'sRespondent's decision of 14th
     November 2001 to refuse leave to enter give directions for his  removal
     from the United Kingdom and to  refuse  his  asylum  and  human  rights
     claims.

1.2   This Determination is being reported because  we  assess  whether  the
     Claimant, who is from Kosovo and who is of  Macedonian  ethnic  origin,
     would be at real risk of persecution or treatment in breach of  Article
     3 in his home area of northern Mitrovica and whether he would  be  able
     to travel to his home area safely from  Pristina,  which  is  where  he
     would be  returned  to.  Further  details  of  the  background  to  the
     Claimant's claim are provided below.

2.1   The Claimant is a national of Serbia and Montenegro, from Kosovo.  The
     removal directions are for Kosovo.

2.2   The Claimant  is  of  mixed  ethnicity  -  his  (late)  father  was  a
     Macedonian and his mother is a Bosniak  Muslim.  The  Claimant  regards
     himself as a Macedonian. He practises the Orthodox Christian faith.  He
     was born and raised in  Pristina.  In  1998,  his  father  was  killed,
     driving over a landmine. The Claimant and his mother then went to  live
     in north west Mitrovica.

2.3   At paragraph 12 of the Determination, the Adjudicator stated that  the
     Claimant's claim - as set out by him in his interview -   was  that  he
     feared the KLA who had tried to  forcibly  recruit  him;  the  Claimant
     believed this was a ploy in order to  get  rid  of  him.  However,  the
     Adjudicator considered that the Claimant was no longer basing his claim
     on his difficulties with the KLA and that the basis of  the  Claimant's
     claim now, as he understood it, is that he feared  persecution  at  the
     hands of the majority Albanian population as an ethnic Macedonian.

2.4   The Adjudicator noted that the Secretary of  State  had  not  disputed
     the  Claimant's  ethnic  origin  or  his  membership  of  the  Orthodox
     Christian faith or his claim that he is  not  able  to  speak  Albanian
     (paragraph 13 of the Determination).

2.5   The Adjudicator made the following findings:

      (a)   that the Claimant and  his  family  relocated  to  Mitrovica  in
           1988/89 (paragraph 12 of the Determination). This timing must be
           an error on the Adjudicator's part, because 1998/99 is  referred
           to at paragraph 7 of the Determination which is consistent  with
           the Claimant's  statement  dated  30th  October  2002.  However,
           nothing turns on this error.

      (b)   that the Claimant's position must be regarded  as  analogous  to
           either ethnic Serbs or other minority groups closely  tied  with
           the Serbs  by  the  common  heritage  of  language  and  culture
           (paragraph 14 of the Determination) and that his  father  worked
           for the Serbs (paragraph 22 of the Determination).

      (c)   that the Claimant has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on
           account  of   his   ethnic   origin   (paragraph   22   of   the
           Determination);

      (d)   that it was  unduly  harsh  for  the  Claimant  to  relocate  to
           Mitrovica, "where apart from questions of his  physical  safety,
           there remains serious doubts as to whether he would have to live
           in such isolation as to deprive him of the basic necessities  of
           life" (paragraph 25 of the Determination).

3.    Permission to  appeal  was  granted  generally  by  reference  to  the
     grounds of application. At the hearing before us,  Ms.  Beach  withdrew
     the third ground, because she could not explain to us  what  it  meant.
     Accordingly, the grounds which remained were:

      (a)   that the Adjudicator had failed to consider  whether  there  was
           effective protection in Kosovo.

       (b)    that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to  distinguish   between
           intimidation, harassment and persecution.

4.    We asked the parties at the hearing whether the Claimant's  home  area
     in Kosovo should be regarded  as  Mitrovica,  given  the  Adjudicator's
     finding that the Claimant had relocated  to  Mitrovica  in  1998.  Both
     parties agreed that the Claimant's home area is Mitrovica. In fact,  we
     need to be more  specific,  since  there  are  two  distinct  areas  of
     Mitrovica - the area to the north of the River Ibar in Mitrovica  town,
     where the Serbs are in the majority and where the Claimant used to live
     prior to his departure from Kosovo and the area south of the River Ibar
     in Mitrovica where the Albanians are in the majority.

5.1   For the Secretary of State, Ms. Beach submitted that  the  Adjudicator
     was wrong to find that the Claimant's  position  must  be  regarded  as
     analogous to Serbs or other minority groups in  Kosovo.  She  submitted
     that the Claimant's own  evidence  (paragraph  12  at  page  3  of  the
     Claimant's bundle) is that he was not part of the Serb  community.  The
     Claimant had initially based his claim on the fact  that  the  KLA  has
     asked him to join them. In Ms. Beach's submission, he  would  not  have
     been asked to join the KLA if he was regarded by the  KLA  as  a  Serb.
     Accordingly, Ms. Beach submitted that the KLA saw the Claimant  as  one
     of them, and not as  a  Serb.  Paragraph  K.6.9  of  the  CIPU  Country
     Assessment Report dated October 2003 states that most ethnic  Albanians
     are  not  strongly  identified  with  their  religion  and  that  their
     animosity towards Serbs is essentially on the basis of ethnicity,  with
     the difference in religion being  a  coincidental  factor.  Whilst  the
     Claimant may share the same religion as the Serbs in  Kosovo,  he  does
     not share their ethnicity.

5.2   Ms. Beach submitted that there was no objective evidence to show  that
     ethnic Macedonians may be ill-treated in Kosovo; there is no  reference
     to ethnic Macedonians in the CIPU report.

5.3   Ms. Beach then took us through  various  parts  of  the  CIPU  report,
     which she submitted shows that the Claimant would not receive treatment
     amounting to persecution if he is returned to Kosovo (paragraphs K.6.31
     to K.6.36 of the CIPU report). Furthermore, he would be able to receive
     adequate protection (paragraphs K.6.38 to K.6.41 of the CIPU report).

6.1   For the  Claimant,  Ms.  Shaw  submitted  that  the  Claimant's  first
     language is Serbian. We pointed out at this stage that the Claimant had
     been interviewed in the Macedonian language and that he had given  oral
     evidence in the Macedonian language. Upon taking instructions from  the
     Claimant, Ms. Shaw informed us that  her  instructions  were  that  the
     Macedonian language is not the same as Serbo-Croat but is very  similar
     to it. The Claimant also shares the same religion as Serbs  in  Kosovo.
     Whilst paragraph K.6.9 of the CIPU report states that religion is  seen
     by ethnic Albanians as a coincidental factor, the second  part  of  the
     same paragraph refers to the destruction of over 100  Serbian  Orthodox
     churches.

6.2   Ms. Shaw submitted that the Adjudicator had carefully  considered  the
     objective evidence, as paragraphs 15 to 23 of the Determination  shows.
     In Ms. Shaw's submission, the  Determination  of  the  Adjudicator  was
     unusual in that the Adjudicator had  set  out  parts  of  the  relevant
     objective evidence in considerable detail.  Accordingly, in Ms.  Shaw's
     submission, the first ground of appeal could not stand.

6.3   With regard to the second ground of appeal, Ms.  Shaw  submitted  that
     the particular incident mentioned in paragraph 23 which is referred  to
     in paragraph 2 of the grounds of application is only  one  incident  in
     Mitrovica. The Ninth Assessment of the OSCE report was only one of  the
     documents the Adjudicator had had before  him.  Accordingly,  Ms.  Shaw
     submitted that the second ground of appeal could not stand.

6.4   In the event that we were not with her, Ms. Shaw  submitted  that  the
     objective evidence before us  shows  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
     treatment amounting to persecution for ethnic minorities in Kosovo  and
     those considered Serbs. The Claimant would therefore be at real risk of
     treatment sufficiently severe as to amount to persecution.

6.5    The  OSCE  Tenth  Assessment  Report  shows  that  there   would   be
     insufficient protection for the Claimant (for example,  pages  93,  98,
     99, 108, 112 and 113 of  the  Claimant's  bundle  refer).  The  Amnesty
     International Report (for example, at pages 115,  119,  120,  121  122,
     123, 128, 131 and 138 of the Claimant's bundle)  also  shows  that  the
     Claimant would be at real risk of treatment  amounting  to  persecution
     and that there would be insufficient protection.

7.    Ms.  Beach  did  not  wish  to  respond  and  relied  on  her  earlier
     submissions.

8.    We reserved our Determination.

9.    We have decided to allow the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.  We  are
     satisfied that the Adjudicator's finding that the Claimant is  at  risk
     of treatment which is sufficiently severe as to amount to serious  harm
     (by which term we refer to treatment amounting  to  persecution  or  in
     breach of Article 3) is plainly wrong, is not sustainable and cannot be
     allowed to stand. In reaching this conclusion,  we  have  followed  the
     guidance of the Court of Appeal in Oleed [2002] UKIAT EWCA Civ 1906. We
     now give our reasons for reaching our conclusion.

10.1  The objective evidence shows that the location of  the  home  area  is
     important, because the security concerns vary from area  to  area.  The
     Claimant's home area was found by the Adjudicator to be Mitrovica. This
     follows from the Adjudicator's finding that the Claimant and his family
     had relocated to Mitrovica in 1998/99. We were careful at  the  hearing
     before us to confirm with  both  parties  that  the  Claimant's  appeal
     should be determined on the basis that his home area is Mitrovica. Both
     parties agreed that this is the case.  As we have stated in paragraph 4
     above, it is necessary  to  be  more  specific  because  the  objective
     material shows that there is a Serb-dominated part of Mitrovica and  an
     Albanian-dominated part of  Mitrovica.  Prior  to  his  departure  from
     Kosovo, the Claimant lived in the Serb-dominated part of Mitrovica.  At
     paragraph 4 of his statement dated 30th  October  2002,  he  refers  to
     north west Mitrovica. At paragraph 11 of his statement,  he  refers  to
     northern Mitrovica.

10.2  With regard to Ms. Beach's  submission  that  there  is  no  objective
     evidence which shows that Macedonians are persecuted in Kosovo, we note
     that Ms. Shaw did not dispute that this was the case.  Indeed,  it  was
     acknowledged by both parties before the Adjudicator. However, it  is  a
     fact that Kosovo has seen hostility along ethnic lines. In saying this,
     we make it clear that we are but making only a general  observation  of
     the situation in general since the ethnic cleansing  of  the  Albanians
     from Kosovo. It would therefore be dangerous  to  assume  that,  simply
     because there is no mention in the objective material of  a  particular
     ethnic group in Kosovo, this means that members of  that  ethnic  group
     are not at real risk of serious harm. It may simply be that the  reason
     why there is no mention of  the  situation  of  ethnic  Macedonians  in
     Kosovo is simply because their numbers have been or are very small.

10.3  As we state below, the  objective  material  as  a  whole  shows  that
     persons who are ethnically in the minority in any particular area  have
     security concerns.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  disputed  the
     Claimant's nationality, nor his ethnic origin as  a  Macedonian.  Given
     that there is no reference in the objective material to  the  situation
     of Macedonians in Kosovo  and  given  that  the  absence  of  any  such
     reference may mean that the total number of Macedonians  in  Kosovo  is
     very small, this leads to the conclusion that the Claimant will be in a
     minority situation in his home area in northern  Mitrovica,  where  (as
     shown by the objective evidence) Serbs are in the majority.

10.4  The Claimant's accounts of his experiences in Kosovo  do  not  suggest
     that he was at real risk of serious harm at the hands of the Serbs. For
     example, at paragraphs 11 and 12 of his statement  dated  30th  October
     2002, he acknowledged that there are mainly Serbs  living  in  northern
     Mitrovica but states that it is not possible for him to survive  there.
     He then states that Albanians did go into northern Mitrovica with  guns
     and he faced their threats. He then said that he was not really part of
     the Serb community and that he experienced some  provocation  from  the
     Serbs but it was not life threatening as the danger he experienced from
     the Albanians. It is clear that his asylum and human rights claims have
     been put on the basis of his fear of  serious  harm  at  the  hands  of
     Albanians. It has not been put on the basis of his fear of serious harm
     at the hands of the Serbs on account of being a Macedonian.  He  shares
     the same religion as Serbs. His own account (see paragraph 10.7  below)
     is that his language is very similar to that of Serbo-Croat,  which  he
     says is the language of the Serbs. Of course,  strictly  speaking,  the
     instructions which the Claimant gave to Ms. Shaw on this point  at  the
     hearing before us cannot be regarded as "evidence".

10.5  The Claimant's mother is a Bosniak Muslim.  At  paragraph  12  of  his
     statement dated 30th October 2003, he said that the Serbs  really  hate
     the Muslims. However, at paragraph 13 of the same  statement,  he  said
     that he has not had any news of his mother since  his  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom. Accordingly, his account is that he  has  lost  contact
     with his mother; this  would  reduce  further  the  likelihood  of  any
     difficulties from the Serbs. In any  event,  his  own  account  of  his
     difficulties from the Serbs when he was living with his mother is  that
     he had "some provocation" from them.  He  has  not  mentioned  anything
     which shows that he experienced treatment amounting to serious harm  at
     the hands of the Serbs, on account of his mother's religion.

10.6  Accordingly, we are satisfied that, on the  Claimant's  own  accounts,
     he would not be at real risk of treatment  sufficiently  severe  as  to
     amount to serious harm on account of his Macedonian  ethnicity  at  the
     hands of the Serbs if he were to return to Kosovo and live in  northern
     Mitrovica, where the Serbs are in the majority. Accordingly, for all of
     these reasons, we consider that this appeal falls to be  determined  on
     the basis of the Claimant's fear of persecution at the hands of members
     of the Albanian ethnic group.

10.7  In deciding whether there is a risk of serious harm at  the  hands  of
     Albanians, we have decided to proceed on the basis of the Adjudicator's
     finding that the Claimant's situation ought to be regarded as analogous
     to that of either ethnic Serbs or other minority  groups  closely  tied
     with the Serbs, for the following reasons:

      (a)   The Adjudicator's finding in this respect was not challenged  by
           the Secretary  of  State  in  the  grounds  of  application  and
           permission to appeal was not granted in this respect.

      (b)   The Claimant has not sought to challenge  this  finding  either.
           Indeed, at the hearing before us, as stated above, his case  was
           put on the basis that he would be  regarded  as  a  Serb  or  as
           associated with the Serbs.

      Having said that we proceed on this basis, we  note  in  passing  that
     the  information  we  were  given  at  the  hearing  (by  Ms.  Shaw  on
     instructions from the Claimant) that the Macedonian  language  is  very
     similar to Serbo-Croat although the two  languages  are  not  the  same
     appears to be at odds with the objective evidence. The CIPU report  for
     Serbia and Montenegro dated October 2003 refers to the Serbian language
     as being formerly known as Serbo-Croat and states that  it  is  usually
     written in Cyrillic script (paragraph 1.2.2). On the  other  hand,  the
     CIPU report for Macedonia dated  April  2003  refers  to  the  official
     language for Macedonia being  the  Macedonian  language.  There  is  no
     reference to this being written in Cyrillic script. We  recognise  that
     we have referred  to  a  document  which  has  not  been  submitted  in
     evidence. We acknowledge that we have not alerted the  parties  at  the
     hearing before us that we might refer  to  it.  This  is  because  this
     matter did not come to our minds until after the hearing.  However,  it
     does not affect the outcome of the appeal, because we have  decided  to
     determine the appeal on the basis of the Adjudicator's finding that the
     Claimant's position is to be regarded as  analogous  to  either  ethnic
     Serbs or other minority groups closely tied with the Serbs.

      In reaching this finding, the Adjudicator took into account  the  fact
     that the Claimant shares the same religion as Serbs and  that  he  does
     not speak Albanian. The Adjudicator also  appears  to  have  considered
     that the Claimant shares the same  culture  as  Serbs.  We  bear  these
     factors in mind in deciding the risk on return  at  the  hands  of  the
     Albanians in Kosovo. We are also prepared to determine this  appeal  on
     the basis that, on account of the language he speaks, he is  reasonably
     likely to be perceived by Albanians  as  being  either  a  Serb  or  so
     closely associated with Serbs that they (the Albanians) are  reasonably
     likely to treat him in the same way as they would treat Serbs.

10.8  We agree with Ms. Shaw that the  Adjudicator  set  out  parts  of  the
     objective evidence in his Determination in  some  considerable  detail.
     However, when assessing the risk of serious harm,  he  failed  to  take
     into account his findings that the Claimant  had  moved  to  (northern)
     Mitrovica in  1998/99  and  that  the  Claimant's  position  should  be
     regarded as analogous to that of either ethnic Serbs or other  minority
     groups closely tied with the Serbs.

10.9  Furthermore, in considering  the  extracts  of  the  UNHCR's  Position
     Paper dated April 2002, the Adjudicator failed to consider them  within
     the context of paragraph 9 of the same report (page 6 of the Claimant's
     bundle). This paragraph is the first paragraph of Section II,  entitled
     "Minorities". This states:

            The term "minority" is used to describe groups  of  persons  who
           are in a numerical minority situation in a particular  location,
           regardless of their status elsewhere in Kosovo or in the Federal
           Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY).

10.10 It is with this in mind  that  the  remaining  parts  of  the  UNHCR's
     Position paper which the  Adjudicator  quoted  should  be  read  -  for
     example, paragraph 14 of the report (on the same page of the Claimant's
     bundle) which states:

            UNHCR stresses that minority  return  should  take  place  on  a
           strictly voluntary basis and based on fully  informed  decisions
           of the members of this  community...........  Minorities  should
           not be forced, compelled or induced to return to Kosovo.

10.11 The overall inference the Adjudicator drew from  the  documents  which
     were before him (including the UNHCR Position paper) is that any  group
     which might be seen as a minority group in  relation  to  Kosovo  as  a
     whole is at real risk of serious harm. That, in fact, is not  what  the
     UNHCR Position Paper states. We are  of  the  opinion  that  the  UNHCR
     Position Paper makes it clear that the  situation  facing  each  ethnic
     community  varies  according  to  the  location  and  whether,  in  any
     particular location, the ethnic group is a minority.  The  OSCE  Report
     (Ninth Assessment, which was before the Adjudicator) is  along  similar
     lines.

10.12 As we have stated above, the Claimant's home area  was  found  by  the
     Adjudicator  to  be  north  Mitrovica.  Besides  the  fact   that   the
     Adjudicator  erred  in  considering  the  internal  flight  option   at
     paragraph 25, the fact is that, in north Mitrovica, the Claimant  would
     be in an area where Serbs are in the majority. At paragraph 23  of  the
     Determination, the Adjudicator quoted from  paragraph  3  of  the  OSCE
     Report (Ninth Assessment). Some of the text he  quotes  has  been  left
     out. The full text of this paragraph is to be found at page 19  of  the
     Claimant's bundle. The missing text  refers to violence perpetrated  by
     Serbs in April 2002. The Claimant is someone whose situation (in so far
     as any risk from the Albanians is  concerned)  has  been  found  to  be
     analogous to either ethnic Serbs or other minority groups closely  tied
     with the Serbs.  The part of this paragraph which the Adjudicator  does
     quote at paragraph 23 of the Determination states:

            ..... periodic  upsurges  of  political  unrest  and  occasional
           violence in north Mitrovica continued to have a negative  effect
           on ethnic minorities in the Serb-dominated  north,  particularly
           those few non-Serbs remaining in  isolation  in  northern  urban
           Mitrovica  towns...................  The  few  remaining  ethnic
           Albanians (who are in a minority  in  this  Serb-majority  area)
           continued  to  be  housebound  and  were  subject   to   threats
           periodically by members of the majority Serb  population,  while
           other non-Serbs (such as some Bosniak families)  also  faced  an
           increase in intimidation .... (Our emphasis)

10.13 We draw attention to  two  matters  -  firstly,  the  fact  that  this
     paragraph also confirms that Serbs are in the majority in the area  the
     Claimant comes from (north Mitrovica) and, secondly, that the reference
     to ethnic minorities is a reference to those  who  are  in  a  minority
     position in north-Mitrovica. The Claimant's claim is based on his  fear
     of serious harm at the hands of  the  Albanians.  Albanians  are  in  a
     minority in northern Mitrovica. The passage we have just quoted  refers
     to  problems  experienced  by  Albanians  and  non-Serbs  in   Northern
     Mitrovica, and not problems caused by Albanians. If the Adjudicator had
     properly applied his finding that the Claimant's position is  analogous
     to Serbs or other minority groups who are closely tied to Serbs, we  do
     not see how he could have found that the Claimant would be at real risk
     of serious harm in north Mitrovica at the hands of Albanians.

10.14 In any event, even if we are wrong about this, the fact  is  that  the
     reference is to "periodic upsurges of political unrest  and  occasional
     violence". Bearing in mind also that the UNHCR did not,  in  its  April
     2002 Position paper, specify that Serbs or those  ethnic  groups  whose
     situation is analogous to Serbs fall within the  protection  categories
     (see page 5 of the Claimant's bundle) and the whole  of  the  objective
     evidence, we are satisfied that  the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  the
     Claimant is at real risk of serious harm is plainly wrong and cannot be
     allowed to stand.

11.1  We therefore determine the risk on  return  ourselves,  based  on  the
     more recent documents we have been referred to. These say much the same
     things, except that, since the dates of the documents  which  were  the
     Adjudicator, the situation has improved, albeit not to a great  extent.
     For example, the Tenth Assessment of the OSCE states:

            Considering the overall situation described in this report,  the
           changes  noted  during  the  reporting  period   are   not   yet
           fundamental enough to conclude that conditions would  exist  for
           large scale return of ethnic minorities in the near future  ....
           (last paragraph on page 93 of the Claimant's bundle).

      We note that this refers to changes being "not yet fundamental  enough
     for large scale returns".

            Notwithstanding the stabilisation  of  the  security  situation,
           the fear of harassment,  intimidation  and  provocation  remains
           part  of  everyday  experience  for  members  of  the   minority
           communities throughout Kosovo. Members of the  minority  groups,
           whether living in mixed communities or moving outside their  own
           enclaves can become targets for grenade attacks, arson, physical
           assault in particular against the Kosovo Serbs, Roma,  Egyptians
           ........... (pages 98 and 99 of the Claimant's bundle).

      We note that this refers to  "fear  of  harassment,  intimidation  and
     provocation" and, further, that it states that minorities "can  become"
     targets for grenade attacks etc "whether living in mixed communities or
     moving outside their own enclaves". The Claimant's  home  area  is,  on
     other hand, dominated by Serbs, with only a minority of Albanians.

            (with regard to Mitrovica) ............  Lack  of  security  and
           freedom  of  movement  remains   a   major   obstacle   to   the
           establishment of normal life in the town...........   (page  108
           of the Claimant's bundle).

      We note that this refers to "normal life". The  test  is  not  whether
     the Claimant would be able to live a normal life in northern  Mitrovica
     but whether he would be subjected to serious harm.

            (with regard to returns of Kosovo Serbs)  .... The  increase  in
           returns for 2002 must be seen within the context of  an  overall
           downward trend in returns,  most  significantly  amongst  Kosovo
           Serbs, witnessed in the previous year. Many factors  contributed
           to this decrease, including violent attacks against the minority
           communities in 2000 and 2001 and the instability created in  the
           region by the  conflicts  in  the  fYROM  and  southern  Serbia.
           Another determining factor was the saturation of the mono-ethnic
           enclaves, where large numbers of IDPs had  sought  refuge,  over
           and above  returnees  going  back  home.  Kosovo  Serb  families
           displaced from these locations have continued to  return.  These
           returns  are  encouraged  by  the  security  provided  by   such
           concentrations of Kosovo Serbs. It should be  noted  that  these
           Kosovo Serb mono-ethnic communities of return  were  mono-ethnic
           villages or separate  Kosovo  Serb  parts  of  ethnically  mixed
           villages or towns in the pre-conflict period (page  112  of  the
           Claimant's bundle).

      Since Serbs dominate  northern  Mitrovica,  northern  Mitrovica  comes
     within  the  description  of  a  "separate  Kosovo  Serb  part"  of  an
     "ethnically  mixed  town  in  the  pre-conflict  period".  Accordingly,
     northern Mitrovica is an  area  to  which  Kosovo  Serb  families  have
     continued to return. This is evidence that Serbs regard north Mitrovica
     as being safe which, in turn, is evidence that they  are  not  at  real
     risk of serious harm at the hands of Albanians in north Mitrovica.

11.2  We were referred in some detail to the  Amnesty  International  Report
     dated 29th April 2003. We agree that this report also provides evidence
     of continuing security concerns for minority groups. Ms. Shaw  referred
     us  to  several  passages  which  she  submitted  show  that  there  is
     insufficient protection. However,  the  issue  of  protection  is  only
     relevant if there is a real risk of serious harm. The  second  page  of
     the Amnesty International Report (on page 116 of the Claimant's bundle)
     states that  Serbs  living  in  other  parts  of  Kosovo  travelled  to
     Mitrovica to access municipal and other services -  including,  in  the
     divided town of Mitrovica, hospitals, schools and a parallel university
     - as well as to purchase Serbian goods.  Again, this is  evidence  that
     Serbs regard north Mitrovica as being safe which, in turn, is  evidence
     that they are not at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  at  the  hands  of
     Albanians in north Mitrovica.

11.3  On the whole of the  evidence  before  us,  we  accept  that,  if  the
     Claimant returns to live in northern Mitrovica, his freedom of movement
     will be restricted, in that, he would  experience  difficulties  if  he
     were to travel south of the River Ibar or elsewhere. He may well be  at
     risk of sporadic problems or even attacks at the hands of the  minority
     Albanians in northern Mitrovica or those Albanians who  may  cross  the
     River Ibar to northern Mitrovica. However, we are satisfied that, taken
     as a whole, the  objective  evidence  shows  that  the  risk  that  the
     Claimant would, in his home area, receive treatment sufficiently severe
     as to amount to serious harm at the hands of the Albanians is not  such
     as to reach the low standard of a  reasonable  likelihood,  and  we  so
     find. Of course, guarantees cannot be given but we make it  clear  that
     we have  assessed  the  risk  on  the  low  standard  of  a  reasonable
     likelihood.

11.4  The Claimant would be returned  to  Pristina.  We  therefore  have  to
     consider whether he would be able to travel in  safety  from  Pristina,
     which is dominated by Albanians, to northern Mitrovica. Page 14 of  the
     Amnesty International Report (page 131 of the Claimant's bundle) refers
     to the provision of escorted transport services. Escorts  are  provided
     by UNMIK or  KFOR.  We  acknowledge  that  the  increased  mobility  of
     minorities has been accompanied in  "some  areas"  by  an  increase  in
     security incidents, "in particular stone throwing  at  both  buses  and
     trains".   We  also  acknowledge  that  these  services  are   limited,
     conditional and "not always  available".  However,  the  fact  is  that
     escorted transport services are available. As stated in paragraph  11.2
     above, there is evidence that Serbs  from  other  parts  of  Kosovo  do
     travel to northern Mitrovica. In  all  of  the  circumstances,  we  are
     satisfied that the  Claimant  would  be  able  to  travel  safely  from
     Pristina to northern Mitrovica.

12.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that  the  findings  of
     the Adjudicator that the Claimant's  removal  to  Kosovo  would  be  in
     breach of the U.K.'s obligations under the Refugee  Convention  and  in
     breach of his rights under Article  3  are  not  sustainable,  and  are
     plainly wrong, given a proper assessment of the objective  evidence  to
     his particular facts.

13.1  On 17th November 2003, we received by  facsimile  a  letter  from  Ms.
     Shaw dated 17th November 2003. On 18th November 2003, we  received  the
     original of this letter in the post. In this letter, Ms. Shaw states:

            We write further to the hearing  before  the  Tribunal  on  12th
           November 2003. We wish  to  clarify  the  basis  on  which  Alek
           Stojkov argues that there is a risk of persecution on his return
           to Serbia.

            We understand that  it  is  not  in  dispute  that  Alek  is  an
           Orthodox Christian from Kosovo who is non-Albanian speaking.  He
           speaks the two Slavic languages,  Serbo-Croat  and  the  closely
           related Macedonian.

            We trust that we made  it  clear  in  our  submission  that  the
           danger for Alek arises when he is  identified  by  the  Albanian
           majority as being part of the Serb community. This  would  occur
           as a result of him speaking either Serbo-Croat or Macedonian, as
           a result of his residence in one of the Serb enclaves, and as  a
           result of his Orthodox Christian faith.

             The  Tribunal  received  at  the  hearing  country  information
           describing the dangers faced by that community.

            We ask that  the  Tribunal  considers  this  clarification  when
           making its decision on this case.

13.2  We have considered  the  information  contained  in  this  letter.  As
     stated in paragraph 10.7 above, we have  proceeded  to  determine  this
     appeal on the basis that, in so far as  the  Claimant  claims  to  fear
     persecution at the hands of Albanians in Kosovo, his position is to  be
     regarded as analogous to either ethnic Serbs or other  minority  groups
     closely tied with the Serbs. As we have stated in paragraph 10.7 above,
     we have proceeded to determine  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
     Claimant does not speak Albanian, that he shares the same  religion  as
     Serbs and that the Adjudicator  considered  that  he  shares  the  same
     culture as Serbs. We have also stated in paragraph 10.7 above  that  we
     are prepared to determine this appeal on the basis that, on account  of
     the language he speaks, he is reasonably  likely  to  be  perceived  by
     Albanians as being either a Serb or so closely  associated  with  Serbs
     that they (the Albanians) are reasonably likely to  treat  him  in  the
     same way as they would treat Serbs. We  have,  indeed,  considered  the
     appeal on the basis that the Appellant would be returning to  his  home
     area of northern Mitrovica, which is Serb-dominated (that  is,  a  Serb
     enclave in Kosovo). Accordingly, we are satisfied that the  information
     contained in the letter dated 17th November 2003 does  not  affect  the
     outcome of this appeal.

14.   It follows that we must allow the Secretary of State's appeal.


      Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is ALLOWED.







Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 18th November 2003
