
                                                                   Appeal
No:
                   | |                              ........................

           FC (Appeals Procedure - Directions) Yugoslavia [2003] UKIAT 00007


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 26th February 2003
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  05.06.2003

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                            HH Judge G Risius CB
                               Mr M Shrimpton

Between:




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   He
     appeals, with leave, against the determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr
     Kenneth Gillance, allowing, without considering the merits, the appeal
     of the Respondent, a citizen of the Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia,
     against his decision on  16th  August  2000  to  give  directions  for
     removal from the United Kingdom having  refused  asylum.   Before  the
     Adjudicator this appeal was certified under the 1993 Act.  We need say
     no more about that feature of it, although we do emphasise  that  this
     is an appeal under the 1993 Act.  The  Claimant's  appeal  before  the
     Adjudicator was on asylum grounds only and as Mr Blundell, who appears
     for the Secretary of State before  us  today,  has  acknowledged,  the
     undertaking given in Pardeepan  applies  to  this  appeal  should  the
     Claimant in due course wish to raise issues relating to human  rights.
     Before us the Claimant has been represented by Mr  Bazini,  instructed
     by Howells.

  2. There is no doubt that the Secretary of State's conduct in relation to
     the Claimant's claim merits criticism.  The first letter refusing  the
     Claimant asylum was, it is  acknowledged,  riddled  with  error.   The
     letter appears to veer between treating the Claimant  as  from  Kosovo
     and treating him as from the part of  Southern  Serbia  which  outside
     Kosovo.  Subsequently, there have been a number of  further  documents
     issued by the Home Office in relation to  this  Claimant.   They  have
     all, we think, now been withdrawn and for  good  reason.   It  appears
     that not one of them was wholly correct.  As a result, at  one  stage,
     the Tribunal appears to have had some doubts as to whether this appeal
     was properly before it  at  all,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
     documents which were before  the  Adjudicator  when  he  attempted  to
     consider this appeal were not merely incomplete:   they  were  frankly
     confusing.

  3. In the circumstances, as Mr Bazini has emphasised to us, the  Claimant
     was bound to be in the situation that he was not  aware  of  precisely
     what case against him he  needed  to  meet.   That  situation  is  not
     readily excusable.  Whatever may  be  the  underlying  merits  of  the
     Claimant's case, he was entitled to have his claim considered properly
     and if refused, refused accurately in  the  form  of  documents  which
     indicated clearly that his claim had been considered properly.  In the
     later history of this appeal, the Claimant was entitled to the sort of
     consideration which he might have felt that he had  had  if  only  the
     Secretary of State had complied with the various directions which were
     made by various Adjudicators, but yet again, the Secretary  of  State,
     in our view, lamentably, failed to do.

  4. Be that as it may, the short history of this appeal  is  that  it  was
     listed for hearing before an Adjudicator on 18th September  2000.   By
     12th January 2001, it was ready for full hearing, but  at  that  stage
     there  was  an  application  for  an  adjournment   because   of   the
     inaccuracies in the refusal letter.  It was further suggested that  at
     that stage the Secretary of State wanted to reconsider the decision to
     refuse the Claimant's claim.  Either then or later  the  Secretary  of
     State took the view that it might be  appropriate  to  reconsider  the
     claim, not on the basis on which it had been made but on the  separate
     basis that at that time the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  returning
     Claimant's to Southern Serbia, the part of the world from  which  this
     Claimant claims to come.

  5. An adjournment was granted relating to the  hearing  on  12th  January
     2001 and there were further adjournments granted at the request of the
     Home Office on 12th March 2001 and 15th May 2001.  It is right to  say
     that we have  some  concerns  about  that  history.   Of  course,  the
     applications were made by the Home Office and on each case, so far  as
     we understand it, the Claimant consented  to  the  adjournments;   but
     nothing that we have seen relating to the  applications,  and  nothing
     that Mr Bazini has shown us, suggests in our view that  there  was  at
     that stage any real reason for an  adjournment  to  be  granted.   The
     appeal was and is on asylum grounds only.  If the refusal  letter  was
     inaccurate, that was a matter which could  be  dealt  with  simply  by
     notice to the Claimant.  There  was  little  excuse  for  putting  the
     hearing off simply on  the  basis  that  the  Home  Office  wanted  to
     consider different matters which would not have been relevant  to  the
     determination of the asylum claim which the Claimant had made.

  6. In any event, in  due  course  there  were  directions  given  by  the
     Adjudicator on 10th July and there was a short hearing on  7th  August
     followed by the full hearing on 24th August, as we have said.  At that
     hearing, the Adjudicator found that the Secretary of State had  failed
     to comply with directions.  Having set out the  failures,  and  having
     set out in short form, indeed it is right to say very short and partly
     incorrect form, the question which was in issue  in  the  appeal.   He
     wrote as follows:

           "10.  I therefore reached the conclusion that the Respondent  in
                 this case had failed to comply with a direction given under
                 the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules  23000
                 and  I  was  satisfied  that  in  all  the   circumstances,
                 including the extent of the failure and the reasons for it,
                 that it was necessary to  have  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in Rule 30(2) and to allow  this  appeal  without
                 considering the merits (Rule 33(1) and (2)).


           11.   Accordingly, I allowed the appeal and gave  that  decision
                 orally in the hearing.  In those circumstances I  found  it
                 unnecessary to make a decision on the certificate.


           Appeal Allowed."


      It is against the Adjudicator's decision to allow the  appeal  without
      considering the merits that the Secretary of State now appeals.


  7. We should say first that although it forms no part of the reasoning in
     our  decision,  we  have  considerable  doubts   about   whether   the
     Adjudicator was entitled to give the directions that he did  give,  in
     particular relating to the preparation of a new  reasons  for  refusal
     letter.  Although it is right to say that  the  Claimant  is  normally
     entitled to know what is the case against him, it is  not  within  the
     jurisdiction of an Adjudicator to require the Secretary  of  State  to
     prepare his reasons for refusal in  a  specific  or  new  form.   That
     proposition we derive from the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Mwanza.  Mr Bazini has referred us to Vahid Razi (01/TH/01836)  where,
     in the particular circumstances of that  case,  the  Tribunal  decided
     that Mwanza could properly be distinguished.  In our view, and for the
     reasons which we shall shortly give in  relation  to  the  outcome  of
     appeals where there has been non-compliance by the Secretary of  State
     with directions, we think that the decision  in  Razi  should  not  be
     followed.

  8. In any event, taking the directions at  their  best,  the  Adjudicator
     concluded that as they had not been followed, he  had  the  option  of
     determining  the  appeal  without  considering  its  merits.   As   he
     correctly indicated, the source for the  determination  of  an  appeal
     without considering the merits is Rule 33 of the  2000  Rules,  (which
     because of the date of the hearing applied to  this  appeal,  although
     the appeal itself was under the previous legislation).   We  will  set
     out the Rule in full, in the form in which it applied as at  the  time
     the Adjudicator determined the appeal.

           "33.  Failure to comply with these Rules
                 (1)   Where a party has failed -
                       (a)  to comply with a direction  given  under  these
           Rules;  or
                       (b)  to comply with a provision of these Rules;
                       and the appellate authority is satisfied in  all  the
                       circumstances, including the extent  of  the  failure
                       and any reasons for it, that it is necessary to  have
                       regard to the overriding objective in rule 30(2), the
                       appellate authority may  dispose  of  the  appeal  in
                       accordance with paragraph (2).
                    2) The appellate authority may -
                       (a)   in the case of  a  failure  by  the  appellant,
                            dismiss the appeal or, in the case of a failure
                            by the respondent, allow  the  appeal,  without
                            considering its merits;
                       (b)   determine  the  appeal  without  a  hearing  in
                            accordance with rule 43;
                            or
                       (c)   in the case of a failure by a party to send any
                            document, evidence or statement of any witness,
                            prohibit  that  party  from  relying  on   that
                            document,  evidence   or   statement   at   the
                            hearing."

      It is apparent that the form of words in paragraph 1 of  the  Rule  is
      infelicitous and it has since been amended.


  9. What is clear is that the Adjudicator, and  indeed  the  Tribunal,  in
     determining whether Rule 33 should be applied, is required to consider
     all the circumstances.  In an asylum appeal, the major consequence  of
     allowing the appeal is that, because of the limited grounds of appeal,
     whether under s 69 of the 2000 Act  or  s  8  of  the  1993  Act,  the
     Claimant is found to be a person whose  removal  as  threatened  would
     contravene the Refugee Convention.  It is necessarily implicit in such
     a decision that the Claimant is a refugee:  because only a refugee can
     be a person whose removal would contravene  the  Convention.   So  any
     case  in  which  an  Adjudicator  allows  an  asylum  appeal  has  the
     consequence that the Claimant is found to be a  refugee.   That  is  a
     matter which sets asylum appeals apart from other immigration  appeals
     and indeed from human rights  appeals,  because  a  successful  asylum
     appeal which gives the Claimant a status which is, to an extent,  good
     not only  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  throughout  the  world.   The
     consequence of allowing an asylum appeal is we think the first, and in
     some ways the most important, factor which  an  Adjudicator  ought  to
     take into account in the course of determining whether to  apply  Rule
     33 in a case where there has been non-compliance  with  directions  or
     any of the other matters which are set out in Rule 33(1).

 10. Mr Blundell today  has  referred  us  to  the  determinations  of  the
     Tribunal in Rasheed Argosh Nori [2002] UKIAT 01887 and  Ercan  Aldogan
     [2002] UKIAT 05120.  In the latter case, we said this:

           "10.  As  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  point  out,  the
                 Tribunal has already indicated in Rasheed Argosh Nori  that
                 asylum is a status which should not be  granted  to  punish
                 the Secretary of State for failing to do what he  ought  to
                 have done.  It should be  considered  on  its  merits.   We
                 would endorse that comment.  The applicability of  Rule  33
                 is of course entirely general, but that does not mean  that
                 it  will  always  be  just  to  apply  it   in   individual
                 circumstances.  There are may cases  including  immigration
                 cases, and perhaps  also  human  rights  cases,  where  the
                 effect of an Adjudicator allowing  an  appeal  against  the
                 Respondent without considering the merits merely  puts  the
                 parties back in the situation in which they were before the
                 Respondent made an adverse decision against  the  Claimant.
                 Similarly, if there is an appeal by  either  party  to  the
                 Tribunal it may be that allowing the appeal  or  dismissing
                 the appeal without considering  the  merits  will  put  the
                 parties back in the situation in  which  they  were  before
                 litigation began.  But where the appeal is on  the  limited
                 ground set out in s 69, the effect of allowing an appeal by
                 the Claimant before the Adjudicator will always be to grant
                 the Claimant asylum status.  We do not think that it  would
                 ever by right to do that without considering the merits."


      The position here is that the Adjudicator allowed the  appeal  without
      considering the merits, with  the  effect  of  granting  the  Claimant
      asylum.  As we have said, we do not think that that was an appropriate
      application  of  Rule  33.   Mr  Bazini  asked  us  to  say  that  the
      application of the Rule by the Adjudicator  was  not  unlawful  or  an
      obviously inappropriate exercise of his discretion.  We disagree.  The
      use of Rule 33 in order to grant asylum to an individual who has never
      established on the merits that he is or  may  be  entitled  to  asylum
      would, in our view, always be an abuse of Rule 33.


 11. What then should the Adjudicator have done?   We  sympathise  entirely
     with the matters which were in his mind when he came to the view  that
     the Home Office had simply failed to comply with the directions  which
     were being given and were, to put it broadly, making  a  mess  of  the
     Claimant's case.  He had papers before him:  indeed,  he  had  copious
     papers before him.  It was open to him to determine the appeal on  the
     merits taking, as he might well have done, a rather  cursory  view  of
     the Secretary of State's case, which the Secretary of State was having
     such difficulty in presenting in  an  intelligible  fashion.   If  the
     Adjudicator had, after considering the material that was  before  him,
     reached a view adverse to the Secretary of State on the material  that
     was there, we think that his decision could  not  properly  have  been
     challenged.  The defect here is not that he allowed  the  appeal,  but
     that he allowed it (and so granted  status)  without  considering  the
     merits.

 12. For all these  reasons,  we  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
     Adjudicator's determination cannot stand.  The appropriate  remedy  is
     that the appeal be reheard by a different Adjudicator.  In view of the
     confusion that has arisen  relating  to  the  removal  directions,  Mr
     Blundell has  conceded  today  that  if  the  Claimant  is  eventually
     removed, his removal will be to Belgrade.  The Adjudicator before whom
     this appeal now comes will, as we have said, be  concerned  only  with
     matters relating to the Refugee Convention, unless  the  Secretary  of
     State decides to withdraw the first of  the  three  removal  direction
     notices, that is to say, the one  issued  on  16th  August  2000,  and
     replace it with a new one which will carry human rights  (as  well  as
     refugee rights) of appeal.  But, insofar as this appeal is  concerned,
     it is limited to asylum matters and  we  direct  that  the  Claimant's
     appeal be considered afresh by an Adjudicator other than Mr  Gillance,
     Mr Cruthers, Mrs Roberts or Mr Shrimpton, who sits on this panel.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

