

   VB (Desertion-Chechnya War-Hamilton) Russia CG [2003] UKIAT 00020

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date heard:  1 October   2002
                                             Date notified:.........04/07/03

                                  Before: -

                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                 MR J BARNES
                                MR M L JAMES



                                                       Between



                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. In this appeal, taking account of certain problems that have  arisen,  we
seek to clarify the approach to military service cases in the light  of  the
Court of Appeal and House of Lords judgments in Sepet and  Bulbul  and  also
to resolve an apparent difference of view  in  previous  Tribunal  decisions
dealing  with  the  issue  of  "international  condemnation"  (Foughali  and
Krotov).


2. The appellant, a national of Russia,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr R L  Walker,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State giving  directions
for removal having refused asylum. Ms T Ahmed of Counsel instructed by  Riaz
& Co Solicitors appeared for the appellant. Ms C Cooper and at  the  resumed
hearing on 29 May 2003, Miss K  Evans,  appeared  for  the  respondent.  The
resumed hearing was convened in order to afford the parties the  opportunity
to make submissions in the light of the House of Lords judgment in  Sepet  &
Bulbul and recent Strasbourg case law on prison conditions.

3. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

4. The basis of the appellant`s claim was that he had been  in  the  Russian
military and had trained as a communications  specialist.  He  had  deserted
the army when he was informed he would be posted to Chechnya. He  considered
that the  armed  conflict  there  was  internationally  condemned  and  that
punishment he would receive as a military deserter  would  be  unduly  harsh
and disproportionate.

5. The adjudicator found the  appellant  credible.  Whilst  finding  he  had
given no ideological basis to  explain  his  unwillingness  to  do  military
service, he accepted that his opposition to  the  policies  of  the  Russian
government vis a vis Chechnya rendered him a  "partial  objector".  However,
he did not think this  proved  the  appellant`s  case  since  the  objective
evidence did not show  that  the  war  in  Chechnya  was  condemned  by  the
international community as being  contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of  human
conduct. And since the appellant "would simply be imprisoned as a  deserter"
for (up to) 7 years, he did not consider the punishment disproportionate  or
attributable to a Convention reason.

6. The grounds as amplified by Ms Ahmed  contended  that  the  adjudicator's
treatment of the military service issue was flawed in several  respects.  As
the appellant would be known to be opposed to fighting in Chechnya,  it  was
likely the  authorities  would  impose  oppressive  conditions  of  military
service on him. As regards the relevance of the  appellant`s  objections  to
participating in the war in Chechnya, Ms Ahmed argued that the  authorities`
knowledge of these would result in a greater level of hostility towards  him
than otherwise. As regards the nature of the military conflict  in  Chechnya
in which the appellant would very likely have to participate, he  was  wrong
to find that it had  not  been  internationally  condemned.  Concerning  the
issue of the likely punishment, the appellant would  face  for  evading  and
refusing to perform  military  service,  Ms  Ahmed  asked  the  Tribunal  to
recognise that the issue was not simply what  penalty  the  appellant  would
receive - up to 7 years imprisonment - but  what  conditions  the  appellant
would  face  whilst  in  detention  (pre-  and  post-  trial).  The  Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch materials indicated  he  would  face  a
real risk of ill treatment during detention. In this regard Ms  Ahmed  again
asked the Tribunal to conclude that the appellant would not be  treated  the
same as other persons detained for refusing  to  perform  military  service,
since the authorities would know that he  had  conscientious  objections  to
the war in Chechnya. The stance he had taken would mean he would be seen  as
holding a political opinion averse to that of the government.

7. At the resumed hearing Ms Ahmed urged us to find that  since  the  latest
country materials indicated that the conflict in Chechnya  continued  to  be
marked by serious human rights abuses which had been criticised by a  number
of international sources, we should treat the  conflict  as  internationally
condemned. As regards the issue of likely punishment, she pointed  out  that
the latest materials continued to show grave concern about the  severity  of
prison conditions. She urged us to  infer  a  real  risk  of  discriminatory
treatment of the appellant from the fact that on  the  one  hand  he  was  a
deserter and on the other hand the authorities would  know  he  objected  to
the war in Chechnya.


8. Before  proceeding  further  it  is  important  to  restate  the  general
principles to be applied to claims in which  military  service  is  said  to
give rise to persecution.  The  Tribunal  had  previously  set  out  general
principles that should apply in  Foughali  (00/TH/0513)  and  in  Sepet  and
Bulbul. But in its judgment in Sepet and Bulbul the Court of Appeal did  not
agree with the Tribunal in identifying, as one of  four  exceptions  to  the
general rule,  objections  to  military  service  based  on  the  ground  of
conscientious objection on its own. In their speeches of 20 March  2003  the
House of Lords agreed with the Court of Appeal.





9. However, the decision of both the Court of Appeal and the House of  Lords
to focus largely on the issue of conscientious objection as a ground on  its
own has led to some uncertainty on the part of adjudicators as to the  shape
and contents of the proper framework for analysing military  service  cases.
There has been uncertainty as to what grounds of  exception  remain  to  the
normal rule that objection to military service does not give rise to a  real
risk  of  persecution;  uncertainty  as  to  whether  or  to   what   extent
conscientious objection remains a prerequisite to any claim based  on  these
remaining exceptions; and uncertainty as to  when  it  will  be  correct  to
identify a  Convention  ground  (such  as  political  opinion)  in  military
service cases.


10. In the House of Lords Lord Bingham of  Cornhill  summarised  matters  as
follows:

      "There is compelling support for the view that refugee  status  should
      be accorded to one who has refused to  undertake  compulsory  military
      service on the grounds that such service would or might require him to
      commit atrocities or gross human rights abuses  or  participate  in  a
      conflict condemned by the international community, or where refusal to
      serve would earn grossly excessive or  disproportionate  punishment...
      But the applicants cannot, on the facts  as  found,  bring  themselves
      within any of these categories" (para 8).

11. At paragraphs 8 and 14 he refers to European Union texts.  Lord  Hoffman
refers in passing at his paragraph 26 to the  exception  relating  to  being
required to "engage in military action contrary  to  basic  rules  of  human
conduct".

12. Lord Hoffman too refers to European Union texts at paragraph 52.

13. What is clear from these limited references is that their lordships  saw
the main issue they had to decide as being whether  conscientious  objection
on its own could give rise to claim to refugee status and so  did  not  wish
to say anything further about remaining limited grounds of  exception  other
than to affirm that they did exist.

14. In order to restate the relevant  general  principles,  our  start-point
has to be the more specific treatment afforded by Laws LJ  at  paragraph  61
of the Court of Appeal (majority) judgment in  Sepet  and  Bulbul.  In  this
paragraph 61 Laws LJ said:


      "In describing this as  the  first  issue  [i.e.  the  issue  of  does
      punishment for draft evasion by an "absolute"  conscientious  objector
      amount to persecution] I should for clarity's sake explain what  I  do
      not intend to include. Thus I am not here  dealing  with  Mr  Howell`s
      argument that the putative persecutor must be subjectively actuated by
      the Convention reason in question, before his actions  can  amount  to
      persecution  which  qualifies  the  claimant  for  asylum  within  the
      Convention. I must address that separately, as I must the case of  the
      "partial" objector. Next I should emphasise that it is  plain  (indeed
      uncontentious) that there are circumstances in which  a  conscientious
      objector may rightly claim that punishment  for  draft  evasion  would
      amount to persecution: where the  military  service  to  which  he  is
      called involves acts, with which  he  may  be  associated,  which  are
      contrary to basic rules of human  conduct;  where  the  conditions  of
      military service are themselves so harsh as to amount  to  persecution
      on the facts; where the punishment in question  is  disproportionately
      harsh or severe. I am here addressing the case  where  none  of  these
      additional factors is present" (emphasis added).



   15. We take from this and others parts of the judgment that the  majority
   of the Court of Appeal, although rejecting one of the (four)  grounds  of
   exception identified by the Tribunal in Foughali,  saw  as  uncontentious
   the existence of the three other grounds of exception. In our view  there
   is no material difference between Laws LJ`s  and  Foughali`s  wording  of
   these exceptions. But for the avoidance of doubt  we  shall  follow  Laws
   LJ`s wording. Thus they are:


      a) where the conditions of military service are themselves so harsh as
         to amount to persecution on the facts;
b) where the military service to which a person  is  called  involves  acts,
   with which he may be associated which are  contrary  to  basic  rules  of
   human conduct;
      c)  where the punishment in question is  disproportionately  harsh  or
         severe.



16. How do these three grounds fit into the overall framework?





17. Before we can answer this question we must  first  of  all  address  the
following  difficulty.  Although  rejecting  conscientious  objection  as  a
ground of  exception  in  its  own  right,  Laws  LJ  appeared  to  identify
conscientious objection as a continuing prerequisite for a  claimant  to  be
able to bring himself within one of the three grounds of exception.


18. This is a difficulty because it requires ascertaining what Laws LJ  took
to be the meaning of the  term  conscientious  objection.  In  Foughali  the
Tribunal sought to base  interpretation  of  this  term  on  the  notion  of
"principled objections", a notion which it saw as in turn based  loosely  on
international human rights law concepts of freedom  of  expression,  thought
and conscience. At the Tribunal stage of the  Sepet  and  Bulbul  case,  the
Tribunal had  taken  perhaps  even  a  narrower  view  of  what  constitutes
conscientious  objection,  considering  in  particular  that  it  could  not
include beliefs based on discriminatory  notions.  Laws,  LJ  in  Sepet  and
Bulbul, by contrast, considered that both  Tribunal  decisions  imposed  too
narrow a meaning and that a  broader  meaning  should  be  adopted  so  that
beliefs  of  all  kinds,  including  even  stupid,  unattractive,  repulsive
beliefs based for example on racist or fascist opinions,  could  qualify  so
long as their practice and exercise  did  not  bring  a  person  within  the
Exclusion Clauses (Art 1F): see paragraph 86.

19. We deduce from this the following. Neither the  Tribunal  in  these  two
cases nor the majority of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul  was
prepared to  make  the  test  of  conscience  entirely  subjective.  But  in
practice the much broader notion accepted in Sepet and Bulbul means that  it
is now far easier than it was previously for a claimant  to  establish  that
he has conscientious objection to military service. Essentially all he  need
do is show that he has an  objection  based  on  conscience.  The  moral  or
ethical basis of such an objection is irrelevant so  long  as  its  exercise
has not brought actions based on it within the scope of Art 1F.

20. However, several caveats are in  order.  Firstly,  as  we  have  already
emphasised by reference to the judgments of the  Court  of  Appeal  and  the
House of Lords in Sepet and Bulbul, proving one is a conscientious  objector
on its own gets a claimant nowhere. It only assists  his  claim  if  he  can
link his objection to one of the three remaining grounds of  exception:  see
above.

21. Secondly, although limiting  the  circumstances  in  which  it  will  be
relevant, the Sepet and Bulbul judgments leave intact the principle that  an
adjudicator must examine whether a claimant holds any objections he  has  to
military service genuinely.  It remains the case, to use the  words  of  the
Court of Appeal in Adan and Lazarevic  [1997]  INLR  251,  relevant  for  an
adjudicator to examine whether a claimant's beliefs are  not  "opportunistic
or extraneous". To be satisfied a claimant holds such  objections  genuinely
or sincerely, there must be objective proof to the relevant standard.

22. Thirdly, although it is correct to conduct analysis of whether a  person
has objections on the grounds of conscience as a first step in  assessing  a
claim based on military service, the extent  to  which  the  contents  of  a
person's objections are relevant in any particular case will vary from  case
to case.  Any  attempt  to  furnish  a  durable  framework  for  approaching
military service cases must  encompass  all  possible  situations  that  can
arise. Thus there will be cases in which the state of a person`s  objections
or beliefs, genuine or otherwise, will  be  virtually,  sometimes  entirely,
irrelevant, as when for example he faces inhuman  and  degrading  conditions
of military service.  Such a person may still not be able  to  establish  he
qualifies as a refugee for want of a Refugee Convention ground, but he  will
be able to establish persecution. (Even if such a person  does  not  qualify
under the Refugee Convention, he will qualify  under  Art  3  of  the  Human
Rights Convention).

23. At the other end of the spectrum there will be cases where the  need  to
test the genuineness or sincerity of a  person's  objection  (in  accordance
with the approach set out at paragraph 174 of the  UNHCR  Handbook)  remains
quite central. The Tribunal in Foughali gave the example of the  person  who
would be required to fight in an armed conflict  contrary  to  international
law but who himself has no ethical  objections  to  killing  civilians.  His
lack of ethical objections may be very relevant in deciding whether what  he
faces is a risk of persecution (in certain cases, in relation to past  acts,
there may also be an Art 1F issue). In respect of a person  likely  to  face
legally imposed punishment, the state and  nature  of  his  beliefs  may  be
highly relevant if the  nature  of  the  punishment  involved  would  offend
against his basic religious beliefs. One example might be  a  strict  Muslim
who as part of a lengthy punishment would be required to eat pork.

24. So long as the wording of paragraph 174 of the 1979  UNHCR  Handbook  is
read in the light of Laws LJ`s observations at paragraph  53  of  Sepet  and
Bulbul, that paragraph remains in our view a sound summary  of  the  factors
to be taken into account in testing the sincerity of a  person`s  objections
where these are material to the claim.

25. Fourthly, it must not be assumed that just  because  a  person  says  he
will face military service  in  one  of  the  three  exceptional  situations
identified earlier, there is a real risk he will in fact do so. As  Laws  LJ
noted at paragraph 98  (in  relation  to  a  point  raised  by  Mr  Scannell
regarding the issue of mistaken belief in the context of a  person  claiming
he would have to fight in an internationally condemned conflict):

      "Mr Sepet had to show, not merely  that  he  reasonably  feared  being
      required to engage in such condemned actions, but that there was  more
      than a fanciful chance that such a fear would eventuate in  fact;  but
      that is contradicted by the adjudicator's finding" (emphasis added).


26. In our view this observation  underlines  the  great  need  in  military
service cases for adjudicators to  consider  carefully  whether  the  causal
chain of events presaged by the claimant is in fact made out  on  the  basis
of real risk. The precise sequence of events said to arise  will  vary  from
case  to  case.  Broadly  speaking  the  sequence  potentially  encompasses:
return; apprehension; classification as an evader or  deserter;  a  decision
whether to force a returnee to serve in the military; a decision whether  to
prosecute  and  or  punish  the  returnee  as   an   evader   or   deserter;
imprisonment;  imprisonment  for  a  certain  period   and   under   certain
conditions. But in the  absence  of  satisfactory  evidence,  it  cannot  be
assumed that just because one or two events will  happen,  the  others  will
also happen. Adjudicators should be very careful  not  to  make  unwarranted
assumptions about sequencing.





27. Finally, as already touched on, it remains that in order  for  a  person
to be able to establish he is a refugee on the grounds of his objections  to
performing military service in three limited situations, he must also  show,
in addition to a real risk of persecution, that he has a Refugee  Convention
ground. If want of a Refugee Convention ground is the only  reason  why  his
claim fails, then there will still be an Art 3 issue.





28. In relation to the Refugee Convention requirement to show  a  Convention
ground, we may also derive from the Court  of  Appeal  and  House  of  Lords
judgments in Sepet and Bulbul two other principles. One is that  it  is  not
necessary in order to show a  Convention  ground  to  demonstrate  that  the
authorities have a subjective intent to persecute  an  individual  for  that
reason (Lord Bingham of Cornhill, para 22). The  other  is  that  it  cannot
easily be assumed that  a  person  who  refuses  to  serve  because  of  his
political or religious beliefs is punished by reason of  those  beliefs.  As
Lord Bingham noted at paragraph 23,





      "The decision-maker will begin by considering the reason in  the  mind
      of the persecutor  for  inflicting  the  persecutory  treatment.  That
      reason would, in this case, be the applicants` refusal to serve in the
      army. But the decision-maker does not stop there. He asks if  that  is
      the real reason, or whether there is some other effective reason.  The
      victims` belief that the  treatment  is  inflicted  because  of  their
      political opinions is  beside  the  point  unless  the  decision-maker
      concludes that the holding of such opinions was the, or a, real reason
      for the persecutory treatment. On the facts here, that would not be  a
      tenable view, since it is clear that anyone refusing to serve would be
      treated in the same way, whatever his personal grounds for  refusing".






29. In the light of the  above  the  basic  principles  that  should  govern
consideration of military service cases can be restated as follows:



      1) In order to establish that military service gives rise  to  a  real
      risk of persecution a claimant must first of all establish that he  is
      a  conscientious  objector.  However,  he  will  usually  be  able  to
      establish that  he  is  a  conscientious  objector  quite  easily.  in
      establishing this, a moral and ethical basis to his objections may  be
      irrelevant  unless  they  are  so  extreme  as  to   engage   Art   1F
      considerations[1]. To what extent it is relevant  whether  a  person's
      objections are genuinely  held  will  depend  on  the  nature  of  the
      particular case.


      2) Assuming a person can establish  conscientious  objection  in  this
      very broad sense, he can only show there is a real risk of persecution
      where one or more additional factors obtain:

     a) where the conditions of military service are themselves so harsh as
        to amount to persecution on the facts;


     b) where the military service to which he  is  called  involves  acts,
        with which he may be associated which are contrary to  basic  rules
        of human conduct;


     c)  where the punishment in question is  disproportionately  harsh  or
        severe.


      3) Even if a person on the basis of one of  these  additional  factors
      can establish a real risk of persecution, he will  not  qualify  as  a
      refugee unless he can further demonstrate that the persecution  is  by
      reason of a Refugee Convention ground (race, religion, etc).



30. Whilst we consider the  above  framework  should  be  used  in  military
service cases, the facts of this case require us to clarify certain  matters
of detail relating to 2 (a), 2(b) and 2(c). What they  add  to  the  overall
framework will be stated in our conclusions.



Application to the facts of this case

31. The adjudicator was prepared to accept that the appellant  had  deserted
from the army. We see no reason to interfere with  that  finding  or  indeed
any other of his findings of fact.

32. Accordingly we approach this case on the  basis  that  upon  return  the
appellant would come to the notice of the authorities and be  classified  as
a deserter.


Conscientious objection

33.  Albeit  finding  the  appellant  had  no  ideological  basis  for   his
unwillingness to do  military  service,  the  adjudicator  was  prepared  to
accept that his opposition to the policies of the Russian government  vis  a
vis Chechyna rendered him a "partial objector". The adjudicator should  have
given clearer reasons why he reached this conclusion. It would  have  helped
if he had examined the case in the way set out at paragraph 174 of the  1979
Handbook. However, since he plainly considered the  appellant  held  genuine
objections to the war in Chechnya,  we  are  prepared  to  accept  that  the
appellant was thereby a conscientious  objector  in  the  very  broad  sense
outlined earlier.

34. We next turn to consider whether the appellant should  have  been  found
to qualify as a refugee on the basis that his objection would expose him  to
a real risk of performing military service in  one  or  more  of  the  three
exceptional situations already identified.


 Conditions of military service

35. As already noted, the appellant contended that  the  adjudicator  should
have accepted that  since  the  conditions  he  would  face  doing  military
service were oppressive, he should qualify as a refugee.  We  cannot  accept
this contention.

36. As regards conditions of military service generally,  it  is  true  that
the April 2002 CIPU report at para 4.12  refers  to  "the  army's  notorious
reputation for bullying, including torture and  rape,  particularly  of  new
conscripts". Paragraph 4.14  notes  that  various  abuses  against  military
servicemen continued during  2001.  It  also  mentions  that  degrading  and
substandard living conditions persist throughout  the  military.  The  Human
Rights  Watch  Report  2003  and  the  Amnesty  International  Report   2003
highlight the incidence of severe abuses and make no mention of  significant
improvements.  However, we agree with the Tribunal in Foughali  (00/TH/0513)
that for a claimant to  qualify  as  a  refugee  on  the  basis  of  adverse
conditions of life whilst  in  military  service  alone  would  require  the
existence of "highly unusual circumstances". As dismal a  picture  as  these
sources paint of life for Russian conscripts, they do not  by  reference  to
figures establish a consistent pattern of gross  and  systematic  violations
of the basic human rights of conscripts.  In  the  context  of  establishing
whether a real risk of persecution or treatment  contrary  to  human  rights
would ensue for a person returning to face compulsory  military  service  in
Russia, we do not think that anything less than evidence of abuses  on  such
a scale of severity suffices. We agree  too  with  the  Tribunal  in  Krotov
[2002]  UKIAT01325  that  the  evidence  concerning  such  abuses  does  not
establish that serious abuses of the human rights of conscripts are  endemic
throughout the army. Most of the examples  of  widespread  torture  and  ill
treatment in the  armed  forces  come  from  particular  units  (  the  72nd
regiment, 42nd army division  in  particular).  Furthermore,  the  objective
country materials attach some significance to the fact that mechanisms  have
been set up in recent times to investigate allegations of abuse  within  the
Military Procurator's Office and President  Putin  has  identified  military
reform as one of his priorities.

37. The appellant also contended that the conditions  of  life  in  military
service would be more difficult for  him  than  for  others  because  people
would know he had  objected  to  serving  in  Chechnya.  However,  from  the
objective country materials it is  clear  that  unwillingness  to  serve  in
Chechnya is a widespread problem. There is  no  satisfactory  evidence  that
the  military  authorities  mete  out  significantly  worse   treatment   to
deserters known to be Chechen refuseniks.


Actual participation in Chechnya

38. Before considering the remaining two grounds of exception, it  is  first
of all necessary to decide whether there would indeed be a real risk of  the
appellant being required to participate in the armed conflict  in  Chechnya.
Here the evidence is patchy. From the CIPU report we glean that  only  about
20% of liable conscripts are actually enlisted, while the remaining 80%  are
granted either postponement or exemption or have not responded to the  call-
up. However paragraph 4.9 of the April 2002 CIPU report notes  that  persons
subjected  to  the  draft  are  divided  into  two  groups:   draftees   and
reservists. Reservists consist of those  who  have  completed  the  military
academy or have completed their military service. As  regards  draftees,  it
states: "All draftees, after six months of serving in the army, can be  sent
to  areas  of  armed  conflict."  At  paragraph  4.10  this  report  further
clarifies that while the Constitution provides for the right to  alternative
civilian service, few cases succeed in the courts and young men continue  to
risk imprisonment for refusing military service  on  conscientious  grounds.
Since in this case the evidence is that the appellant  would  be  classified
as a deserter,  this  information  is  of  limited  relevance.  But  as  his
evidence was that he was on his way to Chechnya when  he  deserted,  we  are
prepared to accept that he would in fact run a real risk of  being  required
(in addition to any punishment he might receive) to serve in Chechnya.



Military service leading to participation  in  armed  conflict  contrary  to
international law
39. As noted earlier, another of the appellant's  contentions  was  that  to
return him to Russia where he would have to fight in Chechnya  would  expose
him to a real risk of involvement in acts  condemned  by  the  international
community. The adjudicator chose to pose the issue in terms  of  whether  or
not the conflict in Chechnya was internationally condemned.

40. In our view the adjudicator did not err by describing the issue in  such
terms: indeed it is used descriptively  in  this  way  by  Lord  Bingham  of
Cornhill in his speech in the House of Lords judgment.  However,  since  the
parties in this case sought to rely on the analytical interpretation  placed
on the term "international condemnation" as set out in the  case  of  Krotov
[2002] UKIAT 01325, it is salient  that  we  seek  to  clarify  this  issue.
Krotov  disagreed with Foughali because it considered the  main  purport  of
paragraph 171 of the 1979 UNHCR Handbook which  referred  to  "...  military
action condemned by the international community as contrary to  basic  rules
of  human  conduct..."  was  to  require  a  test  of  condemnation  by  the
international community. It wrote:

      "Those words of the Handbook have stood for a very long time: although
      they do not have the force of law, they represent the nearest approach
      so far to an international code of refugee law, and  there  are  sound
      reasons of international comity why the  legitimacy  of  a  particular
      campaign should not be passed on by either an individual asylum-seeker
      or an individual court, but left to the judgment of the  international
      community. We regret we are unable  to  agree  with  the  approach  in
      Foughali".

41. It is clear from the judgments of the Court of Appeal and the  House  of
Lords  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul  that   their   lordships   view   the   terms
"internationally condemned" and being "contrary to the basic rules of  human
conduct"  as  interchangeable.  However,  since   the   parties   in   their
submissions in this case have sought to rely on  Krotov`s approach, we  need
to explain briefly why we decline to follow it  on  this  particular  issue.
For one thing the determination in Foughali was one whose  guidance  was  to
be followed according to the  President  in  the  starred  case  of  Slimani
(01/TH/00092). For another, the only point on  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
(subsequently)  disagreed  with  Foughali   concerned   its   treatment   of
conscientious objection as an exception in its own right.


42. The Tribunal in Krotov also appears  to  have  overlooked  that  UNHCR`s
current view of the test adumbrated in paragraph 171  is  one  which  places
the main focus on  the  fact  that  it  must  involve  conduct  contrary  to
international  law  (as  opposed  to  condemnation  by   the   international
community). In the light of  Krotov`s  apparent  call  for  a  reversion  to
earlier lines of authority, it is perhaps pertinent to  reiterate  the  five
main substantive reasons why the international law test is more sound.


43. Firstly, to hinge the test  on  international  condemnation  would  mean
having to assess military service cases under the Refugee Convention on  the
basis of the vagaries of international politics, apt to  vary  depending  on
shifting alliances and whether other countries surveying the  conflict  take
a particular view.



44. Secondly, a test based directly on international law is more  consistent
with the overall framework of the  1951  Refugee  Convention,  whose  schema
also contains  at  Art  1F  Exclusion  Clauses  which  are  directly  framed
precisely on the basis of international law principles. The presence  within
the Refugee Convention  of  the  Exclusion  Clauses  also  demonstrates  the
fallacy  behind  Krotov`s  belief  that  there   were   sound   reasons   of
international comity why the legitimacy of a particular campaign should  not
be "passed on" by an individual court. Art 1F requires such judgments to  be
passed and no point has ever been taken that  it  is  beyond  an  individual
court to establish involvement even in crimes at  the  level  recognised  by
the international community through the Geneva Conventions of  1949  as  the
most heinous known to mankind.

45. Thirdly, the reference to "the basic  rules  of  human  conduct"  has  a
distinct legal meaning within international law governing  armed  conflicts:
see e.g. L.C Green, The Contemporary Law of Armed Conflict (1996) p.  16;  C
Greenwood, "Scope of Application  of  Humanitarian  Law  "  in  Handbook  of
Humanitarian Law  in  Armed  Conflicts,  C  Dieter  Fleck  (ed)  1995.  Used
interchangeably with ius  cogens  the  term  has  been  identified  to  mean
"principles  that  the  legal  conscience  of  mankind  deem(s)   absolutely
essential to coexistence in the international community" (UN  Conference  on
the Law of Treaties, Summary Records of the  Plenary  Meetings  and  of  the
Subcommittee of the Whole at 294: UN doc. A/CONF. /39/11  (1969)  (statement
of Mr Suarez (Mexico)).




46. Fourthly, to make the test other than one  based  on  international  law
would be to subvert the underlying principles of interpretation set  out  by
the House of Lords in Horvath [2000] 3 All ER 577, principles which seek  to
base interpretation of the  Refugee  Convention  on  fundamental  norms  and
values drawn from international law  sources,  in  particular  international
human rights law. As the Tribunal said in Foughali:





      "When assessing risk on the basis of serious human  rights  violations
      outside the context of military service cases, decision-makers do  not
      hinge their decisions on whether or not  these  violations  have  also
      been internationally condemned, although such condemnation may be part
      of the evidence. It  would  be  illogical  to  behave  differently  in
      relation to an overlapping field of public international law  governed
      by the same fundamental norms and values".





47. Finally, a test based directly on international law is also required  by
the need to give the Refugee Convention a contemporary definition  based  on
the very considerable developments in international humanitarian  law  since
1979.


The recent EU texts  discussed  by  their  lordships  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul
(paragraphs 14-16 of  the  speech  of  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill)  clearly
reflect an attempt to build on these, by reference to the international  law
criteria contained in Art 1F.




48. Thus whilst "international condemnation" is serviceable for  descriptive
purposes, it does not define the category. Strictly speaking,  international
condemnation is only one indicator - albeit  a  highly  relevant  one  -  of
whether  the armed conflict involved is/ would be contrary to  international
law.

49. However, to bring Tribunal case law fully up to  date,  we  do  need  to
make clearer than was done  in  Foughali  what  would  be  required  for  an
appellant to show he faced a real risk of persecution as a result of  having
to participate in a  particular  armed  conflict  said  to  be  contrary  to
international law. Plainly the test of real risk requires considerations  of
scale. It would not be met if the evidence was simply that in the course  of
this  armed  conflict  there  would  be  isolated  incidents  in  breach  of
international law. Under international humanitarian  law  and  international
criminal law, of course, it is possible for even an isolated incident,  e.g.
the killing of an unarmed civilian, to give rise to  a  violation.  But  the
test under the Refugee Convention would not be met  because  one  could  not
say that a person having to participate in such  a  conflict  faced  a  real
risk of being implicated in incidents which  were  isolated  in  number  and
character. Nor would the  test  be  met  simply  because  objective  country
materials document  a  relatively  limited  number  of  incidents  in  which
conscripts have been forced,  for  example,  to  massacre  or  kill  unarmed
civilians. The test is met, however, if the armed  conflict  in  general  is
contrary to international law. For that to happen there  would  have  to  be
violations of the laws of war  occurring  on  a  widespread  and  systematic
basis.

50. We are fortified in taking this  view  by  the  fact  that  the  Refugee
Convention was plainly not intended to impose responsibility on host  states
for the abuses which may  be  committed  by  combatants  in  the  claimant`s
country of origin. If the threshold of real risk  was  set  lower,  then  it
could be enough for a person to succeed under the Refugee Convention  simply
by showing that military service in his country can sometimes  involve  acts
of impunity, even if in fact he himself stood only a remote chance of  being
involved in such acts.

51. Our analysis leads us to one further observation. Given  some  confusion
has continued over the proper interpretation to be placed on  paragraph  171
of the UNHCR Handbook, we consider that a useful clarificatory addition  can
be made to the wording of the second  exception  given  earlier  as  follows
(additional words in italics):
.
      "(b) where the military service to which he is called  involves  acts,
      with which he may be associated which are contrary to basic  rules  of
      human conduct as defined by international law..."


The conflict in Chechnya

52. Applying the international law-based test to the  situation  facing  the
appellant in this case, we have come to the following conclusions.

53. Given that the presence or  absence  of  international  condemnation  is
highly relevant evidence  of  whether  an  armed  conflict  is  contrary  to
international law, can it be said that the conflict  in  Chechnya  has  been
internationally condemned?  Despite our disagreement  with  certain  of  the
observations made in Krotov, we entirely agree with its conclusion that  the
evidence did not establish that the current conflict in  Chechnya  had  been
condemned by any official international body, either in respect of  aims  or
methods. That Tribunal correctly noted that, even though the  UN  Commission
on Human Rights  as  noted  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch  report  for  2002
expressed grave concern about human rights violations in Chechnya,  it  fell
short of calling for an international commission of inquiry.

54. Evidence to hand since Krotov appears to point further  in  a  direction
away from international condemnation. According to an Amnesty  International
document dated 19 April 2002 the UN Commission on Human Rights in  its  58th
session narrowly voted against a resolution expressing  concern  at  serious
violations of human rights in Chechnya. The Human Rights Watch  Report  2003
states that: "For the first time in three sessions,  Russia  escaped  formal
criticism of its conduct  in  Chechnya  at  the  U.N.  Commission  on  Human
Rights. A resolution, brought  to  a  vote  when  European-led  negotiations
about  a  consensus-based  chairman's   statement   failed,   was   narrowly
defeated."

55. Can it  be  said  that,  even  if  not  internationally  condemned,  the
conflict is Chechnya is nevertheless one involving its participants in  acts
contrary to international  law  governing  armed  conflict?  Here  both  the
objective behind the actions of the Russian authorities and the  methods  in
conducting this war are relevant. The Human Rights  Watch  Report  2003  and
the Amnesty International Report  2003  report  a  continuation  of  serious
human rights abuses and abuses of international  humanitarian  war  on  both
sides of the conflict, noting a deterioration  during  the  second  half  of
2002, the oppressive use by Russian security  forces  of  zachistki  (raids)
being particularly highlighted.  However  whilst  these  and  other  reports
identify a climate of impunity, none identify that the scale of  abuses  has
become or is likely to become widespread and endemic.

56.  Taken  together  with  the  lack  of  evidence   that   violations   of
international law governing armed conflict  are  endemic  in  Chechnya,  the
evidence of a lack of international condemnation is compelling. It leads  us
to conclude that the real prospect of having to perform military service  in
Chechnya  would  not  expose  this  appellant  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution on account  of  the  repugnant  nature  of  the  armed  conflict
considered as a whole.

57. We would add that even had we found the armed conflict  in  Chechnya  to
be generally contrary to international law, we would  not  necessarily  have
concluded this appellant in consequence faced a real  risk  of  persecution.
That is not because we have doubted that he has genuine  objections  to  it.
It is rather because on his own account he was a communications  specialist,
not a front-line soldier. We would have had to be further  satisfied  either
that he would have been required to do actual fighting or that  his  support
role as a communications  specialist  to  those  in  the  front  line  would
implicate him through a command  structure  in  the  commission  of  actions
contrary to the laws of war. On his  own  evidence  it  was  not  reasonably
likely he would be implicated in abuses of international law.


The issue of disproportionately harsh or severe punishment

58. This brings us to the appellant's final  argument  that  his  punishment
would be persecutory because disproportionately severe. The adjudicator  did
not  think  it  would  be  persecutory  or  contrary  to  Art  3.  Were  his
conclusions sustainable?

59. As regards the likely imprisonment of the appellant  for  deserting,  we
need first of all to clarify the formal punishment  and  then  consider  the
actual consequences. As regards  the  formal  penalties,  draft  evasion  is
widespread and punishable by one to three years`  imprisonment,  five  years
in aggravated circumstances Military desertion is  punishable  by  three  to
seven years` imprisonment, five to seven  years  or  execution  in  wartime.
There have been two amnesties covering deserters or draft evaders  from  the
Chechen conflict but they were for a limited period.

60. There is  some  evidence  to  indicate  that  in  practice  evaders  and
deserters do not serve more than the minimum  periods,  but,  even  assuming
they serve the maximum, we  do  not  think  the  abovementioned  periods  of
imprisonment are in themselves  disproportionate,  particularly  given  that
the duty of Russian citizens to perform military service is currently  being
enforced at a time when the Russian  state  faces  significant  problems  of
internal and external security.

61. Can it be said nevertheless that the  prison  conditions  the  appellant
would face in the course of his punishment would  in  themselves  amount  to
serious harm or treatment contrary to his human rights?

62.  The  country  evidence  regarding  prison  conditions  is   disturbing.
Paragraphs 4.24 of the April 2002 CIPU report states that prison  conditions
remain extremely  harsh  and  frequently  life-threatening.  Prisons  remain
extremely overcrowded, prisoners often suffer from inadequate medical  care.
 Between 10,000 and 11,000 detainees and prisoners are believed to die  each
year in penitentiary  facilities.  The  Amnesty  International  Report  2003
notes that prisons in Russia  continue  to  be  overcrowded  and  rife  with
infectious diseases. The Human Rights Watch Report 2003 states that:

      "Prisoners rights groups reported that the total number of inmates  in
      Russian prisons and pre-trial detention facilities decreased, but that
      overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, and disease epidemics remained  a
      severe problem. The AIDS Foundation East-West  estimated  that  almost
      thirty-five thousand of Russia`s 950,000 inmates were living with HIV,
      a drastic rise from fifteen thousand in 2001."

63. However, the evidence falls short of identifying that  persons  detained
in Russian prisons will routinely face  conditions  which  are  inhuman  and
degrading or otherwise amounting to serious harm.

64. During the course  of  our  deliberations  we  invited  the  parties  to
address us on the significance for this case of a  recent  judgment  of  the
European Court  of  Human  Rights  in  the  case  of  Kalashnikov  v  Russia
(Application no. 47095/99, 15 October 2002). Miss Ahmed urged us to view  it
as further support for her position that the  claimant  would  face  a  real
risk of ill treatment upon return arising from  a  prison  sentence  imposed
for desertion. Miss Evans asked us to confine it to  its  historical  facts.
Having considered the case, we see it as of limited relevance to  the  issue
we have to decide. The applicant in this case  complained  inter  alia  that
his conditions of  detention  in  the  Magadan  detention  facility  IZ-47/1
between 1995 and 1999 was contrary to Art 3.

65. In the course of reiterating general principles underlying its case  law
on Art 3,  the  Court  noted  (as  regards  degrading  treatment)  that  the
suffering and humiliation involved must go beyond  that  inevitable  element
of suffering or humiliation  connected  with  a  given  form  of  legitimate
treatment or punishment. It continued:

      "Nevertheless, under this provision  the  State  must  ensure  that  a
      person is detained in conditions which are compatible with respect for
      his human dignity, that the manner and method of the execution of  the
      measure do not subject him to distress or  hardship  of  an  intensity
      exceeding the unavoidable level of suffering inherent in detention and
      that, given the practical demands of imprisonment, his health and well-
      being are adequately secure.

      When assessing conditions of detention, account has to be taken of the
      cumulative effect  of  those  conditions,  as  well  as  the  specific
      allegations made by the applicant (see Dougoz v Greece,  no.  40907/98
      para 46 ECHR 2001 - II). (paragraph 95)".

66. Applying these principles to the applicant`s case, the Court found  that
there had been  severe  overcrowding  and  unsanitary  conditions  having  a
detrimental effect on his health  and  well-being.  It  concluded  that  the
conditions  of  detention,  which  the   applicant   had   to   endure   for
approximately 4 years and 10  months,  must  have  caused  him  considerable
mental suffering, diminishing his human dignity and  arousing  in  him  such
feelings  as  to  cause  humiliation  and  debasement.  It   did,   however,
acknowledge evidence that conditions had since  been  the  subject  of  some
improvement at this particular prison. At paragraph 94 the Court noted:

      "It  was  acknowledged  that,  for  economic  reasons,  conditions  of
      detention in Russia  were  very  unsatisfactory  and  fell  below  the
      requirements set  for  penitentiary  establishments  in  other  member
      States of the Council of Europe. However, the  Government  were  doing
      their best to improve conditions of detention in Russia. .."

67. Our observations on this case are twofold. Firstly,  although  the  case
deals mainly with pre-trial  detention  facilities,  it  was  accepted  that
conditions in other  types  of  detention  facilities  were  in  general  no
better. Even so, the case did not proceed on the basis  that  conditions  in
all Russian prisons generally were  contrary  to  Art  3,  only  that  given
widespread problems in such prisons an applicant would have less  difficulty
proving his case as to ill treatment in a particular prison  than  would  an
appellant facing imprisonment in a  country  where  prison  conditions  were
generally good. Secondly, and here we  repeat  in  large  part  observations
made earlier, this case involved an allegation concerning past treatment  in
prison and on which the European Court of Human Rights  decided  in  October
2002. Whereas the task facing us is to assess whether if  returned  now  the
appellant would face a real risk  of  treatment  which  was  persecutory  or
contrary to Art 3 as at June 2003. If there is no evidence that  a  claimant
will face treatment worse than that accorded other (military) prisoners,  he
will not be able to succeed in showing he  faces  thereby  a  real  risk  of
persecution or treatment contrary to his human rights unless  the  objective
country materials disclose the existence of a consistent  pattern  of  gross
and systematic abuse of the human rights of  (military)  prisoners.  We  say
this because the test under both the Refugee Convention and  Art  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention is one of real, not remote, risk.

68. We consider therefore that in the absence  of  clear  evidence  to  show
that draft deserters returning to Russia routinely and  systematically  face
conditions contrary to Art 3,  the  conclusion  cannot  be  drawn  that  the
claimant can make out his case either under the Refugee Convention or Art  3
of the ECHR.

69. In reaching this conclusion we have given consideration  to  Ms  Ahmad`s
contention  that  the  appellant  would  face  treatment  worse  than  other
prisoners because he would be  known  to  have  been  a  Chechen  refusenik.
However, given the very large numbers of Chechen refuseniks  encountered  by
the Russian authorities, we do not think this  appellant  would  be  treated
any different from them and there is no satisfactory evidence to  show  that
refusenik detainees are treated worse than other persons detained for  draft
evasion or desertion.


The issue of Convention ground

70. Since we have decided the adjudicator was correct to conclude  that  the
appellant`s return to Russia where he faced punishment as a  deserter  would
not expose him to a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm,  it  is  not
necessary for us to address the issue of  whether  such  risk  would  be  on
account of a Convention ground. But in any event,  following  the  House  of
Lords judgment, especially  the  speech  of  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  at
paragraph 23, we  do  not  think  that  in  this  type  of  case  a  Refugee
Convention grounds is easily discernible.


Summary of Conclusions

71. In the light of the judgments of the Court of Appeal and  the  House  of
Lords in Sepet and Bulbul, it is necessary for the Tribunal to  restate  the
basic principles that should govern consideration of military service  cases
as follows:



      I) In order to establish that military service gives rise  to  a  real
      risk of persecution a claimant must first of all establish that he  is
      a conscientious objector. However, in establishing this, a  moral  and
      ethical basis to his objections may be irrelevant unless they  are  so
      extreme as to engage Art 1F considerations[2]. To what  extent  it  is
      relevant whether a person's objections are genuinely held will  depend
      on the nature of the particular case.


      II) Assuming a person can establish conscientious  objection  in  this
      very broad sense, he can only show there is a real risk of persecution
      where one or more additional factors obtain:

           (a) where the conditions of military service are  themselves  so
           harsh as    to amount to persecution on the facts;


           (b) where the military service to which he  is  called  involves
           acts, with which he may be  associated  which  are  contrary  to
           basic rules of human conduct as defined by international law;


           (c) where the punishment in question is disproportionately harsh
           or severe.



      III) Even if a person on the basis of one of these additional  factors
      can establish a real risk of persecution, he will  not  qualify  as  a
      refugee unless he can further demonstrate that the persecution  is  by
      reason of a Refugee Convention ground (race, religion, etc).





      IV) For a claimant to succeed  under  II  (a),  would  require  highly
      unusual circumstances.


      V) For a claimant to succeed under II (b), he would need to show  that
      the armed conflict in question was characterised by violations of  the
      laws of war on a widespread and systematic basis and that he would  be
      required to be an active participant in such violations.


      VI) Where under II(c), as part of his punishment for draft evasion  or
      desertion a claimant faces having to serve his sentence in poor prison
      conditions, he will not be able to succeed in showing he faces thereby
      a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to his  human  rights
      unless the objective country materials disclose  the  existence  of  a
      consistent pattern of gross and systematic abuse of the  human  rights
      of  (military) prisoners.


      VII) The adjudicator was correct to conclude  that  the  appellant  in
      this case had failed to show  that  either  the  punishment  he  would
      receive as a deserter or the  requirement  that  he  perform  military
      duties in Chechnya would give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to his human rights.


    72. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                              DR H H  STOREY

                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

                                                     -----------------------
[1] The Tribunal has recently  dealt  with  Art  1F  cases  in  the  starred
determination of Gurung [2002] UKIAT 04870
[2] The Tribunal has recently  dealt  with  Art  1F  cases  in  the  starred
determination of Gurung [2002] UKIAT 04870, [2003] INLR 133.

