
ar                                          ZA (Exclusion of evidence -
Lost record of proceedings) Somalia [2003] UKIAT 00143


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 1 September 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:

                             13/11/03.


                                   Before:

                          Mr D J Parkes (Chairman)
                            Professor D C Jackson



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

                         DETERMINATIONS AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an  Adjudicator,
    Mr D.G. Zucker, allowing the appeal of the respondent and her dependant
    child against  removal  directions  as  an  illegal  entrant  following
    refusal of her asylum claim.  The respondent also claimed that  removal
    would be in breach of her human rights.

 2. Before us the Secretary of State was presented by Mr  M.  Blundell  and
    the respondent by Mr Danny Bazini of  counsel,  instructed  by  Howells
    Solicitors of Sheffield.

 3. The respondent claims to be a Somali national who, at the age of three,
    went to Yemen with her parents fleeing because of  persecution  by  the
    authorities of that time.  The respondent's  case  is  that  she  fears
    persecution or ill-treatment if returned either to  Somalia  or  Yemen.
    The Secretary of State did not believe that the respondent was a Somali
    national, nor did he believe that the respondent was at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or persecution if returned to the Yemen.  As  the  respondent
    had claimed to be a Somali national, removal directions  were  set  for
    the country in order, as the  letter  of  refusal  indicates,  that  an
    Adjudicator could review the question of the respondent's  nationality.
    If the Adjudicator took the same view as the Secretary  of  State,  the
    Secretary of State would  seek  to  establish  the  respondent's  'true
    nationality'.

 4. The  proceedings  before  the  Adjudicator  therefore  focused  on  the
    question as to whether the respondent  had  established  her  claim  to
    Somali nationality and the  evidence  with  regard  to  the  Yemen  was
    considered solely in the context of the respondent's credibility.   The
    Adjudicator held on the evidence  that  the  respondent  was  a  Somali
    national, and that the respondent would be at risk  of  persecution  or
    ill-treatment because she was at risk as a woman displaced from  within
    the country and was a  member  of  the  minority  Benadiri  clan.   The
    Secretary of State was granted leave to appeal on two  grounds  -  that
    the finding that the respondent was a Somali lacked any  foundation  in
    the evidence and, secondly, that the Adjudicator had  wrongly  excluded
    as evidence the Presenting Officer's record of earlier  proceedings  in
    the case, and hence had excluded from  consideration  the  question  of
    consistency of the respondent's oral evidence.

The procedural history of the appeal

 5. The appeal before the Adjudicator was started on 2 December  2002  when
    the  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Halligan  of  counsel.   The
    Adjudicator records in his determination  that  the  matter  went  part
    heard and was adjourned until 13th January 2003.  We were  told  by  Mr
    Bazini that the oral evidence had been heard on the first occasion  and
    that the adjourned hearing was solely for the purpose of the making and
    consideration of submissions.  When the matter  came  back  before  the
    Adjudicator,  as  he  records  in  his  determination,  the  record  of
    proceedings of the earlier occasion had been lost.   The  Adjudicator's
    laptop computer which contained the only record had  been  stolen.   At
    the adjourned hearing the appellant was represented by Mr Bazini and he
    told us that the first he knew of the problem was on  his  arrival  for
    the hearing.  The Presenting Officer on both occasions was the same, Mr
    Bligh.

 6. The Adjudicator records in his determination that he indicated  to  the
    representatives that it was  open  to  either  of  them  to  request  a
    transfer but that he (the Adjudicator) would be 'quite happy  to  start
    the matter again as if no evidence had been taken at all'.  It is  said
    in the determination that Mr Bligh was content for the matter to  start
    again but that Mr Bazini after taking instructions requested a transfer
    order.  During the adjournment to allow Mr Bazini to take instructions,
    the Adjudicator sought the advice of the Regional  Adjudicator  and  on
    that advice refused the transfer order on the basis  that  it  was  not
    within his power to grant it.   The  Adjudicator  then  said  that  the
    matter should carry on  with  the  evidence  being  taken  again.   The
    Adjudicator added

           'I further indicated that I would put entirely out  of  my  mind
           any evidence which might have been given on the earlier occasion
           that whilst Mr Bligh might refer to his notes for the purpose of
           cross-examination, what was said on the earlier  occasion  could
           not be treated as evidence.'






 7. In the grounds of appeal prepared by the  Presenting  Officer  who  had
    conducted the case before the Adjudicator, it is asserted that he  (the
    Presenting  Officer)  requested  that  his  record  of  proceedings  be
    admitted as evidence.  This, as is said in the grounds, was refused  on
    the basis that it was 'inadmissible hearsay evidence'.  The  Presenting
    Officer then requested that  if  the  evidence  changed  he  should  be
    allowed to cross-examine the respondent on  her  previous  inconsistent
    statement.  This, it is said, was also refused 'the Adjudicator stating
    that the hearing was to be heard de novo and no questions  relating  to
    the previous hearing would be permitted'.

 8. The submission in the grounds was that the  respondent's  evidence  had
    changed, that the Secretary of State's case was 'gravely prejudiced' by
    the Adjudicator's  ruling,  and  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
    excluding the Presenting Officer's record.

 9. Mr Bazini agreed that  the  Adjudicator  had  excluded  the  Presenting
    Officer's record from evidence but said that  the  assertion  that  the
    Presenting Officer could not cross-examine the  respondent  had  to  be
    qualified.  He pointed out that in his  determination  the  Adjudicator
    had said that Mr Bligh might refer to his notes  for  the  purposes  of
    cross-examination.

10. Mr Bazini said that following the Adjudicator's ruling  that  the  case
    should start again and his exclusion of the Presenting Officer's record
    there  was  no  further  objection  by  the  Presenting  Officer.    In
    particular, there was no request for an adjournment or for any transfer
    because of the  ruling.   Both  representatives  went  ahead  with  the
    hearing as the Adjudicator had ruled.

The substantive point

11. The Adjudicator heard evidence as regards  the  respondent's  claim  of
    being at risk of persecution in  the  Yemen.   This  stemmed  from  the
    persecution of her father by  the  authorities  and  his  disappearance
    after detention and torture, ill-treatment of her  following  enquiries
    she made about her  father,  the  killing  of  her  husband  by  Yemeni
    security guards and threats being made to her security forces.

12. The Adjudicator found the respondent's evidence to have been consistent
    throughout her case, and that insofar as it referred to the  Yemen  was
    supported by the objective evidence.  The two aspects of  her  evidence
    directly  relating  to  Somali  nationality  were,  first,   that   the
    respondent speaks no Somali but Arabic, and secondly, whether  a  birth
    certificate produced in support of the respondent's case  was  genuine.
    The Adjudicator did not accept the birth certificate  as  genuine,  and
    indeed the respondent said she could not say whether  or  not  it  was,
    having found it amongst her father's things.  However, on the  evidence
    as whole, the Adjudicator believed the respondent and in particular her
    claim to be a Somali  national.   As  we  have  said,  the  Adjudicator
    allowed the appeal both as to asylum and human rights.



The proceedings before the Tribunal

13. The argument before us focused almost entirely on the procedural points
    and we consider these first.  If we are in favour of the  Secretary  of
    State, the matter must be remitted for a rehearing and the  substantive
    point as to nationality become irrelevant to this appeal.

14. Mr Blundell contended that the matter was simple and direct in that the
    Adjudicator had no power to start the hearing again having  once  heard
    the evidence.  He sought to draw an analogy with the  Tribunal's  power
    to remit a  case  for  rehearing.   There  was  no  such  power  in  an
    Adjudicator, said Mr Blundell, and yet in this  case  in  practice  the
    Adjudicator had remitted the matter to himself.  Alternatively, said Mr
    Blundell, for  the  reasons  stated  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    Adjudicator had erred in excluding the Presenting Officer's record.

15. As to the first point, Mr Bazini said that the procedure  adopted  here
    had nothing to do with remittal.  That was concerned with the rehearing
    of the case once it had been determined.  An Adjudicator had  power  to
    control its own proceedings and the action taken by the Adjudicator was
    within the scope of that power.

16. As to the exclusion of the evidence Mr Bazini argued strongly  that  it
    was proper to exclude it for there was no consent as to the record, and
    as an account of the previous proceedings it could have  little  or  no
    weight.  Further, the Presenting Officer was allowed to  put  questions
    as to statements made  by  the  respondent  at  the  previous  hearing.
    Thridly, said Mr Blundell,  the  Presenting  Officer  had  always  been
    content for the matter to be reheard and  it  was  Mr  Bazini  who  had
    objected to that course.  It was  unfair,  therefore,  for  the  course
    which the Presenting Officer had supported to have been taken and  then
    for Secretary of State to indicate that the  course  should  have  been
    different.  Once the 'record' had been excluded  it  was  open  to  the
    Presenting Officer to seek an adjournment or a transfer.  That had  not
    been done.

17. Mr Blundell pointed to the difficulties  of  admitting  the  record  as
    evidence - the Presenting Officer would have to appear as a witness and
    could not then present the case.  Further, said Mr Blundell, it was not
    clear that the Secretary of State would seek to put in  the  record  if
    this required the Presenting Officer to be a witness, and therefore any
    remittal would not only be without point, but be a rehearing of a  case
    for no reason.

Conclusions

18. The power of the Adjudicator to restart the hearing

    We agree with Mr Bazini that this case is not concerned with  remittal.
    It is concerned with how the matter is to be handled when the record of
    proceedings on which submissions are to  be  placed  is  no  longer  in
    existence.  As Mr Bazini pointed out, on occasion matters are restarted
    when, for example, it appears after some evidence has been taken,  that
    the evidence has not been accurately reflected by an  interpreter.   It
    is apparent, therefore, that the Adjudicator acted entirely within  his
    power in restarting the proceedings.  In this context we note that when
    the case was heard the power of transfer was vested only in  the  Chief
    Adjudicator and whether or not the  circumstances  of  this  case  fall
    within that power seems at least arguable.


The effect of rehearing on the earlier proceedings

19. In our view the Adjudicator erred in the view he took that starting the
    proceedings  again  somehow  nullified  or  obliterated   the   earlier
    evidence.  That it could not do for though the matter could not proceed
    to a conclusion because of the loss of the Adjudicator's  record,  that
    did not mean that  the  respondent  had  not  made  statements  in  the
    proceedings connected with the case.  The issue therefore  was  whether
    there was any evidence of those  statements.   The  Adjudicator's  view
    that the Presenting Officer could use his  notes  in  cross-examination
    but could not submit those notes as evidence of  the  statements  made,
    seems to us to accept the relevance of those statements but  to  reject
    the 'evidence' on which such questions would be based.  It  would  then
    make it extremely  difficult  for  the  Presenting  Officer  to  put  a
    question concerning an earlier  statement  to  the  respondent  without
    simply having to accept whatever answer was given, whether or not there
    was 'evidence ' to the contrary.

The adducing of the 'record of proceedings'

20. The Presenting Officer's record being  admissible  evidence,  the  next
    question ought to have been as to its method of submission.  That would
    depend  essentially   on   the   view   taken   by   the   respondent's
    representatives.  If the  representative  agreed  that  the  Presenting
    Officer's record should be accepted as an accurate  reflection  of  the
    previous proceedings, then the hearing could  proceed  on  that  basis.
    If, however, it were thought that the record should be adduced in a way
    which would make it open to cross-examination, then  the  Secretary  of
    State would have to consider  whether  the  Presenting  Officer  should
    appear as a witness and 'prove' his record.

21. Further, the respondent's representative may take  the  view  (entirely
    understandably) that the evidence should not be  admitted  without  the
    respondent having the chance to consider  its  accuracy.   There  would
    therefore be a proper case of adjournment if only for a short time.  It
    may be that in this case an adjournment for a period would have allowed
    counsel who had appeared at the first hearing to produce his record and
    thereby there would be a chance of an agreed record.  To summarise,  in
    our view the Adjudicator should have considered how to proceed  in  the
    light of submissions made to him as to the adducing of the evidence and
    no doubt the weight to be given to it in the  context  of  how  it  was
    submitted.

The fairness of the Secretary of State's position

22. Once the Adjudicator had ruled that the record was not admissible it is
    difficult to see what the Presenting Officer could have done other than
    carry on or seek an adjournment.  The  Adjudicator  had  already  ruled
    against the transfer.  It would therefore be pointless in seeking  such
    an order, not only because of the lack of power but also that it  would
    not remove the issue  of  the  standing  of  the  'record'  of  earlier
    proceedings.  It is possible that an adjournment might have enable  the
    representative  to  consider  the  matter  more  fully  and   for   the
    Adjudicator to then have heard argument on it, but in the circumstances
    of the case it does not seem to us that the Presenting Officer could be
    criticised for simply accepting the ruling  and  getting  on  with  the
    hearing.  We do not see any inconsistency in that and in then appealing
    on the basis that the Secretary of State's  case  has  been  materially
    affected by the exclusion.  It may have been as well for the Presenting
    Officer to have indicated that would reserve the right to question  the
    Adjudicator's ruling in due course but failure  to  do  that  does  not
    remove the force of the argument or render it unfair to make it.

23. Mr Bazini sought to make much of the fact that the  Presenting  Officer
    had accepted the Adjudicator's suggestion that he might rehear the case
    while it was Mr Bazini who had asked for transfer.  But  any  criticism
    of the ground of appeal in the light of the willingness for the case to
    be reheard ignores the chronology of  events.   Once  the  question  of
    transfer was excluded from consideration and the rehearing started, the
    Adjudicator's ruling as to the admissibility of the evidence had to  be
    accepted, even if open to challenge later.

The course to be adopted

24. The matter must therefore be remitted for rehearing.  Evidence  of  the
    respondent's statements before Mr Zucker  on  both  occasions  will  be
    admissible.  The weight to be given to that evidence depends  upon  the
    view taken by the Adjudicator of its accuracy.  That may be resolved by
    counsel's note from the earlier proceedings or there may  be  agreement
    between the parties.  Lacking that agreement or  an  agreed  note,  the
    weight of any 'record' would be affected by the force of any  challenge
    to  it  accuracy  or  reliability.   For  any  such  challenge  to   be
    effectively met it may then be necessary for the Presenting Officer (Mr
    Bligh) to be called as a witness.  These are matters for the party.

25. Mr Bazini expressed concern that the matter might be remitted  and  the
    Secretary of State take not action to call the Presenting Officer as  a
    witness.  In our respectful view, this objection does  not  go  to  the
    heart of the matter  which  is  the  admissibility  of  the  record  as
    evidence.  As we say the lack of any opportunity to challenge the maker
    of that record as to its accuracy may affect the weight to be given  to
    it by the Adjudicator.  The essence of this appeal is  that  there  was
    and is  evidence  of  statements  made  by  the  respondent  before  an
    Adjudicator and that evidence was wrongly excluded.

The substantive ground

26. As the matter is being remitted  the  respondent's  case  will  now  be
    considered anew with the evidence being weighed by the Adjudicator.  In
    those circumstances we need not deal with the contentions regarding the
    Adjudicator's findings.  We say only that  it  seems  to  us  that  the
    Adjudicator weighed all aspects of the evidence before him in  reaching
    his conclusions, the error lying in the fact that not all the  evidence
    that was admissible was before him.

27. The appeal  is  allowed  insofar  as  the  matter  is  remitted  to  an
    Adjudicator other than Mr D.G. Zucker for rehearing.



                                D.C. JACKSON
                                LEGAL MEMBER
