
Heard  at  Field  House      VS (Risk-LTTE-Escape) Sri Lanka CG [2003]
UKIAT 00003
On        30 April 2003
Written    30 April 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . 28.05.2003.. . . . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                             Ms S S Ramsumair JP
                                Mr M L James



                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals, with leave, against the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Miss J Beale,  dismissing  her  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 13 July 2001 to refuse  leave
     to enter and refuse asylum

  2. Before us, Mr D Adams, instructed by Sri Kanth &  Co,  represented  the
     Appellant  and  Mr  J  Gulvin,  a  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer,
     represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant's claim is that in November 1988 he  was  forcibly  taken
     from his home by armed members of the EPLRF, an  armed  Tamil  militia,
     supporting the government  and  operating  with  the  Indian  army.  He
     received military training was  transferred  to  a  camp.   However  in
     August 1989 the camp was attacked by the LTTE  and  many  were  killed.
     When the fighting stopped the Appellant  surrendered  along  with  many
     others. He was forcibly recruited into the LTTE but refused  to  fight.
     He therefore undertook low-level functions such as cooking, guard duty,
     buying food and working in a food store. He was released from the  LTTE
     in 1995, during the ceasefire at that time.  In 1996 he got married and
     they have two children. When the ceasefire collapsed  the  LTTE  wanted
     him back, but he went into hiding from them.  On 2  July  1999  he  was
     caught up in a military action.  He tried to escape but the army  fired
     at him wounding him in the right thigh.  He fell and they arrested him.
      He was detained but not taken to court.  On 12 February 2000  a  bribe
     was paid and he was  released.  The  army  told  him  that  they  would
     announce he had escaped and if he were to be caught  again  they  would
     shoot and kill him.  They told him to go away  and  live  somewhere  in
     hiding.  He went to a relative's house but about six days later he  was
     arrested by members of PLOTE,  another  Tamil  pro-government  militia.
     They also threatened to shoot and kill  him,  but  his  relatives  paid
     money and he was released after nine days. After  that  he  decided  to
     flee to the UK. His wife and children remained in Sri Lanka.

  4. The Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  a  substantially
     credible witness. He accepted that, when the army released him, he  was
     told that they were recording this as an escape and if they found again
     they would kill him.  He thought this seemed improbable but he accepted
     it nevertheless, and having regard to the  low  standard  of  proof  he
     accepted also that there was a reasonable likelihood that  the  release
     was recorded as an  escape.  He  further  noted  that  PLOTE  practised
     extortion and it was possible that they knew the Appellant's family had
     bribed the army to release him, and it was possible that PLOTE believed
     the explanation  that  the  army  said  it  would  publicise  that  the
     Appellant had escaped from lawful custody.  They  wanted  to  get  some
     money out of his family as well, and having got that they released him.



  5. However the Adjudicator went on to note that the  Appellant  had  never
     been charged with any offence, nor had he ever  admitted  to  the  army
     that he had worked for the LTTE. In the light of the objective evidence
     concerning the circumstances now prevailing in Sri Lanka  he  concluded
     that there was no reasonable likelihood that he Appellant would now  on
     return be at any real risk of persecution or a breach of Article 3.  If
     there was unrest in the East where his mother and  siblings  lived,  he
     might not wish to return there,  but  he  would  be  in  no  danger  of
     persecution or a breach of Article 3 in Vavuniya  or  Vanni  where  his
     wife and children live, or in Colombo.

  6. Leave to appeal was granted to consider whether the claimant would fall
     within the exceptional category of asylum seekers described by  Collins
     J. in Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869, by virtue  of  his  having  been
     listed as an escapee from custody. In this respect  the  Appellant  was
     relying upon the decision of the Tribunal in  Arulselvam  [2002]  UKIAT
     05465.

  7. Mr Adams also at the hearing sought to argue  that  the  peace  process
     itself was in doubt because according to a recent news report the  LTTE
     had  withdrawn  from  formal  negotiations.  However  the  Tribunal  is
     familiar with this evidence and also the statement from the  LTTE  that
     the current withdrawal would not last long. The Tribunal considers that
     there are bound to some ups and downs in the negotiating  process,  but
     nothing in these recent events indicates that the substantial  progress
     made so far in the peace process is in any material way at risk.

  8. With regard to the substantive point upon which leave was  granted,  Mr
     Adams argued that the Tribunal in Arulselavam had held  that  a  person
     who had escaped from military custody would for that offence  alone  be
     of serious interest to the military authorities and this would make him
     an exceptional case within the terms of  Jeyachandran.  Thus  Mr  Adams
     invited this Tribunal to overturn the Adjudicator's  determination  and
     conclude that the Appellant would be entitled to refugee status.

  9. Mr Gulvin acknowledged that there had been no cross-appeal against  the
     Adjudicator's findings of fact but invited the Tribunal  to  note  that
     the Adjudicator who had heard the appeal had come to the conclusion  in
     the light of the evidence as a whole  that  the  Appellant,  given  his
     history and record, would not now be at risk on return. This conclusion
     was in line with another  determination  by  a  different  Tribunal  in
     Kamaleswaran [2002] UKIAT 07370. In this,  a  Tribunal  comprising  two
     legal members assessed an appeal on equivalent  facts  to  our  appeal,
     where a person who had only been involved in assisting the LTTE in low-
     level ways, actually escaped after a year of detention during  fighting
     nearby. It concluded that whilst human rights abuses were not at an end
     in Sri Lanka it was impossible on the evidence not to conclude that the
     peace process is so far  advanced  that  even  if  there  are  isolated
     outbreaks of violence it is unlikely to disrupt the  peace  process  to
     any permanent degree and nothing could be  gained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
     authorities seeking to harm  someone  such  as  the  appellant  on  his
     return.  If confirmation were needed, the return of 45  deportees  from
     the Netherlands seems to afford it.

 10. The reference to the deportees from the Netherlands is to the report in
     the objective material that 45 failed asylum seekers had been  forcibly
     returned by the Netherlands to Sri Lanka and had been  monitored.  They
     had experienced no difficulties on or following their return.

 11. We have considered the submissions made to us in  the  context  of  the
     evidence.  We have also noted the observations of the Court  of  Appeal
     in Selvaratnam [2003] EWCA 121, concerning the correct approach for the
     Tribunal  to  follow.  In  Selveratnam,  the  applicant  had  signed  a
     confession as to LTTE activity, as  well  as  having  escaped  after  a
     lengthy detention. Buxton LJ stated in paragraph 11, having approved of
     the approach adopted by Collins J. in Jeyachandran,
           "Had the Tribunal asked themselves a question that  specifically
           directed itself to this Applicant rather than to  the  situation
           in general, I find it difficult or  impossible  to  accept  that
           they could have come to a conclusion other than  this  Applicant
           was at a sufficient level of danger on return to Sri  Lanka  and
           that there was about his case a sufficient  likelihood  that  he
           might be detained to bring him  within  the  provisions  of  the
           Refugee Convention."

 12. We consider it is dangerous to try to decide individual  cases  on  the
     basis of the facts in others, as has been urged  upon  us  both  by  Mr
     Adams  and  Mr  Gulvin.  The  general  proposition  by  Collins  J.  in
     Jeyachandran that people who  are  wanted  in  a  serious  way  by  the
     authorities would still be at risk is plainly right.  If  a  person  is
     actively wanted it almost inevitably must follow that  he  will  be  at
     real risk of being taken into detention on return, where he will be  at
     risk of ill-treatment. However we do not consider we can also take as a
     general proposition that any escape in the past, in  any  circumstances
     (or in the case before us a possible deemed escape),  must  necessarily
     qualify the escapee for refugee status on a similar basis. The  reality
     is that prior to the ceasefire, activities on behalf of the LTTE,  even
     low-level activities under duress, attracted serious adverse  attention
     from the authorities. Following the  ceasefire,  the  authorities  have
     withdrawn the proscription of the LTTE and suspended the Prevention  of
     Terrorism Act. They are no longer materially concerned about past  low-
     level support for the LTTE. There is therefore no valid reason why as a
     general proposition, all escapees should now be at risk, especially  if
     they were in detention only as a consequence  of  low-level  activities
     for the LTTE in the past, and their records will reflect this.  However
     each case must turn upon its own facts.

 13. We have looked at the specific facts of the appeal before us and  asked
     the question whether,  in  the  light  of  the  current  state  of  the
     ceasefire and peace  process,  this  Appellant,  with  his  history  as
     described above, would be at any real risk of persecution or breach  of
     Article 3 on return, or thereafter.  This is the  approach  adopted  by
     the Adjudicator and we reach the same conclusion on the evidence as  he
     did. The fact that the army was prepared to release  the  Appellant  on
     payment of the customary bribe shows that they even then  had  no  real
     interest in holding him, or he would not have been released even for  a
     payment. Bribery assisted  releases  have  been  held  in  many  recent
     Tribunal decisions, such as Thiarajah and Balichandran, to  demonstrate
     this. This is reinforced by the fact that he had not been charged  with
     any offence despite having been in detention for some months,  and  had
     not confessed to anything. This is what his record will show,  even  if
     it also shows falsely that he escaped. We can see no  good  reason  why
     the authorities would have today in these circumstances any  continuing
     adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant.  There  is  no  error   in   the
     determination.

 14. For the reasons given above, this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
