
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |HK (Risk on Return -        |
|                           |        |Standard of Proof) Iran     |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00027          |
|On  3 December 2002        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|11/07/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Professor D B Casson (Chairman)                                   |
|Ms S S Ramsumair, JP                                              |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr R Stanley of Darwen Law Chambers, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran against  the  determination  of
      an Adjudicator (Mrs S Brookfield) dismissing his appeal on asylum  and
      human rights grounds against the decision by the respondent on 5  July
      2001 to give directions for removal to Iran as an illegal entrant.

2.    There is no record of the  appellant's  lawful  entry  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  He claimed asylum at the local enforcement office on 23  May
      2001 and said he had arrived clandestinely having travelled from  Iran
      in a number of lorries.  It appears he was without  documentation.   A
      statement of evidence form, including a long statement  dated  6  June
      2001, was submitted, and an asylum interview was held on 29 June  2001
      but the application was refused for reasons given in a letter dated  5
      July 2001.

3.    The basis of the asylum claim was that the appellant was a  member  of
      the Iranian army who worked in the post room.  He said he  had  opened
      letters, copied them and passed the copies  to  another  soldiers  and
      claimed that the information was used by Mojahedin fighters to  attack
      government installations.   He  said  he  had  been  detained  on  two
      occasions and ill treated.  He said he decided to leave Iran when  the
      soldier to whom he had passed the information  was  arrested,  and  he
      feared the soldier would implicate him.  The respondent  examined  the
      story in detail in the refusal  letter,  and  rejected  the  story  as
      lacking  credibility.   In  particular,  the  respondent   noted   the
      appellant's claim at his  asylum  interview  that  he  had  taken  the
      letters he wished to copy into a tearoom, opened them, taken  them  to
      another room and photocopied them, resealed them and then  folded  the
      copies and put  them  in  his  clothing.   He  had  said  he  was  not
      supervised in the post room, but the respondent noted that four  other
      people would have been present.  Further the appellant had said he was
      searched at the end of every shift. The respondent  did  not  find  it
      credible that he would have been able to open, copy  and  smuggle  out
      letters from the post room without being  seen,  or  that  the  copies
      would not have been discovered when he was searched at the end of  his
      shift.  The respondent also noted that the appellant's mother,  father
      and siblings remained in Iran.

4.    The appellant was represented by Mr Stanley at the hearing before  the
      Adjudicator on 23 April 2002, but the respondent chose not to instruct
      a representative.  In his evidence the appellant  said  he  began  his
      military service on 25 August 1999 and was approached by one  Mansoori
      to provide copies of letters sent through the post room.  He knew that
      Mansoori worked against the  intelligence  and  security  forces  (the
      Etelaat).  He provided eight or nine copy letters to Mansoori.   About
      a month later it was discovered that  a  letter  had  been  improperly
      opened.   All  post  room  employees  were  detained  for  five  days,
      interrogated and ill treated.  He and his colleagues were released and
      he was redeployed to do guard duty in another part  of  the  barracks.
      Mansoori told him not to betray him or his group;  the appellant  said
      nothing to the authorities.  Five weeks later he said he  was  knocked
      out while on duty.   Arms  were  stolen  from  the  warehouse  he  was
      guarding.  He was treated medically and on discharge was taken to  the
      Herasat Etelaat and interrogated.  The authorities  believed  that  he
      was in league with his attackers.   He  was  detained  for  ten  days,
      tortured and interrogated.  His military service was  extended  for  a
      further 12 months and he was reposted to a look-out tower.  Two  weeks
      later he said the Ararat Club and  some  military  installations  were
      attacked and blown up.  He realised that he had  supplied  information
      to Mansoori about those places.  A month later Mansoori was  arrested.
      The appellant feared that Mansoori would believe  that  the  appellant
      had betrayed him and that he would name him.  His father sent him away
      to hide with relatives until arrangements were made  for  his  escape.
      While he was in hiding, the Etelaat came to his home on a daily  basis
      looking for him.  His home phone was tapped by the Etelaat.   He  went
      to Turkey and then on to the United Kingdom by lorry.

5.    The Adjudicator examined the appellant's evidence at paragraph  15  of
      her determination, and set out her detailed findings in  the  12  sub-
      paragraphs of that paragraph.  She did not accept that  the  appellant
      would suddenly be motivated by political opinion in  1999  to  involve
      himself in the passing of military  information,  or  that  he  copied
      documents or passed them to Mansoori, or that he was able  to  smuggle
      documents with the ease he  had  described,  or  that  Mansoori  would
      believe that the appellant had betrayed him, or that visits by Etelaat
      to his home were in connection with his desertion,  but  that  it  was
      more likely that any questioning of his father  was  to  do  with  his
      absence  from  the  military.   At  paragraphs  16  and  17   of   the
      determination the Adjudicator did not accept any reasonable likelihood
      that the appellant would face persecution or breach of human rights on
      return to Iran.

6.    The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal make no reference  of  any  kind
      to the alleged facts of the case or  to  the  Adjudicator's  findings.
      The grounds contain generalised criticisms which appear to be intended
      to any asylum and human rights appeal, and give no indication that the
      draftsman  has  read  the  determination.   The  Vice  President   who
      considered the application for leave to  appeal  plainly  agreed  with
      that analysis, since he refers to "A complete  lack  of  challenge  to
      individual elements in  the  Adjudicator's  reasoning".   In  granting
      leave to appeal, the Vice President said:

           "I assume what the draftsman intends to say, apart from the fact
           that the applicant disagrees with the Adjudicator's decision, is
           that her approach to the evidence  is  unsafe  and  that  it  is
           difficult to know what of the applicant's claims she accepts and
           what she does not.  ... The use of phrases [sic] like 'I find it
           more likely' at paragraph 15(ix) raise some concern  as  to  the
           standard of proof applied.  For those reasons only, so that  the
           determination may be more carefully considered  after  argument,
           leave to appeal is granted."

7.    In his submissions to us Mr Stanley told us he relied  on  the  points
      made by the Vice President:  we heard  no  further  reference  to  the
      grounds  of  appeal.   Mr  Stanley  submitted   initially   that   the
      Adjudicator should have found the appellant credible and that  it  was
      unclear what standard of proof had been applied, and finally that  the
      determination showed that the  Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant's
      version of events.  We say at once that there is no possible basis for
      the  latter  submission,  since  it  is  entirely  apparent  that  the
      Adjudicator rejected the appellant's story in general and in detail.

8.     In  his  submissions  Mr  Saunders  referred  to  the  correct   self
      direction, to the detailed examination of the  evidence,  and  to  the
      Adjudicator's clearly expressed conclusion at paragraphs 16 and 17  of
      the determination.  Mr Saunders submitted that there  was  nothing  to
      indicate that the Adjudicator had not applied the proper  standard  of
      proof in assessing the evidence.

9.j   We respectfully agree with the criticisms made by the  Vice  President
      when granting leave to appeal.  The grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal
      are devoid of any possible merit and should not be used in  any  other
      case.   On  the  other  hand,  the  Adjudicator  has  caused  entirely
      unnecessary difficulties by her repeated use of the phrase "I  do  not
      find  it  likely"  and  similar  phrases  expressed   positively   and
      negatively, when expressing her findings on the  detailed  aspects  of
      the evidence.  We do not understand why the Adjudicator has chosen  to
      use such  unsatisfactory  phrases,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  she
      correctly directed herself by expressly referring to the  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal  in  Karanakaran  [2000]  Imm  AR  271.   Detailed
      findings  should  always  be  expressed  by  reference  to  the   four
      categories set out in that case.  It is nevertheless  clear  from  the
      determination as a whole, that the Adjudicator rejected each essential
      element of the appellant's story, despite the  unsatisfactory  way  in
      which she articulated  her  findings.   Further,  her  conclusions  at
      paragraphs 16 and 17 of the determination are clear.  She rejected the
      appellant's claim to have a well-founded fear  or  persecution  or  of
      breach of protected human rights on return to Iran.  Those conclusions
      were clearly open to her on the evidence and are fully  and  carefully
      reasoned.  We have heard nothing from her representative  which  gives
      us any reason to regard those conclusions as unsafe.   We  agree  with
      the Adjudicator's findings.

10.   The appeal is dismissed.





                                                                  D B Casson
                                                       Acting Vice President

