

                                        BK (Failed Asylum Seekers) DR Congo
                             [2003] UKIAT 00032



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                    Date heard:  3 July 2003
                                                Date notified.22ND July 2003
                                  Before:-.


                           DR H H  STOREY (Chair)
                               MR A JEEVANJEE

                                                               Between








                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Democratic Republic of Congo,  has  appealed
with leave of the Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator,  Mr  P  S
Aujla, dismissing the appeal against the decision by the  respondent  giving
directions for removal following refusal to grant  asylum.   Mr  D  Blum  of
Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors represented  the  appellant.
Ms A Holmes appeared for the  respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The appellant claimed he went to Goma in November  1997.  In  1999  rebel
soldiers had abducted him when he was trading in the market  there.  He  was
taken to a camp where he was given training and made to do hard work.  After
14 months he managed to escape. He returned to the market in order to  raise
money to fund his departure. After  a  while  it  became  clear  that  rebel
soldiers knew he had returned and that he was a wanted man.

4. The adjudicator found  that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  credible
account in materials respects. The grounds  of  appeal  submitted  that  the
adjudicator's assessment was based on a series of misunderstandings. He  had
been wrong to find that no valid explanation had  been  given  for  why  the
appellant had been targeted by rebel soldiers at the market in Goma. He  had
been wrong to find the escape story  inherently  implausible.  He  had  been
wrong to discount the appellant's explanation for why  he  had  returned  to
the market after  escaping  from  detention.  Furthermore,  the  adjudicator
should have considered that  simply  on  the  basis  of  being  returned  as
someone who was in Goma in 1997 the appellant would be at risk  upon  return
of adverse treatment from  rebel  soldiers  against  which  the  authorities
could  not  protect  him.   In  respect  of  all  the  shortcomings  in  the
appellant's evidence the grounds argued that the adjudicator had  failed  to
take account of the medical evidence from  Dr  Sears  which  had  found  the
appellant to have memory problems.

5. It is appropriate that we deal with the last-mentioned ground  first.  It
is significant in our view that this point has been  raised  for  the  first
time in the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal. It was not raised before  the
adjudicator despite Mr Blum being the representative on that occasion  also.
That is particularly surprising given that there was  a  specific  challenge
made to the accuracy of  the  appellant`s  interview  record  based  on  the
quality of  the  interpretation.  If  the  appellant's  representatives  had
considered the interview was a misleading record  for  other  reasons,  they
should have said so prior to or at the hearing.

6. Mr Blum has submitted that in  any  event  the  adjudicator  should  have
taken account of the appellant's poor memory even if not raised before  him.
The adjudicator, said Mr Blum, had before him the report of Dr  Sears  which
found at paragraph 13 that "[h]e forgets things easily such as the  date  of
an appointment".  We would agree that an adjudicator must  consider  salient
evidence that is before him. In our view that is what  the  adjudicator  did
in this case. It is true he made no specific mention of this aspect  of  the
report, but he clearly gave the report careful consideration and we  do  not
consider it can be said that he overlooked this aspect.

7. However, even had we considered  that  the  adjudicator  overlooked  this
aspect of  the  report,  we  would  not  have  taken  a  different  view  of
credibility as a result.  Firstly,  the  passage  cited  does  not  indicate
whether the claimed memory difficulties are pervasive and so affect  ability
to recall even life-changing events in an interview  or  hearing  situation.
Secondly, the passage is simply a report of the claimant's own  answers.  In
the evaluative sections of the report, the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  the
degree of PTSD is quite moderate and at  paragraph  18  a  comment  is  made
which indicates  that  to  what  extent  the  PTSD  went  beyond  a  "verbal
instrument"  depended  crucially  on  "the  learned  Adjudicator's  view  on
credibility". Hence the doctor himself gave an indication  that  credibility
as assessed by the adjudicator would be decisive.  Thirdly,  if  the  doctor
had any concerns as to the ability of the claimant due  to  memory  problems
to deal with questions concerning his asylum claim at an interview or  in  a
courtroom, we would expect to have mentioned them.  He  did  not.   Finally,
whilst the appellant was vague about some matters in his interview,  it  was
clear that he was able to give specific particulars  on  other  matters.  We
therefore reject this point as raised in the grounds in its entirety.

8. As regards the other grounds, we would accept that at  paragraph  29  the
adjudicator did not give adequate reasons for doubting why  the  rebels  had
targeted the appellant in the  first  place.  The  appellant  had  said  the
rebels had picked him out as someone to forcibly conscript  because  of  his
physique. We would agree, going by the appellant's evidence at  least,  that
this was a sufficient motive.

9. We would also accept that in paragraph 34 the adjudicator  did  not  deal
specifically with the appellant's reasons for returning to  the  marketplace
where he had been abducted earlier. The appellant had said he  had  done  so
because he could not leave the area without earning money. He also  said  he
used  disguise.  The  adjudicator  should  at  least  have  addressed  these
explanations.

10. However, we do not think  that  either  of  these  shortcomings  in  the
adjudicator's treatment significantly flawed his assessment of  credibility.
We  say  that  because  the  adjudicator  identified  a  number  of  serious
difficulties in the appellant's evidence. In our view the grounds of  appeal
singularly fail to address these.

11. The main difficulties were these. At his interview the  appellant  could
not remember the date or month of his arrest or his  escape.  He  could  not
name the rebel group who kept him in detention for 14 months. He  could  not
furnish adequate details of the place from which  he  escaped.  Yet  by  the
time of his second statement he was able to give these details. We  consider
that the adjudicator was fully justified  in  concluding  that  no  credible
explanation had been given as to  why  the  appellant  could  not  give  the
crucial information as interview. We bear in mind in  this  regard  that  at
this interview the appellant had  his  own  representative  and  interpreter
present and that no complaint was made about the accuracy of  the  interview
or other aspects of the interview until the appellant's second statement.

12.  A  further  difficulty  with  the  appellant's  evidence  was  his  own
chronology as eventually supplied. On the one hand he said he was  held  for
14 months; on the other hand he spoken of being abducted  in  November  1999
and then escaping from detention in mid-2000.

13. The adjudicator also found the appellant's escape  account  implausible,
particularly the claim that the guards would have let him go to  the  toilet
unaccompanied.  Mr  Blum  contended  that  the  appellant  gave  a  credible
explanation for  this,  namely  that  the  appellant  time  had  managed  to
convince the guards for some time that he could be trusted. However, if  the
appellant had won the guards` trust earlier, it is not  easy  to  understand
why he did not seek to escape earlier. We see nothing unsustainable  in  the
adjudicator's findings on this aspect of the appellant`s claim.

14. Rightly  in  our  view  the  adjudicator  counted  heavily  against  the
appellant the lack of credibility in the appellant`s account of  going  back
to the marketplace in Goma after his abduction. Mr Blum has  submitted  that
the adjudicator failed to address the main  explanations.  We  have  already
noted that we agree the adjudicator did fail here. However, we do  not  find
the appellant's explanation at  all  convincing.  On  his  own  account  his
disguise was minimal and it had not stopped rebels identifying  him.  We  do
not think that the need to raise money  would  have  led  the  appellant  in
truth to return to this particular market. On his own  account  it  was  the
very place where he had been picked out before because of his  physique.  On
his own account it was the   area where  rebel  soldiers  came  looking  for
recruits. Yet on his own account he returned to  work  there  for  around  6
months. Given the account he gave of ill treatment whilst  in  detention,  a
return to this marketplace was equivalent to putting himself back  again  in
the lion's mouth. Mr Blum has not persuaded us that in  fact  the  appellant
had "no choice" but to go back to this market.

15. We need finally to deal with Mr  Blum`s  submission  that  even  if  the
appellant had failed to give  a  credible  account  the  adjudicator  should
still have allowed the appeal. This  submission  appeared  two-pronged.  The
first prong was that the appellant would be at risk because upon his  return
the authorities would know he  had  been  in  Goma  in  1997.  However,  the
adjudicator made clear at paragraph 37 that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant ever went to live in Goma. He  did  not  accept  either  that  the
appellant was of mixed ethnicity. On the adjudicator's  principal  findings,
which we have found entirely sustainable,  the  appellant  would  be  in  no
different position upon return than any other failed asylum seeker.

16. The second prong of Mr Blum`s submission  was  that  the  appeal  should
have been allowed purely because  the  appellant  would  be  returned  as  a
failed  asylum  seeker.  He  relied  in  this   regard   on   the   Tribunal
determination in Mozu and a London UNHCR letter of  16  May  2003  in  which
reference is made to London  UNHCR`s  belief  that  the  validity  of  their
earlier view that return was  safe  for  failed  asylum  seekers  "has  been
brought into question by the recent serious deterioration in the  protection
and security situation in the DRC".

17. As regards Mr Blum`s reliance on Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05308, a decision  of
the  Tribunal  dated  20  November  2002,  we  deplore   the   practice   of
representatives who simply select one Tribunal  determination  seemingly  in
their favour without showing that any effort has been made to produce  other
Tribunal determinations  which  have  dealt  with  the  relevant  issues  in
detail. That was particularly called  for  in  this  case  because  Mozu  is
clearly confined to the specific situation of the appellant  in  that  case:
someone in poor mental health at risk of imprisonment  and  rape  who  would
have to  return  with  small  children.  Mozu,  furthermore,  undertakes  no
detailed or reasoned assessment of the objective evidence.

18. As regards the London UNHCR letter, it does not purport to  replace  one
UNHCR position statement with  another.  It  simply  announces  that  London
UNHCR is keeping the situation under review and is asking  its  Headquarters
to provide an updated position on returns, which takes account of  the  most
recent developments.

19. This letter was dated 16 May 2003. It is now early  July  2003.  In  our
view, had UNHCR headquarters considered there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
justify a change in its previous position, it would have  said  so  publicly
before now.

20. Mr Blum has also referred in  passing  to  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
Kennes. However, the Tribunal has considered this evidence  in  other  cases
and not found that it demonstrates a real risk of serious  harm  for  failed
asylum seekers per se. A principal reason why the Tribunal  has  taken  this
view consists in what is said  in  recent  CIPU  reports.  The  recent  CIPU
position as set out in the April  2003  Assessment  is  now  represented  by
paragraph 5.41 which notes:

      "The British Ambassador to the DRC stated in November 2002 that he has
      not seen any evidence to  indicate  that  failed  asylum  seekers  are
      persecuted on arrival in Kinshasa. He also  stated  that  the  French,
      Belgian and Dutch Governments return failed Congolese  asylum  seekers
      to the DRC without any problems. The only formal requirement needed to
      allow the returns of failed asylum seekers is valid travel documents."

21. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




