
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |FG (Risk - Single Female -  |
|                           |        |Clan Member - Article 3)    |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2003]UKIAT 00175|
|On 19 November 2003        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........02/12/2003..............                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr D R Bremmer, JP                                                |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the determination of  an  Adjudicator,
      Miss P Lingam, who  allowed  the  appeal  of  a  citizen  of  Somalia
      (hereinafter for convenience referred to as the appellant)  from  the
      decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  her  application  for
      asylum.

2.    Miss J Bracken appeared for the Secretary of State.   Mr  A  Bradegan
      of the Refugee Legal Centre represented the appellant.

3.    The appellant was born in 1966.   She applied for asylum  on  arrival
      in the United Kingdom on 11 August 1999.   The  Adjudicator  accepted
      that the appellant came from Mogadishu.  She was  from  the  sub-clan
      Waisle which fell within the Abgal that was  the  main  clan  of  her
      Hawiye.   In 1990 the Darood clan attacked the  appellant's  home  in
      Mogadishu.   Her family fled and her  grandmother  had  been  killed.
      In 1993 she was stopped by  members  of  the  Darood  clan  and  they
      attempted to rape her but she was protected by a  neighbour  who  was
      assisting her.  She went to Kenya and remained there until 1998.  Her
      children had apparently arrived in the United Kingdom  prior  to  her
      arrival - we are told they both arrived in January  1997  accompanied
      by her sister.

4.    In the letter giving reasons for refusing the  application  dated  16
      September 2002 the Secretary of State took issue with the appellant's
      credibility.   However, the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  field  a
      Presenting Officer before the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator  resolved
      the Secretary of State's concerns in  favour  of  the  appellant  and
      accepted that she had given a credible account.   He heard from  both
      the appellant and her two sisters who are  in  this  country.     The
      Adjudicator considered that the appellant was at risk as  she  was  a
      single woman  from  a  small  sub  clan  who  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution by the larger clans  because  of  ethnic  grounds.    The
      Adjudicator referred to website information examined by her - and not
      identified in the determination - that shows that  the  situation  in
      Somalia had not improved.  There was  a  real  risk  that  she  would
      suffer a breach of her rights under Article 3.    She  accepted  that
      there would be family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
      appellant as a single female would encounter insurmountable  hardship
      if she were to be returned to Somalia.    The children  had  been  in
      the United Kingdom for 4 years and were settled in  their  education.
      Removal of the children would interfere with their private  lives  in
      the United Kingdom and their family life with their two aunts.   Both
      the appellant and her children  would  face  insurmountable  hardship
      because they would be returned to Somalia without a male adult in the
      family to a harsh environment where there was no state protection and
      they would not be able to  seek  protection  from  the  large  clans.
      Removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  their  family
      life.

5.    The Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal  submitted  that  the
      asylum claim had been based on the  civil  war  in  Somalia  and  the
      appellant had failed to show any differential impact  on  her  -  see
      Adan [1998] Imm AR 338.   The Adjudicator  had  failed  to  make  any
      specific reference to supporting objective evidence to indicate  that
      the appellant, as a member of a majority clan (Hawiye from Mogadishu)
      would be at risk.  The appellant had said that Abgal was a large clan
      in her evidence and there was no material to  suggest  she  would  be
      persecuted on ethnic grounds.  The appellant's children  and  sisters
      did not have indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom and the
      Adjudicator had not properly  applied  Mahmood  [2001]  Imm  AR  229.
      There was no particular circumstances in the case to suggest that any
      interference would be disproportionate.   There was in any  event  no
      obligation to take into account claims about individuals  other  than
      the appellant - see Kehinde 01/TH2668.

6.    At the hearing Mr Bradegan asked us to  adjourn  the  proceedings  to
      enable the Secretary of State to consider whether the  appellant  and
      her children fell within the ambit of any policy or concession.    We
      noted that no application had been made by the RLC in advance of  the
      hearing for the proceedings to be adjourned nor had  any  application
      been made to  the  Secretary  of  State  prior  to  the  hearing  for
      consideration of any applicable policy.   It did not appear to us  to
      be proper to adjourn the proceedings.   There was nothing to  prevent
      the representatives of the appellant making  an  application  to  the
      Secretary of State at any stage whether or not the  proceedings  were
      adjourned.  We declined the application to adjourn the matter.

7.    Miss Bracken relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had not specified what objective evidence she was relying
      on.   She should not have referred  to  website  information  without
      specifying the source.   It was clear from paragraph  6.80  that  the
      appellant came from a majority clan.  The Hawiye indeed dominated the
      militia - see paragraph 6.83.  The  Hawiye  controlled  much  of  the
      territory in south and central Somalia - see paragraph  6.84  of  the
      country  assessment.    All  references  are  to  the  October   2003
      assessment.   The appellant could seek protection from her own  clan.



8.     The  Adjudicator  had  not   applied   the   appropriate   test   of
      insurmountable obstacles.    It was clear from Mahmood that the  fact
      that there was a degree of hardship did not make good  an  Article  8
      claim.   It was speculative to say that the  appellant  would  be  at
      risk.

9.    Mr Bradegan submitted that the Adjudicator's findings were clear  and
      sustainable.   The appellant had  been  persecuted  in  the  past  by
      reason  of  her  ethnicity.     The  appellant's  evidence  had  been
      accepted.   Members of a rival  clan  had  attacked  the  appellant's
      village.   An attempt had been made  to  rape  the  appellant.     We
      pointed out to Mr Bradegan that the appellant attributed her problems
      to in-fighting between the Darood clan and  the  Hawiye  clan.    She
      also referred to her clan  as  being  a  large  clan  -  it  was  not
      suggested that she suffered because of membership of sub clan.

10.   Mr Bradegan submitted that the appellant was a member of sub clan, in
      minority who could not seek  protection.   Mr  Bradegan  referred  to
      written submissions that had been made under cover of a fax dated  11
      June 2003.    The appellant would face hardship on return as a single
      woman.   There was a risk of rape as appeared from paragraph  6.8  of
      the country assessment.   While the Adjudicator had  used  the  words
      insurmountable hardship there was  no  difference  between  that  and
      insurmountable obstacles.   It had been suggested in the  grounds  of
      appeal that the appellant could apply from overseas  to  re-join  her
      family but this was unrealistic as there  was  no  Embassy  with  the
      facilities for making an application and it was unclear how she could
      come within any rule as the children were not settled in  the  United
      Kingdom.    The son would be unlikely to be removed until he  reached
      18 and he would then have been in the United Kingdom  for  10  years.
      The family would get the benefit of one policy or  another  and  that
      should be taken into account.

11.   The appellant would be exposed to inhuman or degrading  treatment  on
      return and had suffered an attempted rape in the  past.    There  was
      continuing violence.  Reference was made to the appellant's bundle to
      indicate the problems in Somalia.   The infrastructure was  extremely
      poor and the human rights situation was also poor.

12.   In  reply  Miss  Bracken  submitted  that  the  Abgal  (Hawiye)  clan
      dominated the region North of Mogadishu:  see paragraph 5.14  of  the
      Home Office Country Information Report.   The  transitional  national
      government had  control  over  some  areas  of  Mogadishu  where  its
      official ministries were located and also had some authority  outside
      the capital and the transitional national government leaders were all
      highly dependent on a cartel partly comprised of  Abgal  businessmen:
      see paragraph 5.10 of the country assessment.   There was  no  reason
      why the appellant should not be protected by her own clan and she had
      stated before the Adjudicator that it was common knowledge  that  the
      clan  of  Abgal  was  a  large  clan  (see   paragraph   8   of   the
      determination).

13.   It was said that the appellant was at risk of rape.   These rapes had
      largely been committed by militia members: see paragraph 6.8  of  the
      assessment.   As the militia were largely Hawiye the appellant  would
      be unlikely to be at risk.

14.   The family had been granted exceptional leave to remain in  the  past
      because that was the Secretary of State's policy.   Now  it  was  not
      the policy and leave was granted on a case by case basis.   There was
      nothing to prevent the family returning with the  appellant  if  they
      wished.   While the appellant had sisters in the United Kingdom there
      was nothing to suggest that  there  was  more  than  the  usual  bond
      between siblings between them.  The family could apply under  the  10
      year rule later in so far as that rule might apply  to  them  in  the
      future.   There  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the
      appellant's return.   There might be a degree of  hardship  but  that
      was not sufficient.   In any event, the Adjudicator  had  misdirected
      herself in relation to the objective material.    The  appellant  was
      not a member of a minority clan.   The Adjudicator's decision  should
      be reversed.

15.   At the conclusion of the submissions, we reserved our  determination.
       We have carefully considered all the material before us.     It  was
      not in our view the appellant's case that  she  was  a  member  of  a
      minority clan.   Indeed, she refers in paragraph 43 of her  statement
      to the fact that her clan was big.  At paragraph 20 of her  statement
      she refers to problems in the early 1990s because there was a lot  of
      fighting between the Darood clan and the Hawiye clan.   The  evidence
      does not tend to  suggest  that  someone  from  a  sub  clan  of  the
      Hawiye/Abgal clan would be at risk in Mogadishu.  The Hawiye are  one
      of the four major clan families - see paragraph 6.80 of  the  country
      assessment.  In paragraph 6.83  reference  is  made  to  the  Hawiye-
      dominated USC  militia.     It  is  said  in  paragrpah  6.8  of  the
      assessment that during 2002 there were 32  rape  cases  in  Mogadishu
      largely committed by militia members and  it  is  suggested  in  some
      reports that the incidents of rape had  increased  during  the  first
      half of 2003.  In one report Amnesty International referred to  women
      and girls who were internally displaced  persons  as  well  as  under
      privileged minorities  including  Bantu,  Bravanese,  Midgan,  Tumal,
      Yabir and the wealthier Benadiri community as being  particularly  at
      risk of rape by militia and other gun men.

16.   It is apparent that the Hawiye clan is dominant in part of the region
      north of Mogadishu - see paragraph 5.14 - and that there is a  strong
      local Abgal based administration in the northern districts of  middle
      Shabelle.  We are also conscious of the fact  that  there  are  other
      interests in southern Mogadishu - see the references to  the  USC  on
      pages 83 and 84 of the country  assessment.    Nevertheless  it  does
      appear to us apparent that even on the appellant's account she  comes
      from a big clan and she also comes from Mogadishu in parts  of  which
      her clan hold sway.   In paragraph 43 of  the  appellant's  statement
      she says as follows:

      "There are still problems in Somalia.   Even though my clan  is  big,
      these clans fight amongst each other.  I could be killed."

17.   We do  not  underestimate  the  difficulties  for  the  appellant  in
      Somalia.   There is  a  report,  for  instance,  from  Medecins  Sans
      Frontieres dated 9 December 2002 which refers to the risk of rape and
      the inadequate health cover and other problems.  The  mortality  rate
      is extremely high among babies and  for  women  during  pregnancy  or
      delivery.   There are food shortages and other serious problems.

18.   Against this, the appellant would be returned to Mogadishu where  she
      comes from and where she would be under the umbrella of a  large  and
      we find dominant clan.  We remind  ourselves  of  the  third  of  the
      considerations set out in paragraph 55 of Mahmood [2001] Imm  AR  229
      at 250:

      "Removal or exclusion of one family member from the state where other
      members of the family are  lawfully  resident  will  not  necessarily
      infringe  Article  8  provided  that  there  are  no   insurmountable
      obstacles to the family living together in the country of  origin  of
      the family member excluded, even where  this  involves  a  degree  of
      hardship for some or all members of the family."

19.   We do not feel on the evidence that the return of the appellant would
      expose her to a real risk of inhuman or degrading  treatment.   While
      there are cases of rape in Mogadishu, it is not established that  the
      appellant, admittedly as a single woman, would  herself  be  at  risk
      given that she is a member of a sub clan of a majority clan.

20.   As we understand the  position,  the  appellant's  children  and  her
      sisters no longer have exceptional leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  If the  appellant  is  returned  to  Somalia  there  is  no
      obstacle to the appellant's sisters and children being returned  with
      her.

21.   We appreciate that the situation in Mogadishu is far from  ideal  and
      that there is some violence and lawlessness and difficulties with the
      infrastructure.   We also  understand  that  there  are  in  fact  no
      returns to Somalia at the  present  time.    We  apprehend  that  the
      Refugee Legal Centre will be making an application to  the  Secretary
      of State for the appellant's position and the position of  the  other
      members of her family in the United Kingdom to be considered  by  the
      Secretary of State under various policies or concessions.    We  have
      no  doubt  that  any  such  application   will   be   given   careful
      consideration by the Secretary of State.

22.   We are not satisfied  that  any  interference  with  the  appellant's
      family  or  private   life   in   the   United   Kingdom   would   be
      disproportionate in  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.     Such
      difficulties as the appellant may encounter on return to Somalia  are
      not in our view sufficient to engage Article 3 although we  recognise
      there may be cases which justify the grant of  exceptional  leave  to
      remain on humanitarian grounds as was said in paragraph 64  of  Ullah
      [2003] Imm AR 304 at 324.

23.   In conclusion, the Adjudicator appears to have decided this appeal on
      the mistaken basis that the appellant was  a  member  of  a  minority
      clan.   She did not make it clear to what objective material she  was
      referring and she also referred to web based material which  was  not
      made available to the parties.   This should never be done.

24.   We accept the submissions  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
      Adjudicator's decision is unsustainable.   We reverse it on both  the
      human rights and asylum aspects.

25.   Appeal allowed.



                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President
