
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |:               |                  |
|Heard on:         |1st August 2003       |Appeal number:  |_A (Understandings|
|                  |                      |                |to Return to KAZ) |
|                  |                      |                |Iraq CG [2003]    |
|                  |                      |                |UKIAT 00118       |
|Date typed:       |1st August 2003                                          |
|Date promulgated: |30th October 2003                                        |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                   |
|MR. M SHRIMPTON                                                             |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                          |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:  Ms. J.  Webb,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.
For the Respondent:          Ms. C. Kilroy, of Counsel, instructed  by  Gill
                        & Co. Solicitors.

1.    Mr. A (who we shall hereafter refer to as the Claimant) is a  national
     of Iraq, aged about 27 years. He arrived in the United Kingdom on  23rd
     February 2001, having left Iraq on 9th February 2001.  His  appeal  was
     allowed on asylum and human rights grounds by an  Adjudicator  (Ms.  J.
     Coker, sitting at Taylor House) following a  hearing  on  20th  January
     2003. He had appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State of
     1st May 2001 to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2.    The Claimant is an Iraqi Kurd from a place in that area of Iraq  which
     was formerly known as the Kurdish Autonomous Area of Northern Iraq  (to
     which, for the sake of convenience only, we shall refer to as the KAA).
     The Adjudicator allowed his appeal  solely  because  she  proceeded  to
     determine the risk on return on the basis that the Secretary  of  State
     would return him to southern Iraq.

3.1   There were several issues which arose before us.  We  set  out  below,
     under  separate  headings,  each  of  the  issues,  a  summary  of  the
     submissions made, our decision  in  relation  to  each  issue  and  our
     reasons.

3.2   Before proceeding any further, it is appropriate that  we  mention  at
     this stage that:

       (i)    in  paragraphs  26  to  31,  the  Adjudicator   assessed   the
           credibility of the Claimant's claims as to his past  experiences
           in  the  KAA.  She  made  findings  of  fact.  These  were   not
           challenged, until a very late stage. Indeed, it was only at  the
           hearing before us that Miss Kilroy  applied  for  permission  to
           cross-appeal these findings of fact.

      (ii)  in paragraphs 32 to 33, the Adjudicator  assessed  the  risk  on
           return on the basis that  the  Claimant  would  be  returned  to
           southern Iraq and gave the reasons why  she  was  assessing  the
           risk on return on this basis. Leave to  appeal  was  granted  in
           relation to this aspect of the Determination.

3.4   Our decision as to the issues mentioned under the headings (below)  of
     "Removal directions", "Application to admit new evidence and  to  cross
     appeal" were delivered at the hearing, for reasons  which  we  give  in
     this Determination. Our  decision  as  to  the  "Risk  on  return"  was
     reserved. We give our decision, and our reasons for  our  decision,  in
     relation to the risk on return in this Determination.

      The removal directions:

4.1   The Notice of the decision (form IS82E) to  issue  removal  directions
     states:

            "I have given/propose to give directions for your removal  by  a
           scheduled  service  at  a  time  and  date  to  be  notified  to
           (country/territory) IRAQ"

4.2   The Adjudicator's Record of Proceedings (ROP)  records  the  following
     at the end of oral evidence and before the commencement of submissions:

                 Please ensure you address me on issue of  return,  rd's  to
     Iraq

                 We take "rd's" to mean "removal directions".

      The ROP then records the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions.  Towards
     the end of the Presenting Officer's submissions, the ROP records:

            From KAA. That is where would be seeking to  return  him.  As  a
           resindet [sic] there no probs [sic] of  him  being  accepted.  I
           understand not being returned at preent [sic]. Returns no  [sic]
           currently taking place cos mechanism not in place. Would be safe
           to reurn [sic] to KAA as soon as that ecomes [sic] possible.

4.3   At paragraphs 20 and 33 of the Determination, the Adjudicator stated:

      20.   I specifically asked  both  representatives  to  address  me  in
           their submissions as to what in their view would happen  if  the
           appellant were to returned to Iraq. The respondent  stated  that
           the [Claimant] was from the KAA and that is where they would  be
           seeking to return him. She said that she understood  that  there
           were no returns at present as there was no  mechanism  in  place
           and that he would be returned to  KAA  as  soon  as  it  becomes
           possible.

      33.   The IS82E states that removal would be to Iraq, not Iraq  (KAA).
           There was no undertaking  in  the  papers  before  me  from  the
           respondent that the [Claimant] would  not  be  removed  to  Iraq
           unless and until he could be removed safely to the KAA.  I  have
           noted the respondent's statement that, contrary  to  the  IS82E,
           the respondent would be seeking to return the [Claimant] to  the
           KAA and that she understood that there were no  removals  taking
           place at the moment. Unlike  Gardi* [01/TH/2997]  there  was  no
           express undertaking offered or given by the  respondent  not  to
           return  this  [Claimant];  merely  "an  understanding"  by   the
           respondent's representative that removals were not taking  place
           "at the moment". This was despite my specific request  that  the
           issue of return be dealt with in submissions. The IS82E in  this
           case pre-dates Gardi*. It has not however, despite  the  comment
           of the Tribunal at paragraph 19 ("We find it quite extraordinary
           that an explicit undertaking has still not been  given  and  the
           directions for removal still refer to a scheduled flight")  been
           amended nor has an  undertaking  been  given.  Paragraph  23  of
           Gardi* states that it is apparent that  an  undertaking  not  to
           return has been given  by  the  Secretary  of  State  if  he  is
           unrepresented. The Secretary of State was  represented  in  this
           case. In the absence of an express undertaking I find  that  the
           [Claimant] will be returned in accordance with the IS82E  namely
           to Iraq and not Iraq (KAA). He will be at risk of persecution on
           such return."

            (Our emphasis)

4.4   According to the transcript of the Tribunal's Determination in  Gardi*
     which has been submitted the us, the relevant parts of  the  Tribunal's
     Determination are paragraphs 18 and 22(3) - and not paragraphs  19  and
     23 as stated by the Adjudicator (there was, fact, no paragraph numbered
     23 in that Determination). We now set out paragraphs 18  and  22(3)  of
     the Tribunal's Determination:

      18.   [Referring to the report approved by the then Minister,  Barbara
           Roche, on 26 March 2001] That hardly amounts to  an  undertaking
           that in every case a removal direction  will  not  be  put  into
           effect  until  some  means  can  be  found  to  avoid   Baghdad,
           particularly as the Secretary of State has chosen to refer to  a
           scheduled flight. If a HOPO has attended the hearing before  the
           Adjudicator, an express undertaking is often given. Judging from
           Paragraph 4.4 of the adjudicator's determination in  this  case,
           the HOPO did not give such an explicit undertaking. We  find  it
           quite extraordinary that an explicit undertaking has  still  not
           been given and the directions for removal continue to refer to a
           scheduled flight. It is even more  extraordinary  that  where  a
           HOPO has not been  provided  the  undertaking  is  not  sent  in
           writing. We strongly suggest that problems will be avoided if an
           explicit undertaking is given and  the  removal  directions  are
           changed so it is clear that return is being directed to the  KAA
           part  of  Iraq.  An  adjudicator  should  accept  any   explicit
           undertaking given in an individual case.

      22(3) Since it is by now apparent that an undertaking  not  to  return
           to Baghdad is given, if the Secretary of State is unrepresented,
           the Adjudicator should not assume that a return  will  be  to  a
           part of Iraq other than the KAA without giving the Secretary  of
           State the opportunity of clarifying the position.

      (our emphasis)

4.5   At the hearing before us, Ms. Webb essentially relied on  the  grounds
     of  application.  She  submitted  that  the  Presenting   Officer   had
     adequately answered the Adjudicator's request to be  addressed  on  the
     removal directions. In any event, Ms. Webb gave the Tribunal an express
     undertaking that the Claimant would only be returned, if and when it is
     possible to do so, to the KAA.

4.6   Miss Kilroy submitted a detailed Skeleton Argument.  Essentially,  she
     contended  that  the  Tribunal  in  Gardi*  stated  that  an   explicit
     undertaking is required in each case that the Secretary of State  would
     only return an applicant, if and when he is able to do so, to the  KAA.
     This is apparent from paragraph 18  of  the  Determination  in  Gardi*.
     Paragraph 22(3) of the Determination in Gardi* does not apply  in  this
     case, because  the  Secretary  of  State  was  represented  before  the
     Adjudicator. When the Adjudicator  had  asked  the  representatives  to
     address her on the issue of risk on return in relation to  the  removal
     directions, it was perfectly clear, in Miss Kilroy's  submission,  what
     she had meant by that. It was clear that the Adjudicator was asking for
     an explicit undertaking. Miss Kilroy was able to say so because she was
     present at  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator.  Nevertheless,  the
     Presenting Officer had failed to  give  the  Adjudicator  the  explicit
     undertaking.  In  these  circumstances,   the   only   conclusion   the
     Adjudicator could draw was that return would  take  place  to  southern
     Iraq. In  paragraph  14  of  the  Skeleton  Argument  produced  to  the
     Tribunal, it is requested that the Tribunal dismisses the Secretary  of
     State's appeal and upholds the Adjudicator's Determination, without re-
     examining  the  Claimant's  claim  in  the  light   of   the   changing
     circumstances in Iraq. Paragraph 14 of  the  Skeleton  Argument  states
     that, in this regard, reliance is placed  on  the  fact  that,  if  the
     Claimant had brought an action for judicial review  of  the  Tribunal's
     decision to  grant  leave  and  had  succeeded,  the  decision  of  the
     Adjudicator would have been "left as it was".  At paragraph 19  of  the
     Skeleton Argument, it is asserted that it is for the Secretary of State
     to show that the cessation provisions (under  Article  1(C))  apply  in
     this case - that is, that the conditions which led the  Adjudicator  to
     find that the Claimant  was  entitled  to  refugee  status  not  longer
     subsist.

4.7   It is clear, from the Adjudicator's Determination, that she  proceeded
     to assess the risk on return on the basis that, in the  absence  of  an
     explicit undertaking, the Secretary of  State  intends  to  return  the
     Claimant to  southern  Iraq.  But  that  is  simply  not  correct.  The
     Secretary of State has no such intention, and did  not  have  any  such
     intention as at the date of hearing before her.

4.8   That  this  is  so  must  be  abundantly  clear,  not  only  from  the
     Tribunal's Determination in Gardi* itself but  also  from  the  several
     Tribunal Determinations  involving  Iraqi  nationals  which  have  been
     promulgated since. The Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  before  the
     Adjudicator did not say anything,  in  response  to  the  Adjudicator's
     request to address her  on  the  risk  on  return,  which  suggested  a
     contrary intention.

4.9   It would appear that the Presenting Officer at the hearing before  the
     Adjudicator did not appreciate that the Adjudicator was asking  for  an
     explicit undertaking. Miss Kilroy informed us that she had been present
     at the hearing and was able to say that it was  abundantly  clear  what
     the Adjudicator had meant when she asked to be addressed on the risk on
     return. To this, we have to say two things. Firstly, Miss Kilroy is not
     in the position to give evidence. Had she wished to do so,  she  should
     have submitted a written statement, advised the Claimant that  she  was
     not  able  to  represent  him  and  then  made  herself  available  for
     questioning at the hearing. Secondly, it is not at all clear, from  the
     ROP itself, that the Adjudicator had  made  clear  that  what  she  was
     seeking was an "express undertaking", with the use of these very words.
     The ROP records that she simply said: "Please  ensure you address me on
     issue of return, rd's to Iraq".

4.10  In Miss Kilroy's submission, there was no need for the Adjudicator  to
     ask expressly for  an  undertaking  and  the  fact  that  she  did  not
     expressly ask for an undertaking  does  not  vitiate  her  decision  to
     determine the appeal on the basis  that  return  would  take  place  to
     southern Iraq. We would say  that  the  Presenting  Officer's  response
     (that the Secretary of State would be seeking to return the Claimant to
     the  KAA)  was  adequate,  bearing  in  mind  the  vagueness   of   the
     Adjudicator's request to be addressed on the removal directions. It was
     not clear, from her request to be addressed on "the  issue  of  return,
     rd's to Iraq", that she was asking whether the Secretary of State would
     be prepared to give an express undertaking, as such. We all know,  from
     the nature of the work we do, that, unless a question is  properly  and
     clearly phrased, the answer may not be to the point the questioner  was
     seeking to have addressed.

4.11  As is abundantly clear from the Tribunal's Determination in  Gardi  as
     well as all cases involving Iraqi  nationals  since,  which  have  been
     considered by the Tribunal, the intention of the Secretary of State  is
     to effect returns, when and if it is possible to  do  so,  to  the  KAA
     only. There is no reason so suppose that, whilst the Secretary of State
     had given explicit undertakings in other Iraqi cases, he would not have
     done so in this particular case, if the Adjudicator had made  it  clear
     that she was seeking an "explicit undertaking".

4.12  The Adjudicator made a finding in  paragraph  33  that  "the  Claimant
     will be returned in accordance with the IS82E namely to  Iraq  and  not
     Iraq (KAA)". It is clear, from her Determination (see paragraphs 32 and
     33 of the Determination)  that  she  was  making  a  finding  that  the
     Claimant would be removed to southern  Iraq.  This  finding  is  simply
     unsustainable, on the evidence which was before  the  Adjudicator.  The
     relevant evidence, for this purpose, is not only the evidence which was
     before the Adjudicator in terms of this particular appeal but also what
     is known generally about the Secretary of State's intentions, from  the
     Tribunal's Determination in Gardi and succeeding cases involving  Iraqi
     nationals. There can be  no  doubt  as  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
     intention in this connection. Indeed,  Miss  Kilroy  did  not  seek  to
     persuade us that there was any doubt as to  the  Secretary  of  State's
     intentions.  Her  submissions  on  this  point  were  directed  towards
     persuading us that, given that an "explicit undertaking" had  not  been
     given to the Adjudicator as (she asserted) had been  requested  by  the
     Adjudicator, the Adjudicator was entitled to proceed to determine  this
     appeal on the basis that return would take place to southern Iraq.

4.13   It  can  also  be  said  that  the   Adjudicator   proceeded   on   a
     misapprehension of a material fact - namely, as to the intention of the
     Secretary of State.

4.14  Gardi* is not authority for the proposition that, where the  Secretary
     of State is represented but, for some reason,  the  Presenting  Officer
     does not give "an explicit undertaking" and merely states the place  to
     which the Home  Office  would  be  seeking  to  return  a  person,  the
     Adjudicator is entitled to find that return would be made  to  southern
     Iraq. The words in paragraphs 18 and 22(3) of the Determination in that
     case which we have emboldened in paragraph 4.4  above  do  NOT  support
     that proposition.

4.15   Accordingly,  we  are  satisfied  that  we   must   set   aside   the
     Adjudicator's determination of the appeal as set out in  paragraphs  32
     to 39 of the Determination - either because the  Adjudicator's  finding
     that return would take place to southern Iraq is unsustainable  on  the
     evidence or, alternatively, because  she  proceeded  to  determine  the
     appeal on a misapprehension of a material fact.

4.16  Finally, we would note that, with  regard  to  paragraph  14  Skeleton
     Argument, an application for judicial review of the Tribunal's decision
     to grant leave was apparently not made. It would not be appropriate for
     us to surmise what would have been the outcome of any such application.
     The fact is that an application was not made, for reasons which we have
     not been told. The contentions in paragraph 19 of the Skeleton Argument
     are misconceived. The Claimant has not been granted refugee status. His
     appeal was allowed by the Adjudicator, either on the basis of a finding
     which was unsustainable or on the basis of a misapprehension as to  the
     intentions of the Secretary of State. Article 1(C) has  no  application
     in this case.

      Application to admit new evidence and to cross-appeal:

5.1   An application had previously been  made  in  writing  (by  way  of  a
     letter dated 23rd June 2003 from the Claimant's solicitors) to call the
     Claimant to give oral evidence  at  the  hearing.  Unfortunately,  this
     request was  placed  before  a  Vice  President  for  a  decision.  The
     application  was  made  on  the  basis  that,  due   to   the   changed
     circumstances in Iraq following the recent war in Iraq, revenge attacks
     are being carried out in Iraq on persons who were associated  with  the
     Ba'ath party and their families.  The Claimant  had  also  submitted  a
     recent statement dated 9th June 2003 in which he  referred  to  attacks
     being carried out on his house in Baghdad and his mother and sisters in
     Baghdad. He says in his statement that  he  does  not  know  where  his
     father is and that his brothers have fled to Iran.

5.2   We heard submissions as to the relevance of  the  new  evidence.  Miss
     Kilroy submitted that the new evidence was relevant in that:

      (a)   the new evidence relates to a new "head of claim" being made  by
           the Claimant which is based on the change  of  circumstances  in
           Iraq following the war. Miss Kilroy requested that the appeal be
           remitted for re-determination on this basis (see also  paragraph
           18 Skeleton Argument), with a direction that the  appeal  should
           not be heard until the situation in Iraq becomes clearer.

      (b)   the new evidence throws  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  at
           paragraphs 26 to  31  into  doubt.  Although  the  phenomena  of
           revenge attacks being carried out on those associated  with  the
           Ba'ath party and their families has only arisen  since  the  war
           started in March 2003 (that is, after  the  hearing  before  the
           Adjudicator took place in January 2003), the new evidence as  to
           revenge attacks (if accepted) shows that it is entirely possible
           for persons who have been associated with the  Ba'ath  party  to
           experience problems many years later. One of  the  problems  the
           Adjudicator had had with the Claimant's accounts is that she did
           not find it credible that the family of Qadir or the  KDP  would
           have waited six years to shoot the Claimant.

            Miss Kilroy therefore applied  at  the  hearing  before  us  for
           leave to cross appeal the  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact  at
           paragraphs 26 to 31 of the Determination. If we were with her on
           this issue, Miss Kilroy requested that the  appeal  be  remitted
           for a re-determination, with a direction that it should  not  be
           heard until the situation in Iraq becomes clearer.

      (c)   the new evidence is relevant to assessing the risk on return  to
           the KAA.

      In Miss Kilroy's  submission,  (a)  and  (c)  were  not  dependent  on
     whether leave to cross-appeal was granted.

5.3   Dealing first with the issue of the application for  leave  to  cross-
     appeal, we noted that no notice of the intention to make an application
     to cross appeal had been given.  Whilst we noted that the appeal before
     the Adjudicator was heard in January 2003 (that is, before the start of
     the war in March 2003), the fact remains that the application for leave
     to appeal was being made very late, given that the Ba'ath party  regime
     was toppled in May 2003. Furthermore,  the  Claimant's  statement  only
     refers to attacks in Baghdad. The Claimant would, however, be  returned
     to the KAA. Our attention was drawn to incidents of revenge attacks but
     these related, in the main,  to  Baghdad.  There  were  no  reports  of
     revenge attacks on the KAA.  Furthermore,  there  was  nothing  in  the
     objective evidence to which our attention was drawn which persuaded  us
     that, even if the Claimant's claims concerning the attacks  in  Baghdad
     were true, there was  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  attacks  in
     Baghdad had anything to do with  father's  activities  for  the  Ba'ath
     party, as opposed to the general mayhem,  violence  and  looting  which
     accompanied and followed  the  allied  action  in  Iraq.  We  were  not
     persuaded that the late application for leave to cross  appeal  had  an
     arguable prospect of success. For all of these reasons, leave to cross-
     appeal was refused.

5.4   In so far as reliance was placed on the new evidence as  a  "new  head
     of claim", we refused to admit the new written evidence and permit  the
     Claimant to be called to give oral evidence. Given  that  the  Claimant
     was raising a new head of claim which is said to  arise  following  the
     recent war in Iraq, the appropriate step is for a fresh application  to
     be made to the Secretary of State on asylum and human rights grounds.

      Risk on return

5.5   In so far as  the  new  evidence  was  said  to  be  relevant  to  the
     assessment of the risk  on  return  to  the  KAA,  we  noted  that  the
     Claimant's statement refers to attacks in Baghdad. We  are  invited  to
     draw two inferences: firstly, that these attacks are reasonably  likely
     to be connected to his father's activities for the Ba'ath  party;  and,
     secondly, that it is reasonably likely that the Claimant would  be  the
     subject of revenge attacks in the KAA.

5.6   However, as we have said above, given  the  general  mayhem,  violence
     and looting which accompanied and followed the allied action  in  Iraq,
     we considered that it is speculative to suppose that these attacks were
     connected to the Claimant's father's activities for the  Ba'ath  party.
     In any event, as we have said above, the objective  evidence  to  which
     our attention was drawn related to incidents of revenge  attacks  which
     took place mainly in Baghdad.  We specifically  asked  Miss  Kilroy  to
     refer us to evidence which shows that revenge attacks were taking place
     in the KAA. She was unable to do so, but submitted that this may be due
     to the  fact  that  journalists  are  concentrating  on  the  situation
     elsewhere in Iraq and that  the  absence  of  any  reports  of  revenge
     attacks in the KAA does not mean that they are not taking place in  the
     KAA or are not reasonably likely to take place  in  the  KAA.  However,
     given the complete absence of any reports of such incidents in the  KAA
     and given, further, that the general situation in the KAA  is  and  has
     been different to the situation in the rest of Iraq, we  consider  that
     it is speculative to suppose that revenge attacks are taking  place  or
     are reasonably likely to take place in the KAA.

5.7   Miss Kilroy also relied on the general situation of chaos in  Iraq  as
     a whole to support her contention that it would not be safe  to  return
     the Claimant to the KAA. In this connection, she relied on  the  letter
     from the UNHCR dated 1st July 2003 and the fact that  the  Home  Office
     has  suspended  consideration  of  asylum   applications   from   Iraqi
     nationals.  These show, in her submission, that it is unsafe to  return
     Iraqi nationals to Iraq. We noted that the  UNHCR's  letter,  which  is
     clearly based on the general situation of chaos in Iraq due to the war,
     makes reference, inter alia,  to the high incidence of  violent  crimes
     and the dependency of large parts of the population on food  and  other
     assistance for their survival and the absence of functioning and  legal
     structures in much of Iraq. There are  two  points  we  would  make  in
     relation to the UNHCR's letter and the suspension by the Home Office of
     any consideration of asylum applications by Iraqi  nationals.  Firstly,
     the UNHCR's letter and the suspension by the Home Office  are  relevant
     pieces of evidence in order to assess the risk on return. However, they
     do not, of themselves, enable the Claimant to succeed in his asylum and
     human rights claims. Secondly, the UNHCR's letter acknowledges that the
     situation in Iraq may vary from one part to another. The  Claimant,  as
     we have said, would be returned to the KAA, where the situation is very
     different to the rest of the country.

5.8   The Adjudicator was prepared to accept that the Claimant was  shot  in
     1995 (paragraph 26 of the Determination) but she found  that  this  was
     not as a result of  any  activity  by  his  father  (last  sentence  of
     paragraph 27 of the Determination). She did not believe the  Claimant's
     claim that he had suffered threats. She found  that  he  had  not  been
     threatened  and  he  did  not  have  problems  between  1995  and  2001
     (paragraph 28 of the Determination).  She  did  not  believe  that  the
     attempted shooting in 2001 took place and stated that, if it  did  take
     place, it was a random shooting not directed at the  Claimant  and  for
     which he was not the target (paragraph 30 of  the  Determination).  She
     found that the Claimant was not persecuted before he came to the United
     Kingdom (paragraph 31 of the Determination). Although she did not  make
     a specific finding as to the Claimant's claim that his father was a spy
     for the Ba'ath party,  it  would  appear  that  she  proceeded  on  the
     assumption that this was true.  Although we recognise that the  war  in
     Iraq has resulted in changes taking place  in  the  KAA  (particularly,
     with regard to the systems in place for the  governing  of  Suleimaniya
     and Arbil), we are satisfied  (bearing  in  mind  the  absence  of  any
     reports of revenge attacks in the KAA and the Adjudicator's findings of
     fact) that there is no reasonable likelihood that the  Claimant  would,
     if returned to the KAA,  experience  problems  which  are  sufficiently
     severe as to amount to persecution or treatment in breach of Article  3
     of the ECHR. Of course, no guarantees can be given but we make it clear
     that we have assessed the likelihood of any risk on the low standard of
     a reasonable likelihood.

5.9   We did not consider it necessary  to  remit  this  appeal  to  another
     Adjudicator for consideration of the risk on return to the  KAA.  Given
     that the Adjudicator's findings of fact as to  the  Claimant's  claimed
     experiences in the KAA were clear, we considered that we were  able  to
     determine the risk on return ourselves, based on  the  evidence  before
     us.

5.10  Finally, with regard to the assertion in paragraph 16 of the  Skeleton
     Argument that the country information on the IND website has  not  been
     updated, Ms. Webb informed us at the  hearing  that  there  was  a  new
     Bulletin on Iraq numbered 3A/2003.  However,  unfortunately,  Ms.  Webb
     only produced this document  at  the  very  end  of  the  hearing.   We
     considered that it would be unfair for us to accept  this  document  at
     such a late stage and we therefore excluded this document.

6.    For the reasons we have give above, we must allow the  appeal  of  the
     Secretary of State.

      Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is ALLOWED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 18th August 2003
