
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |                  |                |
|                  |                      |                  |                |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:  |AA (Ahmandi -   |
|                  |                      |                  |Preaching)      |
|                  |                      |                  |Pakistan [2003] |
|                  |                      |                  |UKIAT 00198     |
|Heard on:         |19th September 2003   |                  |                |
|Date typed:       |19th September 2003                                      |
|Date promulgated: | 09/10/2003                                              |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)                                                    |
|MS. D. K. GILL                                                              |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |




|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Miyan, of Thompson & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Miss K. Evans, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.

1.    The Appellant (a national of  Pakistan,  who  belongs  to  the  Ahmadi
     religion) has appealed, with leave, against the determination of Mr.  M
     L Dineen, an Adjudicator, who (following a hearing on 26th  March  2002
     at Hatton Cross) dismissed  her  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds against the Respondent's  decision  of  8th  November  2002  to
     refuse to vary leave. The Appellant's appeal  to  the  Adjudicator  was
     brought under Section 69(2) and  Section  65  of  the  Immigration  and
     Asylum Appeals Act 1999 (the 1999 Act).

2.    Basis of claim (summary): The Appellant is an Ahmadi  by  birth,  born
     in Lahore. She was an active member of the ladies wing  of  the  Ahmadi
     community in Madina Town, Faisalabad. Since 1999, she was "Muavin Sadar
     Lajna", which was a post of assistant to the president  of  the  ladies
     wing. She also undertook preaching. During her time  in  Pakistan,  she
     lived  in  three  places:-  Faisalabad,  Gujranwala  and  Lahore.   The
     following sets out the main points of her accounts:

                 Up until August 2001 - Faisalabad:

      (i)   Up until August 2001, the Appellant lived in Faisalabad.  Whilst
           living in Faisalabad, she experienced the following problems:

                 a)    In 1974, her home  was  burnt  by  mullahs.  Problems
      continued after that.

            b)   Her recent problems started in  1999.  In  that  year,  her
               father-in-law donated a plot of land in Madina Town  for  the
               building of an Ahmadi mosque. The mullahs of  Khatme  Nabuwat
               (KN) interrupted the building of the  mosque  and  threatened
               her family.

            c)   In June 2001, she was beaten by boys belonging to the KN.

            d)   On 28th July 2001, her father-in-law was  murdered  on  the
               instructions of the mullahs of KN.

             e)    After  her  father-in-law's  death,   the   threats   and
               harassment by KN continued. Members of it  pulled  her  scarf
               from  her  head  on  a  number  of  occasions  when  she  was
               shopping.

            August 2001 until February 2002 - Gujranwala:

      (ii)  In August 2001, the Appellant,  with  her  husband  and  mother,
           moved to Gujranwala. They experienced some problems there.

            February 2002 to end April 2002

      (iii) From February 2002 to the  end  of  April  2002,  the  Appellant
           visited the United Kingdom.

            End April 2002 to June 2002 - at "habitual address":

      (iv)  She then returned to Pakistan. At paragraph 19  of  her  witness
           statement  dated  19th  March  2003  (which   was   before   the
           Adjudicator), she says that "after some time they found us at my
           habitual address".

            June 2002 to September 2002 - Lahore:

      (v)   In June 2002, she moved to her sister-in-law's home  in  Lahore.
           Some days later, the mullahs came to the house in a large group,
           used abusive language, fired weapons in the air, broke the  main
           door and windows and tried to kill the Appellant and her family,
           who escaped from the back door and went to a neighbour's home.

            Before this incident, she and her  family  received  threatening
           telephone calls from the mullahs. They reported the  threats  to
           the police who did not listen and did not take any  action.  The
           officer  in  charge  said  that,  if  they   approached   higher
           authorities, the Appellant and her family would be  charged  for
           preaching their faith.

            After this incident, the Appellant  decided  to  leave  Pakistan
           and come to the United Kingdom, where one of her sons  has  been
           granted exceptional leave to remain and  another  son  has  been
           granted asylum.

            After the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom:

      (vi)  In December 2002 (after the Appellant's arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom), the mullahs attacked her sister-in-law's home and  her
           daughter's home. They beat  her  sister  and  daughter  and  her
           sister's wrist was fractured.

      The Appellant's husband and two  daughters  remain  in  Pakistan.  Her
     husband is in hiding.

      At her screening interview (page A3 of the  statutory  appeal  bundle,
     question 1.30), the Appellant said that  she  had  visited  the  United
     Kingdom five times previously.  It is not clear whether she visited the
     United Kingdom five times including the last occasion in September 2002
     or whether she has travelled to the  United  Kingdom  a  total  of  six
     times.

2.    The Adjudicator's findings: The following is a brief  summary  of  the
     Adjudicator's main findings:

     (a)    He  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  active  in  the  Ahmadi
           religion, both as an organiser and as a preacher.


     (b)    He accepted that her father-in-law was murdered in July 2001 but
           he was not satisfied that the murder  was  carried  out  on  the
           instruction of mullahs, or that its motive  was  religious  (for
           the reasons he gave in paragraph 43). If there was any religious
           element to this killing,  he  was  not  satisfied  that  it  had
           anything do with the donation of land  for  the  building  of  a
           mosque, for the reasons he gave in paragraph 45.


     (c)    He accepted that, on a number of occasions,  the  Appellant  was
           threatened and harassed by people associated  with  the  KN  and
           that these incidents included one where she was struck  by  boys
           while on her way to the mosque, and occasions when her scarf was
           pulled from her head.


     (d)    He did not accept that the Appellant suffered persecution  after
           moving to Gujranwala, for the reasons he gave in paragraph 47.


     (e)    He found that the Appellant would not have returned to  Pakistan
           in 2002 if she had had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
           Pakistan.


     (f)    He did not accept that there  was  a  raid  on  the  Appellant's
           sister-in-law's home in Lahore in June 2003, for the reasons  he
           gave in paragraph 49.


     (g)    He did not accept that there was an attack  on  the  Appellant's
           sister-in-law's and daughter's home in  December  2002  for  the
           reasons he gave in paragraph 51.


     (h)    He stated that if, contrary to his findings, the  Appellant  was
           at risk of persecution in Faisalabad, Gujranwala or  Lahore,  he
           found that she had available  an  internal  flight  option.  She
           could relocate to Rabwa  (now  called  Chenab  Nagar),  for  the
           reasons he gave in paragraph 52. He  also found that  there  was
           adequate state protection.

3.    The grounds of application challenge the Adjudicator's  assessment  of
     credibility  in  several  respects.  The  grounds  also  challenge  the
     Adjudicator's findings  as  to  the  internal  flight  option  and  the
     adequacy of state protection.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in
     general terms, which  meant  that  all  the  grounds  were  before  the
     Tribunal.

4.    At the hearing before us, we heard submissions  in  opening  from  Mr.
     Miyan, at which time he mentioned that he had  with  him  a  bundle  of
     decisions which he said  included  reported  decisions  which  he  said
     showed that  preachers  were  at  risk  of   persecution  in  Pakistan.
     However, these documents had not been adduced  before  the  hearing  in
     compliance with the directions which had been issued. In any event,  on
     examination, they all transpired to be unreported decisions which post-
     dated 19th May 2003, from which date Practice Direction No 10 came into
     effect. The procedure set out in paragraph 4 of that Practice Direction
     (which applies to unreported decisions promulgated after 19th May 2003)
     had not been followed. We therefore excluded these decisions. Mr. Miyan
     also sought to produce, at this late stage, a document which  was  part
     of the subjective  evidence  in  this  case  and  which  had  not  been
     previously produced. Given the  lateness  of  the  production  of  this
     document, we decided to exclude this document as well.

5.1   We now set out the main thrust of Mr. Miyan's submissions. Members  of
     the Ahmadi faith are under a duty to proselytise. The  Adjudicator  had
     found  that  the  Appellant  was  a  preacher.  This  means  that   she
     proselytises. A member of the Ahmadi faith would not  preach  to  other
     members of the Ahmadi faith. They would preach  to  those  who  do  not
     belong to the Ahmadi faith in order to try and convert them. Mr.  Miyan
     referred us to material in the background documents which he  submitted
     shows that Ahmadis are persecuted; they do not receive protection;  the
     police fail to do anything; and they are at risk of being charged under
     the blasphemy laws.  Paragraph 4.68 of the CIPU report dated April 2003
     refers to a party called Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal Pakistan (MMA),  which
     holds 60 seats in the National Assembly. This  means  that  it  is  the
     third largest party in Pakistan. Paragraph  4.69  of  the  CIPU  report
     states that the MMA is a coalition of religious parties. In Mr. Miyan's
     submission, given that the KN is a religious party, this means that the
     mullahs of the MMA are connected to the mullahs of the KN. Whilst other
     organisations have been banned in Pakistan, the  Pakistani  authorities
     have not banned the KN.  It  is  significant  that,  according  to  the
     Amnesty International Report at page 69 of the Appellant's bundle,  the
     KN has formed  a  new  Mujahideen  Force.  Its  aim  is  to  block  the
     activities of the Ahmadis. Two hundred youths have signed the enrolment
     forms with their blood.

5.2    In  Mr.  Miyan's  submission,  the  objective  evidence  shows   that
     preachers of the Ahmadi faith are persecuted in Pakistan. The Appellant
     would not be able to relocate to Rabwa. He  referred  us  to  paragraph
     6.50 of the CIPU report which states  that  the  entire  population  of
     Rabwa was charged under Section  298-C  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code.
     Although this happened in 1989, the First Information  Report  (F.I.R.)
     lodged at that time was an open one and could be used at any time.  The
     Appellant would be at  risk  of  being  charged  under  Section  298-C.
     Furthermore, paragraph 6.113 states that women have a limited  internal
     flight alternative.

5.3   At one stage, Mr. Miyan  informed  us  that  the  Appellant  had  only
     travelled to the United Kingdom twice over the 25 year  period  between
     1974 and 1999. However, Miss Evans pointed out the  Appellant's  answer
     to question 1.30 on page A3 of the statutory appeal bundle  which  made
     reference to 5 visits. Mr. Miyan then informed  us  that  these  visits
     took place more recently (but  before  the  visit  in  February  2002),
     rather than years ago. Although she returned to Pakistan, it was on the
     occasion of her last return to Pakistan that she felt that her life was
     in danger. If it were not for the fact that her life was in danger, she
     could have continued visiting the United Kingdom. It was to her  credit
     that she had not claimed asylum sooner.

5.4   Mr. Miyan submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  from  a  high  profile
     family. Her father-in-law had been murdered.  Her  children  have  been
     subjected to persecution. Her sons have been  recognised  as  refugees.
     Her husband is in hiding. The reason why he has not claimed  asylum  is
     because he is in Pakistan.

6.1   In  reply,  Miss  Evans  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  given
     adequate reasons for his findings of fact.  She  took  us  through  the
     various reasons the Adjudicator  had  given.  A  multi-entry  visa  was
     issued to the Appellant in April 2001, which  was  valid   until  April
     2003. She therefore did not need to delay her departure from  Pakistan.
     Her claim was  undermined  by  the  fact  that  her  mother-in-law  had
     returned to Pakistan. Even if her mother-in-law was ill, she would  not
     have returned to Pakistan if she was at risk  of  being  targeted.  The
     Appellant's claim had been disbelieved, for  very  good  reasons.  Miss
     Evans asked us to uphold the Adjudicator's findings.

6.2   In Miss Evans'  submission,  given  the  Adjudicator's  findings,  the
     internal flight option was not relevant. In any event, the  Adjudicator
     had indicated  that  the  only  place  the  Appellant  had  experienced
     problems was  in  Faisalabad.   He  was  not  satisfied  that  she  was
     persecuted in Gujranwala and he did not accept  that  the  incident  in
     Lahore had taken place.

6.3   The Appellant has never been charged with any offence (question 10  on
     page B6 of the statutory appeal bundle).The MMA is an Islamic  alliance
     of six parties. Paragraph 4.74 of the CIPU report mentions two of these
     parties and states that the MMA is in power in the North West  Frontier
     of the Pakistan. That area is nowhere near the Appellant's area.  There
     is no evidence that the mullahs of the MMA are connected to the mullahs
     of the KN.

7.    In reply, Mr. Miyan asked us to find that the Appellant was  credible.
     Given that her father-in-law was 85 years old when he died, this  means
     that her mother-in-law must be in her 80s. It  is  understandable  that
     she should prefer to die in her country. In any event, a  lady  of  her
     age would not proselytise. Although the CIPU Report states that the MMA
     are prominent in the North West  Frontier  of  Pakistan,  the  laws  of
     Pakistan apply throughout the country. Given that the MMA is the  third
     largest party, this means that they are prominent throughout  Pakistan.



8.    We reserved our determination.

9.    We have decided to dismiss the appeal. We now  give  our  reasons.  We
     approach our determination in the following way:

       (1)    The  first  issue.  We  consider  whether  the   Adjudicator's
           credibility assessment is safe. Obviously,  if  the  credibility
           assessment is unsafe, then we would need to consider remittal.

      (2)   The second issue.  If the Adjudicator's  credibility  assessment
           is safe and his findings as to the Appellant's accounts  of  her
           experiences are sustainable, then we need to go on  to  consider
           whether his finding that she does not have a  well-founded  fear
           of persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 in  her  home
           area is sustainable. It is only if it is reasonably likely  that
           she would experience serious harm (a term which we use  to  mean
           persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment) in her home  area  that
           the internal flight option becomes relevant.

            The second issue involves  consideration  of  whether  there  is
           reasonable likelihood that  the  Appellant  would  face  serious
           harm, on account of her practice of her religion (which includes
           preaching activities, as found by the Adjudicator). The issue of
           protection is also relevant.

      The first issue:

10.1  The challenge to the Adjudicator's credibility assessment is  set  out
     at paragraphs 2 a) to l) inclusive of the grounds of application.

10.2  We have carefully considered the reasons the Adjudicator gave for  his
     findings of fact. He gave clear and cogent reasons. He did  not  accept
     that the murder of the Appellant's father-in-law was carried out by  or
     on the instructions of mullahs or that its motive was religious because
     the murder occurred three years after the  donation  of  the  land.  He
     found  that  there  was  no  satisfactory  evidential  basis  for   the
     Appellant's assertion that the murder was motivated by  her  father-in-
     law's religion. The newspaper extract upon which the  Appellant  relied
     quoted a grandson of the deceased as stating that the murder arose  out
     of a property dispute (paragraph 43 of the Determination).

10.3  At paragraph 39 of the Determination, the Adjudicator stated  that  he
     was not satisfied  that  any  problem  which  the  Appellant  may  have
     encountered between 1974 and 1999 was relevant to the appeal, since she
     had travelled to and from the United Kingdom as a visitor  during  this
     period of 25 years and did not at any time claim asylum.  At  paragraph
     2g) of  the  grounds  of  application,  it  is  asserted  that  it  was
     unreasonable for the Adjudicator to exclude events prior  to  1999  as,
     while these events did not lead directly to her flight  from  Pakistan,
     they contributed to her subjective fear. We noted that the  Appellant's
     account of her early problems were that, in 1974, her home was burnt by
     the mullahs and that "problems continued after that". Given the lack of
     any details of the "problems" she experienced after the burning of  the
     house, and given that she travelled at least four  times  (and  perhaps
     even up to five times) in more recent times prior to her last  arrival,
     we are satisfied that the Adjudicator's finding that the  early  events
     were not relevant is one which was open to him, on the evidence.

10.4  The evidence concerning the status of  the  Appellant's  sons  is  not
     entirely clear. According to the Appellant's accounts as given  to  the
     Adjudicator (paragraph 29 of the Determination), one of  her  sons  was
     granted exceptional leave to remain and the other was  granted  refugee
     status, whereas, according to Mr. Miyan at the hearing before us,  both
     have been granted refugee status. In any event, the  Appellant's  claim
     has to be considered on its own merits. If reliance is being placed  on
     the assertion that the fact that her sons  have  been  granted  refugee
     status indicates that the whole family was  being  targeted,  then  the
     Appellant has another hurdle to cross  -  namely,  she  would  need  to
     explain why, if her family was being targeted and her  sons  had  fled,
     she did not flee at the same time or sooner than she did, and  why  she
     felt safe enough to return in 2002.

10.5  The Adjudicator took into account the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
     delayed leaving Pakistan after the alleged raid on her  sister's  house
     in June 2002.  On the evidence before him, he was entitled to take this
     delay into account, especially bearing in mind that  the  Appellant  is
     someone who had previously travelled to the United Kingdom some four or
     five times and the fact that, on her accounts, her sons had  also  fled
     to the United Kingdom and at least one of them had claimed asylum.  The
     Adjudicator was entitled to find that, if there had been an attempt  to
     kill the Appellant in June  2002,  she  would  not  have  waited  until
     September 2002 before coming to the  United  Kingdom.  Furthermore,  he
     gave another reason for not believing the Appellant's claims concerning
     the alleged raid in June  2002.  He  noted  that,  after  this  alleged
     incident, she did not allege that there were any further problems until
     she came to  the  United  Kingdom.  There  was  no  obligation  on  the
     Adjudicator to put to the Appellant the matter of the delay in  leaving
     Pakistan. He was entitled to assess the evidence which was before him.

10.6  In the grounds of application, it is  asserted  that  the  Adjudicator
     should not have taken against  the  Appellant  her  delay  in  claiming
     asylum after her arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  reliable
     information about the correct procedure for applying for asylum is  not
     readily available in Pakistan. However, this Appellant is someone  who,
     on her own accounts, has at least one son in the United Kingdom who had
     claimed  asylum.  The  explanation  in  the  grounds  simply  does  not
     satisfactorily address this credibility issue. In any event, the  delay
     in claiming asylum after arrival in the United Kingdom was only one  of
     several reasons the Adjudicator gave for not believing the  Appellant's
     accounts. In our view, the other reasons he  gave  were  sufficient  in
     themselves to justify his findings of fact. There was no obligation  on
     the Adjudicator to put the matter of the delay in  claiming  asylum  to
     the Appellant. He was entitled to assess the evidence before him.

10.7  For the reasons we have given above, we are fully satisfied  that  the
     Adjudicator's findings are fully  sustainable  on  the  evidence  as  a
     whole.  The  central  issue  we  are  concerned  with  is  whether  the
     Adjudicator's assessment of credibility and findings of fact are  safe.
     For the reasons we have given above, we are  satisfied  that  they  are
     safe.

      The second issue:

11.1  Although rejecting various aspects of the  Appellant's  accounts,  the
     Adjudicator did accept that she was active in the Ahmadi religion, both
     as an organiser and as a  preacher.  He  also  accepted  that  she  had
     experienced some problems in Faisalabad (see paragraphs 2 (b)  and  (c)
     above). The question remains, therefore, whether these findings  should
     have led him to allow the appeal.

11.2  We were invited to equate "proselytising" with "preaching". Mr.  Miyan
     submitted that the requirement to proselytise is a tenet of the  Ahmadi
     faith. In Mr. Miyan's submission, given that  the  Appellant  has  been
     found to be  a  preacher,  this  means  that  she  has  been  found  to
     proselytise, which in turn  means  that  she  proselytises  to  persons
     outside the Ahmadi religion and so would be at real risk of persecution
     on return. The thrust of Mr. Miyan's submission is that any Ahmadi  who
     preaches in Pakistan is at real risk of serious harm.

11.3  Our starting point in deciding this issue must be the  first  sentence
     of paragraph 6.46 of the CIPU Assessment for Pakistan dated April 2003.
     This states that there are approximately 4 million Ahmadis in Pakistan.
     The third sentence of the same paragraph states that  the  most  recent
     census estimates  indicate  that  there  are  286,000  Ahmadis  in  the
     country, although it also  makes  the  point  that  religious  minority
     groups believe that they are  under-represented  in  government  census
     counts. The next sentence  states  that  the  Ahmadi  community  itself
     claims a membership of approximately 4 million. We  will  proceed  with
     the figure of 4 million, on the assumption that  the  Ahmadi  community
     are better placed to estimate their own numbers. Our second observation
     is that the objective evidence contained in the CIPU and elsewhere does
     not indicate that all Ahmadis are at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in
     current-day Pakistan.

11.4  If the Ahmadi religion requires all its members  to  proselytise  (and
     we  make  it  clear  that  we  do  not  doubt  that  there  is  such  a
     requirement), yet many live in Pakistan without experiencing  treatment
     which amounts to serious harm, then it must follow that:

      either:    (a)   most do not in practice  follow  the  requirement  to
     proselytise;

      or:   (b)  they do so in a way which does not draw  adverse  attention
                 from those who would subject them to serious harm. In other
                 words, they in fact moderate their proselytising activities
                 in such a way that  they  are  able  to  live  in  Pakistan
                 without  being  subjected  to  serious  harm   by   hostile
                 elements.

11.5  We reject the notion  that  simply  because  an  Ahmadi  preaches  (or
     proselytises - we use the word "preach" loosely  in  the  remainder  of
     this Determination to cover both), he is at real risk of serious  harm.
     Obviously, a person who preaches to strangers in the street and who  is
     vocal and persistent is more likely to attract adverse  attention  from
     would-be persecutors than someone who preaches discreetly amongst close
     acquaintances or trusted neighbours.

11.6  Whether an individual is at real  risk  of  serious  harm  must  be  a
     question of fact in each case. We do not purport to  list  exhaustively
     factors which will be relevant. Much will depend on how the  individual
     in question went about his preaching activities. For example,  who  did
     he preach to - to members of the Ahmadi faith or to outsiders?  Did  he
     engage  in  his  preaching  activities  openly  in  public  places,  or
     discreetly behind closed doors amongst those least likely to expose him
     to those who might cause him serious harm? How vocal or  insistent  was
     he? What visibility did he have  to  those  outside  his  faith  or  to
     hostile elements? How often did he engage in his preaching  activities?
     How persistent was he in his preaching activities?  For  example,  when
     faced with someone who showed complete disinterest, did he desist  from
     preaching to that person or did he become more insistent?

11.7  Adjudicators would be entitled to expect an individual's claims  about
     the way he engaged in his preaching activities in Pakistan to be  borne
     out by his  accounts  of  the  problems  he  encountered  from  hostile
     elements. The objective evidence shows that  elements  hostile  to  the
     Ahmadi religion in Pakistan do intimidate, harass and  persecute  those
     persons of the Ahmadi faith who do not moderate their practice of their
     religion. If, for example, at one extreme, an individual claims to have
     been very vocal and persistent in his preaching activities in Pakistan,
     standing at street corners  and  calling  to  strangers,  it  would  be
     reasonably likely (bearing in mind  the  objective  evidence)  that  he
     would have experienced very severe  difficulties  indeed  from  hostile
     elements.

11.8  Where an Ahmadi  claims  that,  if  returned  to  Pakistan,  he  would
     practise his religion in such a way as to expose himself to a real risk
     of serious harm, and points to his past experiences in Pakistan as  the
     basis for asserting that the practice of his religion would  place  him
     at real risk of serious harm in the future, then a credible account  of
     past experiences which amount to serious  harm  would  show  that  that
     individual's way of  practising  his  religion  (whether  or  not  this
     includes preaching) would expose the  individual  to  a  real  risk  of
     serious harm. Conversely, if it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
     individual experienced serious  harm  in  the  past,  then  it  is  not
     reasonably likely that his practice of his  religion  (whether  or  not
     this includes preaching) would  expose  him  to  serious  harm  in  the
     future.

11.9  It  is  therefore  very  important  for  Adjudicators  to  make  clear
     findings as to whether particular incidents alleged to have occurred in
     the past did occur and whether the  incidents  which  are  accepted  as
     having  occurred  cumulatively  amount  to  persecution.  It  is   also
     important to make a clear finding as to whether an  individual's  claim
     that he preached in Pakistan is accepted.

11.10 The Court of Appeal's judgement  in  Iftikhar  Ahmed  (IATRF1999-0490-
     C(Ahmed) is not authority for the proposition that,  simply  because  a
     person is a preacher, he is at risk of serious harm. In that case,  the
     Adjudicator had made an express finding that  the  applicant  had  been
     subjected on a daily basis to  harassment  and  a  degree  of  physical
     violence, including being spat at and having stones thrown at him.  The
     Adjudicator said that there were probably  borderline  cases  but  that
     case was not one of them. During the course of the applicant's evidence
     to the Adjudicator, the applicant had confirmed that he  was  vocal  in
     propagating his religious beliefs. He said  that  his  daily  situation
     became worse and worse as time went by, between 1984 and 1995. He  said
     that, if he returned to Pakistan and went to live in a  different  part
     of the country, he would still follow  the  command  of  his  spiritual
     leaders and would still be vocal in  his  proclamation  of  the  Ahmadi
     beliefs.  We quote from the  fourth  paragraph  from  the  end  of  the
     leading judgement in that case:

            ......... if, as Macdonald noted to be the  position  in  Mendis
           and Ahmad, applicants have not so far done any acts which  might
           lead to prosecution in their own countries, then they can hardly
           be surprised if,  as  in  these  two  cases,  their  claims  are
           rejected. The present case,  however,  seems  to  me  strikingly
           different. This appellant, it is  common  ground,  has  suffered
           persecution in his own country, often daily, over  a  period  of
           years. His religion requires him to proselytise, although it  is
           true that not all - indeed, perhaps few  -  Ahmadis  carry  that
           obligation to the  lengths  he  does.  His  assertion  that  "if
           returned to Pakistan and went to live in a different part of the
           country he would still  follow  the  command  of  his  spiritual
           leaders and  still  be  vocal  in  his  proclamation  of  Ahmadi
           beliefs"  is  in  these  circumstances  highly  likely   to   be
           true..........."

11.11 We now turn to the facts of this case. As  we  have  said  above,  the
     Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant had experienced  some  problems
     in Faisalabad. He did not make an express finding  as  to  whether  the
     Appellant's past experiences in Faisalabad amounted to serious harm but
     it is clear, from reading paragraphs 41 to 52 as a whole, that he found
     that they did not. In any event, he found that she was  not  persecuted
     in Gujranwala or Lahore. Whether the Appellant's  home  area  (for  the
     purposes of applying the  internal  flight  option)  is  Faisalabad  or
     Gujranwala, she had not experienced persecution in either. Accordingly,
     the internal flight option simply does not apply. If the Appellant were
     to return to  Pakistan  now  and  continue  to  practise  her  religion
     (including carrying out her preaching activities) in the way she had in
     the past, we are satisfied that, on the Adjudicator's  findings,  there
     is no reasonable likelihood that she would receive treatment  amounting
     to serious harm from the KN or any non-state actors. Neither  is  there
     any reasonable likelihood that she would receive treatment amounting to
     serious harm from the Pakistani authorities.  Whatever  her  particular
     way of practising her religion (and,  in  this  regard,  we  take  into
     account the Adjudicator's findings that she is active in her  religion,
     both as an organiser and as a preacher), she did not experience serious
     harm in the past and  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  she  would
     experience serious harm in the future.

11.12 In the light of the Adjudicator's finding that the  Appellant  is  not
     at real risk of serious harm, the issue of protection is not relevant.

12.   Whilst not relevant to the outcome of this  appeal,  we  deal  briefly
     with Mr. Miyan's submission that the MMA is connected to the KN. In our
     view, there is no evidential basis for  this  assertion.  It  is  based
     simply on the fact that the KN is a religious party and the  fact  that
     there is reference to the MMA being a coalition of  religious  parties.
     It is pure speculation, in these circumstances, to suggest that the MMA
     is connected to the KN.

13.   For all of these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.


      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 26th September 2003
