

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |SD (Afghanistan -           |
|                           |        |Sufficiency of Protection in|
|                           |        |Kabul) Afghanistan [2003]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00114                 |
|Date:  10 October 2003     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|29.October 2003                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J A O'Brien Quinn QC (Chairman)                                |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, the Secretary of State for the Home Department  appeals
      against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr A C B  Markham  David)
      who, in a determination promulgated on 22 January 2003,  allowed  the
      appeal of the respondent, a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1  January
      1976, against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  made  on  30
      September 2002, to give directions for his  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom and to refuse his application for asylum under  paragraph  336
      of HC395 (as amended).

2.    The Secretary of State was represented by Mr  A  Sheikh,  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, while Mr A  Stedman,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
      Asghar & Co (Southall) solicitors.

3.    The grounds of appeal in this matter submitted  by  the  Secretary  of
      State read as follows:-

      "1.   The adjudicator has erred  in  his  approach  to  the  objective
           situation.  At paragraph 18 of his determination the adjudicator
           states that "having considered the objective evidence  I  am  of
           the opinion there is not a sufficiency  of  protection."  It  is
           submitted that in Kabul the town that the  respondent  would  be
           returned to, there is sufficient  protection  against  non-state
           agents.  This is borne out by paragraphs 5.31 and  5.32  of  the
           October 2002 Cipu report.  Paragraph 5.32 quotes a  report  from
           the Danish fact-finding mission which states that "the  security
           situation in Kabul was (in May 2002) generally good".   Reliance
           is placed on the case of No. 14 (2002 UKIAT 05345) in which  (at
           paras 52 and 53) the tribunal considers this and other  evidence
           and makes a positive finding regarding the security situation in
           Kabul.  It is submitted  that  if  the  respondent  were  to  be
           returned to Kabul the authorities would be both willing and able
           to offer him protection.


      2.    The adjudicator has failed to consider  whether  the  option  of
           internal relocation is open to the respondent.  It is  submitted
           that, given that the respondent fears non-state  agents  in  his
           home area, the option of internal relocation is open to him.  It
           is further submitted that it would not be unduly harsh  for  the
           appellant to relocate within Afghanistan. Reliance is placed  on
           the tribunal's findings regarding the  possibility  of  internal
           relocation at paragraphs 55 to 57 of No. 14."


4.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted by the Tribunal  (Mr  D  K
      Allen, Vice President) on 7 March 2003.

5.    When the appeal opened before the Tribunal in 10 October 2003, we  had
      before us the determinations of the Tribunal in  Sedeqi  [2002]  UKIAT
      06598, and in No. 32 [2002] UKIAT 08360, the Afghanistan  CIPU  Report
      for April 2003, the Tribunal determination  in  No.  14  [2002]  UKIAT
      05345, and a bundle of documents submitted on the respondent's behalf,
      which contained a number of documents relating  to  the  situation  in
      Afghanistan.

6.    We then heard submissions by both Mr Sheikh and Mr  Stedman  and  were
      directed to certain parts of the determination which were  before  us,
      with particular reference to the situation at present in  Afghanistan,
      the situation in Kabul, and the status and power of the Hezb-e-Wahdat.



7.    We considered the submissions  of  both  representatives,  and  having
      considered all the evidence before us,  and  the  various  authorities
      referred to, we directed ourselves that the burden of proof  lay  upon
      the Secretary of State as this is his appeal, and that the standard of
      proof is on the balance of probabilities.

8.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the  determination  of
      the Adjudicator claimed that the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in  finding
      that, while he came to the opinion that, while  the  respondent  (then
      the appellant) had a well-founded fear of being  killed  or  seriously
      harmed by members of the Hezb-e-Wahdat, a Commander of which group  of
      the Hazara Tribe, had been captured by  the  Taliban  in  1999,  while
      staying at the respondent's father's hotel,  who  had  threatened  him
      with death as it was believed that he had told the  Taliban  that  the
      Commander had been staying at the hotel, he, the Adjudicator, had come
      to the conclusion that the respondent  was  clearly  not  entitled  to
      refugee status, nevertheless, under Article 3 of ECHR  found  that  he
      was satisfied that the respondent faced a real risk of suffering  ill-
      treatment if returned to Afghanistan, as there was not  a  sufficiency
      of protection anywhere in the country.

9.    The facts of the matter, as summarised by the Secretary  of  State  in
      his letter of refusal, and as set out  in  the  determination  by  the
      Adjudicator, read as follows:

           "You claim that as an Hazara and Shia Muslim you and many others
           faced difficulties under the Taliban's rule and  your  religious
           activities were restricted.  You claim that in 1999  a  Hezbe-e-
           Wahdat Commander stayed at your hotel and he was arrested.   You
           claimed to have received threatening messages which stated  that
           there would be severe consequences if you  were  ever  found  as
           they believed you had told the Taliban the Commander was in your
           hotel.  You claimed to have been  hiding  in  different  places.
           You claimed your brother was arrested by  the  Taliban  in  late
           2000 due to his religion and  ethnicity  and  escaped  after  26
           days.  You claim to have gone into hiding  and  your  house  was
           searched by the Taliban as they wanted you and your brother  but
           arrested your father, who later died in  custody  due  to  being
           tortured.  You claim that when the Taliban lost control and  the
           Northern Alliance gained power in November 2001 your  house  was
           searched by the Commander's men, who had stayed at  your  hotel,
           but you were not at home.   You  claimed  to  have  decided  you
           needed to leave Afghanistan and so paid  9,000  dollars  for  an
           agent  who  brought  you  to  the  United  Kingdom  via  unknown
           countries."


10.   In his determination, having heard the evidence  and  the  submissions
      made by the respondent's Counsel but not having heard any  submissions
      by the Home Office,  as  there  was  no  representative  present,  the
      Adjudicator dismissed the respondent's appeal  on  Refugee  Convention
      grounds, as it was accepted by the respondent's  representative  that,
      even  though  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat  were  part  of  the  Government  of
      Afghanistan, the government would not sanction a hostile attack on the
      respondent because he allegedly informed on Commander Adozar and  that
      any attack on him would be by non-state actors, in respect  of  which,
      the respondent would not have a sufficiency of protection, but that he
      had established that he would face a real risk of being inhumanly  and
      degradingly treated if returned to Afghanistan.

11.   Mr Sheik's submissions were that the Adjudicator had erred in  finding
      that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for   the
      respondent, as it was clear, from the CIPU Report  for  October  2002,
      and the report of the Danish Fact Finding Mission  that  the  security
      situation in  Kabul  (in  May  2002)  was  generally  good,  that  the
      Tribunal, differently constituted, had made a  positive  finding  that
      the security situation in Kabul was sound, and that, as the respondent
      would be returned to  Kabul,  the  authorities  there  would  be  both
      willing and able to offer him a sufficiency  of  protection.   It  was
      also argued that the Adjudicator had failed to consider  the  internal
      flight alternative open to the respondent who, while he may have had a
      real risk from non-state agents, in his  own  area,  the  province  of
      Bamian, it would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate elsewhere  in
      Afghanistan, particularly in Kabul.

12.   In the course of his submissions,  Mr  Sheik  drew  our  attention  to
      paragraphs 52 and 53 and paragraphs 55 to 57 of No.14  and  paragraphs
      of the CIPU Report for April  2003,  where  it  was  stated  that  the
      security situation in  Kabul  had  improved  significantly  since  the
      arrival of the ISAF, that crime rates had decreased across the city by
      as much as seventy  per  cent,  with  some  eighty  per  cent  of  the
      population saying that they were  happy  with  the  presence  of  that
      force.

13.   Mr Sheik also drew  attention  to  other  parts  of  the  respondent's
      bundle,  which  were  to  the  effect  that,  while  the  security  of
      Afghanistan was undermining all aspects of life, this was particularly
      outside of Kabul, that the central  government  had  no  real  control
      outside of Kabul and  that,  while  increased  lawlessness,  factional
      fighting, repression and  continued  human  rights  abuses  prevailed,
      despite numerous calls to expedite the UN mandate  for  peace  keeping
      operations, the International Security  Assistance  Force  (ISAF)  was
      present only in  Kabul.   Mr  Sheik's  contention  was  that,  if  the
      respondent were to relocate to  Kabul,  he  would  be  able  to  avail
      himself of the protection of  the  ISAF,  which  protection  would  be
      sufficient to obviate any danger from members of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat.
      He submitted that the Adjudicator  had  not  properly  considered  the
      situation in Afghanistan generally, and in Kabul, in  particular,  and
      did not consider the internal flight alternative of  the  respondent's
      relocating to Kabul in the light of the findings of  the  Tribunal  in
      No. 14, and the CIPU Report on the  improving  security  situation  in
      Kabul which was found by the Danish Committee for Aid Refugees.

14.   He submitted that the Adjudicator's determination should be set  aside
      and the Secretary of State's appeal allowed.

15.   In reply,  Mr  Stedman  submitted  that  the  essential  point  to  be
      remembered is that  the  Adjudicator  had  found  the  respondent,  at
      paragraph 15 of his determination, to be credible, that  the  Hezbe-e-
      Wahdat had called at his house looking for him and that they wished to
      cause him harm.  He also contended that the  CIPU  Report  before  the
      Adjudicator had dealt with the situation  in  2002,  but  that,  since
      then, in more up-to-date reports, the situation had  disimproved.   He
      drew our attention to various documents and  extracts  in  the  bundle
      provided by him, which included reports from Amnesty International and
      Human Rights Watch, which indicated that many of the abuses documented
      had been committed by soldiers belonging to militias and other  forces
      under the command of  high  level  officials  and  political  leaders,
      throughout Afghanistan, and  that  not  enough  is  being  done  at  a
      national or international level to address the causes of Afghanistan's
      abuses of human rights and sectarian problems.  He  pointed  out  that
      such violations were taking place,  not  just  in  the  hinterland  of
      Afghanistan, but were taking place  in  areas  near  to  the  capital,
      Kabul, and even in Kabul itself.  He  pointed  out  that  several  key
      ministerial  posts  in  the  transitional  government  were  held   by
      representatives of different warlords and  militia,  including,  among
      them,  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat,  and  that  Afghanistan's  first   interim
      government from  December  2001  to  June  2002,  had  been  made  up,
      predominantly, of representatives of military factions, and  that  the
      leader  of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat,  had,  at  one  stage,  been  a  vice
      president.

16.   In addition, he drew our attention to what was stated, with regard  to
      the military police and intelligence forces in Kabul  which  were  now
      under the control of  commanders  and  officials  who  had  previously
      served in the Northern Alliance, which  included,  among  others,  the
      Hezbe-e-Wahdat.  In these circumstances, he argued, there would not be
      a sufficiency of protection for the respondent, if he were to relocate
      to Kabul.

17.   Mr Stedman placed reliance on the Tribunal  determination  in  Sedeqi,
      and, in particular, drew our attention to paragraph 16, where  it  was
      stated that the UNHCR were of the opinion that there  is  no  official
      protection against attacks by armed local groups.  He also referred us
      to paragraph 15, where it was stated that the ISAF  was  not  able  to
      assist in enforcing security but was there to  provide  a  stable  and
      secure environment for the political process in support of the interim
      and transitional administration.  He also pointed  out  that  in  that
      determination, it had been found that that particular appellant  would
      be at risk of persecution in contravention of Article 3.

18.   Mr Stedman  also  drew  our  attention  to  No.  32,  particularly  at
      paragraph 34, where the Tribunal, there, had considered the  situation
      in Kabul, and the report of the Danish Committee for Aid to  Refugees,
      as well as the expert opinion of a Mr  Marsden,  and  found  that  the
      policing in Kabul was essentially done by Jamiat militia, and had come
      to the conclusion that that claimant would face a real risk if he were
      returned to Kabul, on account of his fear of the Jamiat.

19.   He submitted that, in the light of  the  precarious  circumstances  in
      Afghanistan, and in Kabul,  in  particular,  and  the  fact  that  the
      respondent would be at risk of reprisals by members  of  the  Hezbe-e-
      Wahdat, he would not receive a sufficiency of  protection  from  being
      inhumanly and degradingly treated, if he returned to Kabul,  and  that
      the Adjudicator had come to the correct  conclusion  in  allowing  the
      respondent's appeal.

20.   We have given full consideration to all the points raised  and  argued
      before us, as set out above, and, as we see the situation,  while  the
      Adjudicator found  the  respondent  to  have  been  credible  and  had
      accepted that members of the Hezbe-e-Wahdat wished him  harm,  he  was
      not satisfied that the respondent  was  entitled  to  refugee  status.
      However, the Adjudicator then went on  to  find,  without  taking  any
      account of the internal flight alternative, which the respondent  had,
      but did not exercise, by relocating  to  Kabul,  that  the  respondent
      faced a real risk of being inhumanly or degradingly treated.

21.   The main points for consideration before us  are  whether,  while  the
      respondent may be at risk of a revenge attack on  him  by  independent
      members of the Hezbe-e-Wahdat, acting without the knowledge or consent
      of the authorities, outside Kabul,  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution by such members of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat,  if  he  were  to
      relocate, or to be returned to Kabul, and whether or not he  would  be
      provided with a sufficiency of protection, which would  be  sufficient
      to bring him within the terms of Article 3 of the UNHCR.

22.   In the course of submissions before use, we were referred to  numerous
      reports and documents relating to the situation  in  Kabul,  in  which
      different points of view were  expressed  as  to  the  safety  of  the
      respondent if he were returned or sought  relocation  there.  Reliance
      was placed on different Tribunal determinations which  took  different
      views on  the  matter  also.  However,  in  looking  at  the  Tribunal
      determinations brought to our notice, we have come to  the  conclusion
      that, whereas each Tribunal has given the fullest consideration to the
      particular   issue   before   it,   essentially    their    individual
      determinations turned on the particular facts of each individual case.
       For example, No. 32, which had been heard on 4  September  2002,  but
      had not been promulgated until 28 April 2003, turned on the fact  that
      that appellant's claim was based on his fear  of  the  Jamiat-e-Islam,
      and that, as the policing in Kabul was essentially done by the  Jamiat
      militia, and as the Secretary of State had accepted  in  that  appeal,
      that the appellant would  face  a  risk  from  the  Jamiat  in  Mazar-
      i.Sherif, he would face a real risk on return to Kabul, where, as  the
      instant respondent's fear is of individual  members  of  the  Hezbe-e-
      Wahdat, who, while that party was part of the interim  administration,
      it had not, by any means, the same power as the Jamiat.   Further,  in
      the Tribunal determination in Sedeqi,  which  had  been  heard  on  31
      October 2002, and promulgated only on 18 February 2003, the  basis  of
      the appellant's claim, there, was that his mother  was  a  Tajik,  his
      father was a Pashtu, and his brother had been  a  Commander  in  Ahmed
      Sheik Massoud's, militia who had been killed in fighting, and that the
      appellant, himself, had openly  encouraged  people  to  be  pacifists,
      refused to join the Northern Alliance Force, and was, according to the
      Tribunal, likely to find himself at odds with  influential  Commanders
      in the Shira-i-Nizar, whereas the instant respondent was not,  by  any
      means, prominent in any fighting between  military  forces  and  whose
      only reason for coming to the notice  of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat,  was  a
      suspicion that a Commander of the organisation had  been  captured  by
      the Taliban, at his family's hotel in 1999, and that it had been found
      by the Adjudicator that any attack on the respondent would be  without
      the knowledge or consent of the authorities.

23.   Likewise, in the Tribunal determination in No.14,  it,  again,  turned
      on its own particular circumstances.

24.   We, therefore, find that we cannot apply  what  was  held  in  any  of
      those  determinations,  with  any  particular  confidence,  where  the
      circumstances differ from those before those in the instant case.

25.   We are,  accordingly,  driven  to  consider  the  objective  evidence,
      which, while it points to the general situation in Afghanistan being a
      serious and precarious one, where, if the respondent were to return to
      his home province, there could well be reason for him to fear some act
      of reprisal, the  situation  in  Kabul,  the  capital,  to  where  the
      respondent would be returned, the situation is different, and,  as  we
      see it, the Adjudicator, while he found that the respondent would  not
      have a sufficiency of protection in Afghanistan, and, it  would  seem,
      in his own province, he  had  not  addressed  his  mind  to  what  the
      respondent's situation would be, were he to be returned to Kabul.

26.   Mr Sheik's contentions were that, on the objective  evidence,  as  set
      out in the CIPU Reports for October 2002 and April 2003,  there  would
      be a sufficiency of protection for the respondent, while Mr Stedman's
      contentions were that, as the transitional government  of  Afghanistan
      had its head office in Kabul, and  as  the  administration  comprised,
      among other military factions, members of the Hezbe-e-Wahdat,  and  as
      elements  of  that  faction  would  be  seeking  revenge  against  the
      respondent, the respondent  could  not  seek  the  protection  of  the
      authorities in Kabul and would not get a sufficiency of protection, if
      he did seek their protection, in all the circumstances.

27.   As we view the situation of the respondent, in  the  first  place,  we
      are not satisfied, that, while  some  members  of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat
      faction may, possibly, be looking for him now, some four  years  after
      the incident alleged, the nature of his offence is not so serious that
      if he were to relocate in Kabul, where, as a Hazara, the same tribe as
      that of the Hezbe-e-Wahdat, and of which tribe a large number lived in
      Kabul, we do not consider that he would be persecuted (paragraphs 4.70
      to 6.78 of the CIPU Report for April 2003), and we  consider  that  he
      would be  able  to  seek  and  obtain  a  sufficiency  of  protection.
      Further, in this regard, we note that the Adjudicator, in paragraph 18
      of  his  determination,  when  coming  to  his  conclusion,  regarding
      sufficiency of protection, relied upon there being clear evidence that
      the Hezbe-e-Wahdat  had  been  involved  in  violence  against  ethnic
      Pashtuns, but, as the respondent is not a Pashtun, but a  Hazara,  the
      likelihood of violence being done to him by the Hezbe-e-Wahdat is  not
      anywhere as likely as if he were a Pashtun,  as,  while  the  Hezbe-e-
      Wahdat may attack the Pashtun or members of other  military  factions,
      there is nothing to indicate that they would attack individual Hazaras
      such as the respondent, unless for some particularly  serious  reason,
      which would not be the case here.

28.   Further, although from the reports  referred  to  by  Mr  Stedman,  it
      would appear that a number of previously warring military factions had
      come together and had been put in charge of the running of Afghanistan
      with headquarters in Kabul, it would appear that, while the Loya Jirga
      had commenced, in 2002, in Kabul to pick a transitional government  to
      rule until the 2004 elections, and in the meantime  increase  civilian
      influence in government, Afghanistan's military factions and warlords,
      instead, decided to legitimise their power during the Loya  Jirga  and
      that the army and the police officials threatened, imprisoned and even
      killed candidates to stop them from running the Loya Jirga or in order
      to intimidate them from acting independently.

29.   In our considered opinion, while the situation in  Afghanistan,  as  a
      whole, is precarious, the situation is somewhat better in  Kabul,  but
      that the various  military  factions,  while  outwardly  they  are  in
      agreement to run the country and  maintain  some  sort  of  peace  and
      understanding, pending the elections in 2004, there is the  underlying
      clash between the various military factions, with  the  Jamiat-i-Islam
      being the most powerful, with the Hezbe-e-Wahdat being among the other
      groups but with only limited shared power.

30.   The respondent's fear that he would  be  looked  for  and,  if  found,
      would face a real risk of being persecuted by the  representatives  of
      his own party, the Hezbe-e-Wahdat, with impunity, in Kabul, and  would
      not be sufficiently protected by them, has not been fully analysed  by
      the Adjudicator, and the objective evidence, particularly as  to  what
      the respondent would face if he relocated to Kabul has not been  fully
      gone into, sufficiently  for  the  Adjudicator  to  have  reached  the
      conclusion that he did, namely, that the respondent would face a  real
      risk of suffering ill-treatment under Article 3, at the hands  of  the
      Hezbe-e-Wahdat, in the light of the efforts being made by the ISAF  to
      bring about a state of calm and order in Afghanistan, and that that is
      so, particularly in Kabul.

31.   Accordingly, we have come to the conclusion that the  Adjudicator  has
      not  fully  considered  all  aspects  of  the   matter   before   him,
      particularly in the light of the relative lack of seriousness  of  the
      basis of the respondent's claim, which is  now  four  years  old,  the
      relatively low situation  of  the  Hezbe-e-Wahdat  in  Kabul,  and  in
      Afghanistan generally, in relation to all the other military  factions
      in the Transitional Administration, and the success  of  the  ISAF  in
      bringing about some semblance of order in Kabul, we are of the opinion
      that the appeal should be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
      different Adjudicator so that the whole matter can be looked at in the
      light of  the  most  up-to-date  information,  and  a  fully  reasoned
      determination reached both on the subjective and objective evidence.

32.   This appeal of the Secretary of State is,  accordingly,  allowed,  but
      only to the extent of the appeal's being directed  that  it  be  heard
      afresh before an Adjudicator other than Mr A C B Markham David.

33.   This appeal of the Secretary of State is,  accordingly,  allowed,  but
      only to the extent as stated above.




                                                        J A O'Brien Quinn QC
                                                                    Chairman




