
                           ZH (Women as Particular Social Group) Iran CG
[2003] UKIAT 00207
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 18th February 2003
                                                Date determination notified:
                                                                  06.06.2003

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                             Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                               Mr R Baines JP


Between:




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and






For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Patel, Atkins Public Law



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




INTRODUCTION


  1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  appeals  against  the
     decision of an Adjudicator (Mr B.H. Forster, OBE)   promulgated  on  3
     September 2002 whereby he allowed the asylum and human rights  appeals
     of Ms Hesami, a citizen of Iran, the Claimant.

  2. She was born in 1969 and following her marriage in Iran in  1992,  she
     had a daughter, born in Iran on 14 April 1994.   She  arrived  in  the
     United Kingdom with her daughter on 30 September  2001  with  a  valid
     passport, and used what the Adjudicator described as verbal  deception
     to gain entry to the United Kingdom.  She claimed asylum  in  February
     2002.

  3. The Adjudicator allowed her appeals against the Secretary  of  State's
     refusal of her claim on the basis that he accepted her account of  her
     husband's domestic violence towards her,  which  he  characterised  as
     "serious", causing injury some of which was permanent.   The  daughter
     feared the father, wished no contact with  him  and  was  at  risk  of
     psychological damage if returned to Iran.  The protection of  the  law
     for a wife maltreated by a husband who was a drug and alcohol user was
     in practice very difficult to invoke  successfully.   The  Adjudicator
     concluded that the legal  discrimination  against  women,  the  social
     pressures against invoking what protection there was and the  "virtual
     uselessness" to her of the police and Courts, meant that the  Claimant
     was a member of a particular  social  group,  which  we  infer  to  be
     Iranian women.  In the event of divorce proceedings being  successful,
     the father was likely to obtain custody of the daughter.  This appears
     to have been part of the Adjudicator's reasoning as to  discrimination
     in state protection, the existence of a particular  social  group  and
     the Claimant's persecution because  of  her  membership  of  it.   The
     Claimant was thus being persecuted for a Convention reason.

  4. The Adjudicator also concluded that returning  the  Claimant  to  Iran
     would amount to a disproportionate interference with the rights of the
     Claimant and her daughter under Article 8 ECHR.

  5. The Secretary of State contended that it was not clear what particular
     social group the Adjudicator had concluded the Claimant was  a  member
     of.  We infer that it was Iranian women  in  general  because  of  the
     Adjudicator's reference to and discussion of  R v IAT  ex  parte  Shah
     and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629, 1999 Imm  AR  28.   He  is  clearly  enough
     drawing parallels between the position of women in Pakistan in general
     and in Iran in general.  He was not relying upon some  narrower  group
     such as those women who faced adultery charges and  a  lack  of  state
     protection from the  consequences,  the  narrower  group  seen  as  an
     alternative basis for the decision in Shah and Islam.


THE CLAIMANT'S CASE


  6. It is necessary to set out some of the detail of what happened to  the
     Claimant in Iran, before examining the background evidence.

  7. She married, through  family  arrangement,  an  older,  well-educated,
     religious man.  After a  year  or  so,  her  husband  became  verbally
     abusive and began to drink alcohol.   He  became  a  regular  user  of
     alcohol, opium and cannabis, and went from verbal  abuse  to  physical
     violence as he withdrew from drugs.  He had been  a  regular  user  of
     cannabis, but only of harder drugs in the last two or three years, and
     that was when the violence started, once a month  at  first  and  then
     once or twice a week.  He would punch her, slap her face and kick her.
      His nail had scratched her on the chest once, leaving  a  scar.   She
     regularly had bruising.

  8. She had visited the United Kingdom where her brother worked  on  three
     occasions, once with her husband.  She described how  one  day  during
     that visit he:
           "Had been drinking heavily and became  angry  very  quickly  and
           punched her on the upper arm causing a  bruise.   That  happened
           two years ago and ever since she has been in constant fear  that
           he would physically abuse her.

           Within the last two years he had become short tempered and  more
           and more verbally and physically violent  towards  her  and  the
           physical violence increased to four or five times a  week.   She
           said that she became alarmed about how he might  treat  her  and
           her daughter and although he had not  hit  the  latter,  he  had
           showed no interest in her and never took time to play with her";
            paragraphs 16 and 17 of the Adjudicator's determination.


  9. She had not sought the protection of the United  Kingdom  authorities,
     as she was a guest in the country and frightened of him  but  she  had
     seen her G.P.   Now she was  here,  she  was  on  a  prescribed  anti-
     depressant.

 10. She said that her parents had seen his outbursts and were fed up  with
     his behaviour but to no avail.   She  had  turned  to  a  psychiatrist
     because of her mental suffering, latterly two or three times  a  week.
     She had not sought medical help in Iran.  Her parents  would  not  let
     her contact the police because that could bring great shame  upon  her
     family.

           "Her husband said many times that he would change his  ways  but
           she now knew that she could not trust him as she had  taken  him
           back before and he always returned to violence.  She feared  for
           her daughter.", paragraph 19.

 11. She later said that she had gone to the police once but had  not  made
     an official complaint.  She had reported matters to  a  policeman  who
     was a friend of the family, and in particular  of  her  husband,   who
     like him took drink and drugs.  Nothing had  happened;  the  policeman
     had said it was a family issue, to be resolved according to  what  the
     husband said should happen.

 12. Her daughter had often seen his violence which  had  made  her  quiet,
     withdrawn and stressed; her sleep suffered.  She did not want  to  see
     her father.

 13. Before she left Iran to come to the United Kingdom,  her  husband  had
     gone away for some 4 months and had not been in contact  with  her  or
     her daughter, so she decided with her parent's consent to flee to  the
     United Kingdom to escape the violence of her husband upon  his  return
     to Shiraz.  She said she could not hide from him in Iran,  because  of
     the social structure.

 14. Notwithstanding that, she had told the Home Office  that  her  initial
     intention had only been to escape the stress and tension and to  visit
     her brother.  What triggered the asylum application was that:

           "She had heard that her husband was  now  pressing  to  get  the
           child back and had also threatened her, through  her  solicitor.
           She said that she feared he would take her child  from  her  and
           that this was the more likely outcome in Iran";   paragraph  22.




      The Adjudicator also records her evidence at paragraph 26 as follows:


           "She said that since she  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  her
           husband would ring her at her brother's house,  but  they  would
           only argue and he  was  angry  because  she  had  brought  their
           daughter here.  Her daughter would not speak to him.   She  said
           that he had threatened her through her solicitors who  had  said
           that her  husband  was  complaining  that  she  had  stolen  his
           daughter and taken her away and was very angry  and  would  kill
           her if she went home.  There was a court case  which  was  still
           continuing and she was convinced that if she  returned  to  Iran
           the fighting would start again and he would be even  more  angry
           because she had brought her daughter here".

 15. The Claimant confirmed to the Tribunal, through her advocate Mr Patel,
     in the light  of  the  objective  evidence  that  women  needed  their
     husbands' consent to travel abroad,   even more so if taking a  child,
     that her husband had agreed to her coming to the United  Kingdom  with
     the child to visit her brother, as she had done before;   (Divorce  in
     Iran and the US State Department  report;  the  CIPU  Report  is  less
     specific).

 16. She said that she could not leave her husband; in Iran he  would  find
     her.  She could not live alone because of the way in which  she  would
     be regarded.  It would be extremely hard to rent  a  house.   Whatever
     the divorce laws might say, it was  very  difficult  for  a  woman  to
     divorce a man, and even more so to retain custody  of  a  child.   The
     daughter would be psychologically scarred.  Her family in  Iran  would
     be unable to help much; paragraphs 27 - 28.

 17. The Adjudicator reached the conclusions  which  we  have  set  out  in
     paragraph 3.   There  was  comparatively  little  elaboration  of  the
     reasoning behind the conclusions as to "particular social group"   but
     it is clear that the Adjudicator  accepted  the  personal  and  expert
     evidence of the Claimant in the light of the background evidence.   He
     applied Shah and Islam, recognising that  domestic  violence  did  not
     itself create a "social group" and that the Geneva Convention "was not
     designed to give relief to all those who lived under  a  less  liberal
     social order."

 18.  The  components  of  his  judgment  were  that  women  in  Iran  were
     discriminated against, they were less fairly treated  than  men,  less
     weight was given to their evidence in  Court.   Family  and  religious
     pressures deter complaint or divorce; it is seen as bringing shame  on
     a family if domestic issues are raised outside the family.   He  added
     that complaint or seeking divorce would be "virtually useless" because
     of the weight given to the husband's evidence and the low prospects of
     the wife retaining custody of a child.

 19. The Adjudicator did not have the assistance of any representative from
     the Home Office in analysing the facts or assessing their significance
     as constituting "persecution".  Nor did he have any  submissions  from
     the Home Office, beyond the contents of the refusal letter, as to what
     would constitute "a particular social group."

 20. We say that because Mr Blundell for the Secretary  of  State  has  not
     sought  to  take  issue  with  the  Adjudicator's  acceptance  of  the
     Claimant's evidence, nor with his characterisation of  her  as  having
     suffered "serious  domestic  violence",   or  its  being  assessed  as
     sufficient to constitute "persecution."  In the circumstances, that is
     sensible and fair.  The Claimant has not had the opportunity  to  deal
     with some of the questions to which her own evidence gives  rise  e.g.
     if the husband consented to her departure, why was she  fleeing  while
     he was away but yet had not intended to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom
     until she had been here a while?   There is evidence of  a  clear  and
     not altogether surprising angry reaction from the husband  and  father
     to the realisation that the wife  is  now  proposing  to  live  abroad
     having initially taken the child just for a visit:  at least  some  of
     the threats were made via her solicitor and parents  but  the  husband
     had engaged lawyers to pursue a court case.  But it was these threats,
     after she had not returned with the child,  which caused her  to  seek
     asylum.   The husband had also left the family,  before  the  Claimant
     came to the  United  Kingdom,  and  when  asked  whether  that  was  a
     permanent departure or not, the Claimant in interview (p 24) said  "we
     sent  him  a  message  to  come  back  and  resolve  his  problems  in
     conjunction with his family.  This never  happened".     The  Claimant
     however left for the  United  Kingdom  while  he  was  away,  and  her
     evidence was that she had taken him back  before.   There  is  a  wide
     range of fact and degree potentially covered by the domestic  violence
     recorded on her evidence, varying from the persistent, unpleasant  but
     low level to something altogether  more  serious,  which  receives  no
     analysis from the Adjudicator.

 21. We set out those matters lest it be thought that  the  facts  of  this
     case gave guidance as to what constitutes  persecutory  ill-treatment.
     With that cautionary note for other  cases,  we  approach  the  issues
     which do arise on the basis that the Claimant was  at   real  risk  of
     suffering from ill-treatment which  reached  the  level  necessary  to
     constitute persecution.

THE SUBMISSIONS

 22. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that  the  Adjudicator,
     who accepted that the written law and Constitution of Iran gave  women
     certain rights of divorce  against abusive  husbands,  ought  to  have
     concluded that the State did not discriminate against women, at  least
     in that respect.

 23. The substance of the Secretary of State's submission was that women in
     Iran in general could not be regarded as  constituting  "a  particular
     social group" and that there were significant differences in the legal
     framework and practical  protection  afforded  to  women  in  Iran  by
     comparison with Pakistan, albeit that social and legal attitudes  were
     not the same as those in western countries.  There was  also  a  legal
     framework within which women could  divorce  their  violently  abusive
     husbands and obtain custody of the children.  There was  a  sufficient
     degree of protection in place, even though  it  might  not  always  be
     successful.  The Adjudicator had not recognised the  significance  and
     availability of  the  legislative   provisions.   In  any  event,  the
     Claimant had made no real effort to access the systems  of  protection
     which  did  exist  and  the   Adjudicator's   approach   ignored   the
     significance of her lack of effort in that respect.   If she  had  not
     sought police help because of a resulting "climate of imputed  shame",
     that was an inadequate reason for  seeking  international  protection.
     In reality this was a case of  localised  or  individualised  domestic
     violence and the Claimant should have considered moving  elsewhere  in
     Iran. If  the  Claimant  was  being  persecuted,  she  was  not  being
     persecuted because of membership of a particular social group; she was
     being ill-treated by her husband in respect of which State  protection
     was available and had not been invoked by the Claimant.

 24. Mr Blundell submitted that  there  was  no  basis  for  treating  this
     Claimant as a member of a narrower social group, constituted by  women
     who faced the  threat  of  adultery  charges,  and  a  lack  of  State
     protection from the consequence, the narrower group envisaged in  Shah
     and Islam.

 25. The Adjudicator's reasoning on Article 8 ECHR was also inadequate.

 26. Mr Patel for the Claimant submitted that the key issue was whether the
     position of women in Iran could be distinguished from that  identified
     in  Pakistan  in  Shah  and  Islam:   there  was  in  both   countries
     institutionalised discrimination  and  an  institutionalised  lack  of
     protection.  In reality divorce was difficult to obtain.  He relied on
     a Tribunal decision, Fatemeh [00TH00921]  3rd  April  2000,  in  which
     women in Iran were held to constitute a "particular social group."

 27. The reality was institutional discrimination for women facing  spousal
     abuse as it was in Pakistan.  If the Claimant were to live  away  from
     her husband, away from her home, she  would  be  conspicuous  with  or
     without her child.  She would be at risk of vigilante action.  With or
     without divorce, she risked separation from  her  daughter.   Internal
     flight was at best only an option after divorce.  Were she to  have  a
     relationship with another man she would be at risk of adultery charges
     and stoning to death.

THE BACKGROUND MATERIAL

 28. The Home Office relied upon the October 2002 Iran  Country  Assessment
     from CIPU, and an earlier document "Divorce in Iran", produced by  the
     Home Office which largely dealt with the period 1994-1998.

 29. Paragraphs 5.119 - 5.121 of the CIPU Report deal with the position  of
     women generally.  The ideal woman is seen by the clerical elite as  an
     obedient wife and mother.  Paragraph 5.120-12l says:

           "5.120.     Both the Constitution and international  conventions
                 adopted by Iran grant men and  women  equal  rights.   This
                 conforms to Islamic criteria.  Further, Article 21 of   the
                 Constitution stipulates that the government shall guarantee
                 women's rights in all  respects  and  create  a  favourable
                 atmosphere  for  restoring  their  material  and  spiritual
                 rights. [3(b)].

           5.121.      This is not to say that women do not face social and
                 legal discrimination. [4(f)].   The  view  of  women  in  a
                 primarily familial context and motherhood role continues to
                 be encouraged.  Women may work or  study,  [4(k)]  although
                 some areas of study are closed to  women,  female  students
                 are segregated from male teachers, and  social  constraints
                 inhibit their opportunities."



 30. General discrimination is then discussed:  enforced gender  separation
     in public and a prohibition on women mixing openly with unmarried  men
     or men not related to them.  There are reserved sections for women  on
     public transport and segregated entrances to  many  public  buildings.
     Women are doctors, police officers and journalists; they  hold  a  few
     posts of political and diplomatic weight, and have some judicial roles
     in family courts and as investigative  judges.   The  CIPU  Assessment
     says:

           "These developments indicate some change  in  the  situation  of
           women in Iran."

 31. The CIPU Assessment recognises discrimination  against  women  in  the
     legal code, particularly in  family  and  property  matters,  and  the
     difficulties which they face in obtaining legal  redress  particularly
     outside large cities.

 32. In paragraph 5.126-8 it says:

           "5.126.     Under the  legal  system,  women  are  denied  equal
                 rights of testimony and inheritance.   [10(j)]  In  a  bill
                 passed by the Majlis 22 May 2002 gave divorced mothers  the
                 same custody rights over boys  as  girls  [5(al)]  and  now
                 awaits Guardian Council approval.  A woman's  testimony  is
                 worth half that of a man's, making it difficult for a woman
                 to prove a case against a male defendant.[9(c)].


           5.127.      Violence against women in the family is  recognised,
                 with "blood money" (Deyah) only awarded  if  the  aggrieved
                 party is a man.  In addition, families of female victims of
                 violent  crimes  are  reported  to  have  to  pay  for   an
                 assailant's court costs.  The Majlis  have  just  passed  a
                 bill equalising blood money for men and women (before, that
                 of men was worth twice that of women), but the law has  yet
                 to be ratified.  Little detail is known of  the  degree  of
                 domestic violence in Iran, with no official  statistics  on
                 abuse within the  family.   [4(f)]   There  is  a  lack  of
                 legislative provision to regulate  actions  against  women.
                 Iran  welcomed  UN  contributions  to  the  drafting  of  a
                 convention  on  the  elimination  of  forced   labour   and
                 trafficking in women for  sexual  and  other  exploitation.
                 [10(n)].


           5.128.      A prominent Iranian  scholar,  Ayatollah  Bojnourdi,
                 spoke out in favour of the  revision  of  laws,  which  are
                 discriminating  between  men  and  women.   In   1998   the
                 judiciary's Bureau of Women's  Affairs  further  said  that
                 legislation meant to reduce hardship for women  in  divorce
                 and property cases had not yet properly implemented."

 33. Paragraph 5.131 records:

           "Limited practical improvement in  the  condition  of  women  is
           evident.  The Deputy Speaker in the Majlis has stated that  laws
           need to be amended before women can enjoy their full rights.  In
           1998 the Government published several  papers  on  a  three-year
           action plan to help prevent, identify  and  deal  with  violence
           against women [10(b)]."

 34. The  CIPU  Assessment  discusses  divorce  in  relation  to  permanent
     marriage as is the Claimant's.  Although a husband is not required  to
     cite a reason  for  divorce,  and  this  case  does  not  concern  the
     disadvantage of being divorced by the husband,:

           "conditions under which a woman may divorce depend on  the  year
           that she married, and the legislation that was in effect at  the
           time of her marriage".

 35. An attempt recently to ease the path to divorce for women  appears  to
     have stalled.

 36. In 1986, the government  issued  a  12  -  point  model  contract  for
     marriage  and  divorce  which  limited  a  man's  traditional  Islamic
     privileges, recognising a woman's rights to  a  share  of  matrimonial
     property and to alimony.

 37. As to children, the CIPU Assessment in paragraph 5.142 - 5.143 states:

           "5.142.     In the event of divorce,  the  father  traditionally
                 has legal custody of his  children  [2d)][4(b)],  unless  a
                 women can show her spouse to be an unfit father and applies
                 under  legislation  passed  in  November  1998  to   obtain
                 custody. [4(f)][10(b)]  The civil code provides for custody
                 of a male child to belong to the mother until the child  is
                 2 years  old  and  of  a  female  child  until  she  is  5.
                 [2(d)][4(b)].  Women who remarry  are  forced  to  give  up
                 custody of children from earlier marriages to their father.
                 [4(f)].


           5.143.       The  position  of  a  divorced  woman  and  further
                 relationships  after   divorce   can   be   fraught,   with
                 accusations of "immoral behaviour" and possible  "adultery"
                 brought to the Ershad. [2(m)].

 38. There is  clear discrimination between the treatment under the Islamic
     Penal Code accorded to women and  to  men  adulterers  -  in  process,
     evidence and punishment.

 39. Use both of opium and hashish is not uncommon,  and  severe  penalties
     exist for users and traffickers particularly of harder drugs.

 40. "Divorce in Iran" provides further detail.   The  Iranian  civil  code
     permits a husband to register  the  divorce  of  a  wife  without  her
     consent and without specified  grounds.   But  under  Iran's  Personal
     Status Law, a wife  needs  to  establish  a  breach  of  a  stipulated
     condition  in  effect  in  the  model  code;  those  provisions  cover
     maltreatment such that the marriage has become untenable, i.e. if  the
     marriage entails her being "harmed".  An Islamic Judge  has  power  to
     order or refuse the divorce if requested by a woman.

 41. The paper also states:

           "In addition to the above conditions, a  woman  is  entitled  to
           initiate a divorce under the terms of Iran's Civil Code:


           ... according to article 1130 of the Civil Code, if the wife can
           prove to the court that the continuation of the  marriage  would
           be harmful to her, she can force the husband to divorce her.  If
           the court is unable to force the husband to  divorce  her,  then
           the court  will  divorce  her  instead.   However,  because  the
           legislators have very specific rules for  proving  harm,  it  is
           often very difficult for women to convince the  court  that  the
           marriage is harmful to  them.   Much  is  left  to  the  judge's
           discretion, and in a patriarchal society,  and  where  religious
           leaders favour men over women, it means that women do not  often
           win their  cases.   For  instance,  in  the  current  situation,
           physical abuse must result in permanent  injury  for  it  to  be
           grounds for divorce.  As well, the husband's drug  addiction  is
           not cause for divorce on the grounds of harm, unless it is shown
           that his consumption of opium has economically  ruined  him  and
           made it impossible to support the family".

 42. It discusses the  difficulties  of  proving  the  necessary  pain  and
     suffering.  One beating may not suffice; hospital and  police  records
     may be necessary to satisfy a court  to  a  high  standard  of  proof.
     Divorces  initiated  by  women  are  very  time-consuming,   expedited
     divorces taking only months are often linked to a  husband's  drug  or
     alcohol addition.  If a husband physically ejects a woman who has been
     unsuccessful in divorce proceedings, he is obliged to provide her with
     financial support.  After divorce, he loses authority over her.  It is
     possible for an Iranian woman who obtains a civil  divorce  abroad  to
     take steps to obtain recognition of that divorce under Iranian law.

 43. As to child custody, in the absence of  agreement,  a  divorced  woman
     retains custody of sons  till  two  and  daughters  till  seven.   The
     Claimant's daughter is over seven.

 44. Dr. Mir-Hosseini, an academic researcher on gender and  family  issues
     in the Muslim world, whose views are referred to in "Divorce in  Iran"
     provided an expert report for the Claimant much of  which  is  already
     reflected in the material which we have described.  She emphasises the
     practical difficulties for a woman in proving her  case.   Although  a
     husband's harmful drug addiction can found divorce by his wife,  proof
     of that fact would require him to  have  been  convicted  of  a  drugs
     offence.  Police and medical reports of  repeated  injuries  would  be
     required to sustain divorce based on physical abuse.  Likewise, if the
     mother wanted to retain care of the daughter after the age  of  seven,
     she would have to show the husband's mental  or  moral  corruption  in
     much the same way.  There were no "safe houses"  for  women   such  as
     this Claimant.

 45. The Claimant also relied on other background material.  "Human  Rights
     in Iran", a UNA-UK publication of 2000, referred to clerical hostility
     to the emancipation, western-style,  of  women.   Their  position  had
     undergone no sustained change.  Women  were  still  banned  from  many
     public offices and the armed forces, and subjected to severe penalties
     for incorrect wearing of the chador.  There had been public executions
     of women for drug smuggling.  There was anecdotal evidence of horrific
     wife abuse and it was reported that domestic  violence  was  condoned.
     Although harsh discriminatory laws were not  universally  enforced  in
     Iran, they were widely feared.

 46. The decision of the Tribunal in Fatemeh drew upon the  expert  opinion
     of a Mr Edge and Sabeh Afshan, from SOAS and the University  of  York.
     Those opinions were given in 1997.  They dealt in particular with  the
     position of women charged with  adultery  by  their  husband,  as  Mrs
     Fatemeh had been, and at consequent risk of imprisonment, and lashing,
     if not stoning to death.

 47. The US State Department Report of March 2002  states  "The  Government
     discriminates on the basis of religion and sex";   statistics  on  the
     domestic abuse of women are not  publicly  available;  such  abuse  is
     considered a private matter.  The law against rape is rarely enforced.
      Women, however,  have  access  to  primary  and  secondary  education
     although their professional opportunities suffer from social and legal
     constraints.

 48. Graduate education abroad for women  is  not  permitted.   The  Report
     echoes much that is found in the CIPU Assessment on  the  availability
     of divorce to wives and the limits on custody.

 49. On a more polemical note,  the  International  Federation  of  Iranian
     Refugees in "Human Rights Violations in Iran" states:

           "Women in Iran encounter  violence  and  discrimination  at  all
           levels.  Violence against women is not only  condoned  but  also
           perpetrated by the Islamic Republic of Iran,  and  is  prevalent
           both  in  government  institutions  and   domestic   life.    No
           safeguards exist to protect women in Iran.


           The  sexual  apartheid  that  permeates  social,  cultural   and
           political life in Iran constitutes  a  form  of  oppression  and
           persecution  that  creates  of  the  majority   a   second-class
           citizenry.   Women's  dress,  work,  socialising,  familial  and
           intimate  relationships,  reproduction  and  sexuality  are  all
           subject to control, either by male family members or the  state.
           Women's autonomy, forms of cultural expression, and  freedom  of
           movement are  severely  circumscribed.   Laws  that  criminalize
           adultery or  fornication  are  disproportionately  used  against
           women and create an additional risk of persecution for women who
           are victims of sexual violence.


           The regime's failure to  prosecute  offenders,  both  of  sexual
           violence and of domestic abuse, denies women equality before the
           law and the effective protection of the state."

PARTICULAR SOCIAL GROUP AND THE REASON FOR PERSECUTION : THE LAW

 50. It is necessary to start with Shah and Islam.  We emphasise  in  doing
     so what both Lord Steyn and Lord Hoffmann said:  everything depends on
     the  evidence  and  findings  of  fact   in   the   particular   case:
     generalisations as to the place of women in particular  countries  are
     out of place when dealing with issues of refugee status; [1999]  2  AC
     629 at  635E, 655F.

 51. Lord Steyn recognised that a prevalence of domestic abuse and violence
     towards women did not of itself give rise to refugee status; what  was
     distinctive in Pakistan was that  there  was  no  state  protection  :
     discrimination was partly  tolerated  and  partly  sanctioned  by  the
     State, a discrimination embodied in substantive and procedural statute
     law, constitutional provision notwithstanding;  635E-F.  This affected
     not just the risk of severe punishments to  which  men  would  not  be
     subject, but a woman's evidence would not be admissible  on  the  most
     serious  charges.   The   combination   of   social   and   evidential
     discrimination embodied in statutes or sexual conduct meant  that  the
     very act of seeking  state  protection  against  rape,  by  making  an
     accusation against a man, would probably lead to a charge of  adultery
     with its attendant detention, trial and severe punishment against  the
     complainant.

 52. This context, as summarised by Lord Steyn  and  Lord  Hoffmann,  shows
     both the extent and gravity of the Pakistan state's own discrimination
     against women and its toleration of or indifference to persecution  by
     others.  Lord Hope at p 658D emphasises that  it  is  the  nature  and
     scale of the discrimination in  Pakistan  which  is  critical  in  the
     definition of the group.

 53. Lord Steyn identified women in Pakistan as a particular  social  group
     because they all shared a common immutable characteristic, gender.  He
     adopted the reasoning in Acosta's case 191 & N 211.  He said:

           "This  reasoning  covers  Pakistani  women  because   they   are
           discriminated against and as a  group  are  unprotected  by  the
           State.   Indeed  the   state   tolerates   and   sanctions   the
           discrimination."  644 E-F.

 54. Lord Steyn also concluded that there was a more narrowly circumscribed
     particular social group.  This  was  defined  by  the  coincidence  of
     gender, the suspicion of adultery and their  unprotected  position  in
     Pakistan against such suspicion.   Neither  of  those  categories  was
     thought to involve the circular reasoning that the  particular  social
     group was defined by reference to its being persecuted : these  groups
     existed, as required by the Convention, "dehors"  or independently  of
     persecution.

 55. The effective, or an effective, cause of their persecution  was  their
     membership of either or both of those groups.  As Lord Steyn said :

           "Given the central feature of state  -  tolerated  and  state  -
           sanctioned  gender  discrimination,  the   argument   that   the
           Appellants fear  persecution not  because  of  membership  of  a
           social group but because of the hostility of their  husbands  is
           unrealistic;" 646D.

 56. This shows that he saw the case as one of persecution  by  the  state;
     if the persecution was  by  the  husbands  alone  it  was  not  for  a
     Convention reason.

 57. Lord Hoffmann states  that  the  domestic  violence  suffered  by  the
     Appellants would not be regarded as persecution in the United  Kingdom
     because of the state's  protection  available  against  it,  648C;  it
     becomes persecution in Pakistan because the  state  was  unwilling  or
     unable to offer protection against it, 648D.   The protection to which
     Lord Hoffmann referred in the United Kingdom was not confined  to  the
     criminal law, but reflected the civil  or  family  court's  powers  as
     well.

 58. The Appellants feared persecution "for reason of" their membership  of
     the social group, women in Pakistan, because  of  the  combination  of
     their husbands' violence and the state's denial to them of  protection
     against that serious harm, 653 E-F.  Discrimination by itself  was not
     enough (655E) but the distinguishing feature to Lord Hoffmann of these
     cases was the particular evidence as to the position  in  Pakistan  of
     these Appellants : it did not follow that  all  Pakistani  women  were
     persecuted or persecuted for a Convention reason.  That  evidence  was
     of  institutionalised discrimination against women by the police,  the
     courts and the legal system, "the central organs of the state," 655B.

 59. Thus  for  Lord  Hoffmann,  the  particular  social  group,  women  in
     Pakistan,   was   a   particular   social   group   because   of   the
     institutionalised discrimination against women.  The persecution arose
     from the combination of serious harm from the husbands and the state's
     denial of protection, indeed  a  denial  in  circumstances  where  its
     invocation could lead to adultery charges and a trial weighted against
     the complainant.  The persecutor was the state in its response to  the
     harm done by the husbands.

 60. Lord Hope agreed with both Lords Steyn and Hoffmann on the basis  upon
     which they considered  that  the  women  were  being  persecuted  "for
     reasons of " their being women.

 61. Lord Hutton expressed no view on whether  women  in  Pakistan  were  a
     particular social group, being content to conclude that  the  narrower
     class, suspected of adultery, were.

 62. Lord Millett, dissenting, offered a powerful critique of  the  concept
     of discrimination as a tool in defining a particular social group  and
     of state tolerance of ill-treatment as constituting persecution for  a
     Convention reason.

 63. In our judgment, the following conclusions ought to be drawn.   First,
     women in Pakistan formed a social group not  just  because  they  were
     women, but because they were also discriminated against.  This appears
     in the speeches of all three in the  majority,  and  indeed  from  the
     rejection of that proposition by Lord  Millett.   Second,  it  appears
     inescapably  from  the  way  in  which  the  discrimination  has  been
     described  that  it  includes   legislative,   judicial   and   police
     discrimination in the way in which  women  could  obtain,  and  indeed
     suffer from seeking, state protection.  The lack of  state  protection
     is inherent in the discrimination relied on.


 64. Third, the women were not persecuted "for reason of" their  membership
     of their group by the husbands against whom the state was unwilling or
     the women were afraid to seek the  state's  protection.   Whilst  that
     would have been a possible analysis, the majority,  confirmed  by  the
     rejection of their reasoning  by  Lord  Millet,  clearly  rejected  as
     unrealistic the view that the husbands were  persecuting  their  wives
     for a Convention reason.  It was the serious harm done by the husbands
     in combination with the state's inaction in  providing  protection  or
     reinforcing of the harm when protection was sought, which gave rise to
     the persecution and to the persecution for a Convention reason.

 65. Fourth,  whether  such  circumstances  give  rise  to  or  evidence  a
     particular social group depends very much on the circumstances  within
     any country at the relevant time, and the extent, nature and intensity
     of the social and state discrimination, including the real  risk  that
     seeking protection would rebound  in  further  serious  ill-treatment.
     The same is true of whether there is persecution, or persecution for a
     Convention reason or a lack of state protection.

 66.  Thus,  this  is  a  case,  on  the  particular  evidence  as  to  the
     circumstances in Pakistan,  of  state  persecution  for  a  Convention
     reason.   Discriminatory lack of state protection was a  component  of
     persecution,   and  of  the  reason  for  the  persecution   and   the
     availability of state  protection,  but  it  was  also   part  of  the
     definition  of   the   social   group   through   its   relevance   to
     discrimination.


 67. The crucial issue which is relevant to the definition  of  the  group,
     though not necessarily determinative of it, relevant  to  persecution,
     to the ascertainment of the Convention reason, and indeed to the final
     component of the overall refugee  definition  is  the  nature  of  the
     state's protection.

 68. The inherent overlap between the various components which make up  the
     total definition of a refugee was confirmed in Horvath  v SSHD  [2001]
     1 AC 489.  It is clear that the concepts of protection and persecution
     were not to be treated as wholly  exclusive  concepts,  let  alone  as
     discrete components without scope for  overlap  between  the  evidence
     which supported the various components.  At p 497, Lord Hope  regarded
     failure of state protection as an element in persecution in  non-state
     agent cases.  To Lord Clyde at p 520, there could be state persecution
     by helpless inaction in the face of the behaviour of  others.

 69. But the significance of allowing  the  concept  of  a  lack  of  state
     protection to overlap with  the concept of  persecution,  rather  than
     confining it to a separate component subsequently to be addressed,  is
     that it brings into play the state's reasons for inaction as providing
     the reason for persecution rather than requiring necessarily exclusive
     reliance on the motive of those meting out the direct ill-treatment in
     a non-state agent case.  Therefore where the reason for the direct ill-
     treatment is not a Convention reason, but the state is  unable  to  or
     unwilling to protect against it for a Convention reason, the state can
     become the persecutor, its reasons for so acting can become the reason
     for persecution and the  case  becomes  not  one  of  non-state  agent
     persecution but  of state persecution.

 70. Again this recognition of the overlapping concepts  accords  with  the
     decision in Hari Dhima [2002] EWHC 80 (Admin.) in which  it  was  held
     that the unavailability of state protection against ill-treatment  was
     a relevant part of showing a real risk that Article 3  ECHR  would  be
     breached by returning  someone  to  their  country.   The  absence  of
     express reference to its unavailability in a manner akin to that found
     in the Refugee Convention did not mean that a  different  approach  to
     its relevance was called for in Article 3 ECHR claims  as  opposed  to
     Refugee Convention claims.

 71. Finally, we turn to SSHD v Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567 [2002] A11 ER
     (d) 267, 26th April 2002,  which  concerned  social  group  and  state
     protection in the  context  of  an  Albanian  blood  feud.   Auld  LJ,
     referred to the fact sensitive nature of the judgment  on  "particular
     social group";  it is a mixture of fact, policy and  judgment  in  any
     given social context.  He said at paragraph 17 :

           "To put counsel's respective submissions in context, we  suggest
           that membership  of  a  particular  social  group  exhibits  the
           following uncontroversial and sometimes  over-lapping  features:
           1) some common characteristic, either innate or one of which, by
           reason of conviction or  belief,  its  members,  cannot  readily
           accept   change;   2)   some   shared   or   internal   defining
           characteristic  giving  particularity,  though  not  necessarily
           cohesiveness, to the  group,  a  particularity  which,  in  some
           circumstances can usefully be expressed as a  setting  it  apart
           from the rest of society; 3) subject to  possible  qualification
           that we discuss below, a characteristic other than a shared fear
           of persecution; and 4) subject to possible qualification in non-
           state  persecution  cases,  a  perception  by  society  of   the
           particularity of the social group".

 72. At paragraph 19, he said:

           "We believe it is open  to  question  whether,  in  a  non-state
           persecution  case  as  here,  it   is   a   necessary   defining
           characteristic  of  a  particular  social  group.   There  is  a
           particular difficulty where the persecution is by somebody other
           than  the  state.   In  such   a   case,   if   setting   apart,
           discrimination or stigmatisation is an essential element, who is
           doing the setting apart, discriminating  or  stigmatising?   Not
           necessarily  society.   It  may  just   be   those   doing   the
           persecuting.  The state comes into it if it fails to protect, as
           some of their  Lordships  observed  in  ex  p.  Shah,  but  that
           failure, though a product or symptom of discrimination, goes  to
           a different part of the refugee test".

 73. His analysis of the decision in Shah and Islam,  at paragraphs 23 - 24
     was that discrimination was not always an  essential  requirement  for
     the identification of a  particular  social  group,  although  it  was
     clearly part of the reasoning as to particular social  group  in  that
     case.   He did conclude, in agreement with Lord Hope that  persecutory
     acts or legislative discrimination could serve to identify or create a
     group but not be the sole basis  for  its  definition.   The  Albanian
     family were not so much discriminated against, as not  regarded  as  a
     distinct  group  by  Albanian  society.   If  discrimination  were  an
     essential  feature,  it  could  not  be  found  in  the  state's  non-
     intervention because  that  would  arise  when  protection  was  being
     considered.

CONCLUSIONS

 74. We do not consider that women in Iran form a particular social  group.
     There is clearly a  considerable  degree  of  social  and  legislative
     discrimination  against  women  in  their  general  place  in  Iranian
     society.  Traversing some laws e.g.  not wearing the  chador  properly
     may lead to severe and disproportionate  punishment.   But  there  are
     also rights and opportunities for education at primary, secondary  and
     professional or occupational level.  They have judicial and  political
     roles to play, and employment  opportunities  in  a  range  of  areas,
     professional and otherwise.

 75. In their personal status, women  are  discriminated  against.    Their
     position in being divorced or seeking divorce is not equal to that  of
     men but some rights are given upon divorce  to  alimony  and  custody.
     Grounds do exist and can be proven, albeit with difficulty, upon which
     an abusive and violent husband or one addicted to drugs or failing  to
     provide support can be divorced.

 76. Although the normal  custody  arrangements  for  children  favour  the
     father from a very young age, care can be obtained,  again  with  real
     practical difficulty, of children where the father is violent or  drug
     addicted.  The evidence of friends or parents would be  admissible;  a
     woman's evidence counts for less but is not inadmissible.

 77. There is in Iran a risk of adultery charges being brought, proven  and
     then a risk of  the death penalty by stoning.  Men too are subject  to
     such risks but the evidential burden is harder  to  discharge  against
     them.

 78. There is some legal protection available through the police in respect
     of domestic violence although the evidence in general  suggests  that,
     it is usually seen  as  a  family  matter  and  the  wife  should  not
     complain.  That it is not an invariable rule, but the wife's  evidence
     in Court would have to be supported in a way in  which  the  husband's
     evidence would not.

 79. We accept that discrimination, which  can  include  a  lack  of  state
     protection, on the grounds of gender can identify a particular  social
     group in the light of Shah and Islam.  But that case also showed  that
     the mere combination of those factors would not  necessarily  suffice.
     The conclusion that they did in Pakistan in that case depended on  the
     particular evidence as to those circumstances in  Pakistan,  as  their
     Lordships were at pains to emphasise.   What  is  striking  about  the
     evidence in Pakistan was the widespread  and  intense  nature  of  the
     discrimination.  It was enshrined, the  Constitution  notwithstanding,
     in much legislation, in widespread, deeply felt religious  and  social
     attitudes. It was operated by all the central  organs  of  the  state.
     There was no state protection at all,  rather there was a  malevolence
     about the state's inaction.   The very act of  complaining  about  the
     violation of  human  rights  could  lead  to  the  victim  facing  the
     apparatus of the state on trial for her life, with  little  chance  of
     defence after a long stay in detention.

 80. Although it is not the case that women can only be a particular social
     group if they face discrimination exactly as  intense  as  that  which
     they faced in Pakistan, we consider that the warnings  issued  by  the
     House  of  Lords  that  the  decision  related   to   the   particular
     circumstances of that case should be  heeded.  We  consider  that  the
     Adjudicator  erred  in  his  approach  to  his  assessment   of   what
     constituted a particular social group.  He  appears to have  concluded
     in  reliance  on  Shah  and   Islam   that   institutionalised   state
     discrimination  against  women  necessarily  constituted  women  as  a
     particular social group.  It may or may not do : whether it does is  a
     question of analysis of the material.  It is  sensitive  to  fact  and
     degree, to the nature of the discrimination, its extent and intensity,
     to the availability of protection, and the degree of state  assistance
     to the Claimant or indifference or furthering of  the persecutory ill-
     treatment.


 81. The decision in Fatemeh was based on 1997 material  to  a  significant
     extent and related to fears arising from events in 1994;  we  have  to
     base our decision on the background material now before us.  The  case
     also contains fairly short reasons as to why women in Iran constituted
     "a particular social group".  It seems to proceed from the basis  that
     institutionalised  state  discrimination  against  women   necessarily
     constituted them a  particular  social  group,  as  a  result  of  its
     understanding of Lord Hoffmann's speech in Shah and  Islam.   For  the
     reasons which we have given, we consider that  to  be  too  simple  an
     analysis, insufficiently fact and degree  sensitive.   The  case  more
     readily fits into the narrower group identified in Shah and Islam.

 82. The intensity or nature of the discrimination faced by women  in  Iran
     is markedly less than in Pakistan,  their rights, protection and  role
     significantly better.   Their role is not so lowly.  This  applies  to
     both their status as wives and mothers, their ability to  divorce  and
     rights upon divorce.  Their general role in state or social activities
     is  different  with   educational,   including   higher   educational,
     opportunities, and a range of jobs open to them including those in the
     police and the judiciary.  In examining women in Iran as a  particular
     social group, it is necessary to  examine  their  general  or  overall
     position, and not  just  e.g.  marital  status  laws.   Their  overall
     position is not such that women in general should  be  regarded  as  a
     particular social group.

 83. We do not need to consider the narrower social  group.   There  is  no
     evidence that the Claimant faces a real risk of adultery charges  from
     her husband or anyone else.  Her concern is that  he  wants  her  back
     with their child, and that his  threat  to  kill  her  might  then  be
     realised.

 84. Although there is a degree of overlap in the way in which the relevant
     issues are analysed following the two  House  of  Lords'  decision  to
     which we have  referred  membership  of  a  particular  social  group,
     identified  by  factors  including  state  discrimination,  does   not
     automatically mean that such a person is persecuted or persecuted  for
     a Convention reason, or that the state  in  that  particular  case  is
     unable or unwilling to provide protection.

 85. Although the effect of the Horvath "holistic" as opposed to  the  step
     by step approach is that  the  issue  of  state  protection  resonates
     through all the stages of examination, it may not play the same role.

 86. Even if we had concluded that women in Iran constituted  a  particular
     social group, it would still be necessary to consider whether, for the
     individual in question, she was being persecuted (as is the case here)
     and persecuted for her membership of that social group.

 87. It could be argued and in many cases rightly that if women in Iran did
     constitute  a  particular  social  group  because  of   gender   based
     discrimination reinforced not just by an absence of  state  protection
     but by its positive acts, legislative, judicial  and  law  enforcement
     more generally, the same analysis would lead to  the  conclusion  that
     the persecutory treatment which the Claimant received at the hands  of
     her husband would be state persecution for reasons of  her  membership
     of that particular social group.  The reason for the absence of  state
     protection or worse,  for  the  constructive  persecution  as  it  was
     described in Horvath by Lord Clyde, would be her gender in Iran.   The
     absence of a particular social group means that the  persecutory  ill-
     treatment she fears at her husband's hands is  not  for  a  Convention
     reason.  He has abused her because she is his wife, with whom he lives
     and in relation  to  whom  he  behaves  with  cruelty.   He  does  not
     persecute her for a Convention reason.

 88. But such an approach, if  followed  automatically,  could  ignore  the
     "protection" limbs.  Either at the stage of considering whether  there
     was state persecution or the reason for it or at the stage of applying
     the protection components of the definition to the individual  seeking
     recognition  as  a  refugee,  the  particular  circumstances  of  that
     individual in relation to state protection need to be considered.  The
     "holistic" approach does not require  the  answer  to  the  protection
     limbs to be provided solely by the answer to  the  earlier  questions.
     In any event, state protection is relevant to the question of  whether
     return to Iran would involve a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

 89. It is necessary to consider the two limbs of state  protection  :  the
     state's inability and the Claimant's unwillingness, because of a well-
     founded fear of persecution, to avail himself of  it.   The  Claimant,
     asserting the state's inability to provide  protection relied, on  the
     objective material, her expert and her own experience.   But  her  own
     experience scarcely supports either contention :  she  only  once  and
     informally sought police assistance and that  from  a  friend  of  her
     husband's who himself was a drunkard and a drug addict.  She sought no
     divorce proceedings even though her evidence would be  admissible  and
     her parents would have been able to give evidence.  She  had  made  no
     formal complaints which could have been used in  divorce  proceedings,
     if convictions are required, either in relation  to  drug  or  alcohol
     abuse or  in  relation  to  violence.   She  had  not  sought  medical
     assistance for or recording of any of  the  harm  she  suffered  which
     again would have been  of  evidential  value.   As  Auld  LJ  said  in
     Skenderaj at para.  44  in  relation  to  the  second  limb  of  state
     protection : "It would not qualify under this alternative that he does
     not seek protection because he has  a  well-founded  belief  that  the
     state won't provide it or, as the adjudicator appears to  have  found,
     because of a societal norm not to seek it."  Fear of an imputed social
     climate does not suffice for the second limb.

 90. The objective evidence does not support the  Adjudicator's  conclusion
     as to the  "virtual  uselessness"  of  state  protection.   There  are
     protective divorce provisions which on the Claimant's evidence and her
     parents would apply to her case  and  which  have  never  been  tried.
     Those same provisions apply in relation to care  of  the  child.   The
     evidential difficulties facing a woman are real,  but  the  background
     material shows the nature of the  additional  evidence  which  can  be
     gathered and this Claimant  would  not  need  to  depend  on  her  own
     evidence alone.  Her and her family's  reluctance  to  seek  legal  or
     police help does not demonstrate a state's inability to protect.

 91. We  accept that the police are reluctant  and  unlikely  generally  to
     intervene in  domestic  violence  cases  against  a  husband  but  the
     evidence does not show such a reluctance in respect of drug or alcohol
     abuse, nor  that  the  reluctance  is  marked  where  there  is  other
     supporting evidence, e.g. from parents.  In this country, the attitude
     of the police towards domestic violence  has  been  one  of  reluctant
     involvement, though we accept not to the same degree as in  Iran,  but
     it would still have been regarded as part of a system  of  protection.




 92. The inability of the state to  provide  protection  cannot  always  be
     tested solely by reference to the police, if as here,  relief  can  be
     obtained through divorce.  Lord Hoffmann looked at both  criminal  and
     civil or family court protection in the United  Kingdom  in  Shah  and
     Islam.  In domestic violence, the  availability  and  consequences  of
     divorce constitute a relevant part of the system of state  protection.
      It may be difficult to obtain, but the legislative  provision  exist,
     they are not simply ignored by the courts or made impractical for  all
     to use, as the background  material  on  custody  and  alimony  shows.
     Relevant grounds apply to this  Claimant  and  she  is  not  dependant
     wholly on her own evidence.  The Iranian  state,  whatever  its  other
     discriminatory acts, is not unable or unwilling to provide  protection
     in this instance.  The evidence also does not support  the  conclusion
     that this couple cannot live apart, before divorce; they have at times
     done so.  It does not support the conclusion that after divorce  there
     would be persecution.


 93. For those reasons too, we do not consider that there is a real risk of
     the Claimant's Article 3 rights being breached upon return to Iran nor
     does the picture overall show that those seeking redress in the courts
     or through the  police  are  liable  to  a  serious  common-charge  of
     adultery.  Nor has that been the Claimant's concern.

 94. The Adjudicator's reasons do not  deal  with  much  of  the  objective
     evidence on discrimination and divorce:  civil or family  matters  and
     criminal.  His conclusion that proving  matters  would  be  "extremely
     difficult" so that the courts are "virtually useless" is not borne out
     by a full reading of the available background  material.   We  do  not
     accept that the different approach to the award of custody means  that
     there is no relevant court protection.

 95. Finally, we accept the submission that there  are  inadequate  reasons
     for   the   Adjudicator's   conclusion   that   there   would   be   a
     disproportionate interference with the mother and  child's  Article  8
     rights.

 96. It is not entirely clear, and it might  be  unfair  to  put  too  much
     weight on a singular as opposed to  plural,  whether  the  expectation
     underlying the conclusion was that the mother  might  return  to  Iran
     leaving her daughter behind; such an  assessment  would  require  some
     explanation.  Mr Patel suggested that it related to the fear  that  in
     Iran, the daughter would be taken from the mother.  If that be so,  it
     is difficult to see how that would engage Article 3 ECHR, or Article 8
     within this jurisdiction.  Equally problematic is the assumption  that
     the way in which a foreign country might determine custody and care of
     a child, national of  that  country,  as  between  its  separating  or
     divorcing parent, nationals in that country, engages  Article  8.   In
     effect the Adjudicator was making a decision as between  two  parents,
     not having heard from the father, both of  whom  appear  to  want  the
     child, whom the mother wants to keep  away  from  him  having  decided
     whilst here not to return.    There are undoubtedly problems in a case
     of this sort over  the  interface  with  custody  decisions.   If  his
     concern was who would have custody of the child,  this  problem  would
     require more consideration than, with respect, it received.  It may be
     that his comment related to the mother's personal integrity, in  which
     case it adds nothing of substance to the  conclusions  on  persecution
     and falls with it.

 97. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.

 98. We do not consider that it is right to remit the Article 8 point to an
     Adjudicator.   We  assume  that  mother  and  daughter  would   return
     together; if not, such disruption to family life  here  would  be  the
     consequence of the Claimant's decision.  If  the  fear  was  that  the
     child would be put into the father's custody on divorce or separation,
     the Iranian custody laws are not so inhuman as to constitute a  breach
     of Article 3 - there is no assertion or evidence of child abuse.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT























