
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |              |                    |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision      |_K (Risk - Sikh -   |
|                  |                      |number:       |Women) Afghanistan  |
|                  |                      |              |CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                  |                      |              |00057               |
|Heard on:         |25th July 2003        |Appeal number:|                    |
|Date typed:       |27th July 2003                                           |
|Date promulgated: |29th August 2003                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                   |
|MRS. M. L. ROE                                                              |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                                   |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:  Mr. A. Hutton, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.
For the Respondent:          Mr. J. Patel, of Counsel, instructed  by  Malik
                        & Malik  Solicitors.

1.    The Secretary of State Appellant has  appealed,  with  leave,  against
     the determination of Dr. A E Thorndike, an Adjudicator, who  (following
     a hearing on 20th February 2003 at Rotherham)  allowed  the  appeal  of
     Mrs. K (who we shall hereafter refer as the  Claimant)  on  asylum  and
     human rights grounds against the Secretary of State's decision of  15th
     October 2002 to give directions for her removal to  Afghanistan  as  an
     illegal entrant.

2.    The Claimant is a Sikh  national  of  Afghanistan.  The  Secretary  of
     State proposes to remove her to Afghanistan. Her niece and her son (who
     are both under the age of 10 years) and her widowed mother-in-law  (who
     is in her late 60s) claim as her dependants.
2.    The Claimant is a national of  Afghanistan.  The  Secretary  of  State
     proposes to remove her to Afghanistan. Her niece and her son  (who  are
     both under the age of ten) and her widowed mother-in-law (who is in her
     late-sixties) claim as her dependants.

3.    The Claimant and her three dependants  arrived in the  United  Kingdom
     together, on 5th September 2002. At the start  of  their  journey  from
     Afghanistan, they had been separated by their agent from the  remaining
     three members of their family - namely,  the  Claimant's  husband,  her
     young daughter and her brother-in-law - because the agent was not  able
     to arrange for all seven to travel together. The  evidence  before  the
     Adjudicator was that the Claimant did not know where her husband or the
     others in his group were.

4.1   The basis of the Claimant's claim before the Adjudicator was that  she
     and her family had suffered persecution in Kabul, where they had lived,
     on account of their Sikh religion. They had been persecuted by  members
     of the Northern Alliance after the fall of  the  Taliban.  In  November
     2001, her father-in-law was beaten by members of the Northern Alliance.
     He was told to convert to Islam. The same men went to  their  house  in
     December 2001 to see if he and other male members  of  the  family  had
     converted. When they learnt that they had not done so, they  bludgeoned
     the father-in-law and brother-in-law  to  death.  The  Claimant  feared
     returning to  Afghanistan  because  she  still  feared  persecution  on
     account of her religion / ethnic background.  In  addition,  she  would
     have to be a prostitute in order to support her dependants. This is the
     fate of women who have no male support.

4.2   The  Adjudicator  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds. He found the Claimant to be entirely credible. He stated  that
     his "consuming concern" was that, as a woman without  male  support  in
     Kabul,  without  a  husband  and  a  father-in-law,  she  would  suffer
     persecution and treatment contrary to Article 3. He considered that her
     only real option would be prostitution. He noted the Human Rights Watch
     World Report and the Womankind Report  in  the  Claimant's  bundle.  He
     noted that, in paragraph 4 of the UNHCR's note, the  UNHCR  had  stated
     that "also deserving of particular attention are asylum applications of
     members  of  certain  groups  with  protection   vulnerabilities".   He
     considered that the Claimant comes within the Refugee Convention "as  a
     woman without male support". He considered that  the  prospect  of  her
     parents being in Afghanistan was only a possibility.

.2    The Appellant's asylum claim was  certified.  The  Adjudicator  upheld
     the certificate. Accordingly, the appeal before us relates only to  the
     Appellant's human rights appeal.
5.    The grounds of application for leave to appeal to the Tribunal  assert
     that:

      i)     the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in  finding  that  there  was  an
           applicable  Refugee  Convention  reason.  Furthermore,   if   he
           considered that she was a member of a particular  social  group,
           he erred in not giving sufficient reasons.

      ii)   the Adjudicator had  erred  by  speculating  as  to  what  would
           happen on return to Kabul. He had not  taken  into  account  the
           fact that her parents were still in Kabul when  she  left,  that
           the Sikh community is tight-knit in Kabul and that she would  be
           able to seek assistance from  her  own  community,  if  not  her
           family.

      iii)  that the Adjudicator had erred in not considering the  objective
           evidence fully. It is asserted that this shows  that  there  are
           40,000 widows in Kabul alone, that 36 %  of  the  population  in
           Afghanistan as a  whole  are  widows  and  that  the  NGO  (non-
           governmental organisation) community are beginning to  recognise
           the needs of widows.

6.    Permission to appeal to the Tribunal was  granted  because  the  Vice-
     President  granting  permission  considered  that  the   grounds   were
     arguable.

7.1   At the commencement of the hearing before us, Mr.  Patel  informed  us
     that he had not received any instructions as to the whereabouts of  the
     Claimant's husband. Before the hearing got underway, Mr. Patel raised a
     separate issue.

7.2   Mr. Patel contended that there was no appeal before  us,  because  the
     application for leave to appeal was lodged  out-of-time.  He  had  only
     become aware of this after his arrival at the hearing, when Mr.  Hutton
     informed  him  that  the  Home  Office   received   the   Adjudicator's
     Determination on 11th March  2003.  This  means  that  the  time  limit
     expired, according  to  Rule  18(2)  and  Rule  48(2)(a)  of  the  2000
     Procedure Rules, on 25th March  2003.  The  application  for  leave  to
     appeal was only faxed to the Tribunal on 26th  March  2003.  Mr.  Patel
     submitted that the provisions of Rule 49 were  not  applicable  because
     the Claimant had not suffered any prejudice by the late application for
     leave  to  appeal.  He  could  not  refer  to  any  authority  for  the
     proposition that the grant of leave by the Vice President could be  set
     aside by the Tribunal. He asked for the proceedings  before  us  to  be
     stayed, so that he could make an application to the High Court for  the
     grant of leave to be quashed. He confirmed that the  Claimant  had  not
     been prejudiced by the late application  and  that  the  Claimant,  his
     instructing  solicitors  and  he  himself  had  proceeded  to   prepare
     themselves for the hearing on the assumption that there would be a full
     substantive hearing before Tribunal at the hearing.  He  only  realised
     that there was an out-of-time issue after he had spoken to  Mr.  Hutton
     on his arrival at the hearing centre.

7.3   Decision on  the  out-of-time  issue  raised:  Given  that  leave  had
     already been  granted,  the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
     substantive  appeal.  The  Vice-President   who   granted   leave   had
     jurisdiction to extend the time for the lodging of the application  for
     permission to appeal. There was no reason to suppose that  he  had  not
     directed his mind to the fact that the application was  one  day  late.
     However, in the event that he had not directed his mind to this  issue,
     the time limit for lodging the application was extended at the hearing,
     for the following reasons:

7.4   The relevant Rule in this regard is Rule 16(2) of the  2003  Procedure
     Rules, given that the time limit was extended at the hearing at a  time
     when the 2003 Procedure Rules were already in effect. The fact that the
     application was lodged only one day out of time does  not,  of  itself,
     amount to a special circumstance within  the  meaning  of  Rule  16(2).
     However, it is a relevant factor. Furthermore,  the  Claimant  and  her
     advisers had proceeded on the assumption that leave  had  been  validly
     granted at all times since they were notified of  the  grant  of  leave
     until just before the hearing got underway. If the situation  had  been
     reversed and it was the Secretary of State who was seeking to  rely  on
     the timeliness issue in  similar  circumstances,  it  is  difficult  to
     conceive that the time limit would not be extended, since otherwise the
     applicant would be deprived of a hearing which he or she had  been  led
     to believe that he/she was going to have. The same considerations apply
     when it is the Secretary of State who stood to lose out  on  a  hearing
     which he (and indeed, the Claimant)  was  led  to  believe  would  take
     place. Mr. Patel confirmed that  the  Claimant  had  not  suffered  any
     prejudice by the late application.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  that  the
     provisions of the rules for curing defects do not apply, the fact  that
     the Claimant had not suffered any prejudice was also a relevant  factor
     in deciding whether the time limit should be extended.

8.    We then proceeded  to  hear  submissions  from  both  parties  on  the
     substantive appeal.

9.    Mr. Hutton relied on the grounds of application. The  Adjudicator  had
     to given any reasons for finding that there was an  applicable  Refugee
     Convention reason. Women returning to Afghanistan without male  support
     are not a particular social group. There has been an improvement in the
     security situation in Kabul. He referred us to  the  October  2002  CPU
     report - paragraphs 6.76 and 6.78 and paragraphs 5.31 to 5.32. He  also
     referred us to the CIPU report dated April 2003 -  paragraphs  5.40  to
     5.49. He submitted that, in the event that the Claimant did  experience
     any problems  on  return  to  Kabul,  there  would  be  sufficiency  of
     protection. The Adjudicator had  speculated  in  considering  that  the
     Claimant would be forced to prostitute. This appeared to  be  based  on
     page A96 of the Claimant's bundle. However, page A94 of the  Claimant's
     bundle states that women are permitted to work outside the  home.   The
     Adjudicator also speculated in considering whether  her  parents  would
     still be in Kabul. There is simply no evidence about  this.  Paragraphs
     6.36 to 6.39 of the CIPU report of April 2003 deal with the position of
     Sikhs in Afghanistan. The Claimant would be able to find  work  in  the
     Sikh community. The general humanitarian condition in  Kabul  is  dealt
     with paragraphs 6.160 to 6.164 of the CIPU Report dated April 2003. Mr.
     Hutton also relied on the Tribunal's Determination in Mohamed Arefi  v.
     SSHD [2002] UKIAT 05683.

10.1  In reply, Mr. Patel carefully took us through the objective  evidence.
     He asked us to bear in  mind  the  fact  that  the  Claimant  would  be
     returning to Afghanistan with her dependants, none  of  whom  would  be
     able to help her to support them. He also asked us to bear in mind that
     the Claimant and her family had experienced problems at  the  hands  of
     the Northern Alliance since the fall of the Taliban - that is, they had
     experienced problems at the hands of the current regime in  Kabul.  The
     Adjudicator's finding  that  the  Claimant  would  have  to  resort  to
     prostitution was not speculative, because he had  heard  oral  evidence
     from the Claimant as summarised at paragraph 18 of  the  Determination.
     This weighed heavily in the Adjudicator's mind, as paragraphs 24 and 25
     of the Determination indicate. The Claimant had stated at  paragraph  2
     of her witness statement which was before the Adjudicator (page A17  of
     the appeal's bundle) that she did not know where any of her family are.



10.2  Mr.  Patel  asked  us  to  note  that  the  sources  referred   to  in
     paragraphs 6.38 and 6.39 of the CIPU Report were hopelessly out of date
     and relate to the period when the Taliban were  in  control.  Paragraph
     6.42 refers to a report of June 2002 which indicates  that  as  few  as
     1,000  Sikhs  remained  in  the  country.  Half  of  this  number  were
     concentrated in Jalalabad, about 15 Sikh families were in Kandahar  and
     a further 15 to 20 families in Helmand province. On simple mathematics,
     this means that possibly only about 200 individual Sikhs (as opposed to
     families) were in Kabul - which means that the Sikh community in  Kabul
     is very small. In the grounds of application, it is asserted that there
     are 40,000 widows in Kabul. In Mr. Patel's submission, a  large  number
     of these women must be from the mainstream population -  that  is,  the
     Pashto and Tajik population. These 40,000 widows are supported  by  the
     communities to which they belong. There are no figures which  show  the
     proportion of Sikhs in Kabul  who  are  single  women  or  widows.  The
     Claimant would be returned to Kabul and not to Jalalabad,  because  the
     Interim Administration in Kabul has limited reach outside Kabul.

10.3  The Claimant had said in paragraph 5 of her statement at page  R18  of
     the Claimant's bundle that she had never been  to  school.  This  would
     affect her prospects of employment  in  Kabul.  The  report  which  the
     Secretary of State  seeks  to  rely  on  in  asserting  that  the  Sikh
     community is close-knit is out of  date.  Pages  A62  and  A63  of  the
     Claimant's bundle shows  that  the  Sikh  community  in  Kabul  is  not
     financially  strong  and  therefore  would  not  be  able  to   provide
     assistance to a Sikh family returning to Kabul.

10.4  Mr. Patel submitted that the only way the Claimant would  be  able  to
     live safely in Kabul would be to wear a  burka,  or  a  headscarf,   in
     order to blend with the Muslim population. Page A69 of  the  Claimant's
     bundle mentions two  incidents  of  women  getting  into  difficulties.
     Reference was made to pages A70 and A87. The quality of  protection  in
     Kabul is "suspect". The police are themselves committing  human  rights
     abuses. Mr. Patel referred us to the Women's section of the CIPU Report
     of April 2003. He also referred us to the UNHCR's recommendations in  a
     paper dated July 2002 issued in April  2003  set  out  paragraph  6.94,
     which is that the categories of women set out at paragraph  14.3  below
     should be considered to be at risk and exposed to possible persecution,
     if returned to Afghanistan.

10.5  In Mr. Patel's submission, the Claimant falls in both categories.  All
     of this goes towards the Refugee Convention reason issue. The  Claimant
     would have to move away from her ethnicity to  blend  with  the  Muslim
     population and secure protection. She would otherwise be  transgressing
     social mores. In Mr. Patel's submission, the Claimant does belong to  a
     particular social group - namely, a Sikh woman without male support  in
     a  predominantly Muslim population.

10.6  Mr. Patel referred us to the Danish Fact-Finding Report at pages  E144
     to E147 of the Claimant's bundle. This states (at page E147) that  even
     the UNHCR had given up moving female staff from other areas to a better
     job in Kabul if they do not have relatives, with whom they  could  live
     and that it is not possible to be a female breadwinner  for  a  family.
     This is relevant evidence with regard to the  Claimant's  prospects  of
     employment in Kabul.

10.7  Mr. Patel submitted that the  Arefi  case  does  not  assist  in  this
     particular appeal, because that case relates to a Muslim person.

10.8  In the event that we decided that the Claimant did  not  belong  to  a
     particular social group, then Mr. Patel submitted that  the  Claimant's
     return would be in breach of Articles 3 and 8. Mr. Patel accepted that,
     if we found that there would be no breach of Article 8,  the  judgement
     of the Court of Appeal in Ullah and Do [2002] EWCA Civ 1852 means  that
     the Article 8 claim could not succeed, since this is  based  solely  on
     the treatment the Claimant would face in Kabul. However, he asked us to
     record the fact that he had raised Article 8 before us.

11.   We reserved our Determination.

12.   We have decided to allow the Secretary of State's appeal. We now  give
     our reasons.

13.   Firstly, we  decided  that  the  Adjudicator's  Determination  is  not
     sustainable, not least because he fell into speculation in  considering
     that the Claimant would have to resort  to  prostitution  in  order  to
     survive. Furthermore, he did not give sufficient  reasons  for  finding
     that there  was  an  applicable  Refugee  Convention  reason.  This  is
     important, given that he allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.  He  did
     not consider whether the Claimant would be able  to  obtain  sufficient
     protection, in the event that she did experience  any  problems  "as  a
     woman without male support".

14.1  In the remainder of this Determination, references to the CIPU  Report
     are references to the report of April 2003.

14.2  Paragraphs 6.38 to  6.39  of  the  CIPU  report  show  that  Sikhs  in
     Afghanistan did not, in general  terms,  experience  persecution  under
     Taliban rule. This is borne out  by  the  Claimant's  own  experiences,
     since it is clear, from her accounts, that the problems of  her  family
     began with the fall of the Taliban. The Adjudicator found the  Claimant
     credible. He accepted that the events of  November  2001  and  December
     2001 had occurred and that her father-in-law  and  brother-in-law  were
     bludgeoned to death. Whilst we have every sympathy for the Claimant, it
     has to be borne in mind that there were  security  problems  after  the
     fall of the Taliban. In October 2001, the USA and  the  United  Kingdom
     launched air strikes Afghanistan. It was  in  November  2001  that  the
     opposition  forces  marched  into  Kabul  and  other  cities  (see  the
     chronology at the back of the CIPU Report, page 75).  It  is  generally
     known that there was looting and serious  security  concerns  following
     the fall of the Taliban. Since then, the security  situation  in  Kabul
     has improved greatly. On 22nd December 2001, the Interim Administration
     took office following the signing of the Bonn Agreement (paragraph  5.5
     of the CIPU report). A Military Technical Agreement was signed  by  the
     Afghan Interim Administration on 4th January 2002 on the deployment  of
     an International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in  Afghanistan.  The
     ISAF reached its full  operating  capacity  of  4,500  troops  on  18th
     February 2002 (paragraph 4.59 of the CIPU report). In late April  2002,
     ISAF reported  that  the  security  situation  in  Kabul  had  improved
     significantly since their arrival. In late May 2002,  further  evidence
     of the improvement in the security situation in Kabul was provided when
     night time curfew was reduced, so that the curfew only  ran  from  2300
     hours until 0400 in the morning (paragraph 5.42 of the CIPU Report).  A
     Danish fact-finding mission to Kabul in  May  2002  reported  that  the
     security situation in Kabul was generally  good,  although  in  certain
     areas (particularly districts 5, 6 and 7) civilian security  was  poor.
     The Director of the Danish  Committee  for  Aid  to  Refugees  did  not
     believe that there was any ethnically motivated violence in Kabul.  The
     Deputy Director of Police in Kabul stated that there were  no  security
     problems in Kabul; he attributed the crime rate to  economic  problems.
     In September 2002 during a Danish fact-finding mission to  Afghanistan,
     most sources stated that the presence of the  ISAF  in  Kabul  had  the
     effect of ensuring good security in the capital. According to  the  Co-
     operation Centre for Afghanistan, the situation in Kabul  is  generally
     good, as there is no harassment or political arrests (paragraph 5.43 of
     the CIPU report). This is also attributed (according to footnote 8c  to
     paragraph  5.43)  to  the  Danish  fact-finding   mission   report   on
     Afghanistan from 22nd September to 5th October 2002. We noted that  the
     Secretary-General to the UN Security Council, in his report dated  11th
     July 2002 covering the period from 18th March 2002, reported  that,  in
     Kabul, the ISAF has  continued  to  have  a  very  positive  impact  on
     security in conjunction with  the  Afghan  police  and  other  domestic
     security forces (paragraph 5.45 of the CIPU report). We noted that,  in
     a quarterly report on ISAF operations  covering  the  period  from  1st
     November 2002 to 10th February  2003,  the  Turkish  commander  General
     Zorlu reported that Kabul continued to enjoy vastly  improved  security
     during the reporting period. Crime rates remain low and a full sense of
     normality has  returned.  He  described  the  atmosphere  as  calm  and
     peaceful, with a thriving commercial and social life. The night  curfew
     was lifted  on  3rd  November  2002  for  the  first  time  since  1979
     (paragraph 5.49 of the CIPU report).

14.3  We have noted that paragraph 5.54 of the CIPU report  quotes  from  an
     Amnesty  International  Report  dated  March  2003,  in  which  Amnesty
     International  states  that  members  of  the  NSD  (National  Security
     Directorate) have committed human rights violations including arbitrary
     detention and torture. Amnesty International also reported a widespread
     perception that the  police  are  responsible  for  perpetrating  human
     rights abuses rather than preventing or addressing them. However, it is
     not clear whether, according to Amnesty International,  these  problems
     are said to occur in Kabul or outside Kabul. If they are said to  occur
     in Kabul, then this is  at  odds  with  the  other  reports  which  are
     referred to in the  preceding  paragraph.  It  is  also  at  odds  with
     paragraph 5.53 of the CIPU report which quotes from  the  Danish  fact-
     finding report of September/October 2002 and in which UNAMA  is  quoted
     as saying that NSD does carry out random arrests but could not be  said
     to systematically violate human rights.  For these reasons, we  do  not
     place much weight on what is attributed  to  Amnesty  International  in
     paragraph 5.54 of the CIPU Report.

14.4  In general terms, the picture we have of  the  security  situation  in
     Kabul is that it is good. We conclude on the evidence  before  us  that
     there is, in general terms, sufficient protection in Kabul.

14.5  We were referred to pages  A62  and  A63  of  the  Claimant's  bundle.
     However, in the main, this document relates to the problems of Sikhs in
     a place called Khost in Afghanistan. There is reference, on  page  A63,
     to the Sikh community leader in Kabul (Autar  Singh)  saying  that  "in
     terms of freedom" their lives were much better now and  that  they  had
     good relations with the officials in Kabul. Although it is true that he
     is quoted as lamenting the lack  of  financial  support  for  the  Sikh
     community, as compared to other communities,  there  is  nothing  which
     suggests that Sikhs are a persecuted ethnic group in Kabul. Indeed,  we
     note that, according to the last sentence of paragraph 6.42 of the CIPU
     report, four Hindu and Sikh delegates who attended the  Loya  Jirga  in
     June 2002 reported that they were no longer repressed and felt free  to
     practise their religions. Further, in September 2002,  the  UNHCR-Kabul
     and Co-operation Centre for Afghanistan confirmed  that  the  situation
     for Hindus and Sikhs was generally good; there is  religious  tolerance
     of these groups and they have the right to  practise  their  religions.
     The source for this information (according to footnote 8c to  paragraph
     6.43) is the Danish fact-finding report from September to October 2002.
     The Amnesty International Report dated 23rd June 2003 in the Claimant's
     bundle (which starts at page E17) refers (on page E25)  to  three  Sikh
     asylum seekers who were forcibly returned by the United Kingdom and who
     were forced to seek shelter in a Sikh  temple  in  Kabul  as  they  had
     nowhere else to go. They reported  that  they  were  "singled  out  for
     abuse" in a market place in Kabul three days after their return. Whilst
     we have noted this, this does not amount to evidence of treatment which
     is sufficiently severe as to amount  to  persecution  or  treatment  in
     breach of Article 3.

14.6  Although we agree with Mr. Patel that paragraphs 6.38 and 6.39 of  the
     CIPU report are, in general terms, based  on  out-of-date  sources,  we
     have come to the conclusion,  by  considering  the  objective  evidence
     relating to the current situation which is before us,  that  Sikhs  are
     not a persecuted ethnic group in Kabul.   We  have  concluded,  on  the
     evidence before us, that there is no real risk that the Claimant  would
     face treatment amounting to persecution or in breach of her  Article  3
     rights, simply on account of being a Sikh.

14.7   We  agree  with  Mr.  Patel's  submission  that,  if  one  does   the
     mathematics, then the fourth and fifth sentences of paragraph  6.42  of
     the CIPU report indicate that the Sikh community in Kabul is  now  very
     small, numbering possibly about 200 in total.

14.8  It is generally accepted that the situation of women has  improved  in
     Afghanistan. Women and girls in Afghanistan have gained greater freedom
     to participate in public life and access to education, health care  and
     employment. This is the case  particularly  in  Kabul  where  ISAF  has
     helped to bring much needed security. However,  even  in  Kabul,  women
     faced constant threats to their personal security from other  civilians
     as well as from armed  men  belonging  to  various  political  factions
     (paragraph 6.88 of the CIPU report). We noted that  this  states  that,
     whilst there were no reports of physical attacks in Kabul,  there  were
     reports of instances of harassment (our emphasis). The May 2002  Danish
     fact-finding report reported that women can  now  move  around  without
     fear  of  the  Taliban  religious  police.  However,  generally,  women
     continue to wear the burka for their own safety (paragraph 6.90 of  the
     CIPU report). There are indications, according to paragraph 6.92 of the
     CIPU report which cites a Human Rights Watch Report of  December  2002,
     that restrictions on women and girls  are  again  increasing  all  over
     Afghanistan. In Kabul, a reconfigured Vice  and  Virtue  Squad  is  now
     operating. A team of some 90 women  under  the  Ministry  of  Religious
     Affairs has reportedly been harassing women for "un-Islamic behaviour",
     such has wearing makeup. Women have also been  reportedly  harassed  by
     unidentified men for discarding  particular  aspects  of  the  Taliban-
     mandated dress code. This trend gives some cause for concern.  However,
     there is no suggestion that the problems  experienced  by  women  as  a
     result of the increasing  restrictions  amount  to  persecution  or  in
     breach  of  Article  3.  Furthermore,  we  noted  that  the   Norwegian
     Ambassador is reported in the Danish  fact-finding  mission  report  of
     September 2002/October 2002 as saying  (page  E145  of  the  Claimant's
     bundle) that this initiative should not simply be seen as an indication
     of suppression and control of women but rather as an attempt at guiding
     women in terms of dress standards, etc.

14.9  Our attention was drawn to the report at  pages  A87  to  A89  of  the
     Claimant's bundle. However, it is clear that the problems mentioned  in
     the column entitled "Negative" from the third paragraph onwards on page
     A87 relate to areas outside  Kabul,  although  we  recognise  that  the
     second paragraph of the same column refers to security being poor  even
     in parts of Kabul.

14.10 We have carefully considered the  extracts  of  the  Danish  September
     2002/October 2002 report, at pages  E145  to  E147  of  the  Claimant's
     bundle. Regrettably, we  were  only  supplied  with  extracts  of  this
     report. It would have been helpful to see  the  whole  report  and,  in
     particular, the conclusions of the mission on  the  evidence  gathered.
     Various sources are quoted in the extracts at pages E145 to  E147.  For
     example, the Chief of the Afghan Women's  Association  (AWA)  said  (at
     page E145 of the Claimant's bundle) that  no  serious  changes  in  the
     lives of women  have  taken  place  and  that  women  are  still  being
     mistreated for not wearing a burka. On page E145,  AWA  are  quoted  as
     saying that there is no security for women at any level, that if  women
     go to the bazaar without wearing a burka, they risk  threats  or  -  if
     nobody interferes - actual physical punishment. These assertions by AWA
     run counter to the objective evidence  and  what  is  known  about  the
     situation of women under Taliban rule. It is  also  at  odds  with  the
     observation of the Norwegian Ambassador (on  the  same  page)  that  he
     believed that he had noticed significant changes in the overall  street
     picture in the last 6 months as regards the situation of  women.  Other
     sources are quoted as saying that the situation of women in Afghanistan
     has improved. If women are being attacked in Kabul  in  any  systematic
     way as to amount to persecution, it is inconceivable that  there  would
     be no reference to this in the reports we have referred to in paragraph
     14.8 above.

14.11 On the whole of the evidence before us, we  have  concluded  that  the
     Claimant is not at real risk  of  treatment  amounting  to  persecution
     simply because she is a woman.

14.12 The Danish fact-finding report of September 2002/  October  2002  also
     refers to observations made to the mission about the situation of women
     without male  relatives  or  without  access  to  a  network  in  their
     neighbourhood to protect them. On page E146, an international source is
     quoted as advising that women who have no male relatives for protection
     have serious problems, that it is necessary in the  cities  to  have  a
     network in the neighbourhood in order to get  protection.  However,  we
     are not told who this source is. We have already stated,  in  paragraph
     14.10 above, that we considered that the observations  of  AWA  are  at
     odds with the rest of the objective evidence. In  the  absence  of  any
     information as to the identity of the international source  cited,  the
     weight we are able to attach to their advice is necessarily limited. We
     have noted that the UNHCR, Kabul, stated that women are unable to  move
     without male relatives. However, this appears to be within the  context
     of UNHCR's efforts to move female staff from other areas  to  a  better
     job in Kabul. This paragraph also states that it is  not  possible  for
     women to be a female breadwinner for a family. We are not sure if  this
     is attributed to the UNHCR. We assume it is.

14.13 Paragraph 6.94 of the CIPU report states that, in a paper  dated  July
     2002 which was  issued  in  April  2003,  the  UNHCR  stated  that  the
     following categories of women should be considered to be  at  risk  and
     exposed to possible persecution, if they return to Afghanistan:

      i.    Single women without effective male and/or community support.
      ii.   Women perceived  to  be  or  actually  transgressing  prevailing
     social mores.

14.14 This refers to  the  return  of  women  to  Afghanistan,  whereas  the
     Claimant will be returning to Kabul, where the situation, as  shown  by
     the objective evidence, is much better than the rest of Afghanistan. In
     any event, the UNHCR's advice falls short of saying that women who fall
     within either or both of these categories are at real risk of treatment
     which amounts to persecution. It is inconceivable that if they  are  at
     such risk, the UNHCR would not say so. We therefore conclude  that  the
     mere fact that a woman would be returning to Kabul without male  and/or
     community support does not, of itself, means that she faces a real risk
     of treatment amounting to persecution. We do  consider,  however,  that
     UNHCR's  advice  should  be  seen  as  advice  to  consider  each  case
     individually, to which matter we now turn our attention.

14.15 With regard to category i,  we  note  that  the  Claimant's  husband's
     whereabouts are not known and therefore she would be returning to Kabul
     with her three dependants without any male relatives  accompanying  her
     back to Kabul. However, when she left  Afghanistan,  her  parents  were
     still in Kabul. Although she states that she does not know  where  they
     are now, there is  simply  no  evidence  that  they  have  left  Kabul.
     Although it has been asserted on the Claimant's behalf  that,  equally,
     there is no evidence that her parents are in Kabul, the  burden  is  on
     the Claimant to prove her claim.  Given that there is no evidence  that
     they have left Kabul, it would be pure speculation to suppose that they
     have left Kabul. In any event, the Claimant is a  member  of  the  Sikh
     community in Kabul. It does not follow, simply because paragraphs  6.38
     and 6.39 of the CIPU Report are based on out-of-date  references,  that
     the Sikh community in Kabul is no longer close-knit. Sikhs are in  germ
     terms, a closely-knit community. There is no reason  to  suppose  that,
     following the fall of the Taliban and the reduction in their numbers in
     Kabul, the ties  in  the  Sikh  community  have  broken  down  and  the
     community fragmented. It is interesting to note  that  the  three  Sikh
     asylum seekers referred to in paragraph 14.5 above were not  originally
     from Kabul; they were from Jalalabad. Although they were  not  formerly
     residents of Kabul, they were able to seek shelter in the  Sikh  temple
     in Kabul - which supports our conclusion that  the  Sikh  community  in
     Kabul, albeit diminished in numbers, is still a  close-knit  community.
     If returned to Kabul, there is no reason to suppose that  the  Claimant
     would not be able to obtain the support of the Sikh community there.

14.16 With regard to category ii., we are satisfied that there  is  no  real
     risk  that  the  Claimant  would  be  perceived  to  be   or   actually
     transgressing prevailing social mores. In  this  connection,  we  noted
     that, during the Taliban regime, she was on one occasion only (in 1999)
     beaten on her way to the temple for wearing nail varnish. The  lack  of
     any other problems on account of transgressing social mores shows  that
     she did not in general terms transgress social mores in the past and is
     not reasonably likely to do so in the future. It may well be  that  she
     may decide to wear a burka. In  the  event,  however,  that  she  faces
     problems as a result of not wearing a burka, we are satisfied that  she
     would be able to obtain sufficient protection.

14.17 On the whole of the evidence before us, we have concluded  that  there
     is no real risk that, if the Claimant is returned  to  Kabul  with  her
     dependants, she would face treatment which is sufficiently severe as to
     amount to persecution or in breach of her rights  under  Article  3  on
     account of being a Sikh female who would be returning to Kabul  without
     make support, although we accept that she may well face  discrimination
     falling short of persecution. Of course, guarantees  cannot  be  given.
     But we make it clear that we have assessed the likelihood  of  risk  on
     the low standard of a reasonable likelihood. In the event that she does
     experience problems, we are satisfied that she will be able to turn  to
     the  security  forces  in  Kabul  for  sufficient  protection.  In  the
     circumstances, it is not necessary for us to consider whether she is  a
     member of a particular social group, for the purposes  of  the  Refugee
     Convention. In any event, even if she  is  a  member  of  a  particular
     social group, she has  not  shown  that  she  would  receive  treatment
     amounting to persecution by reason of her membership of the  particular
     social group.

15.1  We now consider the Article 3  claim  to  the  extent  that  is  based
     solely on the conditions which the Claimant will face in Kabul  on  her
     return. We recognise that the general humanitarian condition  in  Kabul
     is still very poor, as compared, for example to  standards  in  Western
     countries. However as the Tribunal stated in Arefi,  this  is  not  the
     test. Paragraphs 6.160 to 6.164 of  the  CIPU  report  state  that  the
     situation in Kabul has improved  greatly.  In  June  2002,  journalists
     reported on the general return to normal life within the city. A report
     in June 2002 has confirmed the availability of food and water in Kabul.
     However, we acknowledge that conditions are still very difficult. There
     are references to the water table running very low, to the  absence  of
     an urban sanitation system and the absence of sewage  treatment.  There
     is reference to a local  water  crisis  in  September  2002  (paragraph
     6.161).  Accommodation  is  available  in  Kabul  although  housing  is
     increasingly limited as more families arrive. Aid  officials  in  Kabul
     have raised concerns about the huge influx of returning refugees  which
     have placed strains on the city's housing and infrastructure.  Although
     we note that reconstruction is under way in Kabul and that over 30  aid
     agencies are  currently  working  within  Afghanistan  on  shelter  and
     housing projects, we note also that it is said that thousands get by in
     tents inside commercial containers with holes cut for windows and that,
     mostly, people get by through extended family networks.

15.2  The Adjudicator considered that the Claimant's only  option  would  be
     to turn to prostitution. This may or may not have been  based  on  page
     A96 of the Claimant's bundle, which refers to girl children  of  widows
     being more likely to be found working in informal sector  undertakings,
     and being more vulnerable to prostitution. Reference  is  made  in  the
     grounds of application for permission to appeal  to  the  situation  of
     widows. The parties before us also made submissions on the position  of
     widows. The Claimant is not a widow, although it is true  that  one  of
     her dependants is a widow. Although we have no  reason  to  doubt  that
     employment opportunities  are,  in  general  terms,  limited  (see  for
     example, the first bullet point under the heading  "negative"  on  page
     A94 of the Claimant's bundle), there is evidence that  there  are  jobs
     for women (see the section under the heading "positive" on page A94  of
     the Claimant's bundle). Paragraph 6.101 of the CIPU report  also refers
     to hundreds of women working as civil  servants  and  professionals  in
     hospitals, courts, government and  non-governmental  institutions,  the
     United Nations and the private sector. We recognise that  the  Claimant
     is not educated. This will make it  even  more  difficult  for  her  to
     obtain employment. We do not underestimate the  difficulties  she  will
     face but we do not accept that her only option  would  be  to  turn  to
     prostitution. She would be able to turn to the aid agencies  in  Kabul,
     although we recognise that their resources  are  stretched.  She  would
     also be able to turn to her own Sikh community for help.  Nevertheless,
     we recognise that life will be very difficult for her. We bear in  mind
     that she has three  dependants.  It  may  well  be  that  she  and  her
     dependants may face poverty. We bear in mind also that the Claimant had
     witnessed her father-in-law and brother-in-law being murdered.

15.3  However, on the whole of the evidence before us, we are of  the  clear
     opinion that the conditions the Claimant would face  would  not  be  of
     such severity as to reach the threshold for a breach of Article 3.  The
     Article 3 threshold is a high one. Any  case  such  as  this   must  be
     judged in the light of the decision of  the  European  Court  of  Human
     Rights (ECtHr) in Bensaid v. The United Kingdom  [2002[  INLR  325.  In
     that case, the ECtHr said (paragraph 40 of the judgement):

      40.   The Court accepts the seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
           condition. Having regard however to the high  threshold  set  by
           Article 3, particularly where the  case  does  not  concern  the
           direct  responsibility  of  the  Contracting   State   for   the
           infliction of harm, the Court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the  applicant's  removal  in  these
           circumstances would be contrary to the standard of Article 3. It
           does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of the  D.  case
           (cited above) where the applicant was in the final stages  of  a
           terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical  care  or
           family support on expulsion to St. Kitts.

15.4  Of course, in the appeal before us, the Claimant does not rely on  any
     medical condition. However, the principle in Bensaid is also applicable
     in this case.

16.   We are also satisfied that the severity  threshold  for  treatment  to
     amount to persecution or in breach of Article 3 is not reached even  if
     any  discriminatory  problems  which  the  Claimant  might   experience
     (paragraph  14.17  above)  are  taken  cumulatively  with  the  general
     conditions which she and her dependants would face in Kabul.

17.   The effect of the judgement of the Court of Appeal  in  Ullah  and  Do
     [2002] EWCA Civ 1852 is that, given that  the  Claimant's  claim  under
     Article 3 has not been established, any claim under Article 8 must also
     fail, because this is based solely on the situation which the  Claimant
     would face in Kabul. However, Mr. Patel asked to record the  fact  that
     he had raised Article 8 at the hearing before us.  We also  record  the
     fact that the Article 8 claim was not mentioned at any stage until  the
     hearing before us. It was not mentioned in the S. 74 Notice, nor in the
     grounds of appeal attached to the Notice of appeal to the  Adjudicator.
     The Adjudicator's Record of Proceedings makes no mention of  Article  8
     having been  raised  before  him.  The  Skeleton  Argument  before  the
     Adjudicator makes no mention of Article 8.

18.   For all of these reasons, the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
     allowed.

      Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is ALLOWED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 8th August 2003
