
Heard at Field House on:
14 October 2003
 | |WAAAW (Family Reunion - Proportionality)  Somalia [2003] UKIAT  00174
| |
|Prepared on:               |        |                            |
|19 November 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........31st December 2003......                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. J. Barnes (Chairman)                                          |
|Mrs. M. Padfield                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANTS                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ADDIS ABABA                              |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


JD

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr. P. Lewis, of Counsel instructed by Wilson &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms. K. Evans, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellants are respectively the mother,  three  brothers  and
      uncle of their  Sponsor,  Abdullahi  Aden  Ahmed.  They  are  all
      citizens of Somalia, and the Sponsor is  settled  in  the  United
      Kingdom with indefinite leave to remain having been recognised as
      a refugee from Somalia.  The  Sponsor's  mother  was  born  on  1
      January 1950. His brothers Abdirisak,  Mohamed,  and  Jamal  were
      born respectively on 15 May 1979, 26 June 1981, and 23  September
      1988, and the youngest was a minor at the date of the application
      for leave to enter the United Kingdom. The fifth Appellant is the
      Sponsor's uncle born on 1 January 1975.


   2. The application for entry clearance, described as an  application
      for family reunion, was made by a letter dated 30 March 2000  and
      the  Applicants  then  included,  in  addition  to  the   present
      Appellants, the Sponsor's wife and their two infant children born
      respectively in 1994 and 1997. The Sponsor's wife and his  infant
      children were all granted entry clearance and joined the  Sponsor
      here. Since the reunion of  the  immediate  family,  two  further
      children have been born to the Sponsor and his wife in the United
      Kingdom.

   3. The Sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom as an asylum seeker  on
      6 February 1998, having travelled from  Ethiopia  where  he  had,
      until his departure, lived with and formed the head of the family
      comprising the Appellants, his wife and two infant  children.  He
      was granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 6
      March 2000 on the basis  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in Somalia, and as will be apparent, the applications
      for entry clearance out of which the present  appeals  lie,  were
      then made very shortly after  his  immigration  status  here  was
      settled. The applications of each of the Appellants were  refused
      by the Respondent on 15 June 2001 on the  basis  that,  save  for
      Jamal, none of them complied with the requirements  of  paragraph
      317 of HC395, the relevant Immigration  Rules.  In  the  case  of
      Jamal, the basis of refusal of the application was a  failure  to
      comply with the requirement of paragraph 297 of HC395 since  this
      was the paragraph of the Rules applicable having  regard  to  his
      age.

   4. The Appellants appealed against those decisions  on  both  asylum
      and human rights grounds  and  their  appeals  were  heard  on  5
      February 2003 by an Adjudicator, Mr. M. P. Keane. The reason  for
      the delay between the decisions and notices  of  appeal  and  the
      hearing  is  that  the  explanatory  statement   and   supporting
      documents  were  not  supplied  to  the   Immigration   Appellate
      Authority until on, or shortly after, 28 October 2002,  the  date
      of the  explanatory  statement.  This  discloses  also  that  the
      Secretary of State had considered the applications  exceptionally
      outside the Immigration Rules in accordance with  family  reunion
      policy. It is pertinent to set out in this respect what  is  said
      in the explanatory statement:

        '2.6.  The Secretary of State also considered the applications
              exceptionally   outside   the   Immigration   Rules   in
              accordance with the family reunion  policy.  Under  this
              policy the existing spouse and minor children are to  be
              permitted to join a recognised refugee  if  they  formed
              part of the refugee's family unit before he fled to  the
              United  Kingdom.   In   compelling   and   compassionate
              circumstances  consideration  may  be   given   to   the
              admission of other dependent relatives if they also  can
              be shown to have formed part of the family unit.


        '2.7    The Appellants were not the spouse or  minor  children
              of the Sponsor. Whilst it appears  that  the  Appellants
              may have been living with the Sponsor before he came  to
              the  United  Kingdom  (although  this  is  by  no  means
              entirely   clear)   there   were   no   compelling   and
              compassionate circumstances. Accordingly, the  Secretary
              of State was not minded to exercise  his  discretion  in
              the Appellants' favour under the family reunion policy.


        '2.8   The  Secretary  of   State   further   considered   the
              application  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  However,
              there was no reason why the Appellants  could  not  look
              after each other, and their circumstances were not  such
              as to persuade  him  to  exercise  discretion  in  their
              favour and grant entry clearance outside the Rules.'


   5. To the extent that those decisions were made outside the Rules on
      the basis of the exercise of a discretion by  the  Respondent  at
      the direction of the Secretary of State to whom the  applications
      had been referred for guidance (paragraph 2.8 above),  they  were
      not justiciable before the Adjudicator by virtue of paragraph  21
      (4) of schedule 4 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  which
      precluded the Adjudicator from considering  the  merits  of  that
      exercise of discretion. The reasoning at paragraphs 2.6  and  2.6
      above was, however, pursuant to consideration of the Secretary of
      State's published policy and therefore was justiciable before the
      Adjudicator (see  Re  Abdi  [1996]  Imm  AR  148),  but  involved
      considerations similar to those  which  led  the  Adjudicator  to
      reject  the  claims  under  paragraphs  297  and  317  of  HC395.
      Nevertheless, the consideration outside the Immigration Rules  is
      of relevance. Although there is nothing expressly stated to  show
      that the Secretary of State or the Respondent formally considered
      whether refusal of entry clearance for settlement was  in  breach
      of the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention, the fact of  the  consideration  given  does
      seem to us to have relevance to considering the degree  to  which
      the Secretary of State has effectively taken into account matters
      relevant to the question of proportionality of  removal  for  the
      purposes of Article 8 (2)  of  the  European  Convention  if  the
      decisions made  engage  Article  8  (1)  by  a  failure  to  give
      appropriate respect  to  any  existing  private  or  family  life
      between the Appellants and the Sponsor.  In this respect we  bear
      in mind that it is the policy of the Secretary of State  in  such
      circumstances to take into account the international  obligations
      of the United Kingdom and that the  United  Kingdom  was  then  a
      signatory to the European Convention even though it had not  been
      formally  incorporated  into  English  law  by  the  coming  into
      operation of the Human Rights Act 1998. Indeed,  the  Immigration
      Rules themselves have been and are refined by  the  Secretary  of
      State as necessary to reflect current developments in  Strasbourg
      human rights jurisprudence.


   6. Before  the  Adjudicator  the  appeals  were  fully  argued  with
      appropriate supporting evidence on  the  basis  first,  that  the
      Appellants  did  comply  with  the   relevant   requirements   of
      paragraphs 317 and 297 respectively of HC395, but the Adjudicator
      dismissed the appeals on those grounds and there is no  challenge
      to his decision in this respect or in relation to the Abdi  point
      before us.

   7. We  are  concerned  only  with  the  challenges  mounted  to  the
      Adjudicator's dismissal also of  the  appeals  before  him  under
      Article 8.



   8. We set out at paragraph 18 below the law as to  the  approach  to
      proportionality in entry cases but  it  is  appropriate  that  we
      should at this point record the provisions of  Article  8,  which
      are as follows:


        '1. Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private  and
        family life, his home and his correspondence.


        '2. There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
        the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
        with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
        interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
        well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
        crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedom of others.'


   9. The Adjudicator made the following findings at  paragraph  19  in
      respect of the past history of the Appellants,  the  Sponsor  and
      his immediate family:


        'The Sponsor and the Appellants are each citizens of  Somalia.
        The  Sponsor's  father  was  murdered  by  the  United  Somali
        Congress in 1991 and the family as a whole were displaced from
        their home or homes. They have lived since 1993 in  a  refugee
        camp situated in Addis Ababa. The [Sponsor] left the  camp  in
        1998 and travelled to the United Kingdom. He made a claim  for
        asylum and was recognised as a refugee in March 2000. In  that
        year an application was made on behalf of the Appellants  [and
        the Sponsor's wife] that they be granted leave  to  enter  the
        United Kingdom. [The  Sponsor's  wife]  duly  arrived  in  the
        United Kingdom with her two children. The applications insofar
        as the Appellants were concerned did not  succeed.  Since  her
        arrival in the United Kingdom, the Sponsor and [his wife] have
        had a further two children. The Appellants live  in  difficult
        circumstances in the refugee camp. Halima Warsame suffers from
        hypertension, rheumatism, and has dizzy  spells.  Jamal  Ahmed
        suffers from tuberculosis. Farah Warsame lost  a  leg  in  the
        Civil War conflict and suffers from an  ulcer  and  a  gastric
        condition. The Appellants have received financial support from
        the Sponsor after  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
        Appellants dearly wish to  join  the  Sponsor  in  the  United
        Kingdom. The Sponsor is acutely concerned  at  the  states  of
        health of the Appellants and their general living conditions.'

  10.  In his consideration of  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules, the Adjudicator went on to make further findings which are
      pertinent at  paragraphs  20  and  21  of  his  determination  as
      follows:


        '20.     I find that the first four-named appellants [that is,
                excluding  Jamal]  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
                decision were  not  living  alone  outside  the  United
                Kingdom   in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
                circumstances  and  mainly  dependent  financially   on
                relatives settled in the United Kingdom. I now  provide
                the reasons for my finding. First,  although  I  should
                acknowledge that the appellants  have  been  living  in
                difficult circumstances when the medical conditions  of
                Jalima Warsame, Farah Warsame and Jamal Ahmed and their
                general living circumstances are  taken  into  account,
                the appellants on the evidence have  coped  with  those
                circumstances.  They  have  received   some   financial
                assistance from the sponsor and I should  not  construe
                the provisions of paragraph 317(i)(e) of the  Rules  as
                if  the  sponsor  had  not  been  providing   financial
                assistance. Second, the appellants have not been living
                alone outside the United Kingdom. They have been living
                together as a close family unit  in  a  camp  or  camps
                situated in Addis Ababa. For that reason alone I should
                not regard them as being either physically isolated  or
                psychologically isolated in the sense of being cut  off
                from members of their  family,  relatives  or  friends.
                Third, although I have found that the sponsor  provided
                some financial support  to  the  appellants  I  am  not
                prepared  to  find  that  the  appellants  were  mainly
                dependent  financially  on  him  in  view  of  his  own
                financial  circumstances  as  a  recipient  of   income
                support.


        '21.       I find that in the case of Jamal  Ahmed  there  are
                not   serious   and   compelling   family   or    other
                considerations which make his exclusion from the United
                Kingdom undesirable. Again, in the case of Jamal  Ahmed
                I  should  acknowledge  that  at  the   date   of   the
                respondent's  decision  he  had  been  living  in  very
                difficult circumstances. Nevertheless, he  had  been  a
                part of a settled family unit and was being  cared  for
                by Halima Warsame and his close family members. He  and
                the remaining appellants are impoverished  but  receive
                support from the sponsor. Jamal Ahmed received physical
                care  and  emotional   support   from   the   remaining
                appellants'.


  11.  A little later, at paragraph 24 he said this:


        'The sponsor was prepared to leave the appellants in Ethiopia.
        The evidence did not  suggest  that  either  they  or  he  had
        experienced persecution  at  the  camp  or  in  Ethiopia.  The
        appellants are plainly able to provide support to  each  other
        although they live in difficult circumstances. Accordingly,  I
        find that the respondent took into account the family  reunion
        policy and gave effect to it...I find that the decision  under
        appeal is in accordance with the law. The  respondent  further
        considered the applications for leave to  enter  exceptionally
        [outside] the immigration rules. In deciding not  to  exercise
        his discretion in favour of the appellants he had in mind  his
        conclusion that the appellants were not  living  in  the  most
        exceptional compassionate circumstances.'


  12.  The Adjudicator then went on to consider whether Article  8  was
      engaged and found that it was. He gives his reasons at  paragraph
      28 as follows:


        'I find that family life existed at the date  of  the  hearing
        between the Appellants and the Sponsor. I find that a deep and
        meaningful family life existed between the Appellants and  the
        Sponsor.  I  find  that  the  Sponsor  espouses  a  degree  of
        commitment to the Appellants  and  that  they  expect  him  to
        discharge that commitment.'


  13.  Although we have some reservations as  to  whether  family  life
      does exist, the Adjudicator's finding in  this  respect  has  not
      been challenged by  the  Respondent,  and  given  the  particular
      history of the family, the fact that it was  also  accepted  that
      the Sponsor had become the head of the  extended  family  on  the
      death of his father, had provided some  financial  support  after
      his arrival in the United Kingdom and had sought  family  reunion
      as soon as his own immigration status here was established  on  a
      basis that would support it, it may  be  that  the  Adjudicator's
      finding in this respect  is  in  any  event  sustainable  on  the
      totality of  the  evidence.  The  finding  is  not,  as  we  say,
      challenged on the part of the Respondent and  we  have  therefore
      proceeded on the basis that it stands for the  purposes  of  this
      appeal.


  14. At paragraph 33 of the determination the Adjudicator  found  that
      the refusal of entry to the United Kingdom was  proportionate  in
      the public interest and he gives six reasons for that  conclusion
      to which we must briefly refer as some of them are the subject of
      challenge in the grounds of appeal. They are as follows:

        (1)The right of the United Kingdom to control  entry  of  non-
        nationals under international law;


        (2) That Article 8 imposes no general obligation to  authorise
        family reunion;


        (3) The Sponsor chose to leave the Appellants in circumstances
        where none of them were experiencing persecution  in  Ethiopia
        and it was his action which  led  to  the  separation  of  the
        family;


        (4) Only Jamal is a minor;


        (5) The Sponsor could return to the camp  in  Addis  Ababa  to
        resume family life with the Appellants so that  there  are  no
        insurmountable obstacles to family reunion in this fashion;


        (6) Apart from any Article 8 claim, the Appellants each had  a
        right to make an application to enter  under  the  Immigration
        Rules and the fact that they might not succeed did not  render
        refusal of admission disproportionate.'


  15.  Mr. Lewis submitted that the fifth reason was  not  sustainable.
      The recognition of the Sponsor as a refugee meant that  he  could
      not be expected to return to Somalia but  he  had  no  status  in
      Ethiopia other than having formerly been a refugee there so  that
      he had no right of entry there to rejoin the Appellants. That  of
      itself constituted an insurmountable obstacle to  his  so  doing,
      quite apart from the fact that it would be wholly unrealistic  to
      expect the Sponsor to return with his wife and now four  children
      and to expose them to the dangers of living as refugees. We agree
      with Mr. Lewis' submission.


  16. As to the Adjudicator's sixth reason, the challenge made was that
      the Appellants had sought entry clearance under  the  immigration
      rules and had been unsuccessful. To say  that  they  had  such  a
      right when patently they could not succeed  was  unreasonable  in
      relation to proportionality under Article 8. In this  respect  we
      do not agree with Mr. Lewis' submission. In considering whether a
      refusal in the public interest is proportionate under  Article  8
      (2), the provisions of the law of  the  refusing  state  and  its
      practice seem to us to be highly relevant to the general issue of
      proportionality of the approach of the state concerned. If, under
      its own laws, a state makes no provision  for  the  admission  of
      family members either in the close sense of spouse and  children,
      or of members of the wider family who may have  claims  based  on
      particularly compassionate circumstances, then  it  seems  to  us
      that  such  a  state  may  well  have   greater   difficulty   in
      demonstrating that removal or exclusion is proportionate than  in
      circumstances where such humanitarian and compassionate needs are
      reflected in the State's own domestic law. In  the  case  of  the
      United Kingdom, there is extensive such  provision,  both  within
      the Immigration Rules and by way of extra-statutory discretion as
      appears from the treatment of the present Appellants.  Given  the
      margin of appreciation which is to be accorded to the State as to
      the regulation of admission of aliens, the degree to  which  such
      provisions exist under domestic  law  is,  to  our  mind,  highly
      relevant when considering issues of proportionality under Article
      8(2) of the European Convention. This  really  follows  from  the
      first and second factors which the Adjudicator took into  account
      and is reflected in the judgement of the Master of the  Rolls  in
      Ullah and Do [2002] EWCA Civ  1856  where,  after  reviewing  the
      Strasbourg jurisprudence, he concludes that it  illustrates  that
      the public interest derogation  under  Article  8(2)  will  often
      trump  or  outweigh  any  consequent  interference  with  private
      rights.


  17.  As  to  the  third  factor,  insofar  as  it  is  based  on  the
      discontinuance of the family life by the Sponsor's departure from
      Ethiopia, it is somewhat difficult to  reconcile  this  with  the
      Adjudicator's finding that there is an extant deep and meaningful
      private life between the Sponsor and the Appellants. It seems  to
      us the inference from the factual  findings  of  the  Adjudicator
      that the Sponsor left Ethiopia for the United Kingdom not because
      he was seeking to abandon his family there  but  because  he  was
      seeking to improve their lot. The fact of some financial  support
      from his arrival in the United Kingdom coupled with the making of
      the applications out of  which  the  present  appeals  lie,  made
      immediately once his immigration  status  was  assured,  strongly
      militates against there being  any  intentional  abandonment  and
      consequent disruption of family  ties  on  his  part.  Given  the
      acceptance of the existence of family life, it does not  seem  to
      us that that factor has  any  real  relevance  to  the  issue  of
      proportionality.

  18. In the course of submissions we were  referred  to  the  Tribunal
      determination in  Shamim  Box  [2002]  UKIAT  02212,  cited  with
      approval in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31, and we agree with
      the approach there recommended to proportionality in entry cases.
      Paragraphs 29 and 31  of  Shamim  Box  seem  to  us  particularly
      relevant in explaining the proper approach as follows:

        '29. Leading cases in Strasbourg have consistently viewed  the
             relevant criteria under  Article  8  in  cases  involving
             entry  as  requiring  not  an  analysis  of  whether  the
             decision interferes with a Claimant's  right  to  respect
             for private and family life (a negative  obligation)  but
             an analysis of whether  it  amounts  to  a  breach  of  a
             State's positive obligation to respect private and family
             life. In Abdulaziz v UK (1985)  7  EHRR  471,  the  Court
             clarified that when considering the extent of  a  State's
             obligations  to  admit  to  its  territory  relatives  of
             settled immigrants, it was  necessary  to  focus  on  the
             positive obligations inherent in the notion of  'respect'
             and to examine whether there had been a lack  of  respect
             for family life. Another leading  case  is  Ahmut  v  the
             Netherlands  (1997)  24  EHRR  62,  which  concerned   an
             application made in Tangiers from a child to be granted a
             residence permit authorising him to rejoin his father  in
             the Netherlands. At paragraph 63 the  Court  reasoned  as
             follows:


               'The present case hinges on the  question  whether  the
               Netherlands  government  was  under  a  duty  to  allow
               Souffiane to reside with his father in the Netherlands,
               thus enabling the Applicant  to  maintain  and  develop
               family life in its territory. For this reason the Court
               will view the case as one involving  an  allegation  of
               failure on the part of the Respondent State  to  comply
               with a positive obligation'....


         '31.  It must be emphasised  straight  away  that  whilst  the
             approach to Article 8 in the case of an entry decision is
             different than in a removal case,  Strasbourg  has  never
             seen  this  to  entail  a   significant   difference   in
             underlying criteria. As the  Court  said  earlier  on  at
             paragraph 63 of Ahmut :


                'The court reiterates  that  the  essential  object  of
                Article  8  is  to  protect  the   individual   against
                arbitrary action by the public authority. There may  in
                addition be positive obligations inherent in  effective
                "respect" for  family  life.  However,  the  boundaries
                between the State's positive and  negative  obligations
                under this provision do not lend themselves to  precise
                definitions.    The    applicable    principles    are,
                nonetheless, similar. In both contexts regard  must  be
                had to the fine balance that has to be  struck  between
                the competing  interests  of  the  individual  and  the
                community as a whole; and in both  contexts  the  state
                enjoys a certain margin of appreciation.'


  19. It was Mr. Lewis' submission to us that not only the Sponsor  but
      the other family members in Ethiopia were living there illegally.
      We do not accept that submission. The family moved to Ethiopia in
      1993 and the Appellants continue to live in a refugee camp  there
      so that they have now been there for upwards  of  ten  years.  We
      accept that they may not have a formally  settled  status  there,
      and we have already accepted that there is  no  evidential  basis
      for saying that the Sponsor, as a departed refugee from Ethiopia,
      will be able to re-enter that country in that  capacity  now.  It
      was claimed that the family feared they might be  repatriated  to
      Somalia. No doubt that is a fear on  the  part  of  many  of  the
      Somali refugees in Ethiopia but there is  no  evidence  that  the
      Ethiopian government acts in such a way and the Adjudicator found
      specifically that neither the Appellants nor the Sponsor had been
      ill-treated in Ethiopia although the conditions under which  they
      lived were hard and sparse. Mr. Lewis conceded that the effect of
      refusal of admission was neutral in the sense that the  situation
      which  had  existed  since  the  Sponsor's  departure  would   be
      maintained save that he claimed that conditions in Ethiopia  were
      deteriorating. No evidence as to this has been adduced before  us
      and we have already set out the findings of  the  Adjudicator  at
      paragraphs 20 and 21 of his  determination  which  bear  on  this
      issue.


  20. It was Mr. Lewis'  submission  to  us  that  in  considering  the
      respect for family life which was  due  to  the  Appellants,  the
      Secretary of State should have taken  into  account  that  mutual
      dependency was accepted to exist  between  the  wider  family  in
      Somalia and similar societies  as  had  been  recognised  by  the
      former Somali family reunion policy, a factor which he  submitted
      we could have regard to in considering  proportionality.  It  was
      incumbent on the Secretary of  State  to  consider  the  specific
      nature of the relationship between the Appellants and the Sponsor
      and the relevant respect was not sufficiently demonstrated by the
      provisions made in general terms under the Immigration Rules. The
      refusal of admission would affect the level and intensity of  the
      family life which had existed prior to  the  Sponsor's  departure
      from Ethiopia.



  21. We accept, as he submitted, that the position  of  the  Appellant
      must be considered  against  the  background  of  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence, but that jurisprudence makes  it  clear  that  the
      existence of family life without more is  accepted  only  in  the
      case of the relationship of  husband  and  wife  and  parent  and
      dependent infant child, the situations in respect  of  which  the
      Immigration  Rules  of  our  domestic  law  already   make   very
      substantial provision for family reunion. In  other  more  remote
      family relationships, the very existence of family  life  depends
      upon special dependency requirements and this different level  is
      reflected in the broad domestic law provisions  under  paragraphs
      297 and 317 of HC 395 where it is accepted that the Appellants do
      not meet the exceptional compassionate circumstances required  to
      satisfy the Immigration Rules. Nor, on the history of the present
      appeals,  did  the  Secretary  of   State   consider   that   the
      circumstances of the Appellants justified discretionary treatment
      outside the provisions of United Kingdom domestic law although at
      the time of such consideration the United Kingdom was a party  to
      the European Convention as part of its international  obligations
      and  this  factor  would  be  relevant  to  the  extra  statutory
      discretionary consideration.


  22. It was submitted by Mr. Lewis that, following Razgar [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 840, it was for the Adjudicator or the Tribunal  to carry out
      the balancing exercise because the Respondent had  not  done  so.
      Whilst we accept that the Respondent, acting on the advice of the
      Secretary of State, does not deal with Article 8  issues  in  the
      explanatory statement, it does not seem to us that these  appeals
      fall wholly within the  Razgar  principle  because  all  relevant
      facts were known to the Respondent at  the  time  of  making  the
      decision and the refusal to exercise discretion, as  recorded  at
      paragraphs 2.6 to 2.8  of  the  Explanatory  Statement,  followed
      considerations that were based on  public  policy  including  the
      applicability of Article 8 obligations as explained at paragraphs
      5 and 21 above. It seems to us that the present case is far  more
      analogous to that which applied in Blessing Edore [2003] EWCA Civ
      716, where it was held that if the Secretary of State has made  a
      decision on proportionality under Article 8 on the basis  of  the
      full factual situation, his decision should be considered subject
      to the margin of appreciation to be accorded to it and interfered
      with only where it is plainly wrong.


  23. In that respect, we take due notice of Ms. Evans' submissions  to
      us that the former Somali family reunion policy (in  contrast  to
      the  general  policy  relating  to  family  reunion   which   was
      considered) had not applied for some time  at  the  date  of  the
      decision by the  Respondent.  Its  discontinuance  was  a  policy
      decision  by  the  State  and  it  seems  to  us  that  in  those
      circumstances Mr. Lewis cannot rely on former policies in support
      of his submissions on proportionality. Further, it  seems  to  us
      that, given the matters rehearsed at paragraphs 2.6 to 2.8 of the
      explanatory statement which we have set out above, it  cannot  be
      said on the facts that the Respondent was plainly  wrong  in  his
      decision to refuse entry clearance.  We  accept  that  it  was  a
      situation where it could fairly have been decided either way.  We
      note Ms.  Evans'  submission  that  there  is  a  distinction  in
      connection with wider family  members  and  that  if  Mr.  Lewis'
      submission were correct, then it would be difficult to refuse the
      application of any extended family member living in circumstances
      which attracted sympathy. This would, however, be to  impinge  on
      the important right of the Secretary of State to  regulate  those
      whom he is prepared to admit. Taking  account  of  the  competing
      interests of the State and the individual,  we  have  formed  the
      view, on the accepted evidence, that it cannot be said  that  the
      decision of the Respondent is plainly wrong and that  it  follows
      that it is proportionate to the legitimate interests of the State
      under Article 8 (2).


  24. If we are wrong in that approach and it is for the Adjudicator or
      us to carry out the balancing exercise, we would not on the facts
      differ from the conclusion  at  which  the  Adjudicator  arrived,
      albeit we would discount his third and fifth reasons as  we  have
      explained above. There is no reason to  think  that  the  Sponsor
      will not continue to provide such supplementary financial support
      as he is able to give. The State is entitled  to  regulate  entry
      into its territory and is not seeking to do so  on  a  capricious
      basis but after due consideration of all  relevant  factors.  The
      interference  in  the  right  to  respect  for  family  life   is
      proportionate  to  the  legitimate  interests  of  the  state  in
      regulating immigration.


  25. Whilst, therefore, we naturally have sympathy with the  situation
      of the Appellants, we  nevertheless  find,  albeit  for  slightly
      different reasons from those applied by the Adjudicator, that the
      human rights claim is not made out  in  respect  of  any  of  the
      Appellants.

  26. These appeals are accordingly dismissed.


                                                               Mr. J. Barnes
                                                              Vice President


