
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |KY (HADEP-PK) Turkey CG     |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00018          |
|On  8 January 2003         |        |                            |
|Dictated 9 January 2003                                           |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..2ND July 2003....                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs S Hussain, JP                                                 |
|Mr A F Sheward                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances
For the appellant:           Mr Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:          Mr R Rees of Counsel
                       Instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Miss L Astle, who allowed the  respondent's  appeal
      on both asylum and human rights grounds against the decision  made  on
      14  January  2002  giving  directions  for  his  removal.    In   this
      determination the  Tribunal  will  refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
      claimant.

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Turkey born in January 1964.  On his  own
      account he left Turkey on 1 November 2000.  His journey  was  arranged
      by an agent.  He travelled in the back of a lorry  across  Europe  and
      made a clandestine entry on about 11 November 2000.  He claimed asylum
      on 12 November 2000.  His claim was based on a fear of persecution due
      to his support for HADEP  and  the  PKK  in  Turkey.   The  claim  was
      rejected for the reasons set out by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
      reasons for refusal letter dated 8  November  2001.   The  Adjudicator
      heard the appeal against this decision on 17 September 2002.

   3. The claimant is an ethnic Kurd, born  in  Bosni  in  the  Province  of
      Adiyaman in South East Turkey.  In the mid-1980s PKK  guerrillas  came
      to the family  home  to  obtain  food  and  shelter.   He  distributed
      leaflets and helped organise meetings for  the  villagers  to  discuss
      Kurdish issues.  He did not become a member of the  organisation.   He
      completed his military service between March 1984 and September  1985.
      He says that he was often physically abused by his fellow officers  as
      a result of his Kurdish ethnic origin.  After completing  his  service
      he returned to his village.  In 1986 his village was  raided  and  the
      appellant with others was taken to the gendarme station in  Bosni  and
      interrogated.  He was released due to lack of evidence.   In  1993  he
      was detained at a police station for two days  following  an  identity
      check.  He became involved with HADEP after it was founded in 1994 but
      did not  become  a  member.   He  would  distribute  leaflets,  attend
      meetings and demonstrations.

   4. In May 1998 he attended May Day celebrations in  Antalya  with  HADEP.
      They were shouting Kurdish slogans.  The authorities moved in on  them
      and the claimant was arrested and detained  for  five  days.   He  was
      released for lack of evidence.  On 1 September 2000 he was attending a
      meeting at the HADEP building in Mersin.  He was stopped and taken  to
      the  security  headquarters  where  he  was  beaten  with  truncheons,
      subjected to falaka and generally beaten.  He denied involvement  with
      the PKK and was released after a week.  He was threatened that  if  he
      were detained again in relation to his activities with either HADEP or
      PKK he would face a more severe punishment. He decided that it was  no
      longer safe for him to remain in Turkey and he travelled  to  Istanbul
      where he remained for about 10 to 15 days before the agent was able to
      arrange for his departure.

   5. The Adjudicator noted that there  were  some  inconsistencies  in  the
      claimant's evidence but broadly speaking  she  found  these  to  be  a
      matter of emphasis  not  going  to  the  core  of  the  account.   She
      considered that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  his
      evidence was true.  She  accepted  that  he  had  suffered  harassment
      generally and had been detained and ill treated.  She found  that  his
      claim that the police wanted him to be an informer to be less easy  to
      believe.  Given the nature of his activities for the PKK and HADEP  it
      seemed doubtful that he would be of  much  use  to  the  police.   The
      claimant had given evidence  about  his  cousin  being  killed  as  he
      refused to be an informant but the Adjudicator said that she  did  not
      feel able to take this matter into account  as  she  had  insufficient
      detail to enable her to form any conclusion.

   6. The Adjudicator said that whilst the claimant  had  been  detained  on
      four occasions between 1986 and  2000  he  had  always  been  released
      without charge.  He had managed to  conduct  his  business  travelling
      freely throughout Turkey albeit with  some  harassment  over  identity
      checks.  He had been able to travel to Istanbul prior to  leaving  and
      remained there for two to three weeks.  She found it doubtful that  in
      the ordinary  course  of  events  he  would  be  of  interest  to  the
      authorities.  She went on to say that the background material  on  the
      procedures adopted for returnees gave  her  cause  for  concern.   The
      claimant's history would be known to the officials concerned  and  she
      considered it likely that he would be detained and questioned.   There
      was sufficient information in the reports before her to indicate  that
      in those circumstances he would  face  a  real  risk  of  further  ill
      treatment and persecution.  On this basis she allowed the appeal.

   7. The grounds of appeal are admirably succinct.  Ground  1  argues  that
      there is a contradiction between the finding that it was doubtful that
      in the ordinary course of events the claimant would be of interest  to
      the authorities with the finding that he was likely to be at  risk  of
      detention, ill treatment and persecution on return.  The second ground
      argues that the Adjudicator had not  taken  account  of  the  guidance
      given in Polat [2002] UKIAT 04332 which dealt in some detail with  the
      risk on return to a low level sympathiser with the PKK/HADEP.

   8. Mr Ouseley argued that if the claimant  was  of  no  interest  to  the
      authorities, he would not be at real risk on return.  He had been able
      to live in Istanbul.  He had never been charged or  placed  under  any
      conditions.  There was a generally improving situation in Turkey since
      the PKK had ended the armed conflict.  No provinces were now  under  a
      state of emergency.

   9. Mr  Rees  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  decision  was  properly
      reasoned and that she had been  entitled  to  reach  her  conclusions.
      They had been  assessed  in  the  light  of  the  background  evidence
      summarised  at   paragraphs   28-34   of   the   determination.    The
      Adjudicator's findings were not  inconsistent.   The  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to look at the risk on return.  Mr Rees referred the Tribunal
      to paragraph 6.90, 91, 94 and  125  of  the  CIPU  Country  Assessment
      November 2002.  He went through the factors identified by the Tribunal
      in paragraph 29 of Polat.  The evidence in  the  CIPU  report  on  the
      treatment of returned asylum seekers had to be assessed in  the  light
      of the fact that there had been no formal monitoring of returns.   The
      reported cases of mistreatment depended  on  reports  being  made  and
      there would inevitably be incidents which went unreported.

  10. The Adjudicator allowed the appeal because of her concern arising from
      the evidence on the procedures adopted  relating  to  returnees.   The
      Adjudicator has referred  to  the  evidence  in  the  CIPU  report  in
      paragraphs 32 and 33 of her determination.  The issue is dealt with in
      paragraphs 6.87-106 of the CIPU report.  Mr Rees points out  that  the
      records held by the authorities can also relate to  official  judicial
      preliminary enquiries or investigations by the  police  or  gendarmes:
      paragraph 6.89.  The relevance of this  point  is  that  the  criminal
      records of asylum seekers who are returned to Turkey  are  checked  on
      entry like those of any other Turkish national.  Criminal records  may
      include a record of preliminary enquiries  or  police  investigations.
      Questioning is designed to establish or  check  personal  particulars,
      reasons for and times of departure from Turkey,  grounds  for  seeking
      asylum, reasons why the application was rejected, any criminal records
      at home and  abroad  including  drug  related  offences  and  possible
      contacts with illegal organisations abroad:  paragraph  6.90.   Anyone
      suspected of  committing  criminal  offences  is  transferred  to  the
      relevant investigative authority and persons suspected  of  membership
      of the PKK, left wing radical organisations  such  DHKP/C  or  TKP/ML,
      militant Islamic groups or  anyone  suspected  of  giving  support  or
      shelter to one of those organisations is  handed  over  to  the  anti-
      terror branch where torture or ill treatment  of  suspects  cannot  be
      ruled out.  However, according to paragraph 6.90  where  there  is  no
      definite suspicion, as a rule, the person is released after an average
      6 to 9 hours detention.

  11. Paragraph 6.92-6 and 102 deal with the allegations of maltreatment  or
      torture after arrival in Turkey.  The general tenor of the evidence is
      that most asylum seekers or returnees are released after  the  routine
      interview although in an Amnesty International report in February 1999
      there was evidence of an increasing number  of  cases  where  returned
      asylum seekers were later picked up by unknown men and  beaten  up  or
      arrested and taken into custody.  In July 1999 the German  authorities
      reported  that  in  general  rejected  asylum  seekers  did  not  risk
      persecution.  The fact that a returnee was a failed asylum seeker  did
      not lead to different treatment on return.   The  Turkish  authorities
      were well aware that many Turkish nationals applied  for  asylum  only
      for the purpose of gaining authorisation to remain in Germany.  An IND
      Fact  Finding  Mission  in  March  2001  was  told  that  the  Turkish
      Government  recognised  that  the  overwhelming  majority  of  Turkish
      nationals who had applied for asylum overseas had done so  purely  for
      economic reasons and were of no interest to the Turkish authorities.

  12. According to  paragraph  6.102  there  have  been  70  reported  cases
      advanced as evidence of the mistreatment of returnees in Turkey. These
      cases date from 1989.  Four cases relate to returns  from  the  United
      Kingdom.  The report says that of those returned during  this  period,
      7,520 out of 48,565 were identified as  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers.
      These figures  must  be  treated  with  caution  because  firstly  the
      allegations of ill treatment may be  under-reported  but  equally  the
      number of returns is likely in reality to be considerably larger  than
      the figures given for the reasons set out in paragraph 6.104.  It must
      also be taken into account that where particular incidents  have  been
      investigated, whilst some have been found to be  well-founded,  others
      have been found to be incorrect or implausible.

  13. In the Tribunal's view it  is  also  significant  that  the  voluntary
      return of Turkish nationals from Northern Iraq has been facilitated by
      the UNHCR who paid frequent visits to returnees in  various  provinces
      in order to observe the results of voluntary repatriation.  The  UNHCR
      was satisfied that returnees as a category have not  been  subject  to
      persecution or reprisals in Turkey.  It must of course be  noted  that
      this conclusion is made in the context  of  the  voluntary  return  of
      nationals from Northern Iraq to Turkey.

  14. In assessing the risk on return it is important to keep  in  mind  the
      current  situation  in  Turkey.   In  September  1999  PKK  combatants
      confirmed that  they  would  cease  operations.   The  armed  conflict
      between the Government and the PKK effectively came to an end  and  in
      October  2000  the  Turkish  armed  forces  announced  that  they  had
      successfully completed their struggle against the PKK.  In August 2002
      the Turkish Parliament approved a package of  key  democratic  reforms
      designed to improve Turkey's chances of EU  membership.   One  Turkish
      human rights activist has described the reforms as the  most  positive
      changes made during the history of the Turkish Republic.  In the Human
      Rights Watch report it is commented that during the  past  year  there
      have been more substantial human rights improvements than in any  year
      since the 1980 coup but the report added that  there  were  two  areas
      needing action, torture and freedom of expression.

  15. It is against this background that the risk to the  claimant  must  be
      assessed.  The Adjudicator concluded that it was doubtful that in  the
      ordinary course of events he would be of interest to the  authorities.
      She noted that he had spent 10 to 15 days in Istanbul.  He  said  that
      he had remained indoors with his relatives.  She commented that if the
      authorities had wanted to find him, she imagined that they could  have
      traced him. She did not believe that the authorities wanted him to  be
      an informer.  However, she concluded that  he  would  be  at  risk  on
      return as his history would be known to the officials concerned.

  16. Looking at the background evidence, in our view the issue crystallises
      into whether there would be any reason for the authorities to  suspect
      that the claimant had been involved  in  separatist  activities  (CIPU
      paragraph 6.88) or had been  in  contact  with  illegal  organisations
      abroad (paragraph 6.90).  The claimant does  not  say  that  he  is  a
      member of the PKK.  There is no suggestion that he has recently  given
      support or shelter to that or any other  militant  organisation.   His
      involvement has been at a minimal level.  His last  detention  was  in
      September 2000 when he was released, on his own account, after denying
      involvement with the PKK.  He was subjected to severe ill treatment on
      that  occasion.   However,  he  was  not  charged  and  no   reporting
      conditions were placed on him.  He has no family connection  with  the
      PKK or HADEP.  He left  Turkey  a  matter  of  weeks  after  his  last
      detention spending 10 to 15 days in Istanbul and  making  arrangements
      for a clandestine departure and arrival in the United Kingdom.

  17. There is nothing to suggest that he has been kept under  surveillance.
      There is no  state  of  emergency  in  his  own  province.   In  these
      circumstances in the view of the Tribunal there is no real  risk  that
      the Turkish authorities would have any  reason  to  suspect  that  the
      claimant was  a  separatist  or  had  been  in  contact  with  illegal
      organisations abroad.  There is no reason to believe that he is wanted
      by  the  authorities  in  Turkey.  This  is  a  situation  where   the
      authorities would have no definite suspicion about the  activities  of
      the claimant.  In  the  view  of  the  Tribunal  when  the  claimant's
      personal history and background is set against the  evidence  relating
      to the current situation in  Turkey  and  the  practices  followed  on
      return, there is no real risk of the claimant being  detained  or  ill
      treated on arrival.  In our judgment the Adjudicator's  assessment  of
      the risk on return was not correct.

  18. In these circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed  on
      both asylum and human rights grounds.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
