

                        FS (Student Ability to Follow Course) India [2003]
                                 UKIAT 00043



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                   Date heard:  21 July 2003
                                               Date notified: 19 August 2003
                                  Before:-.


                           DR H H  STOREY (Chair)
                               MR A  JEEVANJEE

                                                               Between








                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of  India,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal  against  a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Miss  R   L   Meates,
dismissing the appeal against the decision by  the  respondent  refusing  to
vary leave to remain as a student. Miss  J  Onalo  of  IAS  (Tribunal  Unit)
represented the appellant. Ms T Hart appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. The adjudicator dismissed the appeal because she was  not  satisfied  the
appellant had shown he was able to follow the course of studies involved.

4. The grounds as amplified by Miss Onalo  contended  that  the  adjudicator
erred in taking into account the appellant's student history  prior  to  his
date of last  entry   "as  he  was  not  physically  in  UK".  They  further
contended that since the appellant's absence from  his  course  was  due  to
valid medical reasons the adjudicator was wrong  to  conclude  he  had  been
unable to follow his course of studies. Miss Onalo highlighted  the  written
evidence from the appellant's tutors confirming his academic ability.

5. As to the first main ground of appeal, we consider it  misconceived.  The
appellant had come to the UK as a student and, having returned to  India  to
recover from his illness, was  re-admitted  under  the  same  conditions  as
before. Hence when he made his application for further leave to remain as  a
student, the Secretary of State  was  perfectly  entitled  to  consider  his
previous student history taking account of all his periods of  absence  from
study whilst here and abroad.

6. Miss Onalo relied mainly on the second contention. She pointed  out  that
it was not in dispute that the appellant had diligently pursued his  studies
except when he was ill. The adjudicator had accepted  that  his  failure  to
attend his course and to pursue it was through no fault of his own.  He  had
suffered a serious depressive illness. It went to his credit  that  when  he
realised in 2001 that he needed more time to recover, he returned  to  India
to recuperate.

7. Having considered the medical  evidence,  we  entirely  accept  that  the
appellant has suffered from a serious depressive illness.  However,  at  the
date of decision (8 November 2001) the basic  facts  were  as  follows.  The
appellant had arrived in the UK in September 1999 and  was  given  leave  to
enter as a student until August 2001 to pursue an ACCA qualification at  the
International College of Accountancy. He  attended  between  September  1999
and  March  2000.  In  early  March/April  2000  he  developed  symptoms  of
depression and left the UK around June 2000. He returned to the UK  in  July
2001, writing on 23 August 2001 to say that  he  was  now  "well  enough  to
resume my studies". He was due to recommence his course in  September  2001.
He unfortunately  suffered  a  relapse.  Thus  between  September  1999  and
November 2001, i.e. period of just over two years  the  appellant  had  only
attended classes for three months and had been outside the UK  for  as  long
as  11  months.  Furthermore,  despite  asserting  that  he  had   recovered
sufficiently to resume  his  studies  in  August  2001,  the  appellant  had
suffered a further relapse.

8. The appellant's case fell to be decided under paragraphs 60(iv)  and  (v)
of HC 395 which state as follows:

      "[The requirements for an extension of stay as a student are that  the
      applicant:]


      ...
      (iv) can produce satisfactory evidence of  regular  attendance  during
      any course which he has already begun; or any other course  for  which
      he has been enrolled in the past; and
      (v) can show evidence of satisfactory progress in his course of  study
      including the taking and passing of any relevant examinations...."

9. We must also mention that 60 (i) requires that  the  applicant  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 57 which include at 57(ii)  the  requirement  that
he is able and intends to follow his course.

10. What we have  to  examine  is  whether  the  adjudicator  in  this  case
properly applied the relevant legal provisions to the facts  in  this  case.
We consider that she did and that she was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude
that at the date of decision the appellant, whilst he may have  intended  to
follow his course of study, was not able to do so at this time. Nor  was  he
able to produce  satisfactory  evidence  of  regular  attendance  at  or  of
satisfactory progress on is course. His was not a case of someone who  could
point to an attendance record broken only by  relatively  short  periods  of
absence or a progress report showing only temporary disruption  followed  by
satisfactory  performance  on  resumption.  The  appellant  had  effectively
ceased to attend his course  after  the  first  three  months  and,  despite
saying he was well enough to return for the autumn 2000 term, he  had  never
recommenced it. In  our  view  a  decision-maker  faced  with  the  relevant
requirements of the immigration rules has to consider ability in  the  broad
sense. It is not enough that a person is academically able.  If  he  is  not
physically and mentally able, then he cannot perform  the  tasks  which  are
integral to being a student. That was the case here.

11. Miss Onalo sought to persuade us that relevant post-decision facts  cast
a flood of light back on the situation  as  at  the  date  of  decision.  In
particular  she  referred  us  to  letters  from  the   appellant's   tutors
testifying to his excellent attendance record since January 2002  and  their
confidence in his ability to follow the  ACCA  course  successfully  and  on
qualifying to follow a successful career as an accountant.  They  note  that
in June 2003 he retook the ACCA exams which he had failed in  December  2002
and is now awaiting results. However, at the date  of  decision  we  do  not
think that it could be said, given he already had a  relapse,  that  it  was
reasonably foreseeable he would overcome his medical  problems  sufficiently
to function as a student. Furthermore, we do not consider that  these  post-
decision developments point all in the one direction. The  letter  from  the
college registrar dated 24 June 2003 notes that he failed  his  examinations
in December 2002. Certainly this was considered by his college to  be   "due
to the disruption of his revision caused by the stress  of  his  immigration
appeal, the hearing of which took place in November 2002,  and  by  injuries
following a criminal assault at  the  same  time  which  led  to  his  being
hospitalised." But at most this evidence shows that  he  has  been  able  in
more recent times to attend regularly. It does not show  that  his  progress
has been wholly satisfactory.  It may be that injuries caused by a  criminal
assault justified lack of progress to some extent, but on  his  own  account
he was still able to attend his  course  regularly  thereafter.  We  do  not
consider that stress caused by an immigration appeal (based on  a  claim  to
have  ability  to  make  satisfactory  progress  with  studies)  provides  a
satisfactory explanation for lack of progress. In short,  we  do  not  think
that post-decision evidence requires a different view to  be  taken  of  the
appellant's position under the rules as at the date of decision.

12. Miss Onalo also sought to argue that since the  appellant's  failure  to
attend and to make progress was found not to be his own fault  but  to  have
arisen for valid medical reasons we should draw an analogy with an  employee
who is absent from work due to genuine illness. Just as an employer  is  not
entitled to dismiss an employee whose illness is genuine, so  the  Secretary
of State was not entitled to refuse a student extension to  a  person  whose
illness was genuine. We have  some  difficulties  with  this  analogy,  even
leaving aside that illness can sometimes cause frustration of a contract  of
employment. For one thing the relationship between the Home  Office  and  an
overseas student is not a contractual  one  nor  one  between  employer  and
employee. For another,  the  Immigration  Rules  clearly  lay  down  certain
requirements that have to be fulfilled and  clearly  contemplate  that  only
those who have demonstrated an ability to  pursue  their  chosen  course  of
study should be granted extensions as a student.   On  the  evidence  before
the adjudicator in this  case,  the  appellant  had  fallen  well  short  of
demonstrating such ability.

13. We note that the adjudicator made an extra-statutory  recommendation  in
this case. If the appellant's June 2003 exam results prove successful,  that
may vindicate the adjudicator's reasons for making  such  a  recommendation;
but what weight, if any, the Secretary of State chooses to  attach  to  this
recommendation is entirely a matter for him.

14. For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.


                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
