

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |APPEAL NO:  CC002432003     |
|Date:  23 January 2004     |        |ZS (IFA-Women) Algeria CG   |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00211          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......13/02/2004...................                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Chairman)                                       |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances:

For the appellant:     Ms A Sheehan, Counsel
For the respondent:    Miss C Hanrahan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Algeria, has been  granted  permission  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
      C G Blake) who  dismissed  her  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.

2.    The appellant's  evidence  was  well  summarised  by  the  Adjudicator
      within paragraphs 4 to 8 of his determination and at paragraph 10  the
      Adjudicator concluded that having heard  and  seen  the  appellant  he
      found her to be a witness in truth and accepted all that she said  and
      further noted that the Secretary of State in his  refusal  letter  had
      not seriously challenged her account of events.

3.    The Adjudicator nonetheless concluded that the  adverse  acts  against
      her by the authorities and the  Police  Officer  Djemal  (about  whose
      behaviour the appellant had sought to complain to the police  only  to
      find that Djemal was a senior police officer at that station) were, as
      described by the Adjudicator:

           "... far more likely to have been an abuse  of  their  authority
           for private reasons of  his  own  than  any  concerted  campaign
           against her Refugee Convention reasons.  He had  been  harassing
           her and pestering her for sexual favours which  she  refused  to
           offer him.  I do not find that the  treatment  he  received  was
           motivated by a desire to discriminate against her on grounds  of
           her ethnicity.  I also note that she was a civil  servant.   She
           faced some discrimination because of her  Berber  ethnicity  but
           this did not amount  to  persecution.   Her  account  of  events
           relating to the blow  she  received  to  her  head  and  ear  is
           supported by the short medical  report  provided  by  St  Mary's
           Hospital."


4.    The Adjudicator then proceeded to consider whether or  not  there  was
      any future risk to the appellant were she to be  returned  to  Algeria
      and in so doing he  made  it  clear  he  had  taken  full  account  of
      everything Ms Sheehan (who also appeared before the Adjudicator on the
      appellant's behalf) had told  him  and  her  skeleton  argument.   The
      Adjudicator continued inter alia:

           "Having accepted the appellant's account of events I have to ask
           myself how she would be likely to  be  treated  if  returned  to
           Algeria.  It is clear  that  she  has  no  connection  with  any
           terrorist groupings and no action was taken against her in  this
           regard.  I do not accept that there is any evidence that being a
           Berber is enough to hold a well-founded fear of persecution.   I
           accept the  reasoning  of  the  respondent  in  this  regard  at
           paragraphs 6 to 12 of the refusal letter".


      We pause there to point out most fairly Ms  Sheehan  clarified  to  us
      that it was not part of her  submissions  to  the  Tribunal  that  the
      Adjudicator erred  in  terms  of  his  findings  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's ethnicity.

5.    The Adjudicator continued at paragraph 11 of his  determination  inter
      alia as follows:

           "I find that if she were  again  faced  with  such  adverse  and
           hostile acts by the  police  she  could  complain  to  a  higher
           authority and her complaint would be taken seriously.  The  fact
           that such complaints are received and acted  upon  even  in  the
           desperate general  state  of  Algeria  today  is  apparent  from
           paragraphs 6.16 to 6.20 of the CIP Report... I have  found  that
           hostile acts upon her by the police were  for  personal  reasons
           not for her actual or imputed political opinion.  I see  nothing
           in her evidence or in the objective material to enable me to say
           that matters would be different if she were returned to  Algeria
           today".


6.    In this regard we noted the relevant passages of the April  2003  CIPU
      Report to which  the  Adjudicator  referred  which  demonstrates  that
      police disciplinary action is taken against soldiers or policemen  who
      are guilty of human rights abuses and that  some  disciplinary  action
      was indeed taken during the year ending 2002.  Some officers have been
      brought to  trial  and  disciplined  for  their  actions  in  Kabylie.
      Although the government did not  routinely  release  details  of  such
      cases in  2000,  government  officials  reported  that  between  three
      hundred and fifty and four hundred officials  had  been  punished  for
      human rights abuses.

7.    Further, the Algerian Ministry of Justice kept  diverse  international
      human rights organisations informed of criminal  prosecutions  against
      members of security services and Groupes d'Autodefense on the  grounds
      of human  rights  violations  since  1992  without  however  providing
      detailed information.

8.    In July  2001  the  head  of  the  security  forces  told  a  national
      newspaper that changes were needed to improve training and culture and
      that the security forces frequently abuse the law which was attributed
      to a lack of education and culture in the  force  and  to  recruitment
      without respecting criteria and  conditions.   This  had  led  to  the
      dismissal of over seventeen hundred policemen in  1997  of  which  two
      hundred and eighty were tried.  In September  2002  the  head  of  the
      Gendarmerie also announced a reorganisation policy including  a  purge
      of those implicated in abuse during the Kabyle riots in 2001.

9.    Since 2000 judges had to include in their judgment  the  behaviour  of
      Police and Judiciarie the officers who interrogate suspects when  they
      are first arrested towards the suspect in custody.   Further,  at  the
      end of the custody period, a medical examination of the suspect has to
      be carried out.   The  public  prosecutors  occasionally  inspect  the
      detention centres where suspects are held.

10.   Human rights awareness has become an integral part of the training  of
      police and gendarme officers in recent years. It is usually  given  in
      co-operation with foreign - usually French  -  police.  The  ICRC  has
      assisted in the instruction of International Humanitarian Law for  the
      country's armed and security forces.

11.   We took the trouble to check the sourcing of this material and  noted,
      as we drew to Ms Sheehan's attention, that the background material  to
      which we have above referred  was  mainly  sourced  from  a  US  State
      Department Report released in March 2003 and a general Country  report
      on Algeria released in December 2002 by the Netherlands Department for
      Immigration Affairs.

12.   In our view, in the light of the objective material to which  we  have
      referred and the Appellant's particular circumstances we find that the
      Adjudicator  rightly  concluded  that  there  was  a  sufficiency   of
      protection available to her in Algeria and that insofar as the conduct
      of the police officer Djemal was concerned the appellant  upon  return
      to Algeria, and if regrettably faced with further hostility from  him,
      could complain to a higher authority where her complaint would  indeed
      be taken seriously.

  13. Although not specifically raised in the grounds of appeal, Ms Sheehan
      submitted that given that much of Algeria was  desert  and  relatively
      uninhabitable it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  as  "a  lone
      woman" to seek to relocate elsewhere in Algeria,  such  as  along  the
      northern coastline, to be safe from any further attempt on the part of
      Djemal to further pursue her.


  14. We were not persuaded by this submission.  Our starting point  is  the
      Adjudicator's  finding  that  notwithstanding  that  he  accepted  the
      credibility of the appellant's account, she had failed to establish  a
      well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason.   A
      sufficiency of protection was available to her in Algeria.

  15.   A person who for whatever reason has protection in his  or  her  own
      country has no basis for a fear of persecution and there is  no  basis
      for imposing international duties of surrogate protection  in  respect
      of a person who has adequate protection in his or her own country.  It
      is only if his or  her  own  country  fails  her  that  the  surrogate
      protection of the international community is engaged in the medium  of
      the Convention. Thus arises the notion of internal flight.

  16.   We remind ourselves that the Adjudicator rightly  concluded  on  the
      evidence before him that the appellant had failed to establish a well-
      founded  fear  in  that  it  was  open  to  her  in   her   particular
      circumstances to complain about the behaviour of this  senior  officer
      to a higher authority who would provide her  with  protection  as  was
      evident from the objective material to which the Adjudicator referred.

17.   Ms Sheehan had referred us to the CIPU Country Assessment  of  October
      2003 (which we pointed out was not before the  Adjudicator)  where  at
      paragraph 6.152 there is reference to the fact that  "a  single  woman
      living in Algeria can make her own  living  without  the  aid  of  her
      family provided she could find a job".  As  we  reminded  Ms  Sheehan,
      this is an appellant who is an educated intelligent young  lady.   She
      is a librarian, an archivist and who as  a  "lone  woman"  would  have
      significantly less difficulty in finding employment upon return.

18.   We further  observed  that  as  a  "lone  woman",  the  appellant  had
      previously no difficulty in the course of her employ in  a  Government
      Ministry as an archivist to take up employment one hundred  and  forty
      kilometres from her home.  In this regard it follows that even  if  it
      had been incumbent  on  the  Adjudicator  to  consider  the  issue  of
      internal relocation this would represent a positive factor that  could
      not be ignored.

19.   We were informed by Ms Sheehan that the appellant's husband's  appeal
      against the earlier refusal of asylum had yet to be  heard.   In  this
      regard the Adjudicator had rightly concluded at paragraph  12  of  his
      determination that it was "inconceivable that the appellant  would  be
      removed whilst her  husband's  appeal  was  proceeding.   Ms  Hanrahan
      reinforced such a conclusion for the respondent who provided  us  with
      an unequivocal confirmation that the appellant would not be removed to
      Algeria whilst her  husband's  appeal  was  pending.   They  would  be
      removed together in the event that the  appellant's  husband's  appeal
      was unsuccessful.

20.   If follows that the  appellant  would  not  in  any  circumstances  be
      returning to Algeria as a "lone woman" and it was noteworthy  that  Ms
      Sheehan (though reminding us that we knew nothing of  the  appellant's
      husband's circumstances) realistically accepted that her argument  was
      based upon the appellant going back to Algeria alone. To that  extent,
      Ms Sheehan accepted that her submissions were  largely  predicated  on
      matters that in the event would subsequently prove to be academic.

  21. Ms Sheehan nonetheless maintained that upon return the appellant would
      be at risk. She speculated that due to  the  machinations  of  Djemal,
      (because of a previous allegation made against the  Appellant  to  the
      effect that she was involved with an alleged terrorist,  Assouli,  who
      happened to work in the same building);  the  Appellant  might  be  at
      continued risk of arrest and detention at some stage if returned.


  22.  However, as the grounds recognise, the Adjudicator accepted that  the
      appellant  was  required  to  attend  the  police  station  to  answer
      questions about her association with him  and  later  re-attended  the
      police station. Further, her room  at  the  University  was  searched.
      Approximately eight months  later,  the  Appellant  was  summonsed  to
      attend a local tribunal where she was  told  that  the  police  had  a
      warrant to search her home because of her terrorists links,  a  search
      later carried out.

  23.   Ms Sheehan submitted that therefore there "might" be  some  form  of
      record of that police enquiry and that upon return the Appellant could
      be charged with terrorist offences which would give  rise  to  a  real
      risk of persecution.

  24.   We are not persuaded by that submission.  There is no evidence  that
      such a record had been kept and as the Adjudicator noted the  interest
      of the police took place during the  period  June  to  December  2001.
      Further, it was in February  2002  that  the  appellant  received  the
      summons to attend a local tribunal in the town where she worked  where
      she learned that the police had a warrant to search  her  family  home
      because of suspicion of terrorist links.  The  appellant  described  a
      superficial search which took place after which the police left and it
      is noteworthy that she then continued to work to  support  her  family
      and that despite Djemal's continued harassment  of  her  she  did  not
      leave her employ until August 2002.

  25.   Interestingly the Appellant married her husband  in  September  2002
      and they decided to leave Algeria  together  in  that  month.  As  the
      Adjudicator rightly observed and indeed as further submitted to us  by
      Ms Hanrahan for the respondent, it is apparent that the Appellant had
      no connection with any terrorist group and was not found to have  such
      connection. No further action was taken against her in this regard.

  26.   There is no evidence of any continuing  interest  in  the  Appellant
      since she left Algeria in 2002. It is not suggested that  charges  had
      been laid in connection with such earlier  suspected  terrorist  links
      and the submission on the part of Ms  Sheehan  that  such  allegations
      might be resurrected upon her return are speculative.

  27.  We have concluded notwithstanding Ms Sheehan's  eloquent  submissions
      on the Appellant's behalf, that the Adjudicator conducted  the  appeal
      in a very careful and competent way and  reached  findings  that  were
      properly open to him on the evidence.  There is  no  proper  basis  on
      which the Tribunal should reverse or set aside those findings.

28.   It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.




                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice President

