
SB (Article 3 - Employment - Support - Medical Treatment) Serbia &
Montenegro [2003] UKIAT 00194

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 29 October 2003
Prepared: 7 November 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                             Mr D.R. Bremmer JP




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Mr M. Kuznicki, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Miss N. Hough, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The claimant is a national of Serbia.  The Secretary of State  appeals
      against  the  decision  of  an  adjudicator,  Miss  Rebecca   Caswell,
      following a hearing on 11  February  2003  dismissing  the  claimant's
      asylum appeal but allowing her human rights claim.  The  adjudicator's
      decision was in response to the decision of the Secretary of State  to
      refuse both claims.


   2. The claimant was born on 30 March 1969.  She is an ethnic Albanian and
      a Roman Catholic.  She married a Roma in 1990 and the couple have  two
      children.  As a result of her marriage, the claimant's family disowned
      her and she and her husband set up home in the village of Rajinice, in
      southern Serbia.  Unfortunately, her husband was killed.  The claimant
      believes that he had been branded as a collaborator and traitor.

   3. The adjudicator dealt with the current risk faced by the  claimant  in
      paragraphs 21 onwards of the determination.  In paragraph 24, however,
      the adjudicator rejected the asylum claim based on  imputed  political
      opinion because she felt the  local  police  were  in  a  position  to
      protect her.  In addition, she did not consider the claimant would  be
      persecuted on the grounds of her Roma ethnicity because  the  claimant
      herself was not Roma although she has two children of mixed ethnicity.

   4. The adjudicator formed the view that the claimant would not be able to
      re-establish herself with her two children in the current  climate  in
      the Presevo area or in any other part of the country.  She said:

           "She has never had employment.  She has  no  family  to  support
           her; she has not  yet  acquired  skills  which  would  make  her
           desirable in  the  employment  market.   She  would  face  great
           difficulties as the head of a female-only household.   From  the
           CIPU Report at 6.71 onwards it is clear that women are  entitled
           to equal pay for equal work, maternity leave,  participation  in
           government and politics.  They are active in political and human
           rights  organisations.   There  are   women's   rights   groups.
           However, none of this is likely to help the appellant find a way
           to support her family in the current patriarchal society in  the
           area."


   5. In addition, in paragraph 23 of  the  determination,  the  adjudicator
      considered the appellant's mental well-being.  She was categorised  as
      suffering from anxiety, distress, grief reaction  and  possible  post-
      traumatic stress disorder.   The  adjudicator  did  not  consider  the
      claimant was in a favourable psychological state to help her  children
      and  herself  make  the  move  back  to  Serbia  successfully.    She,
      therefore, concluded in paragraph 25 that she would  not  be  able  to
      establish a viable family life for herself and children in any part of
      Serbia.


   6. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  adjudicator's  decision
      allowing the claimant's Article 8 claim.  It is common ground that the
      claimant will be returned to Serbia accompanied by her  two  children.
      Her son was born on 29  September  1991  and  is  now  aged  12.   Her
      daughter was born  on  6  July  1995  and  is  8.   The  family  will,
      therefore, be returned as a unit, thereby avoiding a violation of  the
      claimant's rights to continued family life. Miss Hough submitted  that
      the adjudicator's reliance upon the fact that the claimant  has  never
      been in employment and has not yet acquired the skills that would make
      her desirable in the employment market, was wrong in  law.   We  agree
      that the employment prospects of the claimant are  not  material  when
      considering whether the claimant's return will violate her  moral  and
      physical integrity.

   7. The adjudicator also relied upon the state of  the  claimant's  mental
      health. Dr R. C. Rigby, of the Woodside Surgery, wrote  on  9  October
      2002 to say that the  claimant  joined  the  practice  in  July  2001,
      suffering from poor sleep and nightmares, headaches and anxiety.   See
      page 295 of the claimant's bundle.  He believed most of her  headaches
      were due to stress and anxiety concerning her situation but  that  she
      had obtained some benefit from fluoxetine and Dothiepin.  He suspected
      she had a degree of cervical spondylosis or early arthritic change  in
      her neck, which may have caused some headaches.

   8. At page 294 of the claimant's bundle,  Helena  Hutchings,  Sure  Start
      Counsellor, from the Woodside Surgery wrote on 17 December 2002 to say
      that the claimant had been  referred  to  the  clinic  in  April  2001
      suffering  from  marked  anxiety  symptoms.   For  a  period   between
      September 2001 and July 2002 (10 months) the claimant attended  weekly
      sessions and "appeared to  be  suffering  symptoms  related  to  post-
      traumatic stress."  Ms  Hutchings  stated  that,  through  counselling
      support and medication, the claimant was able to express some  of  her
      distressing feelings and grief.  By  December  2002,  it  appears  the
      claimant had returned to counselling as  her  levels  of  anxiety  and
      distress had increased during her grieving process.  The  letter  ends
      by saying that it would be highly likely that the  claimant  would  be
      further traumatised and acutely distressed if  she  and  her  children
      were to be returned home.

   9. There is also a medical report from a Consultant Psychiatrist,  Dr  K.
      Laudin beginning at page 304 of the bundle.  In a report dated 28 July
      2003, it emerges that the claimant was referred to the  Mental  Health
      Community  Centre  in  April  2003  with   depression   and   anxiety.
      Apparently, she  was  not  responding  to  antidepressants.   She  was
      described as being moderately depressed but did not have any  suicidal
      plans or thoughts of harming her children.   There  was  a  change  in
      medication.  At the bottom of page 304 it is said that it was probable
      the claimant had not completed the grieving process.   A  contribution
      to her depression was the sudden death of her  husband  combined  with
      her departure from Serbia  and  her  inability  to  work  through  the
      grieving process.  The report goes on to say  that  the  claimant  has
      benefited from regular contact with the Centre,  that  her  depression
      has not deteriorated and has not required admission to  hospital.   It
      is said that should she cease to receive treatment, her depression  is
      likely to deteriorate and this may endanger life.  On page  3  of  the
      report, it is said that the claimant has  not  been  referred  to  any
      other health care practitioner.  It might, therefore, be beneficial to
      the claimant for her to be referred  to  a  member  of  the  community
      mental health team experienced in psychological work.  As  far  as  we
      are aware, this has not occurred.


  10. There are a number of  references  in  the  medical  evidence  to  the
      relationship between the claimant's mental health  and  death  of  her
      husband, with the associated grieving process.  There is at least  one
      reference to her depression being related to leaving Serbia.  There is
      little to suggest that a return to Serbia would, in itself, result  in
      a deterioration in her mental health.  There is direct  evidence  that
      she has no suicidal tendencies or is liable to harm others,  including
      her children.  Her medication is conventional, albeit  the  depression
      has shown a stubborn reluctance to respond to some of  the  medication
      tried upon her.  The course of counselling is now completed.  There is
      no other reference to treatment.

  11. In accordance with the decision in Razgar, it is necessary to consider
      the differential impact that is likely to occur on return  to  Serbia.
      The medical evidence does not establish that her mental condition will
      substantially or significantly deteriorate by reason of a return.

  12. Mr  Kuzmicki,  who  appeared  before  us  on  the  claimant's  behalf,
      submitted that the adjudicator found the claimant could not  establish
      a viable life on return to Serbia.  He told us that it was not  simply
      a question of her returning with her children as a  family  unit.   He
      said there must be effective,  viable  and  proper  family  life.   He
      submitted that the adjudicator had identified  a  number  of  ways  in
      which family life would  be  lacking  in  these  qualities,  were  the
      claimant to be returned to Serbia.  It is not  clear  to  us  what  is
      meant by a viable life in this context.  We do not, however,  consider
      that the fact the claimant has never had employment, has no family  to
      support her and has not yet acquired  skills  that  would  render  her
      useful in the employment market renders her life in  Serbia  any  less
      viable than in the United Kingdom where the same  conditions  prevail.
      We are concerned to consider whether, in accordance with the  decision
      in Ullah, conditions in  Serbia  will  be  such  as  to  amount  to  a
      practical violation of her Article 3 rights.  We do not consider  that
      they will be.


  13. The background material contained in  the  October  2003  CIPU  Report
      supports this view.  In paragraph of S.5.34,  it  is  said  that  Serb
      citizens are legally entitled to free health treatment although  years
      of neglect and corruption have seriously damaged the  health  service.
      When the new government took over in October 2000, it found widespread
      abuses and misappropriation of funds, describing the situation in  the
      health service as "critical".  In late 2000, the entire health  system
      depended on foreign aid.  In 2001, the health service suffered from an
      extreme lack of resources at all levels and in all places,  an  urgent
      need for restructuring, poor organisation  and  chronic  inefficiency.
      The state of the health service is, not surprisingly, reflected in the
      overall health of its population.  The mental health of the population
      has also deteriorated.   Substantial,  even  massive,  consumption  of
      sedatives suggests one-half of the population is  reliant  upon  them.
      Treatment  for  medical  health  disorders  is,  however,   available,
      although facilities are limited.

  14. Mr Kuzmicki also drew our attention to paragraph S.6.88  of  the  CIPU
      Report to the effect that  women  refugees  and  internally  displaced
      people, especially households headed by  single  females  and  widows,
      face  particular  problems,  including   difficulties   in   obtaining
      documentation of their husbands' deaths that  would  entitle  them  to
      pensions.  Against that, however, it has to be said that the  claimant
      is not a refugee, nor an internally displaced person.

  15. We accept that, tragically, the conditions in present Serbia  are  not
      to the high standards possible in all European countries.   That  does
      not mean, however, a return to Serbia establishes a breach to the high
      standard required under Article 3.  In our judgment, on  consideration
      of the background material,  the  adjudicator  was  in  error  in  her
      conclusion that the claimant's return to  Serbia  would  result  in  a
      breach of her human rights.  The reasons that she gave for  coming  to
      that conclusion are not sustainable and amount to  an  error  in  law.
      Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.


Decision: The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
7 November 2003
