
H-AS-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |SC (Internal Flight         |
|                           |        |Alternative - Police) Russia|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00073          |
|On 1 July 2003             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date written Determination notified:                              |
|                                                                  |
|16.09.03                                                          |
|Delivered orally in Court                                         |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes                                                       |
|Mr M G Taylor CBE                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  A  Briddock  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Bart
      Williams & Co Solicitors




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Russia born on 2 June 1981 who  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 20 April 2002 with a visit visa valid until 15
    October 2002.  Shortly after admission he claimed asylum  on  29  April
    2002.  His asylum application was refused for the reasons set out in  a
    letter dated 19 June 2002.  On 16 July  2002  the  Secretary  of  State
    issued a notice of refusal to grant asylum noting that leave to  remain
    expired on 15  October  2002.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision on both asylum and human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard
    on 1 November 2002 by Mrs N A Baird, an Adjudicator, who dismissed  his
    appeal on asylum grounds but allowed it on human rights  grounds  under
    Article 3 of the European Convention.

2.    The Secretary of State appeals with leave  to  the  Tribunal  against
    that decision.  There is no appeal on behalf of the Respondent  against
    the dismissal of his asylum appeal.

3.    At the hearing before us Mr Saville relied only on the  third  ground
    of appeal which is as follows:

         "The Adjudicator has not adequately reasoned why  internal  flight
         would not be possible.  The Appellant had  gained  a  visa  within
         Russia and this would suggest that the authorities had no interest
         in him on a national level, any potential threat is only local."


4.    The Adjudicator had found that the Respondent, whose home area was in
    a suburb of Moscow, had on 26 May 2001 become involved in  an  argument
    with a policeman who had attempted to entice his  girlfriend  from  him
    when they were out together in a club.  The  policeman  threatened  the
    Appellant and thereafter carried out his  threats,  firstly  by  having
    them both taken to the police station where the Appellant was  detained
    and beaten, subsequently requiring hospital treatment.  His  girlfriend
    had been raped and had subsequently left the  area  and  he  could  not
    trace her.  The Respondent made a formal complaint about the conduct of
    the policeman but all efforts to pursue this were persistently  blocked
    by superior officers up to the level of the chief of the  local  police
    department.  Thereafter the Respondent was harassed with threats that a
    false charge of drug dealing would be made against him  although  there
    is no evidence that that in fact  took  place.   His  father,  who  was
    assisting him, was attacked in  January  2002  but  thereafter  nothing
    further happened and he and his father visited Finland for a  break  in
    late March with  appropriate  exit  visas.   After  their  return,  the
    Respondent was on 29 March 2002 illegally arrested  and  taken  to  the
    police station where he was again beaten  in  an  effort  to  make  him
    withdraw his complaint.  He refused to do so and he was then  taken  by
    the policeman concerned and some of his colleagues to a car with a view
    of taking him to a location where he could be killed,  but  he  escaped
    from the moving car as they were passing a police post and ran off.  He
    and his father then went into hiding until they were able to arrange  a
    visa from the British Embassy and to leave  the  country  on  20  April
    2002.  Subsequent to his arrival in the United Kingdom he had  received
    two summonses to appear at the police station as a witness on 6 and  11
    July 2002.

5.    He was found to be credible in all these claims  by  the  Adjudicator
    and those  findings  are  not  challenged.   Mr  Saville  accepted  the
    Adjudicator's finding that the treatment to which  the  Respondent  had
    been subjected was persecution by the state.  The Adjudicator dismissed
    the asylum appeal because no Refugee Convention reason was identified.

6.    The Adjudicator said at paragraph 68 of her  Determination  that  she
    had taken into account the fact that  the  Respondent  and  his  father
    managed on two occasions to procure visas  to  leave  the  country  and
    accepted that this could be indicative of  the  authorities  having  no
    interest in them.  In allowing the appeal on human rights  grounds  she
    said this at paragraph 70 of the Determination:

         "It seems to me to be clear on the  objective  evidence  that  the
         Appellant could not return to Russia  and  live  in  another  area
         because of the registration system.  He said the police  who  were
         persecuting him would know he had returned and he would be at risk
         of arrest  and  further  ill-treatment.   I  think  this  fear  is
         justified.  I think the Appellant has established to the  standard
         of proof required that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  his
         rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European  Convention  for  the
         Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  would  be
         breached if he were returned to Russia."

7.    As we have noted, Mr Saville challenged the finding that the internal
    relocation alternative was not open to  the  Respondent.   It  was  his
    submission that the Respondent's fear was localised to the actions of a
    specific rogue police officer, in respect of whose  behaviour  some  of
    his colleagues supported him and his superiors had not been prepared to
    permit the complaint as to the policeman's conduct properly made by the
    Respondent to go forward.

8.    Both advocates agreed that the issues  before  us  were  whether  the
    evidence supported the Respondent's claim that there was  a  reasonable
    likelihood wherever he went in Russia that the policeman would seek  to
    and would be able to trace him with a view of carrying out further acts
    in breach  of  his  human  rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention; secondly , if there  was  no  such  reasonable  likelihood,
    would it be unduly harsh to expect the Respondent  to  relocate  within
    his own country instead of seeking surrogate international  protection.



9.     The  Respondent  is  recorded  as  saying  in  evidence  before  the
    Adjudicator that there was a  network  in  Russia  where  everyone  was
    registered on a computer and that this was available through a  network
    of police stations throughout the whole country.  If you moved you  had
    to register in the new district and if you did not do so you could  not
    work or study.  All citizens had  to  carry  their  internal  passports
    around with them and were subject to spot checks.  He  could  not  live
    safely in another area of Russia because of this registration system.

10.   As we have noted above the Adjudicator accepted  this  on  the  basis
    that it was clear from the objective evidence  although  she  does  not
    identify the objective evidence on which she relied,  simply  referring
    to the Respondent's representative before her having set  out  some  of
    the objective evidence  in  her  skeleton  argument  referring  to  the
    mandatory registration system.

11.   The first issue with which we  are  concerned,  therefore,  turns  on
    whether there is objective evidence to support the Respondent's  claim.



12.   Mr Saville referred us to paragraphs 6.30-6.32 of the April 2003 CIPU
    Assessment on Russia.  We set out those paragraphs in full:

         "6.30    People who have a well-founded fear of  persecution  from
              the local authorities in one of the regions  of  the  Russian
              Federation, without the involvement or the complicity of  the
              federal  authorities,  may,  in  principle,  find   effective
              protection elsewhere in Russia.  However, such an alternative
              may be limited due to the cost  of  moving,  the  undeveloped
              housing market, and above all by the  enforcement  of  strict
              registration  regulations  or  practices  in  parts  of   the
              country.  Despite constitutional protections for  freedom  of
              movement, the government places some limits  on  this  right,
              and some regional  authorities,  most  notably  the  city  of
              Moscow, restrict movement  in  particular  by  denying  local
              residency permits to new settlers from  other  areas  of  the
              country.


         6.31     Although new  rules  were  justified  as  a  notification
              device rather than a control system,  their  application  has
              produced many of the same restrictive results as  the  Soviet
              era propiska (pass) regulations.  While citizens are free  to
              travel within Russia,  the  government  imposes  registration
              requirements on domestic travel.  All adults are issued  with
              internal passports, which they must  carry  while  travelling
              and use to register with local authorities for visits of more
              than three days (in  Moscow,  for  visits  of  more  than  24
              hours), although travellers not  staying  in  hotels  usually
              ignore this requirement.  These internal passports  are  also
              required for obtaining many governmental services.   Citizens
              must register to live and work  in  a  specific  area  within
              seven days of  moving  there;  the  fees  for  permanent  and
              temporary  registration  remain  low.   Corruption   in   the
              registration process in local police precincts is a  problem.
              Police demand bribes in processing registration  applications
              and  during  spot  checks  for  registration   documentation.
              Meanwhile, lack of registration  leads  in  practice  to  the
              deprivation  of  most  civil,  social  and  economic  rights.
              People may not be admitted to public services, such  as  free
              medical services, education, pensions, child and unemployment
              allowances, unless they hold registration at their  place  of
              residence,  and  employers  are   required   to   hire   only
              individuals holding registration in their place of residence.
               While federal law provides for education for all children in
              the Russian Federation, regional authorities frequently  deny
              access to schools to the children  of  unregistered  persons,
              asylum seekers and migrants.


         6.32     Russian citizens changing residence in Russia, as well as
              people with a legal claim to citizenship who decide  to  move
              to Russia from other  former  Soviet  republics,  often  face
              enormous difficulties or are simply not permitted to register
              in some  cities.   There  is  no  uniform  procedure  on  the
              registration of residence in Russia; each region and republic
              has its own regulations, the application of  which  is  often
              arbitrary or racially motivated.   The  United  Nations  High
              Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)  and  refugee  rights  non-
              governmental organisations have cited  Stavropol,  Krasnodar,
              Moscow,  and  St  Petersburg  as  being  the  least  open  to
              migrants.  It is not unusual for dark-skinned persons  to  be
              stopped at random and for  officers  to  demand  bribes  from
              those without residence permits.  Some (but not all)  of  the
              Russian regions which implement registration regulations in a
              less strict manner are located in the far north  of  Eurasia,
              where the hard climatic conditions, the remoteness  from  the
              central regions of Russia and the severe  economic  situation
              may make it difficult  for  people  to  establish  themselves
              there.  Meanwhile, the government and residents of Moscow and
              other large cities defend registration as necessary in  order
              to control crime, to keep crowded urban areas from attracting
              even more inhabitants, and to gain revenue.  However, another
              major factor has been a desire to shield themselves from  the
              wave of refugees and internally displaced persons fleeing the
              numerous ethnic conflicts on the territories  of  the  former
              Soviet Union."

13.   It was Mr Saville's submission to us that by reason of the  localised
    nature of the  adverse  treatment  of  the  Respondent,  there  was  no
    evidence that the officer concerned would be prepared to seek to follow
    the Respondent, having achieved his object of stopping  the  Respondent
    continuing with his complaint against him.  There was no evidence there
    was a reasonable likelihood that the officer  would  find  out  if  the
    Respondent returned.  There was no finding that the Respondent had been
    charged with any offences in his home area  although  the  officer  had
    threatened to make drugs charges against him if he persisted  with  his
    complaint as to his treatment.  We note that  the  Adjudicator  details
    his evidence as to this at paragraphs 14 and 15 of  the  Determination,
    saying that he was summonsed to the police station and interrogated  on
    this basis on occasions in November and December 2001, but that did not
    lead to any formal charge being laid and the Respondent is recorded  as
    saying at paragraph 15 that he knew that they were just trying  to  use
    scare tactics on him to try to get him to withdraw his complaint.   The
    two court summonses accepted by the Adjudicator simply required him  to
    attend at the police station "as a witness" and there was  no  evidence
    as to the nature of the matters about which  he  would  be  questioned.
    The ability of the Respondent and his father to obtain  exit  visas  on
    two separate occasions during 2002 pointed to the fact that he  was  of
    no adverse interest to the Federal Russian authorities.

14.   For the  Respondent  Mr  Briddock  pointed  out  that  there  was  no
    challenge in the grounds of appeal to the finding that there was  state
    persecution and, although he  accepted  that  it  did  not  necessarily
    follow from this that the Respondent would be persecuted  elsewhere  in
    Russia by the state given the particular  facts,  it  was  his  primary
    submission that this would be the case.  He  relied  on  the  objective
    evidence of general corruption and of gross human rights abuses on  the
    part of  the  police  force  although  he  did  not  suggest  that  the
    Respondent was being generally sought by the authorities.  Nevertheless
    he had offended a local  policeman  to  the  point  where  he  and  his
    colleagues were prepared to kill him in order to suppress the case that
    he was seeking to pursue.  Due to the  state  registration  system  the
    probability was that he would have to register if he lived elsewhere in
    Russia and this would lead to a real risk that his persecutors  in  his
    former local area would be able to find him wherever he was.  Asked  to
    point us to the evidence of such an ability to trace the Respondent, Mr
    Briddock frankly said that he was asking us to take  a  leap  of  faith
    that the registration requirements lead to  a  sharing  of  information
    federally to which his local police force  would  have  access.   Asked
    what evidence there was that the local police officer  would  have  any
    interest in pursuing him at this stage, he said that he relied  on  the
    degree of corruption which exists in the  police  force.   He  accepted
    however that  there  was  no  objective  evidence  that  Russian  local
    authorities shared information as to registration in their  areas  with
    the former place of residence but asked that we should assume there was
    a reasonable likelihood that this will happen.  He also placed reliance
    on the fact of the summonses issued in July 2002 as showing that  there
    was some continuing  interest  in  the  Respondent  on  a  local  basis
    although there was no evidence at all as to what information the police
    were seeking from him "as a witness".  He submitted that there were  so
    many uncertainties that  they  should  be  weighed  in  favour  of  the
    Respondent and that it should be  accepted  that  he  would  be  sought
    outside his home area so that internal flight was not available to him.



15.   As to the test of reasonableness of internal relocation, he submitted
    that it was a very  low  standard  to  be  applied  in  favour  of  the
    Respondent.  The use of the words "in principle" in paragraph  6.30  of
    the CIPU Assessment as  to  the  possibility  of  relocation  were,  he
    suggested, indicative of the fact that such was not readily available.

16.   Even though an applicant may  have  a  genuine  fear  of  persecutory
    treatment in his home area, as has this  Respondent,  he  will  not  be
    entitled to claim surrogate international protection if there are other
    parts of his own country where he may safely live and it would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect him to go there.  We accept the  guidance  given
    in the judgments in Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271 that the task for  us
    is to evaluate the evidential material before us.  This applies both to
    the question of whether there are other parts of  his  own  country  to
    which the Respondent may  safely  go  and  also  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for him to do so.  As to the first question,  we  note  from
    the CIPU Assessment that at 1 January 2002 the estimated population  of
    the Russian Federation was  in  excess  of  143  million  people.   The
    Respondent is not suggested to be from an ethnic minority in Russia  or
    to have experienced any difficulties whatsoever living in  his  country
    prior to the event in May 2001 which triggered the sequence  of  events
    which led him to leave.  His ability to  leave  with  appropriate  exit
    visas on two occasions during 2002 does, it seems  to  us,  demonstrate
    that he is of no adverse interest to the authorities  as  such,  beyond
    the adverse local interest in him on the part of  the  police  officers
    who have sought to prevent him from pursuing a  complaint  about  their
    conduct.  Save for these specific officers, there has been no  positive
    action against him by other police officers locally although we  accept
    that  there  has  been  the  passive  action  of  preventing  a  proper
    investigation of his complaint.  We are therefore  satisfied  that  his
    fear is indeed local to his former place of residence and we note  that
    by inducing him to abandon it  the  officers  concerned  have  achieved
    their objective.  Looking at the CIPU Assessment which we have set  out
    above, and which is more detailed than, but in a similar vein  to  what
    is said in the current United States State Department Report  to  which
    we were also referred, it is clear that Russian citizens  are  required
    to carry an internal passport which they may be  required  to  produce,
    and that if they stay beyond a very short time in parts of the  country
    in which they are not resident they will be required to register  their
    presence.   This  is  a  matter  of  practice  and  contrary   to   the
    constitutional protections for freedom of movement.   It  appears  that
    the government limits placed on this  right  are  in  relation  to  the
    requirement to carry an internal passport and to produce it on  demand.
    There is, however, a further degree of  local  control  in  that  "some
    regional authorities" restrict  movement  by  denying  local  residence
    permits to new settlers from other areas of the country.  It  is  clear
    that this is driven by their own requirement to avoid overcrowding  and
    the assessment makes it clear that it has particular application to the
    cities named in paragraph 6.32 but that the position varies from region
    to region.  There is no suggestion in the background evidence that even
    those cities which are least open to migrants routinely  notify  former
    places of residence of a registered change to residents in their  area.
    It is a form of control driven by  their  perceived  needs  to  prevent
    overcrowding  and  general  migration  rather  than  as  part   of   an
    overarching state apparatus to check the movements of Russian citizens.
     It seems to us that  this  follows  from  the  fact  that  such  local
    requirements are in breach of the Russian constitution  and  provisions
    for freedom of movement.  We note further that  the  implementation  of
    such registration requirements is a matter for  the  local  regions  in
    question and is not universal throughout Russia.

17.   The Adjudicator's finding that the objective  evidence  supports  the
    claim that the Respondent could not return and  live  in  another  area
    because of the registration  system  is  unreasoned.   It  contains  no
    analysis of the objective evidence.  For that reason we do  not  regard
    the Adjudicator's finding in this respect as sustainable on  the  basis
    of her reasoning and it is proper to substitute our own  finding  based
    upon the submissions made to us today and  a  proper  consideration  of
    that objective evidence.

18.   Given the localised nature of the adverse interest in the Respondent,
    in respect of which there is no credible  evidence  of  any  continuing
    interest now that the threat of his complaint about police conduct  has
    been lifted by his departure, the general constitutional provision  for
    freedom of movement and  the  uneven  local  registration  requirements
    imposed by local  authorities  in  Russia  on  new  residents,  we  are
    satisfied that it would be open to the Respondent safely to relocate to
    another part of his country.

19.   The second consideration is  whether  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to do so, in the sense that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    require him to relocate.  In Robinson v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [1997] Imm AR 568 the court said that the unduly harsh  test
    was the correct one and we do not accept Mr Briddock's submission  that
    it imposes a very low standard.  The "unduly harsh" test was  described
    in Robinson in the judgment of the Master of the Rolls at paragraphs 18
    and 19 in the following terms:


         "18.     In determining whether it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the claimant to relocate internally, a  decision  maker
             will have to  consider  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case
             against the background that the issue is whether the  claimant
             is entitled to the status of refugee.  Various tests have been
             suggested.  For example, (a) if as a practical matter (whether
             for financial, logistical or other  good  reason)  the  'safe'
             part of the country is not reasonably accessible; (b)  if  the
             claimant is required to encounter  great  physical  danger  in
             travelling there or  staying  there;  (c)  if  he  or  she  is
             required to undergo undue  hardship  in  travelling  there  or
             staying there; (d) if the quality of the  internal  protection
             fails to meet basic  norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-
             economic  human  rights.   So  far  as  the  last   of   these
             considerations is concerned, the preamble  to  the  Convention
             shows that the contracting parties were  concerned  to  uphold
             the principle  that  human  beings  should  enjoy  fundamental
             rights    and    freedoms    without    discrimination.     In
             Thirunavukkarasu,  Linden  JA,  giving  the  judgment  of  the
             Federal Court of Canada, said at page 687: 'Stated another way
             for clarity, would it be unduly harsh to expect  this  person,
             who is being persecuted in one part of his country, to move to
             another less  hostile  part  of  the  country  before  seeking
             refugee status abroad?'


         19.      He went on to observe that while claimants should not  be
             compelled to cross battle lines or hide  out  in  an  isolated
             region of their country, like  a  cave  in  the  mountains,  a
             desert or jungle, it will not be enough for them to  say  that
             they do not like the weather in a safe area, or that they have
             no friends or relatives there, or that they may not be able to
             find suitable work there."

20.   The only reason put forward by the Respondent for not being  able  to
    live in another part of Russia was the registration system, as recorded
    at paragraph  44  of  the  Adjudicator's  Determination,  and  that  is
    endorsed by what  the  Adjudicator  records  at  paragraph  70  of  her
    Determination,  which  we  have  already  set  out  above.   There  is,
    accordingly,  no  evidence  beyond  that  which  appears  in  the  CIPU
    Assessment which we have quoted  on  the  issue  of  reasonableness  of
    relocation and, given the fact that there  are  areas  in  the  Russian
    regions which implement registration regulations less strictly than  in
    some of the major cities, we are not persuaded on the evidence that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the Respondent to relocate to  an  area
    where he would be safe.

21.   For the above reasons, the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    allowed.




                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
