
Heard  at  Field  House                 BL (Failed Asylum Seekers -
Membership of Political Group) DR Congo [2003] UKIAT 00046
On        22 July 2003
Written    22 July 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . . . . . .06/08/03
. . . . . . . . . . . .

                                   Before

                            Mr J Barnes (Chairman)
                               Mr S L Batiste
                                Mr R Chalkley





                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo,  appeals,
     with leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T R  Jones,
     dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Respondent on  3  May
     2002 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum.  Before  us,  Mr  F
     Gaskin represented the  Appellant  and  Mr  L  Parker,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  2. The Appellant claimed that he  was  a  student  at  the  University  of
     Kinshasa and was a member of FONUS, a political lobbying group.  He was
     the organiser and a leading light in a student demonstration on 11  and
     12 December 2001 at the University over the level of  university  fees.
     On 11 December they marched to the University but were stopped  by  the
     police who shot into the air to disperse them. The following day  there
     was a meeting with various officials but the students were dissatisfied
     and a riot ensued.  Three policemen were killed  in  the  fighting  and
     many arrests were made, including the  Appellant.  Between  12  and  14
     December 2001 he was interrogated under torture and  held  in  inhumane
     and unhygienic conditions.  When  it  was  discovered  that  he  was  a
     ringleader he was told  he  would  be  shot.   However  he  escaped  by
     climbing through a window with the help of one of the other  detainees.
     There was a residential house next door and the people  there  provided
     him with money.  He went on to hide in a friend's  house  in  Kinshasa.
     His family raised money to pay for an agent to enable him  to  come  to
     the UK.  He left by air on 24 March 2002 and arrived in London the next
     day.  The agent abandoned him the airport.  He claimed asylum two  days
     later.

  3. The Adjudicator reached an adverse credibility finding  concerning  the
     claim, which was fully reasoned in paragraphs 19a-19g. He  went  on  to
     dismiss the Appellant's asylum  and  associated  human  rights  appeal.
     Permission to appeal was sought on various grounds but was granted only
     so that the Tribunal could assess the risk on return in  the  light  of
     another decision by the Tribunal in Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05308.

  4. At the hearing before us, Mr Gaskin as a preliminary issue invited  the
     Tribunal to allow him to challenge the adverse credibility  finding  by
     the Adjudicator on the basis that a medical  report  was  not  properly
     taken into account.  This issue was raised in the grounds of appeal and
     rejected when permission was granted on  the  limited  basis  described
     above.  The Tribunal noted that the medical report  was  by  a  GP  and
     contained no diagnostic tests. The GP nevertheless  concluded,  on  the
     basis that the Appellant was  telling  the  truth,  that  he  had  some
     psychological  symptoms  that  were  consistent  with  his  claim.  The
     Tribunal considered that this report could be of no material  value  in
     assessing credibility as the GP did not consider what other matters the
     symptoms described could be consistent  with,  and  indeed  offered  no
     diagnostic testing in relation to his symptoms.  Moreover he based  his
     conclusions on the Appellant's account, which the Adjudicator  properly
     held to lack credibility. The Tribunal therefore refused to extend  the
     grounds of appeal.

  5. We were left with a very restricted basis for appeal. The  decision  in
     Mozu was made in October 2002 and was relatively brief. It  related  to
     an appeal by a female asylum seeker. Essentially it accepted an  expert
     report by Dr Kenne, prepared in July 2002.  Dr Kenne  stated  that  the
     Director General of the Immigration Service in the Democratic  Republic
     of Congo and the Minister of the Interior had said that  failed  asylum
     seekers would be arrested at the airport on return and  imprisoned.  Dr
     Kenne offered the opinion that returnees from the  UK  would  be  under
     greater suspicion because of support given to the RCD  by  the  British
     government. He also indicated that there was a specific  risk  of  rape
     for women in prisons. Consequently the  Tribunal  concluded  that  "the
     Democratic Republic of Congo is in a very unsettled condition  and  the
     evidence of the reception of returned asylum seekers, particularly from
     the UK, is such that her return does indeed expose the Appellant  to  a
     serious risk of imprisonment and with rape.  The conditions in  prisons
     are clearly inhuman and degrading  anyway.   This  would  be  a  breach
     therefore of Article 3."

  6. Mr Gaskin before us acknowledged that Dr Kenne's report was now a  year
     old and had been produced in response  to  a  specific  claim.  He  was
     unable to say whether permission had been sought or  obtained  from  Dr
     Kenne to produce the report in this appeal, after such a lapse of time.
     In our view the passage of time and this failure to  obtain  permission
     and current revalidation undermines the present value of the report, as
     described by the Tribunal in Ali [2002] UKIAT 03472  and  Kuldip  Singh
     (20762), which we adopt.  It follows also  that  the  determination  in
     Mozu, made in October 2002 and based upon this report, is of little  if
     any present value in assessing the current risk on return.

  7. This view is reinforced by the fact that in the year that has  followed
     since the report was written by Dr Kenne,  no  objective  evidence  has
     emerged of arrests of returning failed asylum seekers at  the  airport.
     To the contrary, the UK Ambassador in DRC has indicated that he is  not
     aware of any problems for returning asylum seekers at the  airport.  Mr
     Gaskin has been wholly unable to  point  us  to  any  direct  objective
     evidence to show that the UK Ambassador is  wrong.   Whilst  we  accept
     that there are problems in DRC, we consider  that  if  there  were  any
     significant number of arrests of returnees from those  countries  which
     have been returning failed asylum seekers over the past year, it  would
     by now be apparent from the objective material.  The  absence  of  such
     information, together with the report from the  UK  Ambassador  suggest
     that this problem  has  not  arisen  in  practice  to  the  extent   of
     establishing a real risk to returnees.

  8. We also note that on 2 April 2002  UNHCR  indicated  that  it  was  not
     opposed to the return of failed asylum seekers to the  DRC  insofar  as
     they have had access to a full and fair hearing  of  their  claims.  Mr
     Gaskin has referred us to two further letters from UNHCR in  May  2003,
     which he suggests have materially  changed  the  nature  of  the  UNHCR
     advice.  These  letters  state  that  there  are  reports   that   some
     individuals may face serious problems following possible  interrogation
     by the security services on return, should it be discovered  that  they
     have a military or political profile or have sought asylum abroad owing
     to a political or military background.   We  do  not  know  what  these
     reports were and we note that the Respondent is seeking  clarification.
     However, we do not consider that this is a material change in the UNHCR
     advice insofar as it relates to this appeal.  The Adjudicator has found
     that the Appellant does not have a military or political  profile,  nor
     does he have a political or military background.  His asylum claim  was
     a fabrication. The authorities in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
     would not be aware of the basis of his fabricated claim.

  9. In the circumstances, there is no error in the  Adjudicator's  findings
     or his dismissal of the Appellant's asylum and associated human  rights
     appeal.

 10. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
