
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |HT (Surendran Guidelines -  |
|                           |        |Questioning - Test for Bias)|
|                           |        |Algeria [2003] UKIAT 00128  |
|On  22 July 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|04/11/03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr S L Batiste                                                    |
|Mr R Chalkley                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Miss J Lule of Counsel instructed by Simmons,
                       Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on  28  January  1972.   He
      claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 June  2001  but  he
      was at all events here on 25 June 2001 when  he  claimed  asylum.   He
      submitted a statement but subsequently failed to attend at  interview.
      The Secretary of  State refused his asylum application for the reasons
      set out in a letter dated 9 August 2001, such refusal being under both
      paragraphs 336 and 340  of  HC395,  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,
      although the claim was dealt with substantively insofar as it was  set
      out in the appellant's statement.  On 15 August 2001 the Secretary  of
      State issued directions for the removal of the appellant to Algeria as
      an illegal entrant  after  refusal  of  his  asylum  application.   He
      appealed against  that  decision  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.  His appeal was heard on 3 February 2003 by  an  Adjudicator,
      Miss C J Hamilton, who dismissed his appeal on the basis that his core
      evidence lacked credibility.

2.    The appellant had been represented  before  the  Adjudicator  by  Miss
      Lule, who also settled the grounds of appeal in respect of which leave
      was granted in relation to ground 7 which challenged the  decision  on
      the basis that the Adjudicator had failed to act  in  accordance  with
      the  Surendran  guidelines  as  adopted  in  the  "starred"   Tribunal
      determination in MNM [00/TH/02423]; and in relation to ground 8  which
      asserted that the Adjudicator had failed to give any, or any adequate,
      reasons for her adverse credibility findings.

3.     At  the  hearing  before  us  we  had  the  Adjudicator's  record  of
      proceedings as well as a transcript  of  Miss  Lule's  contemporaneous
      notes of the hearing before the Adjudicator.  The respondent had  not,
      of course, been represented before the Adjudicator.

4.    It is not necessary for the purposes of this determination to set  out
      the basis of the appellant's claim in  any  detail.   It  suffices  to
      record that he claimed to have been threatened by members of  the  GIA
      in 2001 but that, following his seeking of protection from the  police
      in Algeria, he claimed that he then become the object of suspicion  on
      the part of the military security service who accused him of  being  a
      terrorist working for the GIA and sought to pressurise him into making
      a signed confession during detention.  His treatment in detention  led
      to him becoming ill and being transferred to a military hospital  from
      which he was able to effect his escape and he then  left  Algeria  and
      made his way to the United Kingdom,  having  since  his  arrival  been
      informed that the authorities in Algeria were still seeking him.

5.    It was common ground  that  if  the  appellant  was  credible  in  his
      claims, there was an arguable issue as to whether his removal would be
      in breach of the United Kingdom's International Treaty obligations.

6.    So far as the challenge arising  from  the  Surendran  guidelines  was
      concerned, both advocates had been referred  by  us  to  the  Tribunal
      decision in Yildizhan  [2002]  UKIAT08315  which  had  given  detailed
      consideration to the Surendran guidelines, emphasising that they  were
      no more than guidelines to  the  conduct  of  hearings  in  which  the
      Secretary of State was unrepresented but that, whether or not they had
      been followed in a particular  appeal,  the  issue  for  the  Tribunal
      remained that of whether the findings of the Adjudicator  were  unsafe
      and unsustainable on  the  basis  that  the  requirements  of  natural
      justice had not been followed by reason of apparent bias on  the  part
      of the relevant Adjudicator.

7.    Since the Tribunal  decision  in  MNM,  the  issue  of  the  test  for
      determining apparent bias has been the subject of consideration by the
      House of Lords in Porter and Another v Magill [2001]  UKHAL  67.   The
      test for apparent bias had been formulated by Lord Goff  of  Chieveley
      in R v Gough [1993] AC646 in the following terms:

           "...having ascertained the  relevant  circumstances,  the  court
           should ask itself whether, having regard to those circumstances,
           there was a real danger of bias on  the  part  of  the  relevant
           member of the Tribunal in question, in the sense that  he  might
           unfairly regard (or have  unfairly  regarded)  with  favour,  or
           disfavour, the case of a party to the issue under  consideration
           by him ..."

8.    That formulation of the relevant test was reconsidered  in  the  light
      of  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  in   re
      Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods  (No.2)  [2001]  1WLR700  who
      summarised the Court's conclusions as follows:

           "When the Strasbourg jurisprudence is  taken  into  account,  we
           believe that a modest adjustment of the test in  R  v  Gough  is
           called for, which makes it plain  that  it  is,  in  effect,  no
           different from the test applied in most of the Commonwealth  and
           in  Scotland.   The  Court  must   first   ascertain   all   the
           circumstances which have a bearing on the  suggestion  that  the
           judge was biased.  It must then ask whether those  circumstances
           would lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude  that
           there was a real possibility, or a real danger,  the  two  being
           the same, that the Tribunal was biased."

9.    That formulation was approved by the House  of  Lords  in  Porter  and
      Another v Magill save  for  deletion  of  the  reference  to  "a  real
      danger".  In the leading judgment given by Lord Bingham  of  Cornhill,
      he said in this respect:

           "Those words no longer serve a useful purpose here, and they are
           not used in the jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court.   The
           question is  whether  the  fair-minded  and  informed  observer,
           having considered the facts, would conclude  that  there  was  a
           real possibility that the Tribunal was biased."

10.   That authority is, of course, binding on us and must  inform,  as  has
      previously been accepted by this Tribunal, the proper approach to  all
      questions of alleged bias which encompasses those appeals where it  is
      said that such apparent bias arises from the failure  to  observe  the
      Surendran guidelines.

11.   It follows that a failure  to  observe  those  guidelines  is  not  of
      itself  sufficient  to  show  apparent  bias  on  the  part   of   the
      Adjudicator.  It remains the case that the relevant circumstances will
      still have to be found by  the  appellate  court  from  the  available
      evidence and their task will be to apply the test for apparent bias as
      formulated in Porter and Another v Magill.

12.   The statement of the Tribunal in Hemachi  [HX/07645/2001]  that  where
      there has been a failure to follow the Surendran guidelines the better
      course is to remit the hearing afresh before a different  Adjudicator,
      cannot be regarded as authoritative  following  the  decision  of  the
      House of Lords.  It may be that it will be the right  course  but  the
      Tribunal must first consider the existence of  any  apparent  bias  in
      accordance with the guidance of the House of Lords.

13.   In her submissions to us Miss Lule rightly did  not  seek  to  suggest
      that because the Adjudicator had herself questioned the  appellant  in
      the course of the appeal this of itself gave rise  to  any  basis  for
      remittal.  Quite apart from the fact that it seems to us that there is
      an inherent right in any  judicial  officer  to  ask  questions  of  a
      witness in order to clarify issues which concern him, there is in  any
      event nothing in the Surendran guidelines to  suggest  that  there  is
      anything improper in the Adjudicator asking questions as  guideline  7
      makes clear.  It is  recommended  in  paragraphs  5  and  6  of  those
      guidelines that it is preferable for the Adjudicator to  indicate  the
      areas of concern so that the appellant's representative may deal  with
      them in the course of examination in chief and this is no  doubt  good
      practical advice because it avoids  the  possibility  that  by  asking
      questions the Adjudicator will  give  the  appearance  of  a  lack  of
      impartiality and of entering into the arena.  Whether the  Adjudicator
      has done so in any given case is, however,  a  matter  which  requires
      investigation and resolution by application of the test  for  apparent
      bias.  Whether objectively the result has been to cause any  prejudice
      to the claimant in the outcome of the appeal will be an important  but
      not necessarily always a determinative consideration.

14.   The nature  of  the  challenge  raised  by  Miss  Lule  was  that  the
      Adjudicator had identified areas in respect of  which  she  wished  to
      have clarification but had interrupted Miss  Lule  in  the  course  of
      examination in chief seeking to deal with those identified areas.   It
      is apparent from the record of proceedings that Miss Lule was able  to
      ask  only  two  questions  in  relation  to  the   first   issue   for
      clarification raised by the Adjudicator before the Adjudicator herself
      intervened and took over the examination of the witness for  the  next
      five questions.  That pattern was repeated during the remainder of the
      examination of the appellant with counsel being able to  ask  at  most
      one or two questions  before  the  Adjudicator  again  took  over  the
      questioning.

15.   Additionally, Miss  Lule  complained  that  the  questions  which  the
      Adjudicator sought  to  raise  went  beyond  matters  which  had  been
      challenged in the refusal letter and that this, too, was to extend the
      range of questioning in a way which  was  contrary  to  the  Surendran
      guidelines.  We have no hesitation in saying that there  is  no  basis
      for such a submission.  It is  the  function  of  the  Adjudicator  to
      determine the facts in each appeal and whether or not the Secretary of
      State is represented, the Adjudicator is not in that  enquiry  limited
      to issues which are the subject of direct  challenge  in  the  refusal
      letter. It is only where there are issues in respect  of  which  there
      has been a clear  and  unequivocal  concession  on  the  part  of  the
      Secretary of State that it would be inappropriate for  an  Adjudicator
      to raise once more the issue which had been conceded.  Paragraph 5  of
      the guidelines is quite clear  that  there  is  no  limitation  on  an
      Adjudicator raising additional points as to  credibility  which  arise
      from consideration of the papers and this is made clear again  in  MNM
      at paragraph 19 in the reference to the earlier Tribunal  decision  in
      Muwyinyi that Adjudicators were not bound to accept accounts  at  face
      value but could and should  probe  apparent  improbabilities  provided
      they did not involve themselves directly in questioning appellants  or
      witnesses save as necessary to enable them  to  ascertain  the  truth,
      never adopting or appearing to adopt a hostile attitude.

16.   In response to questions from the Tribunal, Miss Lule agreed that  the
      real basis of her complaint  was the degree to which  the  Adjudicator
      had interrupted her own examinations in chief so that she was deprived
      of the opportunity of drawing out the evidence in an  orderly  fashion
      without interruption.

17.   So far as the second limb of the  grounds  of  appeal  was  concerned,
      Miss Lule submitted that the Adjudicator's reasoning in rejecting  the
      credibility of the appellant was inadequate and unsafe  and  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to evaluate that  evidence  against  the  known
      country background situation at any point in her  reasoning.  Further,
      that the adverse findings were derived from the Adjudicator's views as
      to what was and was not plausible. It  is  not  necessary  for  us  to
      detail the challenges  in  this  respect  further  because  Mr  Parker
      conceded that there was merit in the challenges to  the  Adjudicator's
      approach to credibility. We are satisfied that concession is  properly
      made and Ms Lule sought remittal so that the evidence could  be  taken
      afresh. We consider that this is the appropriate course. We  also  had
      some concern as to the way in  which  the  Adjudicator  inhibited  the
      examination in chief of the appellant although  that  would  not  have
      been a determinative factor without further careful analysis which the
      accepted unsatisfactory nature of the reasoning to support the adverse
      credibility findings has rendered unnecessary on our part.

18.   We are indebted  to  both  advocates  for  their  assistance,  and  in
      particular to Miss Lule for her very lucid and helpful submissions.

19.   For the reasons which we have already given,  we  are  satisfied  that
      the Adjudicator's determination is unsafe and cannot stand.   It  will
      be necessary for the evidence  to  be  taken  afresh.   We,  too,  are
      satisfied that the proper  course  is  to  direct  remittal  for  this
      purpose, taking into account the requirements of the Procedure  Rules.
      It is further not satisfactory in such circumstances that an appellate
      tribunal should become the primary finders of fact by reason of errors
      on the part of an adjudicator.

20.   For the above reasons, this appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  it
      is remitted for hearing afresh before an Adjudicator other than Miss C
      G Hamilton.





                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President





