
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |AD (Psychiatic Illness -    |
|                           |        |Articles 3 and 8) Macedonia |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00171          |
|On 11 November 2003        |        |                            |
|Prepared 12 November 2003  |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17 December 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Miss B Mensah                                                     |
|Mr D Froome                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the  appellant:            Mr  L  Parker,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer
For the respondent:          Ms V Easty of Counsel, instructed by
                       Bates, Wells and Braithwaite

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr J Bailey, who  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on
      human rights grounds  against  the  decision  made  on  10  May  2002
      refusing him leave to enter following the refusal of  his  claim  for
      asylum.   In this  determination  the  Tribunal  will  refer  to  the
      respondent to this appeal as the applicant.

   2. The applicant left Macedonia with his wife on 17 August 2001.    They
      travelled to the United Kingdom in the back of a lorry.  The  journey
      was arranged by an agent.   They arrived on 21 August 2001  making  a
      claim for asylum the following day.   The claim was refused  for  the
      reasons set out in the Secretary of State's decision letter  dated  1
      May 2002.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision  on
      2 April 2003.  For the reasons which he gave  he  was  not  satisfied
      that the applicant would be at risk of persecution for  a  Convention
      reason on return to Macedonia.   His reasons are set out in paragraph
      10.1-5 of his determination.   The applicant has not sought to appeal
      against this decision.

   3. The Adjudicator went  on  to  consider  the  claim  on  human  rights
      grounds.   The  Adjudicator  accepted  the  applicant's  accounts  of
      events in Macedonia.   The applicant had been detained by soldiers of
      the Macedonian army in April 2001.    About  a  month  later  he  was
      assaulted by members of the UCK and accused of  being  a  spy  and  a
      traitor.  In July 2001 soldiers from the Macedonian army forced their
      way into his home.   The applicant was assaulted.  Both  he  and  his
      wife were taken to separate army camps.   His wife was detained for 2
      days and during that period she was raped by 3 soldiers.    They were
      released on the basis that they left Macedonia.   When they  returned
      home they found that their house had been burnt  to  the  ground  and
      their son Afrim had been killed in the fire.

   4. The Adjudicator heard oral evidence not only from the  applicant  but
      also from Mrs J Avigad, Principal Family  Therapist  at  the  Medical
      Foundation, who had submitted a  detailed  report  at  A8-20  of  the
      bundle before the Adjudicator.   This describes the general state  of
      both the applicant and his wife when they were first referred to  the
      Family Therapy Team at the Medical  Foundation.    There  were  major
      concerns as to the applicant's wife  both  as  to  her  physical  and
      mental state.  Her gait was unstable and she  was  having  blackouts.
      Her mood was extremely low.   She  was  not  able  to  take  care  of
      herself and their three year  old  daughter  Enida  without  constant
      supervision from the  applicant.    There  were  concerns  about  the
      parenting of Enida who had been born in  the  United  Kingdom  on  12
      October 2001.

   5. The applicant and his wife were taken on as clients in the  light  of
      the severity and potential danger arising from  their  health,  child
      care and psychological problems.   Initially,  the  applicant's  wife
      was withdrawn and unable to make eye contact.   She only occasionally
      gave monosyllabic whispered answers to questions.   She suffered from
      flashbacks, nightmares and her  sleep  was  continually  interrupted.
      The applicant felt unable to leave his wife on her own with the  baby
      at any time.  There was no bonding between her and  the  baby.    The
      applicant's wife was referred to Dr Rundle a  consultant  neurologist
      as Mrs  Avigad  was  concerned  that  she  was  displaying  psychotic
      symptoms.   In the event there were no findings to  that  effect  but
      the need for on-going therapy was confirmed.

   6. At the hearing  before  the  Adjudicator  Mrs  Avigad  was  asked  to
      forecast as best she could, the effect that a decision requiring  the
      applicant and his wife to return to Macedonia  would  have  on  them.
      It was her opinion that the applicant's wife  would  pull  back  into
      herself psychologically or would be reduced to  a  distressed  state.
      She would have  difficulties  in  walking  without  being  physically
      propped up.   She would see herself as "going crazy".   The applicant
      may well be able to sustain his role  as  a  supporter  for  a  short
      period but he would then fracture.   There was a very real likelihood
      that both or either would become suicidal and a likelihood that their
      daughter would be neglected due to the  inability  of  both  to  cope
      emotionally with the trauma of return.

   7. Mrs Avigad was not able to comment from her  own  personal  knowledge
      about the facilities available in Macedonia.   The general thrust  of
      the  background  information  was  that  Macedonia  had   traditional
      hospital based mental health services, which were not  efficient  and
      largely depended on centralised organisation.   There was a reference
      to community healthcare facilities for patients with mental disorders
      which were branches of the secondary and tertiary  mental  healthcare
      institutions.    She had grave concerns as to whether  the  applicant
      and his wife would or could receive the complex therapeutic treatment
      they both needed.   She feared that the applicant's wife would simply
      be admitted to an institution and placed on  medication  which  would
      destroy the prospect of any outcome for her  and  lead  almost  to  a
      vegetable like existence.

   8. On the basis of this evidence the Adjudicator found that the  removal
      of the applicant would breach both Article 3 and Article 8.   He said
      that, notwithstanding the treatment which may or may not be available
      on return, he accepted the evidence that the threat of and the actual
      return could in themselves amount to inhuman or  degrading  treatment
      sufficient to satisfy Article 3.  It would reduce the  applicant  and
      his wife to a mental state that could be so acute  as  to  present  a
      real risk of suicide.   He went  on  to  consider  Article  8.    The
      family would be returned together but the return would destroy family
      life with its impact  on  the  fragile  mental  health  of  both  the
      applicant and his wife.   There was a real  risk  that  return  could
      lead to their daughter being cared for outside the family.    Such  a
      deterioration if it occurred in the United Kingdom could  lead  to  a
      situation where the caring agencies would  contemplate  taking  their
      daughter into care.

   9. In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator  erred  in
      his approach to Article 3.   The Adjudicator should have  focused  on
      what would happen to the applicant when he returned.   He appeared to
      have disregarded the availability of any treatment  in  reaching  his
      conclusions.   He had  failed  properly  to  take  into  account  the
      guidelines in Bensaid [2002] INLR 325.   He had failed  to  focus  on
      the correct issues and this materially  affected  his  assessment  of
      Article  3.    There  were  facilities  available  and  psycho-social
      services which would prevent a breach of Article 3.     It  was  also
      argued that the Adjudicator erred  in  his  approach  to  Article  8.
      Having accepted that the act of removal would not interfere with  the
      family, the claim under Article 8 fell  away.    In  the  absence  of
      evidence that there was a lack of family  support  in  Macedonia  and
      taking account of the fact that the wife's parents  were  there,  his
      conclusion that there  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8  was  not
      reasonable.   It was also asserted that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to
      consider the issue of proportionality.

  10. At the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  Mr  Parker  argued  that  the
      applicant failed to show exceptional  circumstances  which  could  be
      described as extreme as envisaged by the Court of Appeal in N  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 1369.  If the family returned to Macedonia  the  applicant's
      wife would have access to treatment there and the  applicant  himself
      would  continue  to  provide  moral  support.   They  had  family  in
      Macedonia. When analysed the medical evidence tended to show that  if
      anything there had been an improvement in his wife's  mental  health.
      The claim did not come within an exceptional category because it  was
      not shown that the condition of the applicant's wife was sufficiently
      severe.   The medical reports had been very carefully  worded.    The
      treatment centred around counselling rather than any drug therapy.


  11. Looking at the three stage test in Razgar [2002] Imm AR 269  although
      the applicant might be receiving better support and treatment in  the
      United Kingdom, this was not a case where there would be no treatment
      in  Macedonia.    Once  her  location  and  status  was  settled  the
      likelihood was that the  condition  of  the  applicant's  wife  would
      improve.   The background evidence showed that there was support  for
      the most vulnerable: see the CIPU report April 2003 paragraphs  5.28-
      33.   The Adjudicator had failed to give proper weight to the medical
      treatment available in Macedonia.   He  had  not  spelt  out  in  his
      determination what the proper standard was to show a breach of either
      Articles 3 or 8.


  12. At  the  beginning  of  her  submissions  Ms  Easty  applied  for  an
      adjournment so that oral evidence could be called.    This  would  be
      further evidence from Mrs Avigad dealing with the current  situation.
       The Tribunal noted that no draft witness statement as such had  been
      prepared but there was a further report in the Tribunal bundle.    In
      our view this appeal can properly be determined without the need  for
      further oral evidence.   As already indicated, the  Tribunal  have  a
      further report from Mrs Avigad.

  13. Ms Easty submitted that this was not  a  case  where  post  traumatic
      stress disorder  was  being  relied  on.    It  was  clear  from  the
      Adjudicator's summary of Mrs Avigad's evidence in paragraph 11 of his
      determination and in particular paragraphs 11.1, 2  and  4  that  the
      applicant's  wife  was  suffering  from  a  severe  condition.    The
      Adjudicator had accepted Mrs Avigad's evidence of  the  risk  that  a
      removal would have: see  paragraph  11.8.  The  consequences  of  the
      removal itself could lead to a breach of Article 3.   In the light of
      those findings the Adjudicator was entitled to  conclude  that  there
      would be a breach of both Article 3 and 8.  Ms Easty  argued  that  a
      proper distinction could be drawn between Article 3 and 8.   Even  if
      the high threshold for Article 3 was  not  reached  there  was  clear
      evidence of a breach of physical and moral integrity relating to  the
      applicant's wife if she were to be  removed.   It  would  lead  to  a
      severe reaction which would directly interfere with her private life.
        In the light of the severity of her reaction to a removal, it would
      not be proportionate to a  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
      control.

  14. The Tribunal will deal firstly with the claim under Article 3.   This
      provides that no one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment or  punishment.    This  is  an  absolute  right.
      Because the rights it enshrines are so fundamental to  human  dignity
      there can be  no  derogation.   The  article  has  extra  territorial
      effect: a contracting state must not subject an  individual  to  such
      treatment nor can it return anyone to a state where there is  a  real
      risk of  receiving  such  treatment.   When  granting  permission  to
      appeal, the Vice President commented that it was  arguable  that  the
      Adjudicator may have erred in finding that the  fact  of  removal  of
      itself would lead to a breach of Article 3.

  15. It depends on the  facts  of  each  individual  case  whether  it  is
      possible to draw any real distinction between the act of removal  and
      the consequences of removal but in our judgment it would be wrong  to
      place a gloss or restriction on the  plain  words  of  Article  3  to
      exclude as a matter of principle any  consequences  flowing  directly
      from the act of removal in so far as they can be  distinguished  from
      those arising from events or conditions in the  country  of  proposed
      removal.

  16. Because of the absolute nature of the obligation under  Article  3  a
      high threshold must be passed before it is established that there  is
      a breach.   When  considering  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  the
      European Court has confirmed that such treatment must reach a minimum
      level of severity.   When considering a  claim  based  on  Article  3
      where the complaint in essence was a want of medical resources in the
      applicant's home country, the Court of Appeal in N  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
      1369 held that Article 3 cases must be based on facts which were  not
      only exceptional and extreme but extreme when judged in  the  context
      of cases all or  many  of  which  may  demand  sympathy  on  pressing
      grounds.   The Court held that the case  of  D  (1997)  24  EHRR  423
      should be strictly confined.   In that case the European  Court  held
      that Article 3 would be violated if someone in  the  last  stages  of
      Aids were returned to St Kitts even though the  conditions  he  would
      face in St Kitts would not  by  themselves  amount  to  a  breach  of
      Article 3 standards on the part of the St Kitts' government.  As  the
      Court of Appeal point out in N, this decision is a further  extension
      to the extra territorial extension to Article 3.  This case  even  if
      strictly confined supports the Tribunal's view that it would be wrong
      to place any restriction on the wording of Article 3.  All the  facts
      must be looked at to assess whether removal would lead to a breach of
      Article 3.

  17. The facts of D and N illustrate how difficult it can be in individual
      cases to achieve the balance between  the  general  interest  of  the
      community and the need to protect an individual's fundamental rights.
        As Laws LJ says in paragraph 40 of N there are no sharp legal tests
      in this area.   The difficulty is to set in context the facts  of  an
      individual case which may arouse feelings of sympathy and  compassion
      with the broader purposes of the convention which was never  intended
      to impose impossible legal obligations on contracting states  nor  to
      undermine  the  government's  power  to  control  and  regulate   the
      conditions of lawful immigration.  Set  against  this  there  may  be
      cases where the humanitarian appeal of a case is so powerful that  it
      cannot in reason be resisted.

  18. The Adjudicator accepted that the applicant and his  wife  have  been
      caught up and were innocent victims in the conflict  which  developed
      between ethnic Albanians and the Macedonian authorities in Macedonia.
       It is now argued that to return the  applicant  and  his  family  to
      Macedonia would amount to inhuman or degrading treatment.   Both  the
      applicant and his wife have been receiving therapeutic counselling in
      the United Kingdom.   On the basis of the medical evidence there  can
      be no doubt about the need for this treatment to  continue  at  least
      for the time being.  Mrs Avigad gave her opinion about the effect  of
      removal on the applicant's wife and its possible  consequences.    It
      was her view that neither would be able to cope emotionally with  the
      trauma  of  return  and  there  was  a  real  risk  of   the   family
      disintegrating.

  19. But return is not to a country where there are no  effective  medical
      services.   The World Health Organisation working with the Macedonian
      Ministry of Health has developed a  strategy  to  support  access  to
      healthcare facilities in under-served areas affected by the conflict.
       Existing psycho-social services have been expanded to deal with  the
      consequences of the conflict  and  related  stress  and  trauma.  The
      Adjudicator accepted that there would  be  a  severe  reaction  to  a
      removal but in our judgment that reaction cannot be categorised as so
      extreme as to engage the United Kingdom's obligations  under  Article
      3.  The risk of suicide is very speculative.  The family would return
      together. The applicant would no doubt attempt to  support  his  wife
      and family as best he could.  This taken  with  the  availability  of
      medical services and support in Macedonia, even  if  not  to  be  the
      extent of those being provided in the  United  Kingdom,  are  factors
      properly to be taken into account in assessing whether there would be
      a risk of Article 3.

  20. In summary, the Tribunal accept that the Adjudicator failed  to  give
      adequate weight to the medical services available  in  Macedonia  and
      gave undue weight to the compassionate circumstances in the light  of
      the high threshold required to establish a breach of Article 3.   The
      facts  are  not  so  extreme  as  to  engage  the  United   Kingdom's
      obligations under article 3.

  21. The Tribunal must now turn to the question of Article 8.   Article  3
      and Article 8 do not necessarily stand or fall together  although  in
      many cases they do.  The human rights being protected  in  Article  8
      are of a very different kind from the fundamental rights  covered  by
      Article 3.   Article 8  provides  that  everyone  has  the  right  to
      respect  for  his  private  and  family  life,  his  home   and   his
      correspondence.   The Court of Appeal has confirmed in Ullah  and  Do
      [2003] EWCA Civ 1856 that Article 8 does not have  extra  territorial
      effect.    In so far as the claimant seeks to rely on  article  8  in
      respect of events or conditions in the proposed country of removal he
      must show a breach of sufficient gravity to engage Article  3  before
      the United Kingdom's obligations are engaged.

  22. In so far as the applicant argues that there would  be  a  breach  of
      private and family life relating both to himself and his wife because
      of a lack of medical  facilities  in  Macedonia,  Article  8  is  not
      engaged.   But this does not preclude a claim based on Article 8 when
      the interference with the Article 8(1) right arises as  a  result  of
      the removal rather than from conditions or events in the  country  to
      which the claimant is removed.   The distinction  implicit  in  Ullah
      and Do is between the consequences of  interference  to  private  and
      family life enjoyed in the United Kingdom as opposed to  those  which
      follow from events or conditions in the country to which an applicant
      is returned.

  23. The guidance given in Razgar as to how claims of this  nature  should
      be assessed should not be treated as limiting the ambit of Article  8
      but as illustrating the  basic  principle  that  all  relevant  facts
      relating to the particular applicant must be taken into account.   It
      is important to emphasise that a successful  claim  under  Article  8
      does  not  necessarily  depend  upon  a  comparison  of  the   health
      facilities available in this country and the country to which removal
      is proposed although those factors may  be  relevant  when  assessing
      whether there is a breach of an existing family or  private  life  in
      the United Kingdom.

  24. In this appeal the Adjudicator found that there would be a breach  of
      family life as a return would  destroy  the  family  because  of  the
      impact of removal upon the fragile mental state of both the applicant
      and his wife.  In the grounds the Secretary  of  State  argues  that,
      having accepted that the act of removal would not interfere with  the
      family in the sense that all the family were being removed  together,
      the claim under Article 8 fell away.   The  Tribunal  do  not  agree.
      The need of both the applicant and his wife for further  support  and
      treatment is clear from  the  medical  evidence.   If  a  removal  to
      Macedonia would lead to a disintegration  of  the  family,  there  is
      clearly a  breach  of  Article  8,  whether  it  is  regarded  as  an
      interference with family life or with the physical or moral integrity
      of one or more family members of such severity to engage Article 8.

  25. The Adjudicator found that this would be the  case.   He  found  that
      there would be a breakdown of the family because  of  the  effect  of
      removal on the fragile mental state of both  the  applicant  and  his
      wife.   In our view the Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that  on
      the particular facts of this appeal, the  applicant's  rights  within
      Article 8(1) were engaged. The Adjudicator did not refer to the issue
      of proportionality.   In paragraph 19 of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision letter, proportionality is considered  but  in  a  different
      context.


  26. In these circumstances it is  for  the  Tribunal  to  assess  whether
      removal would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.    In most  cases
      the  need  for  effective  immigration  control  will   justify   the
      interference  with  Article  8  rights.   However,  there   will   be
      exceptional cases where humanitarian considerations are so compelling
      that removal would not be proportionate.  The effect  of  removal  on
      all the family members must be taken  into  account.    The  Tribunal
      must consider not just the effect on the applicant and his  wife  but
      also on their young daughter.

  27. The onus is on the Secretary of State to show that removal  would  be
      proportionate.   The Adjudicator accepted the evidence of Mrs Avigad.
       This is a particularly vulnerable family where the  consequences  of
      removal would be exceptionally severe regardless of the  availability
      of support in Macedonia.  Even giving due weight to the need to  have
      proper immigration control, the Tribunal have come to the  view  that
      removal at the present time would be  disproportionate.   It  may  be
      that with  time  and  treatment  the  consequences  of  a  return  to
      Macedonia would diminish and would not have such a severe  impact  on
      this family but the Tribunal must deal with the situation  as  it  is
      now.


  28. Accordingly, for these reasons the appeal by the Secretary  of  State
      is allowed on Article 3 grounds but dismissed on Article 8 grounds.



                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President
