
Ar TM (Withdrawl of Asylum Grounds - Consequences) Kazakhstan [2003]

                                             UKIAT 00169


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing: 13 October 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 11 December 2003 ..........

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                                Mr D J Parkes



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This case is being reported as it addresses  the  issue  of  what  the
      consequences are, in the context of an  appeal  based  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds, of withdrawal of the asylum grounds. At the  end
      we set out brief guidelines on this issue.

   2. The appellant, a national of Kazakhstan, has appealed  with  leave  of
      the Tribunal against a determination of the  Adjudicator,  Mrs  M.M.S.
      Shanahan, dismissing the appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
      of State, refusing to grant leave to enter on asylum grounds.  Miss A.
       White  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Fawcett  &   Pattini  Solicitors
      appeared for the appellant. Mr R. Holmes appeared for the respondent.


3.    The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.


4.    The appellant claimed that in  Kazakhstan she had  been  subjected  to
      harassment from her own family and the surrounding  community  because
      she had married a  Muslim  from  Afghanistan.  Difficulties  continued
      after the birth of her son in June  2001.   Because  of  threats  from
      family and relatives including an uncle  who  was  involved  with  the
      mafia, they decided in February 2001 that her husband should leave the
      country. Having been turned  away  from  her  church  because  of  her
      marriage and her son even after her husband had left, she  decided  to
      come to the UK to be with him.  She made this decision in Autumn  2001
      and eventually left in February 2002. Both she and her husband claimed
      that she did not know about his having been  granted  ELR  before  she
      came to the United Kingdom.


5.    In relation to the appellant's a claim the Adjudicator wrote:


             'She has now withdrawn her claim for asylum so I  must  assume
             the treatment and harassment she claims to have  suffered  was
             not of a level she  that  would  have  established  a  Refugee
             Convention claim or an Article 3 claim and as I attach  little
             weight to this in considering her situation on return.'

6.    In relation to the Article 3 claim the Adjudicator accepted  that  the
      appellant was a Russian Christian who established a family  life  with
      her Muslim husband in Kazakhstan before he left to  come  to  the  UK,
      living with her parents and then in their own flat.  They had  met  in
      July 2000 and married in November  2000.   She  was  already  pregnant
      before she left. Her husband did not contact her  until  approximately
      six months after he came to the UK. A citizen of Afghanistan,  he  has
      been granted ELR for four years. Since they made contact here they had
      not lived in the  same  accommodation  but  had  re-established  their
      family  ties  to  some  extent.  She  was  now  pregnant  again.   The
      Adjudicator accepted that any removal would result in interference  in
      her family life. She did not, however, accept that  removal  would  be
      disproportionate.  She noted that apart from the usual side-effects of
      pregnancy, the  appellant  had  no  medical  or  health  difficulties.
      However,  her  principal  reason  for   not   finding   the   decision
      disproportionate was that she did not accept that  the  appellant  had
      satisfactorily  explained  why  she  had  not  applied  for  UK  entry
      clearance in Kazakhstan. In this regard she rejected the claim of  the
      couple that she did not know before she left that he had obtained ELR.
      Given that they spoke to each by phone once a week, she found that not
      credible. Despite saying she made her plans to leave  in  secret,  the
      appellant had  managed  to  obtain  a  Czech  visa.  Accordingly,  the
      Adjudicator concluded, the appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  the
      option of applying for entry clearance from Kazakhstan was not a valid
      one, then or now.


7.    The first point raise in the grounds of appeal was that  the  previous
      legal representatives  incorrectly  withdrew  the  appellant's  asylum
      appeal.  They maintained that the appellant was not aware and did  not
      understand the drastic implications of withdrawing the asylum  appeal.
      They contended:


             'A large part of her evidence was considered irrelevant to the
             Article 8 issue but in fact was material in  establishing  how
             the appellant found her (sic) forced  to  leave  her  country.
             She and her husband have suffered considerable persecution and
             received death threats and have no authority to turn to as the
             police are involved with the  family.  This  rather  important
             issue  which  forced  her  husband  and  then  her  to   leave
             Kazakhstan was not even considered.'


8.    The second  point  raised  was  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      conclude that there was a viable  option  open  to  the  appellant  of
      applying for entry clearance from abroad. Her husband  had  only  been
      granted  ELR.   Furthermore,  there  were  exceptional   circumstances
      applying  in  her  case:   the  couple  had  been  forced  to  live  a
      significant  period  apart  because  of  necessity,  not  choice.  The
      appellant's husband would  be  denied  contact  with  his  child.  The
      appellant was pregnant and in a delicate  state  of  health.   In  her
      country she would again be exposed  to  death  threats.   Her  husband
      could not join her there, because of the threats made against him.


The  issue  of  withdrawal  of  the  asylum  grounds  of  appeal   and   its
consequences

9.    Leave to the Tribunal was not granted  on  the  first  point.  It  was
      rightly refused. The asylum  grounds  of  appeal  had  been  withdrawn
      before the Adjudicator  without  qualification.  At  the  hearing  the
      appellant had been represented.  The  grounds  of  appeal  contain  no
      substantiation of the claim that she had  not  in  fact  instructed  a
      withdrawal.  There is  no  affidavit  from  the  appellant  about  the
      matter.   There is nothing to show that these  claims  were  taken  up
      with the appellant's previous representatives.


10.   Nor do we think that the appellant, by withdrawing her asylum  grounds
      of appeal, was  precluded  from  giving  evidence  about  her  overall
      situation. The  appellant  gave  evidence  about  her  experiences  in
      Kazakhstan, as did her husband.  The Adjudicator clearly took  account
      of these. This observation disposes of another  point  raised  in  the
      grounds, that somehow the appellant was wrongly denied an  opportunity
      to have her case considered as a whole.
11.    The  question  remains  nevertheless  as  to  what  should   be   the
      consequences for an appellant in  a  mixed  asylum  and  human  rights
      appeal of withdrawal of the asylum grounds of appeal.


  12. With regard to this question, we observe there is a significant amount
      of confusion amongst representatives, and sometimes Adjudicators. This
      case is an apt illustration. The confusion is between withdrawal of an
      appeal and withdrawal of grounds of appeal. Representatives who  speak
      of withdrawing their client's asylum appeal in an  appeal  brought  on
      asylum and human rights grounds can scarcely be taken literally, since
      there is strictly  speaking  only  one  appeal  against  the  decision
      refusing asylum. In Zenovics [2002] INLR 219, Schiemann LJ  stated  at
      para 11:


           "...like the Tribunal,  we  consider  that  the  scheme  of  the
           Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 is that in relation to  any  one
           administrative decision, there should only be one appeal  to  an
           adjudicator, albeit this could be on a number of  grounds  which
           might be unrelated or related".


13.   If, when representatives purport to withdraw their  client  's  asylum
      appeal they were taken literally, there would be nothing left for  the
      Adjudicator to consider.  He would have no jurisdiction.  There  would
      no longer be any pending appeal within the meaning of the  Immigration
      Acts; see Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, s.58 (5) - (7).

14.   Plainly what is normally intended is not withdrawal of the  appeal  as
      such but only withdrawal of the asylum grounds of appeal.


15.   But there is also confusion as to precisely which  grounds  or  points
      are intended to be  withdrawn.   Following  Kacaj  (01/TH/00634*),  of
      course, it is settled law that, subject to  very  limited  exceptions,
      the asylum and Art 3 grounds of appeal stand or  fall  together.  This
      does provide an overall framework in which to  clarify  withdrawal  of
      any asylum grounds of appeal in an appeal brought on asylum and  human
      rights grounds, but it does not relieve representatives  of  the  need
      for particularity.


16.   Currently, representatives do not always make clear what elements,  in
      respect of the asylum  grounds  of  appeal,  they  mean  to  withdraw.
      Bearing in mind  that  there  are  several  elements  to  the  refugee
      definition contained in Article 1A(2), this does not  help.   Do  they
      mean that their client no longer contests that he faces a real risk of
      serious harm? If so,  they  are  effectively  withdrawing  the  asylum
      grounds of appeal and any Art 3 grounds. Or do  they  wish  rather  to
      maintain the claim that he faces a real risk of serious  harm,  albeit
      now accepting there would be effective state protection  against  such
      harm? If so, whilst that effectively amounts to withdrawing the asylum
      grounds and the Art 3  grounds,  being  specific  about  this  may  be
      relevant to a "mixed case" arising under Art 8: see Razgar [2003] INLR
      543.


  17. Similar need may arise for clarification as to whether they still mean
      to submit that their client faces a real risk of  persecution  in  his
      home area, albeit now conceding he  would  have  a  viable  option  of
      internal relocation. That too may be relevant in "mixed cases" in  the
      Razgar sense.

18.   In many cases all that representatives appear to mean is simply  that,
      whilst they consider that all other elements of the refugee definition
      are made out, they now accept he  cannot  show  a  Refugee  Convention
      ground (race religion, political opinion etc).  If that  is  so,  then
      Art 3, of course, remains central.

19.   Two basic questions should suffice to clarify what is  meant  in  most
      cases. Firstly, do representatives still intend in  the  human  rights
      grounds to pursue Article 3 grounds of appeal (which  following  Kacaj
      entails a claim that there is a real risk of serious harm)?  Secondly,
      are they confining issues to Article 8?


20.   This case illustrates the dangers of  inchoate  withdrawal,  since  no
      attempt was made to identify any element of the refugee definition  on
      which reliance was  still  placed.   Nor  was  there  any  mention  of
      continuing reliance, in the human rights grounds, on Article 3.


21.   Given the evident fact that the representatives cannot  have  intended
      a withdrawal of the appeal as such, we have decided it would be  wrong
      to take a technical point against the appellant  in  this  regard.  We
      also think it would not be fair to deduce a  priori  any  consequences
      (for the basis on which the human rights grounds were brought) from  a
      subsequent withdrawal of the asylum grounds of appeal. Each  case  has
      to be looked at in relation to its particular circumstances.

22.   At the end of this determination we  set  out  certain  guidelines  on
      this issue. We would emphasise, however, that  once  these  have  been
      reported, representatives  should  not  necessarily  expect  the  same
      degree of forbearance.  Representatives must appreciate the importance
      when withdrawing grounds of appeal (as opposed to  withdrawal  of  the
      appeal as such) to clarify the precise extent of, and reasons for  the
      withdrawal, to avoid the danger of an Adjudicator drawing  conclusions
      they did not intend.

23.   Turning back  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case,  the
      grounds of appeal appear at one point to assert that a  withdrawal  of
      asylum grounds of appeal automatically entitles an appellant  to  have
      his claims about adverse experiences in his or her country  of  origin
      accepted uncritically.   Plainly  it  does  no  such  thing.   Such  a
      contention is no more tenable than its opposite  (that  withdrawal  of
      the asylum  grounds of appeal negates any reliance  on  such  evidence
      for other purposes: we return to this below). An  Adjudicator  has  to
      assess the evidence about adverse experiences in that country  on  the
      basis of the evidence placed before him.  We move  on,  therefore,  to
      consider how adequately the Adjudicator in this  case  conducted  that
      assessment.

24.   Although making reference to past and present risk  of  serious  harm,
      the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal were confined to Article 8.   No
      mention was made of Article 3.

The Adjudicator's treatment of difficulties in Kazakhstan in the context  of
Article 8

  25. Criticism can be made of the Adjudicator's approach at paragraph 16 to
      this issue.  In that paragraph she was  wrong  (for  reasons  we  have
      given  earlier)  to  treat  withdrawal  of  the   asylum   appeal   as
      automatically entailing that she should "attach little weight" to  the
      difficulties the  appellant  had  faced.   She  wrongly  thought  that
      withdrawal of the asylum grounds of  appeal  proved  itself  that  the
      appellant had not experienced and would not experience serious harm in
      Kazakhstan. She was not entitled to make that jump. The fact that  one
      way in which the evidence could have been deployed  was  withdrawn  or
      discounted did not mean that the same evidence stood to be treated  as
      withdrawn or discounted for all purposes. Even though it was  accepted
      that the degree of treatment on return would  not  engage  Art  3,  it
      should have been kept in mind that hardships might be relevant  to  an
      aspect of an Art 8 claim.


  26. However,  we  do  not  think  this  error  undermined  her  subsequent
      assessment, as elsewhere she clearly did consider to what  extent  the
      evidence  showed  these  difficulties  posed  real  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's ability to remain in Kazakhstan, and to return there.

27.    Criticism  can  also  be  made  of  the  Adjudicator's  statement  at
      paragraph 17 in relation to  the  grant  of  ELR  to  the  appellant's
      husband (made because he was a citizen of Afghanistan) that "I have no
      evidence that her husband's claim was  based  on  any  persecution  in
      Kazakhstan".  She did have some evidence, in the form of  the  written
      and oral evidence of the appellant  and  the  oral  testimony  of  her
      husband.  However, once again, we do not  consider  that  this  was  a
      fatal error, since she, the  Adjudicator,  was  plainly  intending  to
      indicate the  lack  of  any  evidence  from  independent  sources,  in
      particular any evidence to show that the grant of ELR was based on  an
      acceptance by the Home Office of the credibility of all he had said in
      relation to the situation in Kazakhstan.  Given that her  husband  was
      from Afghanistan, it must seriously be doubted whether  the  Secretary
      of State would have reached any view on his claims in respect to  past
      experiences in Kazakhstan.  But in  any  event,  the  Adjudicator  was
      essentially right that this  was  not  a  case  where  an  appellant's
      husband has been proved to face a real  risk  of  persecution  in  the
      appellant's receiving country (compare in this respect  the  situation
      considered by the Tribunal in Soloot (01/TH/1366).

28.   In addition to lack  of  independent  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      husband  faced  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  Kazakhstan,  the
      Adjudicator  clearly  also  formed  the  view  that  upon  return  the
      appellant could live with her parents.  Since on her own evidence  she
      and her husband had originally lived together  with  her  parents  and
      since she had gone back to live with her parents after her husband had
      departed, we see nothing unsustainable in that conclusion.

29.   We would agree that the Adjudicator should  have  made  more  specific
      findings on whether she  accepted  the  claimant's  account  of  death
      threats and church exclusion.  However, what she did address and  rely
      on was the fact that the claimant had been able to remain living  with
      her parents for some time and obtain a Czech  visa.   The  Adjudicator
      also specifically did not believe the couple's claim that she did  not
      know before she left Kazakhstan that her husband had obtained  ELR  in
      the UK.  Given that on the appellant's own account she had remained in
      Kazakhstan for several months after deciding to leave, living with her
      parents who helped her to collect money so that she could  travel,  we
      consider  that  the  Adjudicator  was  quite  entitled  to  find   the
      appellant's action in obtaining a Czech visa as indicative of the fact
      that her decision to leave Kazakhstan was one of choice,  rather  than
      necessity.  Mr Holmes was also right to point out that, even if  there
      had been a finding that the appellant faced  serious  difficulties  in
      her home area, she could have relocated to another part of  Kazakhstan
      to avoid threats from the uncle.

30.   Although therefore the Adjudicator was not  entitled  to  deduce  from
      the fact of withdrawal of the asylum grounds of appeal  an  acceptance
      by the appellant that she was not at risk of harm,  we  consider  that
      she was entitled to conclude that the evidence failed to  establish  a
      level of difficulties reaching the threshold of serious harm.

31.   The Adjudicator's finding that conditions for her  and  her  son  were
      not as serious as she claimed were clearly relevant to the  assessment
      the Adjudicator had to make about whether the appellant had  a  viable
      option for entry clearance.  Following the principles set out  by  the
      case of Mahmood [2001 INLR 1, she correctly recognised  that  she  was
      not entitled to allow the Article 8 appeal unless satisfied that there
      were  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the  appellant  in   nor
      pursuing the option of applying from abroad for entry clearance  as  a
      spouse.

32.   Insofar as conditions in Kazakhstan are  concerned,  we  have  already
      clarified that she was quite entitled to conclude, especially in  view
      of the fact that the claimant had been able whilst living at  home  to
      make a past application for a Czech visa, that those conditions  would
      not be sufficiently hazardous to prevent her  from  lodging  an  entry
      clearance application to join her husband in the UK.

33.   Insofar as other exceptional circumstances are concerned, we  consider
      the Adjudicator was perfectly entitled to reject the  claim  that  the
      appellant's pregnancy amounted to exceptional circumstances.   As  the
      Adjudicator noted,  there  were  no  medical  or  health  difficulties
      associated with this except for the usual side-effects  of  pregnancy.
      In any event, it must always be borne in mind that in the case of  any
      serious health reasons preventing travel, temporary or  otherwise,  it
      cannot be assumed that the Secretary of State will act contrary to his
      obligations to comply with human rights.

34.   Factors relating to delay in the processing  of  the  entry  clearance
      application and separation of the appellant and her young  child  from
      her husband were rightly viewed by the Adjudicator, following Mahmood,
      as not amounting to exceptional circumstances.

35.   The only other point raised in the grounds  was  the  contention  that
      the Adjudicator was wrong to consider that the appellant had a  viable
      option of entry clearance, since her husband only had ELR and  so  she
      could not qualify as a spouse seeking to  join  someone  "present  and
      settled" in the UK.

36.   We do not think the Adjudicator erred  here.   Leaving  aside  that  a
      grant of ELR for four years normally leads to a  grant  of  indefinite
      leave to remain and so there was a  real  prospect  that  her  husband
      would by August 2005 qualify as  someone  "present  and  settled",  it
      remains that: (1) the  appellant  was  entitled  to  apply  for  entry
      clearance and receive a decision  on  that  application;  and  (2)  in
      reaching that decision the Entry Clearance Officer would be obliged by
      paragraph 2 of HC 395 to ensure that his  decision  did  not  cause  a
      disproportionate breach of the appellant's human rights: if he thought
      it would cause a breach of her Article 8 rights, he would be bound  to
      grant entry clearance.  Furthermore, (3),  if  she  was  refused,  she
      would have a right to appeal in which she could invoke Article 8.   In
      other words, the option of an entry clearance application  was  viable
      because it would afford the appellant  an  effective  remedy  for  any
      potential breach of her Article 8 rights.

37.   Accordingly, we consider that the grounds of  appeal  fail  to  impugn
      the Adjudicator's principal reasons for concluding that  the  decision
      to refuse the appellant leave to enter on asylum grounds did  not  and
      would not amount to a disproportionate interference with her right  to
      respect for private and family life.

Guidelines on withdrawal of asylum grounds of appeal

38.   In the light of existing confusion on  this  issue,  it  is  important
      that representatives take  particular  care  when  withdrawing  asylum
      grounds of appeal in the context of an  appeal  combining  asylum  and
      human rights grounds, to make clear precisely what they intend by  the
      withdrawal. Since they do not normally intend to withdraw  the  appeal
      as such, but only the asylum grounds of appeal, they should avoid  any
      terminology that suggests withdrawal of the appeal as such.

38.   In cases where a claimant makes or seeks to make a withdrawal  of  his
      asylum but not his human rights grounds of appeal, Adjudicators should
      take particular care, where possible, to  clarify  what  precisely  is
      intended. The party withdrawing should spell  out  precisely  what  is
      still being maintained and what is not:

      (i)    Where  the  asylum  aspect  of  an  appeal  is  withdrawn,  the
           Adjudicator should ensure that there is no doubt but  that  this
           is what is intended;


      (ii)  The basis on which  the  withdrawal  is  being  made  should  be
           carefully noted - e.g. is it because it  is  conceded  there  is
           effective protection or a viable internal relocation alternative
           or is it simply, as in most cases of this kind, because there is
           no Refugee Convention reason  of  race,  religion,  nationality,
           political opinion or particular social group (see  paragraph  16
           above)?


      (iii) Where the withdrawal of the asylum aspect  is  not  prima  facie
           compatible with any continued assumption that the claimant faces
           Article  3  serious  harm  or  ill-treatment  if  returned,  the
           Adjudicator will be entitled to find that there is no real  risk
           of such harm, unless there is some  particular  feature  of  the
           case that negatives this.


       iv) However, as a point of best practice and  so  as  to  avoid  any
           misunderstanding, the Adjudicator  should  ask  the  appellant's
           representative whether, in the light of the withdrawal on asylum
           grounds, it is formally conceded that there is no real  risk  of
           Article 3 harm.


        v) If it is conceded that there is no Art 3 point but that there is
           an Art 8  point,  adjudicators  should  not  disregard  evidence
           relating to Art 3 harm, since there are reasons  why  an  asylum
           appeal might not be appropriate even though  the  risk  of  some
           harm remains.  Even  if  it  is  accepted  that  the  degree  of
           treatment on return would not engage Art 3, it is possible  that
           the hardships might be relevant to an aspect of an Art 8  claim.
           Any consideration of an Art 8 claim in such circumstances, must,
           however, be subject to the constraints set out by the  Court  of
           Appeal in Razgar [2003] INLR 543.


39.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                  DR. H.H. STOREY
                                                  VICE PRESIDENT












   -----------------------
      1


