
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |               |                   |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision       |BM (Article 3 -    |
|                  |                      |number:        |Article 8 - Country|
|                  |                      |               |Material) dr Congo |
|                  |                      |               |[2003] UKIAT 00051 |
|Heard on:         |29th May 2003         |Appeal number: |                   |
|Date typed:       |31st May 2003                                            |
|Date promulgated: |10th July 2003                                           |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|Before:                                                                     |
|MR A. MACKEY (CHAIRMAN)                                                     |
|MS D K GILL (Vice President)                                                |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |
|                                                                            |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Ward, of P. J. Ward Solicitors.
For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  P.  Deller,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.

1.    This is a human rights appeal. The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the
     Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) (DRC),  in  his  mid-
     twenties. He has appealed, with leave,  against  the  determination  of
     Mrs. S M Charlton-Brown, an Adjudicator (the Second  Adjudicator),  who
     (following a hearing on 25th November 2002 at Hatton  Cross)  dismissed
     his appeal under Section 69(1) and under Section 65 of the  Immigration
     and Asylum Appeals Act 1999 (the 1999  Act)  against  the  Respondent's
     decision of 6th August 2002 to refuse to grant leave  to  remain  under
     the Human Rights Act 1998  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.  The
     Respondent proposes to remove the Appellant to the DRC.

2.    The Appellant left his country in 1997, at a  time when it  was  known
     as the Republic of Zaire. The passport which he held at that  time  was
     one which had been  issued by the Republic of  Zaire.  His  account  is
     that he entered the United Kingdom on 26th October 1997 using a Belgian
     passport to which he was not entitled. He applied for  asylum  on  28th
     October 1997. That application was refused and certified on 23rd August
     2000. His appeal against that refusal was heard by Mr. G F  Denson,  an
     Adjudicator (the First Adjudicator), at a hearing on 18th January  2001
     at Taylor House. The First Adjudicator dismissed the appeal but made  a
     recommendation that the  Appellant  be  granted  exceptional  leave  to
     remain due to  the  situation  in  the  DRC  at  that  time.  This  was
     considered by the Respondent but leave was refused on 1st  March  2002,
     as the situation in the DRC had  improved.  On  23rd  April  2002,  the
     Appellant's  representatives  submitted  a  human  rights  application,
     raising Articles 2,  3,  5  and  6  of  the  1950  Convention  for  the
     Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the ECHR).

      Basis of asylum claim (before the First Adjudicator):

3.    Whilst in Zaire,  the  Appellant  worked  for  a  church.  The  church
     collected money for him to be educated and offered him a place to  stay
     and work. He attended university part-time through their  funding  and,
     when he completed his university studies, continued  to  work  for  the
     church. In 1997, the regime  of  President  Mobutu  was  overthrown  by
     President Kabila. The day after Kabila came into power,  soldiers  from
     his army went to the church and arrested and  detained  the  Appellant.
     Other people were also arrested and those who resisted arrest were shot
     and killed. The Appellant was taken to a military camp in a town called
     Ceta where he was kept in a large room for three days and subjected  to
     torture. He was then removed from the camp and placed in the back of  a
     jeep, along  with  five  other  people.  They  were  guarded  by  armed
     soldiers. During the trip, there was an  altercation  and,  whilst  the
     soldiers were involved in this, the Appellant effected his  escape.  He
     went to his grandmother's house and, from there,  to  another  village.
     Whilst in this village, his parents were attacked  and  his  father  so
     severely beaten that he died of his injuries. The house of his  parents
     was then sold and the money enabled the  Appellant  to  travel  to  the
     United Kingdom. He left through Kinshasa airport. He  feared  returning
     to the DRC because the soldiers of the Kabila regime believe that he is
     a collaborator with a man named Mr. G. This is because he  lived  in  a
     house owned by Mr. G where arms were  found.  In  1990,  Mr.  G  was  a
     minister in the Mobutu government and later became an  advisor  to  the
     government.

      The First Adjudicator's Determination:

4.1    The  First  Adjudicator  found  the  Appellant's  credibility  to  be
     severely undermined by inconsistencies in the story he  gave.  He  gave
     some  examples  of  these  inconsistencies  in  paragraph  40  of   his
     Determination. The cumulative effect of the discrepancies was such that
     he did not believe the Appellant's account of his association with  the
     church,  the  details  of  his  detention  and  his  subsequent  escape
     (paragraph 41 of the Determination). He then referred  to  the  medical
     report  of  Dr.  Philip  Steadman  and  said  (paragraph  42   of   the
     Determination):

            I am satisfied as to  the  contents  of  that  report  that  the
           injuries sustained by the appellant were sustained in the manner
           stated by him through being beaten while in custody. However,  I
           do not accept the reasons why he was taken into custody  due  to
           his lack of credibility nor do I accept the details  of  how  he
           purportedly escaped from such custody, again due to  a  lack  of
           credibility.

4.2   At paragraph 44 of the Determination, the First Adjudicator stated:

            As previously stated I accept that  the  appellant  did  receive
           injuries through being beaten but I do not  accept  the  reasons
           for his detention and subsequent escape.

4.3   At paragraph 46 of the Determination under  the  heading  "Conclusions
     as to this Appeal", the First Adjudicator stated:

            I find that  the  appellant  has  not  provided  any  basis  for
           challenging the assertions in the respondent's  letter  that  he
           would be persecuted if he were to return to the DRC  on  account
           of his claimed relationship to a person closely associated  with
           the Mobutu regime nor does he fall to be in a category of  those
           at risk as advised by the UNHCR.

4.4   At paragraph 43 of the Determination, the First  Adjudicator  accepted
     that the Appellant would indeed encounter difficulties  as  a  returnee
     without a passport and may in fact  be  detained  while  enquiries  are
     carried out in relation to his identity. He further found that, if  the
     Appellant were to be detained, his forced incarceration  would  subject
     him to such treatment as would amount to torture. At paragraph 47,  the
     First Adjudicator said:

            On the basis of the facts as described above  I  find  that  the
           appellant has not established a claim for refugee  status  under
           the 1951 Convention. However I  find  that  if  he  were  to  be
           returned to Zaire at this moment in time he would undoubtedly be
           detained and face torture that would bring the United Kingdom to
           be in breach of our obligations under the 1951 Convention.

4.5   The First Adjudicator dismissed the appeal under the 1951  Convention.
     He then said:

            However I make a recommendation that the  appellant  be  granted
           exceptional  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  by
           returning him to Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of Congo at
           this time would undoubtedly send him to face  certain  detention
           and subsequently punishment that would amount to persecution.

4.6   As the Second Adjudicator  noted,  it  appears  that  the  Appellant's
     previous representatives did not seek leave to appeal to  the  Tribunal
     against the First Adjudicator's Determination.

      The Second Adjudicator's Determination:

5.1   The Second  Adjudicator,  who  heard  brief  oral  evidence  from  the
     Appellant, was clearly in a difficult position.  As the grant to  leave
     against her determination states, she coped well with the difficulty of
     applying Devaseelan in a  case where there was a lack of clear findings
     by the First Adjudicator. She examined his Determination very carefully
     and properly identified  such  relevant  findings  as  she  could.  She
     considered that the First Adjudicator's Determination shows:

      (i)   that, due to the Appellant's  lack  of  credibility,  the  First
           Adjudicator did not accept that any period of  detention  was  a
           result of political activities or association on behalf  of  the
           Appellant   (paragraph   16   of   the   Second    Adjudicator's
           Determination).

      (ii)  that the First Adjudicator had accepted that the  Appellant  had
           been beaten during  a  period  of  detention,  but  he  was  not
           apparently satisfied that this was for the reasons the Appellant
           had stated and in view of his lack of credibility did not accept
           that  he  was  ever  suspected  of  any   political   activities
           (paragraph 30 of the Second Adjudicator's Determination).

      (iii) that the reference in paragraph 47 of  the  First  Adjudicator's
           Determination to the 1951 Convention is in fact a  reference  to
           the 1950 Convention, as this appeared to be  the  only  sensible
           construction of that  paragraph  (paragraph  10  of  the  Second
           Adjudicator's Determination).  Further, that the thrust  of  the
           Appellant's  case  would  appear  to  be  that,  if  the   First
           Adjudicator had been able to allow the appeal  on  human  rights
           grounds, he would have done  so  (paragraph  11  of  the  Second
           Adjudicator's Determination).

5.2   The Second Adjudicator therefore considered herself  bound  to  accept
     the First Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant was beaten whilst he
     was in custody. The Second Adjudicator then made her  own  comments  on
     this factual matrix, as follows (paragraph 30):

            If he had been detained in the past, it might well be  for  some
           minor criminal offence. He has not  to  my  knowledge  indicated
           that he was ever charged with an offence, that it would lead  to
           the keeping of any official records on him.

5.3    The  Second  Adjudicator  appeared  to  disagree   with   the   First
     Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant does not have a passport.  The
     Second Adjudicator noted that, although the Appellant had used a  false
     passport to enter the United Kingdom,  he  had  said,  at  the  hearing
     before her, that he did in fact have his own passport  which  had  been
     taken by an Immigration Officer. She therefore determined the appeal on
     the basis that, if the Respondent was indeed in possession of a genuine
     passport in the Appellant's name, such a document could be used on  his
     return, rather than the temporary documents provided on his  behalf  by
     the Respondent.

5.4   The Second Adjudicator then considered the objective evidence she  had
     been provided with and the Tribunal case-law as to the risk  on  return
     to the DRC of failed asylum seekers and concluded that "there  were  no
     substantial grounds for believing that the Appellant was at  real  risk
     of" treatment in breach of Article 3.

5.5   The Second Adjudicator then considered Article  8  (right  to  private
     life in the United Kingdom). The  evidence  before  her  was  that  the
     Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for several years  and  had  a
     home  and  a  job   (paragraph   32   of   the   Second   Adjudicator's
     Determination).  The  Second  Adjudicator  noted  that  the   Appellant
     appeared to be a single man living in rented  accommodation  and  that,
     whilst he has friends in the United Kingdom, it did not appear  to  her
     that he had ties of  a  more  binding  nature.  Given  that  the  First
     Adjudicator had questioned the Appellant's credibility "in almost every
     other  respect",  it  appeared  to  the  Second   Adjudicator   to   be
     questionable that the Appellant's father had indeed died or that he has
     no other family members to  whom  he  could  turn  to  on  return.  She
     acknowledged that the housing and employment situation in the  DRC  may
     well not be as desirable as that in the United Kingdom.  She  concluded
     by saying that it did not appear to her that the Appellant's return  to
     the DRC would be a disproportionate act.

6.    Grounds of application for  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal:  The
     grounds of application, in essence, assert that:

      (i)   The Second Adjudicator was wrong to conclude that the  Appellant
           could use a current valid passport to return to the DRC, because
           the passport which he had arrived with was a passport issued  by
           the former Republic of Zaire prior to 1997.

      (ii)  The Second Adjudicator had erred in  her  consideration  of  the
           objective evidence and the Tribunal case-law as to the  risk  on
           return of failed asylum seekers.

      (iii) The Appellant  had  asserted  that  he  would  face  a  risk  of
           starvation, ill-health and death, given the evidence of lack  of
           food, clean water, healthcare and shelter in the DRC.  This  was
           relevant  to  both  Article   3   and   to   the   question   of
           proportionality in relation to Article 8. The Second Adjudicator
           had erred in not considering or  making  any  findings  on  this
           aspect of the Appellant's appeal.

7.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted in  a  determination  sent
     to the parties on 9th April 2003. Leave was granted on all the  grounds
     mentioned in the grounds of application.

8.    It should be noted that the grounds of application  do  not  challenge
     the factual matrix on  which  the  Second  Adjudicator  determined  the
     Appellant's human rights  appeal,  save  in  relation  to  whether  the
     Appellant would be returning with a  current  valid  passport  and  the
     assertion that (in relation to Articles 3 and 8) the Second Adjudicator
     had failed to take into account the general living  conditions  in  the
     DRC which the Appellant would have to endure on return.

      The issues:

9.    There are three issues before us:

      Issue 1:   Whether, in general terms, a failed  asylum  seeker  is  at
             real risk of persecution and/or treatment in breach of Article
             3 simply on account of being a failed  asylum  seeker  per  se
             (i.e. the Senga point). This question is  focused  on  whether
             the DRC authorities take  an  adverse  interest  in  returnees
             (regardless of their backgrounds), leading to the detention of
             returnees and their ill-treatment.

            If the answer is yes, then we would simply allow the appeal.  If
             the answer is no, then we would go on  to  consider  the  next
             issue, which is:

      Issue 2:   Whether the Appellant's background is such  that  he  would
             be of adverse interest to the DRC authorities on his return.

      Issue 3:   Whether the general humanitarian condition in  the  DRC  is
             such that the Appellant's removal would be in  breach  of  his
             rights under Article 3 and/or Article 8.

      Documents before the Tribunal:

10.1  Documents submitted on the Appellant's behalf:

      (i)   Extracts from the  Danish  Immigration  Service  Report  on  the
          roving attach� mission to Kinshasa dated January 2000;

      (ii)  Extracts from the report of Oxfam GB "No  end  in  sight"  dated
          August 2001;

      (iii) Expert report of Erik Kennes dated 19th June 2002;

      (iv)  Letter from Amnesty International Netherlands  to  the  Ministry
          of Justice, The Hague, dated 9th July 2002, with translation.

      (v)   Two reports of Docu Congo with  translations,  each  dated  16th
          May 2003;

      (vi)  Letter from UNHCR dated 22nd May 2003;

      (vii) AFP News Report dated 26th May 2003; and

       (viii)      Transcripts  of  the  following  Determinations  of   the
          Tribunal submitted to the Second Adjudicator:

            Andre Bashiya [2002] UKIAT 00186 (heard on 21st January 2002)

            Jean Marie Kalala Nibanga [2002]  UKIAT  02369  (heard  on  19th
          April 2002)

            Akoye Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05308 (heard on 7th October 2002)

10.2  Documents submitted on the Respondent's behalf:

      Due to administrative problems, Mr. Deller was not able to  lodge  any
     documents before the Tribunal. However, we  have  the  documents  which
     were submitted before the Second Adjudicator, which are:

      (i)   The CIPU Report dated October 2002;

      (ii)  The CIPU Bulletin dated 1/2002, dated 1st May 2002;  and

      (iii) Transcripts  of  the  Determinations  of  the  Tribunal  in  the
     following cases:

            Blandine Kama-Museu [2002]  UKIAT  00747  (heard  28th  February
     2002)

            Ngunga Nzakimuena [2002] UKIAT 01961 (heard 24th May 2002)

      Issue 1 - Risk as a failed asylum seeker:

11.1  We would say at the outset that we are considering  the  situation  of
     failed asylum seekers returning to  the  DRC  whose  claims  have  been
     properly assessed and whose backgrounds have been found to be such that
     there is no real risk that they would draw the adverse attention of the
     DRC authorities. We entirely accept that  anyone  whose  background  is
     such that there  is  a  real  risk  that  they  would,  on  arrival  or
     subsequently, draw the adverse attention of the DRC authorities,  would
     be very harshly treated indeed. They, however, would succeed  in  their
     asylum and human rights claims (Article 3).

11.2  We have no reason to doubt the expertise of Mr. Kennes to  comment  on
     the situation in the DRC. His curriculum vitae (which is annexed to his
     report)  shows  that  he  has  undertaken  studies  (including  ongoing
     research papers on Zaire), been involved in training  courses,  written
     or co-written several publications and working papers on  Africa  (with
     emphasis on the DRC). The copy of the report we have been  given  is  a
     generic one, dated 19th June 2002. We are conscious of  the  fact  that
     the Tribunal in Bashiya heard evidence from Mr.  Kennes  and  that  the
     Tribunal accepted his evidence. We are conscious also that the Tribunal
     in Mozu and Nibanga also accepted the report of Mr.  Kennes,  it  seems
     without question. However, for the reasons we give in  paragraphs  11.7
     and 11.10 below, we do not place as much weight on Mr.  Kennes'  report
     as the Tribunal in these cases apparently did.
10.3  (WHERE KENNES' REPORT produced IS A SPECIFIC ONE - E.G. THE ONE  DATED
     30TH July 2002): We noted that Mr. Kennes' report has been prepared for
     a specific case. Our attention has not been  drawn  to  anything  which
     suggests that the report is authorised for use  generally  and/or  that
     its contents are of general application. The Tribunal has, on countless
     occasion in the past, made  it  clear  that  reports  should  not  been
     adduced if they have been prepared  for  a  specific  case  unless  the
     author's permission has been obtained and the author has confirmed that
     the contents are of general application. This simply has not been  done
     in this case. Nevertheless, we considered the report.

11.3  Section C of Mr. Kennes' report (pages 20 and 21  of  the  report,  on
     pages 44 to 45 of the Appellant's  bundle),  deals  with  the  fate  of
     returned asylum seekers the DRC. It is  appropriate  that  we  set  out
     Section C in its entirety:

            C.   The fate of returned asylum seekers in the DRC

            No systematic studies have been done on  the  fate  of  returned
           asylum seekers, nor on the Kinshasa government policy.  We  must
           relay on two letters and two press articles.

            The first press article is a statement of a former  official  of
           the Minister of  the  Interior,  inspector  of  the  immigration
           police. According  to  his  statement,  returned  failed  asylum
           seekers are immediately arrested at the airport and subsequently
           imprisoned. No other source of information is known  about  this
           alleged practice, and it has not been independently verified.

            The second press article is about an official statement  by  the
           immigration  office.  On  May  24,  2001,  the  newly  appointed
           director general of  the  Congolese  immigration  services,  Mr.
           Leyka  Moussa  Nyembo,  delivered  a  speech  in  Hotel  Memling
           (Kinshasa) where he outlined his immigration policy. Mention was
           made of the attitude of his services and the government  towards
           returned political asylum seekers. Mr. Leyka declared he  wanted
           to dismantle underground emigration networks, who operate  under
           the cover  of  applications  for  political  asylum  in  western
           countries. One of the instruments of his  policy  would  be  the
           creation of "migratory detention centres" in  Kinshasa.  In  the
           press reports about this speech, it was not clear what the  role
           would be of these centres.

            During a telephone conversation with the author of  his  report,
           Mr. Leyka made it clear that the "migratory  detention  centres"
           are not centres of imprisonment. The aim of the centres  is  the
           screening and identification of returned  asylum  seekers,  with
           the view of their reintegration  into  society.  Information  is
           gathered about the individuals behind the underground  networks,
           to be  able  to  put  them  before  justice.  According  to  the
           assistant to the director general, some  of  these  centres  are
           already operational.

            According to this official  version,  the  "migratory  detention
           centres" are just a screening agency. There is no  problem  with
           it as long  as  the  returned  asylum  seekers  are  effectively
           members of an underground migration network.  When  the  centres
           harbour returned asylum seekers who were entitled  to  political
           asylum  but  were  unjustly  refused,   then   the   authorities
           immediately have their opponents at hand to interrogate them and
           put them into jail. The real function of the  detention  centres
           is  thus  linked  to  the  overall  government  policy   towards
           opposition. The government policy towards  political  opposition
           cannot be considered without taking into account the workings of
           the judicial system, and more specifically, the workings of  the
           Military Court.

            The first letter is made up by the Amnesty International  London
           office and states that Amnesty had received  reports  in  August
           2000  about  three  returned  asylum  seekers  who   have   been
           imprisoned in Makala prison, Kinshasa.

            The second letter is the most  crucial  document.  In  a  letter
           written by Mr. Wanigasekara (UNHCR London) to Mr. Zohreh  Neinzi
           of the Devon law Centre, dated November 20, 2001, it is said

                 It is important  to  consider  that  the  overall  security
                 situation remains volatile  and  is  a  matter  of  general
                 concern to everyone resident in the  DRC.  Despite  ongoing
                 efforts and negotiations between  the  opposition  parties,
                 armed  movements  and  the   government,   fighting   still
                 continues between the rebel and the  government  forces  in
                 the  eastern  and  southeastern  regions  as  well  as  the
                 Equateur province, resulting in human rights violations.

                 Against this backdrop, persons originating from  rebel-held
                 territories (....) are held  in  suspicion  and  liable  to
                 adverse attention - sometimes amounting  to  persecution  -
                 from the authorities in Kinshasa (...)

                 According to information available to UNHCR, agents of  the
                 security   services   frequently   interrogate    Congolese
                 returning to Kinshasa from abroad, particularly  those  who
                 are  known  to  have  sought  asylum.  UNHCR  is  aware  of
                 instances where  interrogation  at  the  airport  has  been
                 followed by arbitrary detention and serious  ill  treatment
                 by DRC security agencies. If the returnee  is  not  already
                 known to the DRC authorities, there is a strong  likelihood
                 that were he to be returned  to  Kinshasa,  his  background
                 would be revealed  in  the  course  of  interrogation  upon
                 arrival.

            We may add to this element that  returned  asylum  seekers  from
           the UK will be met with more suspicion than others,  because  of
           the support given by the British government  to  the  RCD  rebel
           movement in the East, and more specifically to  the  governments
           of Rwanda and Uganda.

11.4  We noted that the first press article   is  attributed,  according  to
     footnote 52 on page 20 of  the  report  (page  44  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle), to a release dated 13th October 2000 - which  is  nearly  2  �
     years ago. Furthermore, Mr. Kennes himself states, in relation  to  the
     first press article, that no other source of information is known about
     the alleged practice of immediately arresting  returned  failed  asylum
     seekers at the airport and  imprisoning  them,  and  that  the  alleged
     practice has not been independently verified.

11.5  The second press article (having been issued  in  May  2001)  is  more
     recent than the first press article. The second press  article  was  an
     official statement issued by the immigration  service.  We  acknowledge
     that official statements  from  the  DRC  authorities  suggesting  that
     returned asylum seekers would be properly treated  should,  bearing  in
     mind the appalling general human rights record of the  DRC  government,
     be viewed with great suspicion. We  noted,  however,  that  the  second
     press article  states  that  persons  whose  asylum  claims  have  been
     "unjustly refused" would be interrogated  and  imprisoned.  It  is  not
     clear, from Mr. Kennes' report, who is supposed to have said  this.  If
     this was said by the official in question to Mr. Kennes,  then  such  a
     candid admission on the part of the official endows  the  remainder  of
     what he is quoted to have said  above  with  greater  credibility  than
     might have been the case if he had  denied  that  the  DRC  authorities
     would mistreat such persons. However, we still only place  very  little
     (indeed,  if  any)  reliance  on  official  statements  from  the   DRC
     authorities that they would not in  general  interrogate  and  imprison
     returnees.  If, on the other hand, the  assertion  that  there  are  no
     problems  with  the  migratory  detention  centres   unless   the   DRC
     authorities are dealing with persons who have  been  "unjustly  refused
     asylum" is attributable to Mr. Kennes  himself,  then  the  Appellant's
     evidence itself shows that it is safe to return failed  asylum  seekers
     to the DRC, provided their claims have been properly assessed.

11.6  We also noted that the Respondent's May 2002 CIPU Bulletin  refers  to
     the speech mentioned in the second press article. It  states  that  the
     British Embassy have provided information about the speech. The Embassy
     indicated that the news network which issued  the  report  was  not  an
     official government website but one  which  is  run  by  pro-opposition
     journalists; that the  news  report  is  mainly  about  the  increasing
     problem of illegal immigration into the  DRC  by  Africans  from  other
     countries seeking work or entering the country to commit  crimes,  that
     foreign nationals and Congolese travelling to and from the country with
     forged or illegally obtained travel documents may be  detained  in  the
     proposed immigration detention centres until their identity  and  legal
     status is determined by the authorities.

11.7  Mr. Kennes was either not aware of the information  mentioned  in  the
     preceding paragraph or chose not to  refer  to  it  in  his  report  in
     conjunction with the second  press  article.  We  note  that  May  2002
     Bulletin states that there is no suggestion that Congolese returning to
     the country with proper  travel  documents  would  be  detained  simply
     because they had been refused entry into a country or because they have
     had their asylum applications rejected. We considered that some  weight
     should be attached to this.

11.8  The second letter (from the UNHCR) is dated  20th  November  2001.  We
     noted that this letter was addressed to Mr. Zohreh Neinzi of the  Devon
     Law Centre. We do not know whether this letter was prepared in  respect
     of a specific proposed returnee. However, even if  this  letter  is  of
     general application, the letter only states that the UNHCR is aware  of
     "instances" where interrogation at the airport  has  been  followed  by
     arbitrary detention and serious ill-treatment. The  standard  of  proof
     for showing that returned failed asylum seekers would receive treatment
     amounting to persecution or in breach of Article 3 is that  of  a  real
     risk or a real likelihood. Of course, guarantees cannot be  given.  The
     fact that there are "instances" where interrogation at the airport  has
     been followed by arbitrary detention and serious  ill-treatment  simply
     is not sufficient to discharge the low standard of proof.

11.9  We considered that the final sentence  of  the  UNHCR's  letter  would
     only apply if the returnee's background is such that there  is  a  real
     risk  that  he  or  she  would  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  DRC
     authorities. As we have already stated above, we are  here  considering
     the risk on return for persons whose backgrounds have been found to  be
     such that there is no real risk of adverse attention from the DRC.

11.10 Whilst we are on the subject of the UNHCR letter dated  20th  November
     2001 to the Devon Law Centre, we have noted that the Tribunal in Ngunga
     Nzakimuena [2002] UKIAT 01961 referred to the same letter in  paragraph
     16 of its Determination.  However,  paragraph  16  of  that  Tribunal's
     Determination states that the UNHCR made it clear that the UNHCR is not
     opposed to returning failed asylum seekers to  the  DRC  provided  that
     they have had access to a full and  fair  hearing,  that  the  decision
     should be reached on the basis of the circumstances  of  each  claimant
     and with regard to the "ever changing and  political  security  context
     for the DRC". It is most unlikely that the UNHCR would have written two
     separate letters on the same date to the same addressee. Mr. Kennes was
     either not aware that more than one letter existed or of the full  text
     of the letter he quoted or he chose not to mention UNHCR's position  in
     principle concerning the return of failed asylum seekers to the DRC.

11.11 The first letter (from Amnesty International) is  dated  29th  January
     2001.  The letter does not provide  details  such  as  whether  persons
     other than the three who were detained at Makala were returned  to  the
     DRC and what happened to the others. Neither does  the  letter  provide
     any details  about  the  background  of  the  three  persons  who  were
     detained. Are they, for example, persons whose asylum claims  ought  to
     have been allowed  but  who  somehow  "slipped  through  the  net"  and
     therefore persons who (in the words used in the second  press  article)
     were "unjustly refused asylum". We considered it inconceivable that, if
     there was a real risk of persecution in the DRC  for  returning  failed
     asylum seekers in the DRC, the letter from the UNHCR (which  post-dates
     the letter from Amnesty International) would not have made this clear.
xx    We entirely accept that, if there is  a  real  risk  that  a  returned
     failed asylum seeker would  be  transferred  to  a  prison  or  illegal
     detention centre whilst they  are  interrogated  and/or  enquiries  are
     conducted  into  their  backgrounds,  then  he  or  she  would  receive
     treatment amounting to persecution or in breach of  Article  3,  either
     because of the general conditions they are likely  to  have  to  endure
     and/or because of the treatment which, as detainees, they are likely to
     be subjected to by those detaining  them.  Whether  there  would  be  a
     Convention reason for the purposes of the 1951  Refugee  Convention  is
     something which we do not need to determine in this particular appeal.

xx    However, the evidence before us simply does not show, even to the  low
     standard, that there is  a  real  risk  that  returning  failed  asylum
     seekers would be transferred to prisons or illegal  detention  centres.
     Mr. Gaskin's submission was that, given that illegal detention  centres
     are operated by the ANR  and  given  that  the  ANR's  responsibilities
     include border security matters, this means that there is a  real  risk
     that returning failed asylum seekers would be  transferred  to  illegal
     detention centres. We do not accept that submission, as it is based  on
     pure supposition. Furthermore, if this was the fate of returning failed
     asylum seekers, we would expect to see reports from international human
     rights organisations to this effect. The evidence which has been  drawn
     to our attention either:
xx    Mr. Gaskin submitted that it should not be assumed that conditions  in
     migratory detention centres are any better than  those  in  prisons  or
     illegal detention centres. However,  there  is  a  complete  dearth  of
     evidence about the conditions in migratory detention centres. We  again
     revert to the fact that no evidence has been produced from human rights
     organisations that returned failed asylum seekers  receive  persecutory
     treatment or treatment in breach of Article 3. We again revert  to  the
     fact that the UNHCR has not said that it is  at  present  not  safe  to
     return failed asylum seekers to the DRC. This in spite of the fact that
     the evidence is that returns are being effected.

11.12 We noted that Mr. Kennes' report makes references to the following:

      (i)   Paragraph 82 of the report of  the  Special  Rapporteur  of  the
           United Nations Economic and Social Council - Commission on Human
           rights, dated February 2001 (on page 19 of Mr.  Kennes'  report,
           page 43 of the Appellant's bundle)  which  refers  to  ten  UDPS
           leaders being  transferred  to  unknown  detention  centres.  We
           cannot conceive that, given the  procedures  and  appeal  rights
           which are in place in the  United  Kingdom  for  refugee  status
           determination and given the  current  objective  evidence,  UDPS
           leaders  would  feature  amongst  failed  asylum  seekers  being
           returned to the DRC by the United Kingdom. The context  suggests
           that the UDPS leaders were in detention following arrest  within
           the DRC.

      (ii)  The extract from the Amnesty international report of  26th  June
           2001 quoted at page 14 of Mr. Kennes' report on page 38  of  the
           Appellant's bundle which refers to torture being routinely  used
           by  the  DRC  government  forces  against  known  or   suspected
           government opponents.

      (iii) (On pages 14, 15 and 16 of the Mr. Kennes' report)  the  arrests
           and detentions of persons such as -

                  two  persons  who  were  leaders   of   a   human   rights
           organisation;
                 a director of a well-known journal;
                 two journalists;
                 the president of the UNAFEX political party

            It is easy to see how, within  the  context  of  the  repressive
           environment in the DRC, journalists and those  involved  in  the
           media can, depending on the content  of  their  media-reporting,
           come to the adverse attention of the DRC authorities. Indeed, we
           note that, in relation to the arrests of the two leaders of  the
           human  rights  organisation,  the  authorities  prohibited   the
           publication of a  journal  of  the  organisation.  We  note,  in
           relation to the arrest of the president of the UNAFEC  political
           party, that he was interrogated  about  the  strategies  of  his
           party.

      We considered that the information mentioned above does not assist  in
     determining whether failed returned asylum seekers, regardless of their
     background, are at real risk of treatment amounting to  persecution  or
     in breach of Article 3. It  is,  however,  in  line  with  the  UNHCR's
     general advice that each case must be carefully examined.

11.13 We have noted the  letter  from  Amnesty  International,  Netherlands,
     dated 9th July 2002  relating to group removals  from  the  Netherlands
     (page 56 of the Appellant's bundle). This refers to "several  accounts"
     of returned asylum seekers being made on arrival to  give  their  names
     and addresses and states that the security services  then  subsequently
     began within a few days to systematically and  repeatedly  visit  these
     addresses to enquire after the returnees. In addition to the fact  that
     the letter does not provide details of the backgrounds of the returnees
     in question and the numbers who experienced these  difficulties,  there
     is no suggestion, even in this letter, that those  returnees  who  were
     visited repeatedly were subjected to treatment amounting to persecution
     and/or in breach of Article 3.

11.14 We noted the letter from Docu Congo dated 16th May 2003  addressed  to
     Mr. Stefan Vnuk of Fisher Meredith Solicitors  in  the  United  Kingdom
     (pages 58 and 59 of the Appellant's bundle, translations on pages 64 to
     66 of the Appellant's bundle).  This  letter  states  that  Docu  Congo
     experiences difficulties in attempting to make contact with  returnees.
     This letter refers to those returnees with whom Docu Congo were able to
     speak being terrified by the "harassment" they experience at the  hands
     of the secret services and disappearing soon afterwards. We noted  that
     this letter refers to "harassment" and, again, we noted that we are not
     provided with details of the returnees' backgrounds and the  proportion
     of the returnees who experienced these problems.

11.15 There is another letter from Docu Congo,  also  dated  16th  May  2002
     addressed to the same Mr. Vnuk (pages  60  to  63  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle, translations on pages 67 to 70 of the Appellant's bundle).  The
     first paragraph under the heading "A" states:

            Most people who are sent back to the DRC  Congo  which  we  have
           been able to follow over a period of time  involve  insecurities
           and  even  unlawful  and  arbitrary  detention.  Here  are  some
           precisions:

      We are not told how many people were returned to the DRC,  the  number
     of people Docu Congo spoke to and the  number  of  people  who  alleged
     "insecurities" or "unlawful and  arbitrary  detentions".  What  follows
     this paragraph by way  of  "precisions"  quotes  from  5  sources.  The
     picture  which  these  convey  is  a  mixed  one.  Under  the   heading
     "testimonies", specific examples of various people are  given  but,  in
     the main, we are not told about  the  backgrounds  of  the  individuals
     concerned, except, for example, for:

      -     the  person  mentioned  in  paragraph  g.  on  page  69  of  the
         Appellant's bundle. However, we note that he was an active  member
         of an opposition party.

      -     the person  mentioned  in  paragraphs  d.  on  page  68  of  the
         Appellant's bundle. However, we  note  that  he  was  accused   of
         treason and of being an active member of an opposition party.

      -      the  person  mentioned  in  paragraph  h  on  page  69  of  the
         Appellant's bundle. We note that he was accused of "having come on
         behalf of the rebels".

      These examples  do  not  show  that  returnees,  regardless  of  their
     backgrounds, are at real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment
     simply on account of being failed asylum  seekers.  They  do,  however,
     show (once again) that the backgrounds of the individual returnees have
     to be carefully examined.

11.16 The Second Adjudicator referred to a report of the Danish  Immigration
     Service dated August 2001. This was referred to in the CIPU Bulletin of
     May 2002. She had also been provided, on the Appellant's behalf, with a
      copy of the report of the  Danish  Immigration  Service  dated  August
     2001. She appeared to criticise Mr. Ward for  not  having  submitted  a
     copy of the more recent report. At the  hearing  before  us,  Mr.  Ward
     assured us that he had searched the website of the  Danish  Immigration
     Service and could find no trace of a report of August 2001. Mr.  Deller
     assured us that he would check, for future reference, whether there had
     been a typographical error in the May 2002 CIPU  Bulletin.  We  mention
     this simply for the record. We have to determine  this  appeal  on  the
     basis that the only report of the Danish Immigration Service is the one
     dated January 2000.

11.17 Section 6 of the Danish Immigration Service Report dated January  2000
     (pages 1 to 5 of the Appellant's bundle) deals  separately  with  those
     who are forcibly returned and those return voluntarily. In the case  of
     voluntary returns (page 4 of the Appellant's bundle), the President  of
     the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights  in  Kinshasa  considered
     that such persons would not be at risk of persecution if they  did  not
     resume their political activities;  however, if the returnee was  known
     to have been politically active abroad, this might lead to  a  risk  of
     arrest and possibly persecution. An anonymous source  stated  that,  if
     the authorities were aware that the returnee had tried to obtain asylum
     abroad, he would probably questioned about  his  stay  abroad  and  his
     reason for seeking asylum; the source did not  believe  that  generally
     returnees were suspected of supporting or collaborating with the rebels
     or of any other serious offences. In the case  of  involuntary  returns
     (pages 4 and  5 of the Appellant's bundle)  (which  is  what  Mr.  Ward
     relied  on),  the  report  states  that  an  anonymous  source  in   an
     international organisation considered that a refused asylum seeker from
     the DRC who did not return to the DRC  voluntarily  and  was  therefore
     escorted to Kinshasa airport by foreign police  would  be  arrested  on
     arrival "almost  without  exception",  "very  probably  be  imprisoned"
     without the right to see either a judge or a lawyer. Mr. Muila Kayembe,
     the Secretary General of the BLACK TOGAS (International Association  of
     Lawyers and Magistrates Committed to Defending Human Rights,  Kinshasa)
     also said that a person who was escorted home to  Kinshasa  by  foreign
     police would be arrested on  arrival  in  what  was  described  as  the
     "normal way" and would be questioned and, further, that the duration of
     his detention might depend on the extent to which he was able to  bribe
     the authorities. We considered that this is not consistent with another
     statement attributed to Mr. Kayembe in the same section of the report -
     that is, the section dealing with forcible returns. Mr. Kayembe is said
     to believe that a UDPS member who had been refused  asylum  abroad  and
     was returned  to  the  DRC  would  not  necessarily  have  problems  on
     returning to Kinshasa, although this would depend on whether he  was  a
     "known face" or had been accused by anyone after his return  of  having
     worked against the regime in the DRC.   In any  event,  in  considering
     the weight to be attached to  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  Report
     dated January 2000, we bear in mind that:

      (a)   what is said in that report is  based  on  information  gathered
           for the proposes of a report published in 2000; and

      (b)   the UNHCR letter of 20th November 2001 states that the UNHCR  is
           not opposed to the return of failed asylum seekers  to  the  DRC
           provided that they have had access to a full and fair hearing.

      We consider ourselves entitled to place great weight on the advice  of
     the UNHCR, being a non-partisan body and which takes its responsibility
     of monitoring the fate of asylum seekers seriously.

11.18 We place no weight on paragraph 5.33 of the CIPU Report dated  October
     2002. This states that information from the British Embassy in Kinshasa
     in 2001 indicates that embassy officials there are "not aware"  of  any
     reports that indicate failed asylum seekers returned  to  the  DRC  via
     Kinshasa are subject to detention or persecution. In essence, Mr.  Ward
     submitted that all this shows is that the British Embassy simply had no
     knowledge about the matter and, accordingly, the Second Adjudicator was
     wrong to regard this as "evidence". Mr. Deller entirely  accepted  this
     assertion and  we  also  agree.  We  accordingly  place  no  weight  on
     paragraph 5.33.

11.19 The letter from the UNHCR dated 22nd May 2003 addressed  to  Mr.  Vnuk
     is at pages 71 and 72 of the Appellant's bundle. Although we  are  able
     to tell that this letter was produced for a particular  asylum  seeker,
     the text of the letter is in general terms. It is appropriate for us to
     quote the main body of the letter:

             UNHCR  can  make  the  following  comments  on  the  return  of
           unsuccessful asylum seekers to the DRC. The current situation in
           the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)  is  characterised  by
           serious deterioration on both protection  and  security  fronts.
           This raises questions as  to  whether  unsuccessful  DRC  asylum
           seekers may be returned without security and protection risks.

            Whilst maintaining that rejected asylum seekers may be  returned
           to  the  DRC  as  a  general  rule,  UNHCR  would  advise   that
           humanitarian  considerations  should  be  given   the   broadest
           possible interpretation whenever return is  envisaged.  In  this
           regard, it has to be borne in mind that the overall humanitarian
           situation in the DRC continues to be of concern, mainly  due  to
           human rights violations, epidemic outbreaks,  major  nutritional
           and health problems and restrictions on humanitarian access that
           are exacerbated by the ongoing hostilities. Over 2.5 million  of
           the estimated 50 million Congolese citizens are  now  displaced.
           Over 500,000 people were displaced in 2002 alone, mainly due  to
           intensified violence and renewed fighting. Almost a  million  of
           them have not received any aid because of the unstable  security
           situation, especially in the eastern provinces of DRC.

            With the above  considerations  in  mind,  UNHCR  would  caution
           against any forcible returns to areas outside Kinshasa.  Persons
           originating  from  Kinshasa,  and  who  are  not  in   need   of
           international protection, may be returned there,  provided  that
           family  links  and  economic  support   in   the   capital   are
           ascertained.

             In  addition,  asylum-seekers  with  certain  profiles   should
           receive particularly  careful  consideration  prior  to  return.
           Issues such as the individual's place of origin, last  place  of
           habitual  residence,  family   relations,   ethnic   group   and
           profession should be considered before the person is removed. An
           individual approach is therefore required on the  basis  of  the
           circumstances of each case  and  careful  consideration  of  the
           changing political and security context in the DRC.

            First hand accounts and reports from  local  human  rights  NGOs
           suggest that certain individuals who are deported (regardless of
           whether  they  sought  asylum  abroad),  or   even   repatriated
           voluntarily,  may  face  serious  problems  following   possible
           interrogation conducted by security  services  upon  arrival  in
           Kinshasa. Should the authorities in  Kinshasa  discover  that  a
           deportee has a political or  military  profile,  or  has  sought
           asylum abroad owing to a political or military background,  such
           person may be at risk of arbitrary detention and  ill-treatment.
           There have also been reports  of  abuse  of  power  by  security
           offices  at  Ndjili  International  Airport  (Kinshasa).  It  is
           alleged that they intimidate deportees to extort money, and send
           them to detention centres in cases where neither they nor  their
           families can pay.

            However, the DRC authorities  maintain  that  the  deportee  who
           returns with a travel document  "tenant  lieu  de  passport"  is
           required to complete immigration  formalities  upon  arrival  in
           order to confirm his or her Congolese  nationality.  He  is  not
           detained and is  allowed  to  leave  immigration  premises  once
           Congolese  nationality  is  confirmed.  The   problem   in   the
           deportation procedure may occur  when  the  deportee  is  not  a
           Congolese  national  and  has  acquired  a  DRC  passport  in  a
           fraudulent manner. In such cases, there have been  reports  that
           persons suspected of being nationals of countries considered  as
           "unfriendly" (e.g. Uganda, Rwanda) may be  arbitrarily  detained
           and face  ill-treatment.  Nationals  of  other  countries  would
           normally  be  released  after  interrogation.  It  is  therefore
           recommended that the nationality of rejected asylum  seekers  be
           carefully ascertained before they are processed  for  return  to
           the DRC.

            DRC authorities maintain that the information in  the  preceding
           paragraph correctly reflects the procedure in place  to  receive
           deportees. The UNHCR (UN High Commissioner for Human Rights) has
           nevertheless received reports about deportees transferred to the
           DRC  security  services  such  as  ANR  (Agence  Nationale   des
           Renseignements) and DEMIAP (Detection  Militaire  des  Activites
           Anti  Patrie)  for  interrogation.  The  Minister  of   Interior
           recently announced that these two security  services  no  longer
           officially operate at Ndjili International Airport.  Officially,
           only the police and the DGM (Direction Generale des  Migrations)
           are  currently  operating  at  this  airport.  Reports  suggest,
           however, that the remaining security services have not  in  fact
           ceased their operations and continue to maintain  an  unofficial
           presence at Kinshasa Airport.

            (the emphasis in bold is ours)

11.20 In this most recent  letter  from  the  UNHCR,  the  UNHCR  are  still
     maintaining that rejected asylum seekers may be returned to the DRC  as
     a general rule. It cautions against forcible returns to  areas  outside
     Kinshasa but persons originating from Kinshasa may be  returned  there.
     Although in the case of persons originating from Kinshasa, UNHCR states
     that an individual's family link's and economic support in the  capital
     should be ascertained, it does not state that the lack of  such  family
     links and economic support would mean that there is a real risk of  the
     deportee receiving treatment amounting to persecution or in  breach  of
     Article 3. Indeed, if there was  such  a  risk,  the  UNHCR  would  not
     maintain that, as a  general  rule,  rejected  asylum  seekers  may  be
     returned to the DRC. The words which we have emboldened  in  the  quote
     above simply are not sufficient to discharge to  the  low  standard  of
     proof that failed asylum seekers are, per se, of adverse interest.

11.21 We note that Mr. Kennes states that returnees from the United  Kingdom
     are viewed with more suspicion. We have no reason to  take  issue  with
     this. However, if returning  failed  asylum  seekers  from  the  United
     Kingdom are at real risk of persecution after arrival in  the  DRC,  we
     considered it inconceivable that the UNHCR would not say so.
xx    We have been provided (on behalf of the Respondent) with a copy  of  a
     letter from the British Ambassador in Kinshasa dated 22nd November 2002
     addressed to the Immigration and Nationality Directorate.  This  letter
     states:

            In answer to your recent enquiry I can confirm  that,  since  my
           appointment to Kinshasa in May 2000, this Embassy has  not  come
           across any evidence that  DRC  nationals  forcibly  returned  to
           Kinshasa after failing to obtain political  asylum  in  European
           countries have faced persecution from the DRC authorities.

            The Belgian and French  governments  regularly  forcibly  return
           failed asylum seekers to Kinshasa; the Dutch government returned
           a group of 48 on 20 November. The local Embassies of these three
           countries have told me that the essential  requirement  for  DRC
           Immigration is acceptable identification documents.

            I am  not  in  a  position  to  offer  assurances  however  that
           returnees would not face prosecution if it were established that
           they had left the DRC without the mandatory travel documents, or
           if they had been the subject of criminal arrest warrants  or  of
           legal investigation prior to their original departure.
xx.   Mr. Gaskin submitted that, given that returned failed  asylum  seekers
     are not British nationals, there is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
     British Embassy would receive information about the  fate  of  returned
     failed asylum seekers.  We  can  see  some  merit  in  this  assertion.
     However, it is evident, from the letter from  the  British  Ambassador,
     that the Ambassador had been in touch with the embassies of three other
     governments, all of which have forcibly returned failed asylum  seekers
     to the DRC. We are  aware  that  there  are  numerous  non-governmental
     international organisations which are interested in  the  human  rights
     situations in countries across the globe,  including  the  DRC.  It  is
     inconceivable that, if returned failed asylum  seekers  (regardless  of
     their background) had encountered persecutory treatment or treatment in
     breach of Article 3 simply on account of being failed  asylum  seekers,
     this would not be reported. We have not had produced to us any  reports
     which show that returned failed asylum seekers are, simply  on  account
     thereof, at risk in the DRC. The lack of any  such  evidence,  together
     with the lack of any general advice  from  the  UNHCR  that  it  is  at
     present not safe in general to return failed asylum seekers to the  DRC
     is, in our view, significant.

11.22 We have no reason to suppose that the Respondent would seek to  remove
     any failed asylum seekers to the DRC without valid  identification  and
     travel documentation. Indeed, we are aware from our own  experience  in
     dealing with these appeals that the Respondent does not effect  returns
     to the DRC unless the returnee has been issued by the  DRC  Embassy  in
     London with a valid travel  document.  Indeed,  the  Bulletin  numbered
     1/2003 dated January 2003 issued by CIPU on the DRC suggests  that  the
     delays currently being experienced in effecting removals to the DRC are
     on account of the administrative problems of obtaining travel documents
     from the DRC Embassy in London - which suggests that removals are  only
     effected after proper documentation is in place.

11.23 We have carefully considered the Tribunal cases  relied  upon  on  the
     Appellant's behalf. Of course, these decisions are not binding  on  us.
     However, we note as follows:

      (i)   Mozu is a case which was decided on its own facts.  Furthermore,
           the Tribunal in Mozu proceeded on the  basis  that  Mr.  Kennes'
           report was to be accepted  without  question.  We  have  already
           explained above why we have concerns about Mr. Kennes report. In
           addition, it is not clear which UNHCR  letter  (referred  to  in
           paragraph 12 of the Tribunal's Determination)  was  referred  to
           the Tribunal and whether (if it was the  UNHCR  letter  of  20th
           November 2001 mentioned as the  second  letter  in  Mr.  Kennes'
           report), the Tribunal's attention was drawn to the full text  of
           the letter, or merely to the abridged version contained  in  Mr.
           Kennes' report. Mozu should not be regarded as authority for the
           proposition that failed asylum seekers are, per se, at  risk  of
           treatment amounting to persecution or in breach of Article 3 (if
           it ever was) and should no longer be cited.

      (ii)  Bashiya was a case where the  Adjudicator  had  found  that  the
           Appellant was arrested and tortured in prison and  the  Tribunal
           determined the appeal on the basis that the cause of his arrests
           was his support for the MLC. We  are  aware  that  the  Tribunal
           received evidence from Mr. Kennes but there  is  no  indication,
           from the Determination itself, that the Tribunal was referred to
           the full text of the UNHCR's letter of 20th November 2001.

      (iii) Nibanga was a case  where  the  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the
           applicant was an escapee from possible prosecution  for  assault
           and that he had had a very minor role in the UDPS. We are  aware
           that the Tribunal considered many  of  the  documents  which  we
           ourselves have been referred to. However,  two  things,  in  our
           view, stand out particularly - firstly,  the  Tribunal  made  no
           mention of the UNHR's letter of 21st November 2001; secondly, it
           is evident, from paragraph 17 of  the  Determination,  that  the
           Tribunal was not  considering  whether  failed  asylum  seekers,
           regardless of their backgrounds were at risk on return. This  is
           evident from the following  extracts  of  paragraph  17  of  the
           Determination:

            .................. we take the  view  that  the  clear  evidence
                 shows  ongoing  harassment  of  UDPS  members  whether  one
                 endeavours to categorise them  as  active  prominent,  less
                 prominent or simply members.

            and, at paragraph 19:

                 We find that there is a  real risk that mistreatment  could
                 take place and the reason being the  appellant's  political
                 activities even at the low level.

11.24 We, on the other hand, have specifically addressed  ourselves  to  the
     question as to whether failed asylum seekers are, regardless  of  their
     backgrounds, at such risk.

12.   We have concluded, on the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  us,  that
     failed asylum seekers are not at real risk of being  subjected  by  the
     DRC authorities to treatment which amounts to persecution or in  breach
     of Article 3, simply because they are  failed  asylum  seekers.  It  is
     patently clear, from all of the documents, that  the  circumstances  of
     each individual should be  carefully  examined.  As  indicated  in  the
     UNHCR's letter of 22nd May 2003,  there  will  need  to  be  a  careful
     examination, within the context of the changing political and  security
     situation in the DRC, of factors such  as  the  individual's  place  of
     origin, last place of  habitual  residence,  family  relations,  ethnic
     group and profession and whether the  individual  has  a  political  or
     military profile.

13.    In  our  analysis  above,  we  have,  of  course,  referred  to  both
     persecution  and  Article  3,  because  treatment  which   amounts   to
     persecution also amounts to treatment in breach of Article  3.  In  the
     appeal before us, only Article 3 is relevant.

      Issue 2:

14.    Whilst  we  accept  that,  on  his  return,  the  Appellant  will  be
     questioned and possibly detained for a short while whilst his  identity
     is checked, we find, on the totality of the evidence, that he will  not
     be of adverse interest to the authorities. He  was  only  detained  and
     beaten on one occasion; this happened some 6 years ago.  His  detention
     was not on account of any political activity or  association  with  any
     persons (paragraph 5.1(i) above). He was not suspected of any political
     activities (paragraph 5.1 (ii) above). His detention  might  well  have
     been for some minor criminal offence; he has not indicated that he  was
     ever charged with an offence (paragraph 5.2 above). He has not  claimed
     to have been engaged in any political activity in the  United  Kingdom.
     We have, of course, taken note of the fact that he is from Kinshasa and
     that he would be returning from the  United  Kingdom.  Although  he  no
     longer has a current valid passport (his Zairean passport  issued  when
     the Mobutu regime was in power having expired), his return to  the  DRC
     will not be effected until a travel document has been obtained from the
     DRC Embassy in London. We have also taken note of  the  fact  that,  as
     pages 73 and 74 of the Appellant's bundle show, the  peace  process  in
     the  DRC  is  stalling  and  the  general  situation  in  the  DRC   is
     deteriorating further. Of course, we give no guarantees but we make  it
     clear that we have determined whether the Appellant would be of adverse
     interest to the DRC authorities on the low standard of a real risk.

      Issue 3:

      Article 3:

15.1  It is undoubtedly  the  case  that,  quite  apart  from  the  security
     situation, the general humanitarian situation in the DRC is  appalling.
     It has been rightly described as a humanitarian crisis, and one of  the
     worst such in the world. This is evident from  the  Oxfam  report,  Mr.
     Kennes' report and the Docu Congo report at  pages  67  to  70  of  the
     Appellant's bundle. There is a lack of food, water and  healthcare,  to
     name but a few of the problems. In his report of 19th  June  2002,  Mr.
     Kennes states that he has never before seen so many  emaciated  mothers
     as he witnessed in Kinshasa (page 7 of the report on  page  31  of  the
     Appellant's bundle). He says that, even in Kinshasa, formerly  well-to-
     do families are often  compelled  to  breed  rats  for  food  to  avoid
     starvation. Mr. Ward did not seek to suggest that everyone in  Kinshasa
     is living in inhuman or  degrading  conditions  but  submitted  that  a
     significant number clearly do. The Docu Congo report at page 70 of  the
     Appellant's bundle states that eating, even if  only  once  a  day,  is
     currently considered a miracle of God in Congo. It also states  that  a
     person who has lived for a while in Europe is incapable of adapting  to
     this life.

15.2  All of this evidence has to be set against the  fact  that  the  UNHCR
     has not advised against the return of individuals who do not  meet  the
     criteria under the Refugee Convention to the  DRC,  although  we  noted
     that the UNHCR letter dated 22nd May 2003 refers to epidemic outbreaks,
     major nutritional and health problems and restrictions on  humanitarian
     access. We are aware that the UNHCR does  take  a  wider  view  of  the
     overall  humanitarian  situation  in   a   country   and,   where   the
     circumstances warrant, has in the past  advised  against  the  forcible
     return of persons who do not qualify under the Refugee Convention.  For
     example, in the case of Kosovo, the UNHCR did recommend that  signatory
     states ought to consider allowing individuals  falling  within  certain
     categories to remain. In the case  of  Afghanistan,  UNHCR  did  advise
     against the return of Afghan nationals to Kabul for some time after the
     fall of the Taliban, on account of the humanitarian situation in Kabul.
     In the case of the DRC, the UNHCR have not issued such general  advice.
     In the case of persons originating from Kinshasa, the UNHCR's advice is
     that persons who are not in need of  international  protection  may  be
     returned there, provided that family links and economic support in  the
     capital  are  ascertained.  In  this  case,  the   Second   Adjudicator
     considered it questionable that the Appellant's father had died or that
     he has no other family members to turn to on return. We assume that  he
     has no one he could turn to. In addition, to the  general  problems  we
     have already referred to, he  will  experience  problems  in  obtaining
     accommodation and employment.

15.3  However, the threshold for a breach of Article 3 to arise  is  a  high
     one. We are mindful of the fact that the Appellant has now spent some 6
     years in the  United  Kingdom.  Mr.  Ward  submitted  that  his  6-year
     residence in the United Kingdom, coupled with the fact  that  he  works
     for a large department store in London, would not  equip  him  for  the
     struggle to survive in the general conditions in the Kinshasa. Although
     we recognise that much in  the  DRC  has  changed  since  he  left  his
     country, the Appellant was born and brought up there.  He  was  in  his
     late teens when he left the DRC; he is now  in  his  mid-twenties.  Our
     attention has not been drawn to anything which  suggests  that  he  has
     health problems and is not fit and healthy. We do not  accept  that  he
     would not be able to readjust to life in the DRC,  although  we  accept
     that he will find the conditions very harsh.

15.4  We find, on the evidence before  us,  that  the  general  humanitarian
     condition which the Appellant would have to endure on his return to the
     DRC is not such that Article 3 threshold is reached.

      Article 8:

16.1  No evidence has been adduced to suggest that  reliance  is  placed  on
     the right to family life, as opposed to private life.

16.2  To the extent that reliance on the right to  private  life  is  placed
     solely on the general humanitarian condition  in  Kinshasa,  the  claim
     fails, given our finding that the threshold for a breach of  Article  3
     is not reached and given the Court of Appellant's judgement in Ullah  &
     Do [2002] EWCA Civ 1856.

16.3  With regard to the Appellant's  right  to  his  private  life  in  the
     United Kingdom, the Second Adjudicator noted that the Appellant appears
     to be a single man living in rented accommodation and that,  whilst  he
     has friends in the United Kingdom, he did not appear  to  her  to  have
     ties of a more binding nature. However, we note that he has been in the
     United Kingdom for some 6 years, which  is  a  considerable  length  of
     time.

16.4  We are prepared to determine this appeal on  the  basis  that,  during
     his six  years  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  will  have  formed  some
     connections and associations which would qualify as private life  under
     Article 8.

16.5  It is not in dispute that any interference with the Appellant's  right
     to his private life in the United Kingdom is in accordance with the law
     and that the reason for  the  interference  comes  within  one  of  the
     (exhaustive) list of reasons in Article 8(2) (namely, the  exercise  of
     legitimate immigration control on the part of the United Kingdom).

16.6   The  question  therefore  is  whether  the  interference   with   the
    Appellant's right to his private life in  the  United  Kingdom  by  his
    removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
    control. In this connection, the general humanitarian condition in  the
    DRC is relevant, as are the facts mentioned in  paragraph  16.3  above.
    Immigration control is a  very  weighty  consideration  and  cannot  be
    lightly overridden. Cases where the general humanitarian  condition  is
    not found to give rise to an Article 3  breach  but  where  removal  is
    nevertheless disproportionate under Article 8 will be rare, rather than
    the  norm.  In  this  particular  case,  we  are  satisfied  that   the
    Appellant's  removal  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of
    immigration control.

      Decision

      The appeal is dismissed.




|                                    |                                    |
|Ms. D. K. GILL                      |                                    |
|Vice President                      |Date: 6th June 2003                 |

