
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |MK (Proportionality -       |
|                           |        |Application of Edore) Turkey|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00116          |
|On 23 July 2003            |        |                            |
|Prepared 23 July 2003      |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....24/10/2003.......                                             |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr L V Waumsley                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances
For the Appellant:           Ms T. Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. K. Mukherjee, Counsel instructed  by  Wilson  &
                       Co., Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Mr B W Dawson, who allowed the Respondent's  appeal
      on article 8 grounds against the decision  made  on  28  January  2002
      refusing him leave to enter and making removal directions for  Turkey.
      In this determination the Tribunal will refer  to  the  Respondent  to
      this appeal as the Applicant.

   2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom as long  ago  as  15  July
      1996. He had travelled to Bulgaria and then Romania, before travelling
      by lorry across Europe to the United Kingdom.  He  claimed  asylum  on
      arrival. He did not receive a decision on  his  application  until  28
      January 2002.

   3. In the meantime he had married Beyhan Bulutcok (Mrs Koc)  on  19  July
      1997. She is also a citizen  of  Turkey  who  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in December 1994. She has  also  claimed  asylum.  A  daughter
      Kardelen was born on 22 November  1998.  She  and  her  daughter  were
      granted exceptional leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  24
      January 2000 until 24 October 2003 under the backlog  policy  then  in
      force. Their son, Ali Denise born 22 March 2001, has also been granted
      exceptional leave.

   4. The Applicant appealed on both asylum and human rights grounds and his
      appeal was heard by the Adjudicator on 12 March 2003. For the  reasons
      which he gave the Adjudicator was not satisfied that the Applicant was
      entitled to asylum nor that there would be  a  breach  of  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under article 3 if  he  were  to  be  return  to
      Turkey. There is no challenge to  these  findings.  The  Tribunal  are
      concerned with the Adjudicator's finding that there would be a  breach
      of article 8 if the  removal  directions  were  put  into  effect.  In
      paragraph 4 of the Adjudicator's determination, he raised the issue of
      whether the Respondent's policy DP3/96 would apply  as  the  Applicant
      had married on 19 July 1997. This provided that deportation or illegal
      entry action should not normally be initiated where  the  subject  has
      been in a genuine and subsisting marriage with  someone  settled  here
      for at least two years before the commencement of enforcement  action.
      It was argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that the policy  did
      not apply to those  refused  leave  to  enter  and  further  that  the
      Applicant's wife was not settled. This is indeed the case.  The  grant
      of exceptional leave is not the same as being settled.

   5. The Respondent's representative before the Adjudicator is recorded  as
      acknowledging that it was reasonably  likely  that  after  four  years
      exceptional leave Mrs Koc would be granted indefinite leave to  remain
      and in consequence would be settled. The issue  of  settlement  is  of
      course relevant in  considering  whether  it  would  be  open  to  the
      Applicant to make an  application  within  the  Immigration  Rules  on
      return to Turkey. In order to qualify as a spouse he  must  show  that
      his wife is a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.  Mrs
      Koc did not fall within that category at the date of decision  nor  at
      the hearing before the Adjudicator, nor indeed  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing before the Tribunal.

   6. When considering the issue of article 8 the Adjudicator heard evidence
      from Mrs Koc.  She  adopted  her  witness  statement  at  R13-16.  She
      confirmed that she had arrived in the United Kingdom in 1994 when  she
      was aged fourteen. She asserted that her  sister  and  niece  were  in
      prison in Turkey. They had been prosecuted  for  supporting  the  PKK.
      They had given a statement made under torture admitting to  this.  She
      claimed that he had been taken to Goksun Gendarme Station  where  they
      tried to force her to make a statement  confirming  their  involvement
      with the PKK. Her sister and niece were sentenced to thirty-six  years
      imprisonment. She claimed that because of  her  suspected  involvement
      with her sister and niece she would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
      Turkey.

   7. Mrs Koc  was  not  cross  examined  on  these  issues  and  there  was
      consequently no challenge to her account.  The  Adjudicator  commented
      that it hardly lay with the Home Office  to  say  that  she  could  be
      returned to Turkey because her claim had been  dealt  with  under  the
      backlog policy and by implication her account had been untested. There
      was an opportunity of testing the account at the hearing  before  him.
      In the absence of any inherent improbability, he said that  he  should
      accept her account. He was satisfied that  there  were  insurmountable
      obstacles to her joining the Applicant in Turkey. He went on to  write
      as follows:

               "I am therefore concerned with the split up of a couple  who
               have been together in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage
               since 1997, of which there are two children. The couple have
               been in a relationship for six and a half years. By  October
               it is probable that Beyhan will be granted ILR. I would find
               little difficulty in reaching the conclusion  the  Appellant
               was/is an illegal entrant having regard  to  his  method  of
               entry therefore entitled to be considered under DP3/96.  But
               having regard to  the  length  of  the  relationship  alone,
               coupled with the  considerable  delay  in  the  Home  office
               dealing with the Appellant's application, I do not think  it
               proportionate for the purposes  of  immigration  control  to
               require the Appellant to leave. It cannot even be said  that
               he could make application for entry clearance in Istanbul to
               return to his wife since he is faced with  the  prospect  of
               imprisonment and subsequently military  service  which  will
               delay his return for some time.


               It is for these  reasons  I  consider  article  8  would  be
               violated if the Appellant is returned. My recommendation  is
               that the Appellant's leave be brought in line with  that  of
               his wife."


   8. In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator has  failed
      to take into consideration the case of Mahmood [2001] IMM AR  229.  It
      is argued that the Adjudicator also failed to consider the  fact  that
      at the time the Applicant married, he and his wife  were  both  asylum
      seekers, with  no  immigration  status  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      Adjudicator had placed undue weight on the  fact  that  his  wife  had
      exceptional  leave  to  remain  and  had  speculated  on  her   future
      immigration status when he commented that it  was  probable  that  she
      would be granted indefinite leave to remain. It  is  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator was incorrect to make an assessment of his wife's claim at
      the appeal. This is  a  challenge  to  the  finding  that  there  were
      insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  returning  to  Turkey   with   the
      Applicant.

   9. Finally it  is  argued  that  the  Applicant  could  apply  for  entry
      clearance to return to the United Kingdom as a spouse. The Adjudicator
      was wrong to attach weight to the prospect that  the  Applicant  would
      face imprisonment and subsequently military service which would  delay
      his return. It was primarily this ground which  led  Dr  Storey,  Vice
      President, to  grant  leave  to  appeal.  He  commented  that  it  was
      difficult to follow the Adjudicator's reasoning  in  relation  to  the
      issue of entry clearance delay  caused  by  the  Applicant  having  to
      perform military service in Turkey when that was a lawful  requirement
      which a state could impose on its citizens which inevitably  caused  a
      degree of interference in a couple's married life and it could not  be
      in the interests of the UK government within the meaning of article  8
      (2) considerations  to  obstruct  another  country  in  requiring  its
      citizens to perform lawful obligations.

  10. At the hearing before the Tribunal Ms  Hart  adopted  the  grounds  of
      appeal. She submitted that the fact that Applicant may have to serve a
      short sentence of imprisonment and then undertake military service  on
      return to Turkey did not make his removal disproportionate.  This  was
      the position for all Turkish citizens  undertaking  military  service.
      The Adjudicator was wrong to speculate as to whether  the  Appellant's
      wife would be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The  Adjudicator
      should have  considered  both  whether  there  was  an  insurmountable
      obstacle to family life in Turkey,  and  if  there  was,  whether  the
      Applicant should be expected to return and  make  an  application  for
      entry clearance. The Adjudicator should not have made findings on what
      was effectively his wife's asylum claim in reaching his conclusions.

  11.  Mr  Mukherjee  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  were
      properly open to him. He was entitled to take into  account  the  long
      delay in reaching the decision. There were two  small  children  whose
      interests had to be considered.  There  was  no  indication  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to follow the guidelines in Mahmood. It was not
      wrong for him to infer that indefinite leave would in  all  likelihood
      be granted. It was for the Adjudicator to assess whether there was  an
      insurmountable obstacle to family life in  Turkey.  Having  made  that
      finding he was entitled to take the view this was an exceptional  case
      having regard to the length  of  the  relationship  coupled  with  the
      considerable delay. The  Adjudicator's  recommendation  was  that  the
      Applicant's leave be brought in line with that of his  wife.  Although
      this was only a recommendation, it indicated  the  Adjudicator's  view
      that it would disproportionate for the family to be split prior to the
      decision being made on the  wife's  position  in  the  United  Kingdom
      following the expiry of her period of exceptional leave.

  12. The Adjudicator did not have the benefit, which the Tribunal have,  of
      judgments from the Court of Appeal dealing with  the  approach  to  be
      adopted when considering appeals on article  8  grounds.  In  Blessing
      Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716, Simon Brown LJ  approved  the  analysis  of
      Moses J in Ismet Ala [2003] ECHC 521 (Admin) that where there  was  no
      issue of fact an Adjudicator on an  appeal  based  on  article  8  was
      concerned only with the question of whether the Secretary of State had
      struck a fair balance  between  the  need  for  effective  immigration
      control and the claimant's rights under article  8.  The  question  in
      issue was whether the decision of the Secretary of State  was  outwith
      the range of reasonable responses.

  13. In paragraph 20 of his judgment, Simon Brown LJ summarised  the  issue
      in the following way:

               "Where the essential facts are not in doubt or dispute,  the
               Adjudicator's task on a human rights appeal under section 65
               is to determine whether  the  decision  under  appeal....was
               properly within the decision maker's discretion, i.e. was  a
               decision which could reasonably be regarded as proportionate
               and striking a fair balance between the competing  interests
               in play."


  14. His approach was confirmed by the Court of  Appeal  in  Razgar  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 840 where the court also dealt with the  proper  approach  if
      the facts found by the Adjudicator were fundamentally  different  form
      those determined by the Secretary of State. In  paragraph  41  of  the
      court's judgment, Dyson LJ wrote as follows:


               "Where the essential facts found by the Adjudicator  are  so
               fundamentally  different  from  those  determined   by   the
               Secretary of State as subsequently to undermine the  factual
               base of the balancing exercise performed by him, it  may  be
               impossible for the  Adjudicator  to  determine  whether  the
               decision is proportionate otherwise than by carrying out the
               balancing exercise himself. Even in such case, when it comes
               to  deciding  how  much  weight  to  give  to  a  policy  of
               maintaining an effective immigration policy, the Adjudicator
               should  pay  considerable  deference  to  the  view  of  the
               Secretary of State as to the importance of maintaining  such
               a policy. There is obviously a conceptual difference between
               (a) deciding whether the decision of the Secretary of  State
               was within  the  range  of  reasonable  responses,  and  (b)
               deciding whether  the  decision  was  proportionate  (paying
               deference to the Secretary of State so far as is  possible).
               In the light of Blessing  Edore,  we  would  hold  that  the
               correct approach is  (a)  in  cases  except  where  this  is
               impossible because of the factual basis of the  decision  of
               the Secretary of State has been substantially undermined  by
               the findings of the Adjudicator. Where  (a)  is  impossible,
               then the correct approach is (b). But we doubt  whether,  in
               practice, the application of the two approaches  will  often
               lead to different outcomes."


  15. The Tribunal also reminds itself of the judgment in Oleed [2002]  EWCA
      Civ 1906 and in particular paragraph 29 of the judgement of  Schiemann
      LJ  that  the  Tribunal  should  only  set  aside  a  decision  of  an
      Adjudicator who has heard the evidence  if  it  is  plainly  wrong  or
      unsustainable. We have also taken into account  the  judgment  of  the
      Court of Appeal in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233 dealing with the issue of
      delay when assessing an appeal under article 8.


  16. Against this background the Tribunal turn to the submissions  made  on
      behalf of the Secretary of  State.  It  is  argued  firstly  that  the
      Adjudicator has failed to take into  consideration  the  judgments  in
      Mahmood. There is  no  substance  in  that  assertion.  Mahmood  gives
      valuable guidance in paragraph 55 on the  factors  to  be  taken  into
      account when assessing the potential conflict between the respect  for
      family life and the enforcement  of  immigration  control.  The  first
      guideline is that the removal or exclusion of one family member from a
      state where other members of the family are lawfully resident will not
      necessarily infringe article 8 provided there  are  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to the family living together in the country  of  origin  of
      the family member  excluded  even  when  this  involves  a  degree  of
      hardship for some or all members of the family. It is clear  that  the
      Adjudicator  did  consider  this  issue:  see  paragraph  34  of   his
      determination. The fourth guideline refers to the length of time  that
      family life has been established and the fifth to the knowledge on the
      part of the spouse at the time of  the  marriage  that  the  right  of
      residence was precarious. It is  clear  from  his  determination  that
      these issues were considered by the Adjudicator.


  16. The second ground of appeal  deals  specifically  with  the  issue  of
      whether the Adjudicator considered the  fact  that  at  the  time  the
      Respondent got married both he and his wife were asylum  seekers  with
      no immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Adjudicator  was
      certainly aware of that fact. He could hardly have been unaware of  it
      in the light of the discussion about exceptional leave and the witness
      statement from the Applicant's wife. It is argued that he placed undue
      weight on  the  fact  that  the  Applicant's  wife  had  been  granted
      exceptional leave to remain. This was not in dispute. It was  for  the
      Adjudicator to what weight to attach to this factor.   Ground  2  also
      argues that the Adjudicator should have considered the merits  of  the
      case as they were at the hearing and not speculate  about  the  future
      immigration  status  of  the  Applicant's  wife.  In  our   view   the
      Adjudicator was  entitled  to  assess  the  future  situation  of  the
      Applicant's wife, and to take it into  account,  particularly  in  the
      light of the acknowledgment made at the hearing before  him,  that  it
      was reasonably likely that after  four  years  exceptional  leave  she
      would be  granted  indefinite  leave.  This  is  not  a  case  of  the
      Adjudicator speculating about future immigration status but drawing  a
      reasonable inference from the evidence.


  17. It is argued that the Adjudicator was incorrect to make an  assessment
      of the Applicant's wife's claim. This is  how  ground  3  is  phrased.
      Certainly it is not for the Adjudicator to determine Mrs Koc's  asylum
      claim as such. That matter was not before him. However,  in  assessing
      whether there is an insurmountable obstacle to her  returning,  he  is
      entitled to take into account her evidence as  to  why  she  says  she
      cannot return to Turkey. In our view there was an  obligation  on  the
      Adjudicator  to  assess  Mrs  Koc's  circumstances  in   his   overall
      assessment of whether there would be a breach  in  article  8.  Indeed
      this was at the heart of the appeal. If there  was  no  insurmountable
      obstacle to Mrs Koc and the children returning to Turkey, there  would
      be no interference with family life.

  18. The Adjudicator heard evidence from Mrs Koc.   It was not  challenged.
      It was for him to assess that evidence and he came to  the  conclusion
      that there was an insurmountable obstacle to her joining  her  husband
      in Turkey. In our view it is impossible to argue that this finding was
      plainly wrong or not sustainable on the evidence.

  19. The final ground  raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  the
      Adjudicator was wrong to attach weight to the fact that the  Applicant
      was faced with the prospect of a period of  imprisonment  for  evading
      military service and would then have to carry out his military service
      and that would delay his return. As a matter of general  principle  if
      it is reasonable for the Applicant to return  to  Turkey  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance, it would he  reasonable  for  him  to
      take the consequences of  any  draft  evasion  and  to  undertake  his
      military service before making an  application  for  entry  clearance.
      Removal  in  these  circumstances  would  either  not  amount  to   an
      interference with  family  life  or  would  not  be  disproportionate.
      However, the Adjudicator's comments in this respect were expressed  in
      the alternative. At present the Applicant is  not  in  a  position  to
      apply for entry clearance as his wife is not  settled  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

  20. It was also argued before the Tribunal whether the Adjudicator  should
      have followed approach (a) or (b) in Razgar. Mr Mukherjee argued  that
      the Adjudicator should have followed approach (b) as  the  Adjudicator
      had more information about the family circumstances and the facts were
      essentially different.

  21. The Tribunal do not agree. In our view, it cannot  be  said  that  the
      facts before the Adjudicator were fundamentally different  from  those
      determined by the Secretary of State. There was  no  real  dispute  of
      fact at all. It was common ground when  the  Applicant  and  his  wife
      arrived in the United Kingdom, when they married,  when  the  children
      where born, and the fact that the marriage was subsisting. It was  for
      the Adjudicator to assess whether the Secretary  of  State's  decision
      was within the range of reasonable responses.

  22. When the decision was made in January 2002 the Applicant was  married.
      The marriage took place  in  July  1997  with  two  children  born  in
      November 1998 and March 2001. The Applicant had  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom since 1996 only receiving a decision in January 2002. His wife
      had been granted exceptional leave to remain until October  2003.  The
      Adjudicator found that there were insurmountable obstacles to his wife
      returning to Turkey. In our  judgment  the  Adjudicator  was  properly
      entitled in these circumstances to come to the view that removal would
      be disproportionate. It was  for  him  to  assess  in  the  particular
      circumstances relating to the Applicant whether the considerable delay
      coupled with length of the relationship took the decision outside  the
      range of reasonable responses on the issue of proportionality.

  23. The Adjudicator clearly took the  view  that  the  Applicant's  future
      should be  considered  together  with  that  of  his  wife  and  young
      children. This is clear from his recommendation that  the  Applicant's
      leave should be brought in line with that of his wife. In the light of
      all the evidence, the  Adjudicator's  findings  and  conclusions  were
      properly open to him on the evidence and it follows that the  decision
      reached by the Secretary of State was outside the range of permissible
      responses

  24. In these circumstances  the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
