
JD

|Heard at Field House       |        |HA (Article                 |
|                           |        |3-Refugee-Adultery-Punishmen|
|                           |        |t) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00095                       |
|On 1 October 2003          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17.10.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|P R LANE (CHAIRMAN)                                               |
|J A O'BRIEN QUINN QC                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances
For the  appellant:  Mr  C.  Buckley,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer.
For the respondent:  Ms  N.  Braganza,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Mssrs
Berryman Shacklock, Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, appeals with leave against the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr D. E. Colyer, sitting at Nottingham, in which  he
      allowed on asylum grounds the  respondent's  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to  give  directions  for  his
      removal from the United Kingdom.


   2. The respondent is a citizen of Iran, now aged 30. He  is  married
      with twin children. His work in Iran was that of  a  salesman  of
      mobile telephones. In 2002 he began to rent a shop in Oronieh.  A
      divorced woman  called  Mahboobeh  Lotfi  came  to  the  shop  to
      purchase a telephone line. A friendship developed between her and
      the respondent.


   3. On 15 June 2002 the couple went in  the  respondent's  car  to  a
      lake, which was situated close  to  a  small  village.  They  had
      sexual intercourse in the car, at the lakeside. Unfortunately for
      them, the couple had not noticed that  people  coming  home  from
      their farms had seen them. The couple were sitting naked  in  the
      car when there was a knock on the window and "about eight  people
      were standing outside who were insulting  the  couple  for  their
      actions. They were both dragged from  the  car  and  beaten  with
      kicks and punches before having to put their clothes back on. One
      of the men phoned the police to say that  they  had  caught  some
      people committing Zena" (determination, paragraph 37).


   4. The couple were arrested by the police. The following morning the
      brother of Mahboobeh attended the police station and attacked the
      respondent. Also present were some  of  the  witnesses  from  the
      previous evening ( paragraph 39).


   5. The respondent was taken to court. Four witnesses  gave  evidence
      against him. On 6 August 2002 he  was  sentenced  'to  a  hundred
      lashes and then death by stoning. Mahboobeh was  sentenced  to  a
      hundred lashes' (paragraph 42).


   6. The respondent then apparently was able to appeal to  the  appeal
      court, and, moreover, to be released on bail, subject to a surety
      of approximately $50,000.


   7. Having been told "that 99 per cent of cases that went  to  appeal
      failed and the original decision would be  upheld  and  that  his
      only option to prevent being killed was to  leave  the  country",
      the respondent did so by departing in the boot of a car that  had
      been  arranged  by  an  agent.  The  respondent's   journey   was
      controlled by agents until he eventually arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom, where he claimed asylum (paragraphs 45 and 46).


   8. The Adjudicator found the respondent's account to be credible. As
      for what might happen to the respondent in terms of  the  Iranian
      legal system, the Adjudicator had this to say:-


        '48. I accept in total the report of  Professor  Haleh  Afshar
        who is an immanent (sic) and well-qualified academic expert on
        Islam and Iran and as such able  to  give  a  very  persuasive
        opinion which I accept. Her opinion being that there is a high
        level  of  probability  that  the  [respondent]   would   face
        execution in Iran. According to  Iranian  law  adultery  is  a
        cardinal sin, in a country that is ruled by the faith. In  the
        case of an adulterous couple Article 61 of the Iranian Islamic
        Qassas laws condones their murder.


        49. Honour  killing  is  not  considered  to  be  a  crime  at
        all...the Qassas laws allow the state to stone  the  "sinners"
        to death. She further comments on the position regarding  bail
        by stating that it is  quite  common  for  courts  to  release
        individuals on bail pending  appeal  or  further  trials.  The
        accused and sometimes even prisoners are required to  place  a
        substantial sum or deeds of their houses as  security  against
        their temporary release. Again I accept this opinion and it is
        consistent with the account given by the [respondent].


        50.  I  also  note  from  the  background  material  that  the
        punishment of stoning for adultery is not a mere threat but is
        carried out and in the  words  of  one  of  the  parliamentary
        representatives these are difficult but necessary  punishments
        that put the fear of god into potential sinners'.

   9. Given his findings, the Adjudicator concluded that the respondent
      had 'well-established according to the lower  standard  of  proof
      that he faces a real risk of the  most  severe  treatment  if  he
      returns to Iran. I find that the treatment  is  way  beyond  that
      acceptable  in  international  standards  of  legal  process  and
      acceptable punishment'(paragraph 54).


  10.  The Adjudicator then turned to the question of 'whether in these
      circumstances this [respondent] faces persecution or prosecution.
      The [respondent's] contention  being  that  because  Iran  is  an
      Islamic state the  religious  laws  therefore  have  a  political
      dimension. Thus failure to adhere to the strict tenants (sic)  of
      religious law imply a rejection of the political/religious  order
      and that the [respondent's] adulterous act  is  contrary  to  the
      religious law and offends the political/religious order and  will
      be perceived as a rejection of the same' (paragraph 54).


  11. Paragraphs 55 and 56 of the determination are where one finds the
      Adjudicator's conclusions:-


        '55. I find that according to the  proper  standard  of  proof
        that having examined the objective  documents  and  considered
        the [respondent's] evidence which I accept that  this  is  the
        correct  interpretation  of  the   situation.   Although   the
        respondent should have known what  the  consequences  were  of
        entering into an adulterous relationship he opened himself  up
        to risk of retribution by his one act of indiscretion but this
        one act is likely to  result  in  what  I  find  as  a  wholly
        disproportionate consequences because of  the  religious  code
        and system  of  policing  what  the  Iranian  Authorities  may
        considered (sic) to be social deviancy.


        '56. I find therefore that this is in effect  an  instance  of
        both religious and/or  political  persecution  for  which  the
        [respondent] is entitled to protection  of  the  international
        community under the 1951 Refugee Convention. I find  that  the
        persecution is and would be carried out by the state itself or
        by its agents and that it is reasonably likely that  he  would
        be arrested at Tehran airport on arrival'.


  12. The Adjudicator went on to find that, on the facts,  irrespective
      of his findings on the Refugee Convention, the respondent,  as  a
      convicted adulterer facing death by stoning,  would  be  at  real
      risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European
      Convention for the protection of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
      Freedoms.


  13. In his Grounds of Appeal, the Secretary of  State  did  not  seek
      leave to appeal the decision under Article 3 of the ECHR.  Whilst
      he did seek such leave in respect of Article 2,  contending  that
      the respondent had not shown 'a  near  certainty'  of  death,  if
      returned, Mr Buckley did not seek to pursue that issue before the
      Tribunal.


  14. Accordingly, the question for us is whether the  Adjudicator  was
      wrong to conclude that the respondent has a well-founded fear  of
      being persecuted in Iran  by  reason  of  religion  or  political
      opinion, or both.


  15. For the appellant, Mr Buckley submitted  that  the  reference  to
      religion in Article 1(2) of the Refugee Convention should not  be
      given a 'strained interpretation'. Persecution on the grounds  of
      religion means what it says and there was no evidence before  the
      Adjudicator that the respondent, as an adulterer, was seen by the
      Iranian authorities as a person who had rejected Islam altogether
      or adopted any other form of religious belief.  The  law  against
      adultery was of general application and it could not be said that
      anyone who contravened  a law rooted in a dominant religion of  a
      particular country was persecuted on the grounds of religion  or,
      indeed, political opinion. The respondent was not regarded in any
      sense as a political opponent of the Iranian regime.


  16. For the respondent, Ms Braganza submitted  that  the  persecution
      could legitimately have been  found  by  the  Adjudicator  to  be
      partly political and partly religious in nature. It all  depended
      upon the particular facts of the case and the situation disclosed
      by the evidence of the conditions in the  particular  country  in
      issue. The motive of  the  victim  of  the  persecution  was  not
      necessarily  a  conclusive  factor  in  determining  whether  the
      persecution was for a Refugee Convention reason. On the contrary,
      persecution must be looked at through the eyes of the  persecutor
      and any  deliberate  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  victim  was
      academic. The Refugee  Convention  must,  she  said,  be  applied
      'broadly'. Faced with the evidence in this case, the  Adjudicator
      had, Ms Braganza submitted, reached a view that was  not  plainly
      wrong. The question he had to determine was a mixed one  of  fact
      and law.


  17. As the US State Department Report on Iran for 2001  makes  plain,
      the  constitution  of  that  country,  ratified  after  the  1979
      Revolution, 'established a theocratic Republic  and  declared  as
      its purpose the establishment of institutions and a society based
      on Islamic principles and norms' (appellant's bundle,  page  13).
      The Government 'is dominated by Shi'a Muslim clergy. The head  of
      state, Ayatollah Ali Khamene'i, is  the  Supreme  Leader  of  the
      Islamic Revolution and has direct control over the armed  forces,
      the security forces,  and  the  judiciary'.  Later  in  the  same
      report, we observe that  a  'Council  of  Guardians  reviews  all
      legislation passed by the Majles [or consultative  assembly]  for
      adherence to Islamic and Constitutional principles.  The  Council
      consists of six clerical members who are appointed by the Supreme
      Leader, and six lay-jurists who are appointed by the head of  the
      judiciary and approved by the Majiles'.


  18. At page 55, the report goes on to opine that  the  'influence  of
      conservative Government clerics, which  pervades  the  judiciary,
      often prevents  citizens  from  receiving  due  process  or  fail
      trials. The Government uses the judiciary to stifle  dissent  and
      obstruct progress on human rights. The  Government  infringes  on
      citizens' privacy rights, and restricts freedom of speech, press,
      assembly, and association. Over the last 2 years, the  Government
      has closed nearly all reform-oriented publications,  and  brought
      charges against prominent political figures and  members  of  the
      clergy for expressing ideas viewed  as  contrary  to  the  ruling
      orthodoxy'.


  19. On the same page, it is observed that the  'Government  restricts
      freedom of religion. Religious minorities, particularly  Baha'is-
      who are viewed not as a religious group, but as a heretical group
      and a  subversive  political  organization-  continue  to  suffer
      repression by conservative elements of the judiciary and security
      establishment. In July  2000  10  Iranian  Jews  were  tried  and
      convicted on charges of having illegal contact with Israel'.


  20. At page 56, the US State Department Report notes that during 2001
      'citizens continued to be tried and sentenced  to  death  in  the
      absence of sufficient procedural safeguards. In 1992 the domestic
      press stopped  reporting  most  executions;  however,  executions
      continue in substantial numbers according to  the  UN  and  other
      reporting'. According to 'exiles and human  rights  monitors'  it
      may be the  case  that  'many  of  those  executed  for  criminal
      offenses, such as narcotics trafficking, actually  are  political
      dissidents.' Later on page 56, press reports  are  cited  in  the
      case of a woman stoned  to  death  on  charges  of  appearing  in
      pornographic films. There were also at least two cases  of  women
      stoned to death for murdering their husbands.


  21. At page 58, the US State Department Report observes that 'stoning
      and flogging are prescribed expressly by the Islamic  Penal  Code
      as appropriate punishments for adultery'. Public  floggings  were
      also 'increasingly used for  a  wide  range  of  social  offenses
      including breaches of the dress  code,  despite  opposition  from
      Interior Ministry officials who  question  the  effectiveness  of
      such punishment. For example, eight  men  convicted  of  drinking
      alcohol and causing public disturbance were flogged  publicly  in
      Tehran in July.'


  22. At page 60, there is  specific  reference  to  the  court  system
      which, as we have already noted, 'is subject  to  Government  and
      religious influence. It serves as the principal  vehicle  of  the
      State to restrict freedom and reform in the society'.  There  are
      several different court systems. The most  active  ones  are  the
      'traditional courts' which adjudicate civil and criminal offenses
      and the Islamic Revolutionary Courts, which try  cases  involving
      threats to  the  Islamic  Republic,  narcotics  crimes,  economic
      crimes, and official corruption. In addition there is  a  special
      clerical court which examines alleged transgressions  within  the
      clerical establishment and a military court which deals with  the
      army, police and revolutionary guards.  Finally,  a  press  court
      hears complaints against publishers,  editors  and  writers.  The
      Supreme Court has 'limited authority to review cases'.


  23. The US State Department considers that the 'judicial  system  has
      been designed to conform, where possible,  to  an  Islamic  canon
      based  on  the  Koran,  Sunna   and   other   Islamic   sources'.
      Interestingly, 'many aspects of  the  pre-revolutionary  judicial
      system survive in the civil and  criminal  courts.  For  example,
      defendants have the right to a public trial, may choose their own
      lawyer, and have the right of appeal. Trials are  adjudicated  by
      panels of judges. There is  no  jury  system  in  the  civil  and
      criminal courts. If a situation  is  not  addressed  by  statutes
      enacted after the 1979 revolution, the Government advises  judges
      to give precedence to their own knowledge and  interpretation  of
      Islamic law, rather than rely  on  statutes  enacted  during  the
      Pahiavi Monarchy'.


  24. At page 42 of the appellant's bundle, there is what appears to be
      a page from a website of the Iran-e-Azad organisation,  to  which
      we were referred by Ms Braganza.  It  sets  out  the  details  of
      Article 83 of the Penal Code. This provides that the penalty  for
      adultery under that Article,  called  the  law  of  'Hodoud',  is
      flogging for unmarried males and female offenders, whilst married
      offenders may be punished by stoning regardless of gender. A  man
      is buried up to his waist and a woman up  to  her  neck  (Article
      102). Article 104 of the law of Hadoud provides that 'the  stones
      should not be so large that a person dies after  being  hit  with
      two of them, nor so small as to be defined as pebbles,  but  must
      cause severe injuries'.


  25. The website commentary, which is clearly not sympathetic  to  the
      Iranian regime, states that the latter 'carries  out  stoning  in
      the name of Islam' but that 'stoning is not an Islamic punishment
      and the Qu'ran makes no mention of it'.


  26. Many other passages in  the  appellant's  bundle  deal  with  the
      punishment of stoning to  death,  both  for  adultery  and  other
      illicit sexual relations and other crimes, such  as  murder.  For
      example, at page 148 there is a press  release,  which  describes
      stoning to death as 'just  one  example  of  gross  human  rights
      violations in Iran'.


  27. At page  139  in  the  bundle,  Ms  Braganza  drew  our  specific
      attention to a web-site from  Christianity  Today,  dealing  with
      sentences of death handed down to Nigerian Muslim women convicted
      of adultery under Islamic  legal  systems  operating  in  certain
      Northern states of Nigeria.


  28. Until the coming into force of the Human Rights Act  1998,  which
      in effect incorporated  into  domestic  United  Kingdom  law  the
      provisions of the ECHR, the primary avenue for those seeking  the
      protection of the United Kingdom against  threatened  harm  in  a
      foreign  country,  was  the  Refugee   Convention.   The   latter
      Convention remains, of course, of great importance  in  our  law.
      However, the ability of claimants to rely directly upon the  ECHR
      means that there is no excuse for an Adjudicator or, indeed,  the
      Tribunal to succumb to the temptation of  distorting  the  proper
      interpretation of the Refugee Convention, in a case where  it  is
      manifest that a person should be given international protection.


  29.  Although  not  cited  before  the  Tribunal   in   the   current
      proceedings, this point is clearly made by Buxton  LJ  in  Januzi
      [2003] EWCA Civ 1187. Commenting upon the judgement of the  Court
      in AE and FE [2003] EWCA Civ 1032, the learned Lord Justice  said
      (at paragraph 25)  that  'this  court  considered  that  on  some
      occasions, sight had been  lost  of  the  centrality  of  refugee
      considerations  when  considering  issues   under   the   Refugee
      Convention;  and  that  human  rights  considerations-  important
      though they are, but not engaged by the Refugee Convention -  had
      been allowed to play a part'.


  30.  In essence, the present appeal involves answering  the  question
      of whether the Adjudicator, faced with the  information  on  Iran
      set out  above,  was  correct  to  agree  with  the  respondent's
      contention 'that because Iran is an Islamic state  the  religious
      laws therefore have a political dimension' and that a failure  to
      adhere  to   such   a   law   implies   'a   rejection   of   the
      political/religious order' and that it would be 'perceived  as  a
      rejection of the same' (determination, paragraph 54).


  31. The Tribunal is in no doubt that the Adjudicator fell into  error
      in agreeing with this proposition.


  32. The Adjudicator's  first  mistake  was  to  be  beguiled  by  the
      asserted  description  of  the  Iranian  Penal  Code  proscribing
      adultery as a  'religious'  law.   A  law  against  adultery  is,
      however, no more 'religious' than a law against murder. Both have
      their ultimate origin in the Ten Commandments,  as  described  in
      the Book of  Genesis,  and,  thus,  are  a  part  Judeo-Christian
      teaching, as they are of Islamic teaching. Adultery may  well  be
      'a cardinal sin, in a country that is ruled  by  the  faith',  to
      quote Professor Afshar (bundle p32). However, so too  is  murder.
      As we have seen, that offence is punishable in Iran by stoning to
      death.


  33. It might be said that, today, many people regard the laws against
      murder and other offences against the person as justified, not on
      religious grounds, but on  the  basis  that  these  laws  protect
      society. However, it is apparent that adultery can be regarded by
      both religious and non-religious  people  alike,  as  potentially
      destructive of family life and, hence, as  damaging  to  society.
      This is as true in Iran as other countries.


  34. The logic of the Adjudicator's stance is that, because Iran is  a
      theocratic  state,  anyone  who  violates  its  laws,  and  faces
      punishment as a result, can be said to be at risk of  persecution
      by  reason  of  religion.  In  the  Tribunal's  view,   such   an
      interpretation substantially distorts the purpose of the  Refugee
      Convention. The logic would mean that an Iranian thief, who faced
      imprisonment for that offence, could, without more,  successfully
      claim refugee status, since imprisonment is, in the  abstract,  a
      sufficiently serious consequence as to be capable of amounting to
      persecution. The fact that the law against theft, along with  the
      law against adultery or murder, has  its  ultimate  origin  in  a
      religious code does not make it fall within one  of  the  Refugee
      Convention heads.


  35. The contention that the Refugee Convention is engaged because the
      laws in Iran  have  a  'political  dimension'  is  also,  in  the
      Tribunal's view, thoroughly misconceived. Indeed, it  falls  foul
      of the proposition, categorically rejected  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Gomez (00TH02257), that "even in countries such as Colombia where
      the boundaries between the political and the  non-political  have
      been heavily distorted by the conduct of paramilitary bodies  and
      drug cartels, every case where such  a  body  persecutes  someone
      must be on account of an imputed political opinion". There are no
      Colombian-style drug cartels in Iran, so far as we are aware, but
      the point being made in Gomez is nevertheless relevant here.  All
      laws necessarily have to some extent a "political dimension"  but
      that does not mean that a person who transgresses  a  law  is  on
      that account being persecuted for a political reason.


  36. Ms  Braganza  sought  to  defend  the  Adjudicator's  finding  in
      relation to political opinion in two ways. First, she  said  that
      it was permissible to identify a mixture of politics and religion
      in the persecution. With respect, however,  that  argument  falls
      for the simple reason that if, as here, there is, upon  analysis,
      no rational basis for finding either a  religious  element  or  a
      political element to the alleged persecution,  there  is  nothing
      with which either such element can be 'mixed'.


  37. Ms Braganza's second point was that it was wrong to look  at  the
      motivation of the victim of persecution. What  mattered  was  the
      motivation of the persecutors.  Again,  however,  this  does  not
      advance the respondent's case. The respondent is not a person who
      holds any political  views  which  are  adverse  to  the  Iranian
      regime. He finds himself  in  his  present  position  because  he
      decided to satisfy his sexual appetite by engaging in  adulterous
      intercourse in what turned out to be a public place. There is  no
      evidence whatsoever that the Iranian regime regards him as having
      done this as some form of political protest. In reality, he is no
      more or less than the victim of a criminal  law  against  illicit
      sexual behaviour.


  38. Ms Braganza put the case on the basis that the political  opinion
      in this case is imputed. But, as we have already stated, there is
      no indication at all that the Iranian  regime  imputes  any  such
      opinion to this respondent.


  39.  Ms Braganza also submited that the 'disproportionate' nature  of
      the punishment facing the respondent is something  which   brings
      his case within the Refugee Convention. The  immediate  question,
      however, is: with  what  is  the  sentence  to  be  compared,  in
      arriving at a finding that it is 'disproportionate'? It is  trite
      refugee law that a criminal sanction can constitute  persecution,
      for a Refugee Convention reason, if  disproportionately  applied.
      For instance, where two people commit the same criminal  offence,
      under identical circumstances, but one is punished more  severely
      than the other because he or  she  belongs  to  an  ethnic  group
      viewed with disfavour by the authorities, the Refugee  Convention
      is engaged. Discrimination is, indeed, often of great  importance
      in determining  issues arising under the Refugee Convention.


  40. Here, however, we have no evidence that the respondent  is  being
      treated differently from others in the same position  as  himself
      in  Iran,  on  account  of  his  race,   religion,   nationality,
      membership of a particular social group or political opinion.  On
      the contrary, as the appellant's bundle of evidence makes  plain,
      he is one of a regrettably large number of individuals who,  each
      year, are sentenced to death for a variety of offences which,  if
      committed in many other countries,  would  not  carry  the  death
      sentence or, indeed, be criminal offences at all.


  41. The categorisation of the punishment  facing  the  respondent  as
      disproportionate must, accordingly,  depend  upon  comparing  his
      case with those who commit adultery in such other countries.  But
      how does such a comparison bring  the  case  within  the  Refugee
      Convention? The Adjudicator, at paragraph 55, considered that the
      'wholly disproportionate  consequences'  of  the  adultery  arose
      'because of the religious code and system of  policing  what  the
      Iranian authorities may considered to be social  deviancy'.  With
      respect to the Adjudicator, it is difficult  to  understand  what
      this means. The argument appears to be that, because adultery  is
      punished more  severely  in  one  country  than  another,  or  is
      punished at  all,  the  reason  for  the  disparity  between  the
      countries is to be found in the religious and/or political nature
      of the Iranian state, so that anyone who falls foul of the law is
      as such to  be  regarded  as  facing  persecution  by  reason  of
      religion or political opinion.

  42.  If that is the argument, we are back at paragraphs 34 to  38  of
      this determination.

  43. A State is entitled to subscribe to  a  legal  code  under  which
      those coming within its jurisdiction are entitled to  protection,
      on the ground that, if returned to their own countries, they face
      punishment  that  the  host  State  regards  as  abhorrent.  Such
      abhorrence will necessarily be rooted in the  difference  between
      what punishment (if any) the person could expect  to  receive  in
      the host State and what he faces in his home State. Such a  legal
      code is to be found in the ECHR, as introduced into our  domestic
      law by  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.  The  Refugee  Convention,
      however, has a narrower ambit, in that the disparity in treatment
      as between the different States cannot in itself cause one of the
      "Convention grounds" (race, religion etc.) to come into play,  if
      it would not otherwise do so. Were it to have such an  effect,  a
      prisoner who faced "death row" in one of the States  of  the  USA
      would be a refugee in the United  Kingdom,  whatever  his  crime.




  44. In order to see whether it might be  of  any  assistance  to  the
      respondent, the Tribunal  has  examined  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on
      Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee  Status.  Neither
      paragraphs 71-73 dealing with  religion,  nor  paragraphs  80-86,
      dealing  with  political  opinion,  afford  any  support  to  the
      propositions advanced on his behalf.


  45. In her submissions, Ms Braganza drew the Tribunal's attention  to
      material in the respondent's bundle,  dealing  with  prosecutions
      for adultery in certain Northern, Muslim states  of  Nigeria.  It
      is, of course, the case that  many  Muslim  countries  have  laws
      which  impose  severe  maximum   penalties   for   adultery   and
      fornication. One such is the Zina  Ordinance  in  Pakistan.  That
      Ordinance appears to be rooted in Islamic law, to the same extent
      as is the equivalent provision in the Iranian Penal Code. In this
      regard, it is, in the Tribunal's view, noteworthy  that  in  Shah
      and Islam [1999] Imm AR283, the House of Lords felt compelled  to
      take particular care in analysing whether women in Pakistan,  who
      might be charged  under  the  Zina  Ordinance,  fell  within  the
      Refugee Convention, as  being  members  of  a  particular  social
      group. On the approach taken by the Adjudicator  in  the  present
      case, there would have been no need  for  such  a  course  to  be
      adopted; the claimants could successfully have argued persecution
      on the grounds of religion.


  46. The Tribunal concludes that the Adjudicator was wrong in  law  to
      find that, on the facts of the case, the respondent  is  entitled
      to refugee status in the United Kingdom. The respondent's removal
      to  Iran  is,  as  we  have  already  stated,  precluded  by  the
      uncontested finding that the he would face treatment contrary  to
      Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, were he to be returned.





  47. The appeal of the Secretary of  State  on  the  asylum  issue  is
      accordingly allowed.


                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President
