
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |_M (Djebari                 |
|                           |        |Decision-Evidence) Algeria  |
|                           |        |CG [2003] UKIAT 00089       |
|On 20 August 2003          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|1st October 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Chairman)                              |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is a claimant's appeal from  the  determination  of  Mr  Brennan,
      Adjudicator, sitting on 22 August  2002.   By  that  determination  Mr
      Brennan dismissed the appeal of the claimant from  removal  directions
      and refusal of asylum by the Home Office.

2.    Leave was granted to appeal from the determination of the  Adjudicator
      on limited grounds.  Those grounds were whether, as a returning failed
      asylum seeker, the claimant would be at real risk of persecution for a
      Refugee or Human Rights Convention reason if he were to be returned to
      Algeria.  There were many findings on credibility by the  Adjudicator,
      but we do not need to refer to them for they are not  the  subject  of
      appeal.  It is sufficient to say that this appeal  is  concerned  with
      this claimant solely as a failed economic migrant to this country.

3.    He is an Algerian citizen who was born on 4 December 1967, he is  thus
      35-years of age.  He claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  on  8
      June 2000.  He claimed asylum on 15 June  2000  and  it  is  from  the
      refusal of that claim that the proceedings have sprung.

4.    The question of the treatment of failed asylum seekers to Algeria  has
      been before the Tribunal, and indeed the Court of Appeal, on occasions
      in the past.   This  matter  was  adjourned  so  that  further  expert
      evidence could be submitted on the topic, if such expert evidence were
      available.  The Tribunal does now have before  it  material  that  was
      available at the last adjourned hearing and also a further report.   I
      shall  be  referring  to  that  material  in  the   course   of   this
      determination.

5.    I shall begin by referring to the expert's report of Professor  Seddon
      which was initially compiled for another case,  the  case  of  Djebari
      [2002] EWCA Civ.813.  This report was compiled on  26  September  2001
      and the report is largely concerned with the risk on return of  failed
      asylum seekers.  I will quote from the passages that seem to us to  be
      relevant to the issues that arise in this  particular  case.   On  the
      final page of his report, which is page 97 of our  bundle,  Dr  Seddon
      states as follows:

           "Failed asylum seekers are highly likely,  on  their  return  to
           Algeria, to be detained by the immigration security services for
           further questioning as to the reasons for being  abroad  and  to
           having sought asylum.   They  are  usually  easily  detected  by
           virtue of the papers they carry which are often  issued  by  the
           Algerian Embassy in the country in  which  they  sought  asylum,
           which mark them out  from  other  Algerians  returning  after  a
           period of time abroad.  Those returning on an Algerian  laissez-
           passer  are,  therefore,  more  likely  to   be   detained   and
           interrogated than those holding a legitimate Algerian passport -
           although it should be emphasised that all failed asylum  seekers
           are at risk, and even someone with a  valid  passport,  who  has
           been refused entry to or returned from the  UK  is  at  risk  of
           being detained and questioned.


           This  observation  is  substantiated  by  several  reports  from
           personal friends and colleagues of mine who have  observed  this
           process on arrival  at  immigration  when  returning  themselves
           (after having been legitimately out of the country).  It is also
           confirmed by other 'specialists' familiar  with  the  procedures
           adopted - including Mr George Joffe and Dr Hugh Roberts, both of
           whom have provided expert witness reports  which  refer  to  the
           routine questioning and detention of  returnees  (failed  asylum
           seekers).


           Those who are detained for questioning may be held garde  a  vue
           (incommunicado) for up to a week or so in order to allow stories
           to be checked and records consulted.  The  Algerian  authorities
           have a  good  intelligence  and  record  keeping  system,  which
           usually allows them to identify those who have been, for example
           identified as suspected political  activists  with  one  of  the
           illegal  Islamist  movements  or  para-military  groups,  or  as
           deserters from the army.


           Individuals with suspicious or criminal  backgrounds  are  still
           highly likely to be held in detention or passed swiftly  to  the
           appropriate   military   authorities   and   detention   centres
           respectively.  In detention there remains  a  strong  risk  that
           they  will  be  subjected  to  brutal,  inhuman  and   degrading
           treatment.  Those without a file with the authorities, those not
           providing  any  basis  for  being  suspected  of   'undesirable'
           political affiliations, and those whose military service  status
           is regular, are less likely to be held for long,  and  are  less
           likely to be beaten or brutally treated while in detention.  The
           very fact, however, that they have sought asylum  in  the  first
           place puts them at risk and there are cases known  to  me  (from
           former political asylum cases which have been refused by the  UK
           Home Office) where returnees have been  subjected  to  prolonged
           detention and very rough interrogation."

6.    This report was supplemented  after  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Djebari by Professor Seddon in a  further  report  dated  13
      June 2002 in which he clarified certain  issues  that  arose  in  that
      case.  I do not need to identify what those issues are but they  refer
      back to Dr Seddon's initial report and  add  certain  detail  to  that
      report that was not previously given.  At page 117 of  the  bundle  in
      the fourth paragraph, Professor Seddon wrote as follows:

           "I understand that the Court of Appeal in the course of argument
           considered that the last paragraph of my first report  was  open
           to some ambiguity regarding the assessment of the degree of risk
           to Mr Djebari.  I stated that in my opinion that "those  without
           a file with the authorities, those not providing any  basis  for
           being suspected of  'undesirable'  political  affiliations,  and
           those whose military service status is regular, are less  likely
           to be held for long,  and  are  less  likely  to  be  beaten  or
           brutally treated while in detention".  I can only  add  to  this
           assessment as to relativeness that for persons in this  category
           there remains a real risk that they will be detained for further
           interrogation and a real risk of brutal treatment.


           Again, with  reference  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  comment  at
           paragraph 34 that the phrase used with such persons such  as  Mr
           Djebari without political  affiliation  and  irregular  military
           service status and without a criminal file are 'less likely'  to
           be held for long and 'less likely'  to  be  beaten  or  brutally
           treated does not evidence 'whether the degree of risk is  now  a
           real risk' but couches the risk in relative rather than positive
           terms.  I can state that, even for persons in this category  (of
           'less likely') there is in  my  opinion  a  real  risk  of  more
           prolonged detention and ill treatment.


           If find it difficult in regard to this matter to make  the  very
           fine distinctions that the Court of Appeal appears  to  feel  is
           possible, for example between a reasonable  likelihood,  a  real
           risk and a serious possibility, if these are intended to mark  a
           point on some scale of risk being applied  to  these  cases.   I
           attempted in  my  earlier  reports  to  indicate  a  distinction
           between 'more likely' and 'less likely'  and  the  criteria  for
           making this distinction.  I repeat that there is in  my  opinion
           in the case of  Mr  Djebari  and  indeed  in  the  case  of  all
           returnees a real  risk  of  more  prolonged  detention  and  ill
           treatment.  If Mr Djebari were to be held it could well  be  for
           longer than the maximum 12-day limit  pre-arraignment  detention
           allowed by Algerian law, (which is already far in excess of that
           required by international standards).   Longer  than  two  weeks
           without charge would seem unlikely.


           I take the point made by Lord Justice Schiemann at paragraph  34
           of his judgment to the effect that "it is not  helpful  for  the
           determination of the essential issues in this case to  say  that
           the risk of ill treatment is less than it was a few  years  ago"
           and note his statement to the effect that "the Tribunal will  be
           concerned with whether the risk now is a  real  risk,  not  with
           whether that risk is less than it was a  few  years  ago".   The
           risk of prolonged  detention  and  of  ill  treatment  while  in
           detention remains very real  in  cases  like  that  of  returned
           asylum seekers like Mr Djebari in Algeria today.


           As to the risk of prolonged detention  and  rough  interrogation
           for failed asylum seekers on return, I know directly of at least
           two cases of individuals who were refused  asylum  by  the  Home
           Office and were subject on return  to  prolonged  detention  and
           what could only be described as very rough  treatment.   I  have
           not been able to name these persons because of  the  risks  this
           might lead to for them  and  their  families,  (through  whom  I
           learned of  their  treatment),   given  that  reports  of  court
           hearings in the UK, such as the one  to  which  this  report  is
           directed, can be obtained and  passed  on  to  those  who  might
           misuse them under the present circumstances in Algeria.


           By rough treatment I mean serious physical and verbal abuse, the
           former including  beatings  and  other  forms  of  physical  ill
           treatment.  It is  unlikely  that  the  more  extreme  forms  of
           torture and physical ill treatment would  be  applied  to  those
           returning asylum seekers without a file  with  the  authorities,
           those  not  providing  any  basis   for   being   suspected   of
           'undesirable' political affiliations and  those  whose  military
           service status is regular."

7.    Professor Seddon then goes on to illustrate instances  of  severe  ill
      treatment by the Algerian police authorities, but in light of what  he
      says about the likelihood of what he describes  as  the  more  extreme
      forms of torture and physical ill treatment being meted out on someone
      in this claimant's position, I do not need to set out in  detail  what
      he there says.

8.    It would appear from what Professor Seddon says in  this  report  that
      he has evidence of what he says are at least two cases of  individuals
      who have been refused asylum by the Home Office who have been  subject
      to very rough treatment, which I take to mean from what he says in the
      next paragraph, beatings or other forms of physical ill treatment  but
      forms of ill treatment falling short of extreme forms  of  torture  or
      physical ill treatment.

9.    It is not easy, indeed it is impossible to say exactly what  Professor
      Seddon means by this degree of ill treatment, but also we do not  know
      what the background of the returned asylum  seekers  was  in  the  two
      cases, it may be that there are more cases but he says at  least  two,
      where such ill treatment occurred.  They may have been targeted by the
      authorities for some reasons, but we do not know whether they were.

10.   The second expert's report is one that was produced by recently by  Mr
      Emile Joffe for this Tribunal and this is dated 13 August 2003.   Much
      of this report is of only marginal  use  to  this  particular  hearing
      because it relied on Mr Mokhtari's assertions as to what had  happened
      to him in Algeria.  These no longer form part of the appeal.  Mr Joffe
      deals with the issues to be faced on return to  Algeria in his  report
      at the fifth page.

           "The Algerian authorities will be aware of his  expected  return
           because it will be necessary to apply for travel  documents  for
           him as he has no  passport.   If  Mr  Mokhtari  is  successfully
           returned to Algeria on travel documents obtained for him at  the
           Algerian Embassy in London the  border  authorities  in  Algeria
           will have been warned of  his  impending  arrival,  because  the
           delivery of such documents is only made upon approval  from  the
           security authorities in Algiers.  It is normal for such  persons
           to be interrogated upon arrival and, if there  are  grounds  for
           any kind of suspicion, they can be detained in custody.  This is
           the "garde vue"  procedure  used  in  Algeria,  confirmed  by  a
           magistrate after 12 days when it becomes a "mandate de depot. In
           practice the period is often arbitrarily lengthened  beyond  the
           12 days maximum without a magistrate being consulted, since  the
           border authorities, being  part  of  the  security  system,  are
           effectively unaccountable to the legal authorities.


           Quite  apart  from  Mr  Mokhtari's  specific  claims  of  regime
           hostility towards him, it should be borne in mind that detention
           in Algeria, as elsewhere in North Africa except perhaps Morocco,
           tends to be a testing experience to say the least.  The security
           services customarily use physical abuse and torture as  part  of
           the interrogation procedure so that he is very likely to be  ill
           treated.  There is also a pre-disposition to assume that persons
           returned on travel documents are a potential threat to  national
           security, so that the security services often  assume  they  may
           have information about Islamist networks abroad who are  engaged
           in supporting the violence inside Algeria.  If  Mr  Mokhtari  is
           suspected of this the ill treatment is likely to be severe ...


           This is known to other European governments to be the case.   In
           fact the process of return is  fraught  with  uncertainties  and
           danger in terms of the  potential  for  ill  treatment,  as  the
           German  government  admits.   Although  several  governments  do
           return Algerians now, all of them admit they do not monitor what
           happens after return. "

      The comment about the German  government  is  sourced  from  the  CIPU
      enquiry to France, Germany, Netherlands and Belgium of  February  2000
      where those countries authorities were asked:  "If you  have  returned
      asylum seekers any views/knowledge of how they have  been  treated  at
      the airport of  subsequently  on  return".   The  German  government's
      response was:

           "There are serious indications of torture in police custody  but
           no proof that an Algerian expelled from Germany has been subject
           to "state repression."


11.   In addition to those reports, there is before the Tribunal,  the  CIPU
      report on Algeria of April 2003, as  well  as  the  bulletin  on  that
      country of February 2003 which relies heavily on a Netherlands report.
       We will turn first to the CIPU report.  The relevant paragraphs begin
      at 6.153.  I will begin to quote at 6.154.

           "A 1998 report quoting an academic  at  the  Centre  for  Middle
           Eastern and Central Asian Studies  at  the  Australian  National
           University  stated  the  following.   "It  is  certain  that  an
           unsuccessful  asylum  applicant  who  has  a  high  profile   in
           opposition or  held  a  high  ranking  position  in  government,
           diplomatic corps  or  the  armed  forces  would  be  subject  to
           punitive measures by the state.  And in the light of the  above,
           if the unsuccessful applicant is neither known to the regime nor
           his asylum application, he or she categorically faces no  threat
           to their life or freedom.  Algeria is a country of  hundreds  of
           thousands of migrants and ex-patriots and movement  by  citizens
           is not in itself cause  for  concern  or  for  state  suspicion.
           Should the state have information on returning  asylum  seekers,
           especially  those  with  no  history  of  political  opposition,
           Islamic affiliation or criminal activities, some  irritations  I
           should imagine should be expected.  Asylum is not  always  about
           politics, it has economic motivations.  The latter category does
           no necessarily invite state suspicion or retaliation.  I see  no
           problem with Algerian seekers of asylum, which molre often  than
           not are motivated by economic concerns, returning  home  without
           being retaliated against by the state."

           At 6.155:  "Since the 1990s  European  countries  have  returned
           hundreds  of  such  persons  to  Algeria,  either  under  formal
           agreements or on a case by case basis.  An Algerian has no  need
           to  fear  persecution  on  return  solely  on  the  grounds   of
           submitting an asylum application. "

      The sources for paragraph 6.155 and the assertions made in it are  the
      report on Algeria by the Council of  Immigration  of  the  Embassy  of
      Canada in Paris of May 2001 and the general country report on  Algeria
      for  December  2002  by  the  Netherlands  Department  of  Immigration
      Affairs.

12.   To continue from the CIPU report:

           "6.156.  Algerian nationals who return to  Algeria  after  their
           request for asylum is rejected  in  another  country  are  often
           interrogated upon their entry into Algeria  to  determine  their
           identity and check whether there are  any  outstanding  criminal
           proceedings or unfulfilled military service.  It can happen that
           people are held for several days.  In the last couple  of  years
           there have been no known cases in any European country of former
           asylum seekers who  were  maltreated  nor  tortured  upon  their
           return."


      This was according again to the Netherlands report cited above.

13.   At 6.157:

           "Another  report  stated  that  while  none  of  the   countries
           concerned appears to have carried out a  formal  study  of  what
           happens to "deportees", they all believe they would  have  heard
           had persons who were returned  to  Algeria  encountered  serious
           difficulties.   Deportees  sometimes   contact   the   Embassies
           concerned to sort out administrative  matters  relating  to  the
           time they spent  in  the  other  country,  and  none  have  ever
           complained of their treatment by Algerian authorities upon their
           return to Algeria.  It could also be expected that relatives  of
           deportees would in some cases make it  known  if  a  person  had
           suffered at the hands of the Algerian  authorities.   There  has
           been no incident of this sort ever brought to the  attention  of
           the Embassies concerned.  The UNHCR office in  Algiers  and  the
           Algerian Foreign Ministry  reported  that  persons  returned  to
           Algeria do not encounter problems. "

      The source for this is the Canadian Report already cited above  and  a
      further Canadian report of 24 January 2002.

14.   Thus against this background the Tribunal must consider whether  there
      is a real risk of persecution or Article 3 harm to Mr  Mokhtari  as  a
      returned failed economic migrant and failed asylum seeker if  he  were
      to be repatriated to Algeria.

15.   First, what is likely to happen to him immediately  upon  his  return?
      It seems to us the answer to this is clear; he will be detained at the
      airport and he will be interrogated.  That  may  be  the  end  of  the
      matter.  On a balance of probabilities we would hold it likely that it
      would be the end of the matter.  Even Mr Joffe states that it is  only
      where suspicion is excited that a person is likely to be detained  for
      any greater period of time than that required  for  his  identity  and
      other particulars to be clarified.  However, in this Tribunal  we  are
      not concerned with balance of probability but with real risk  or  real
      likelihood and we consider in light of what is said in the CIPU report
      and the  report  of  Professor  Seddon  that  there  must  be  a  real
      likelihood that Mr Mokhtari's detention may be  for  a  longer  period
      than that and that he may be detained incommunicado for  a  period  of
      some days whilst enquiries are made into him.

      He is not a person  with  a  political  or  Islamist  past.   We  must
      therefore consider what risks of physical ill treatment he would  run.
      It seems to us that the evidence of Professor Seddon is that he  might
      encounter a beating, he might encounter other forms  of  physical  ill
      treatment, but he will not be likely to be severely tortured or to  be
      seriously physically ill treated.  At least that is how  we  view  his
      report.

16.   It may therefore be that even if one takes Professor  Seddon's  report
      at its highest, he will not be at real risk of harm so  severe  as  to
      contravene the relevant Articles of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the
      Human Rights Convention.  But we do not feel it appropriate  to  leave
      the matter there.  We should consider what  likelihood   there  is  in
      reality that he will suffer any sort  of  physical  maltreatment  that
      this Tribunal should recognise?  Evidently  the  possibility  of  such
      maltreatment exists.  Professor Seddon is aware of two cases where  it
      has occurred.  But as against that, we  must  also  pay  heed  to  the
      widespread  experience  of  many  western  countries  who  have   been
      returning failed asylum seekers to Algeria over a long period of time.
       We consider it inconceivable that if there was any real risk  of  ill
      treatment on a more than isolated  basis  of  returned  failed  asylum
      seekers that word would not have got out by now.

17.   Persons have been returning to Algeria in substantial numbers, not  of
      their own free will but as failed asylum  seekers  from  many  western
      countries for many  years  now.   In  the  CIPU  report  hundreds  are
      specified.  We would venture to suggest from our experience  that  the
      number must be thousands by now,  from  all  the  countries  that  are
      returning persons to that country.   It would be astonishing, if there
      were any real risk of serious physical ill treatment of  these  people
      that no word of it has reached any of these  Embassies.   And  yet  it
      appears that none has.

18.   We do not say that Professor Seddon is  incorrect  in  recounting  the
      detail that he has of the specific cases that are known to him.  We do
      not know anything, as we have already pointed out,  of  the  suspected
      political background of the two cases that he has instanced of serious
      ill treatment.  No doubt such isolated cases do occur but that is  not
      to say that in this case there is a real risk of  such  ill  treatment
      being inflicted on Mr Mokhtari.   This  Tribunal  is  here  to  assess
      whether there is a real risk or real likelihood  of  serious  physical
      harm eventuating and we consider on all the  material  that  has  been
      placed before us that even though there is a real risk that he will be
      detained under the gard a vue procedures, there is not a real risk  of
      the sort of physical harm that engages either  the  Refugee  or  Human
      Rights Convention being visited upon him.

19.   For these reasons we consider that this appeal must be dismissed.




                                                   His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                                              Vice President
