
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |               |                   |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision       |_G                 |
|                  |                      |number:        |(Psychiatric/Psycol|
|                  |                      |               |ogical Evidence    |
|                  |                      |               |Only on            |
|                  |                      |               |Abnormalities) DR  |
|                  |                      |               |Congo [2003] UKIAT |
|                  |                      |               |00054              |
|Heard on:         |30th July 2003        |Appeal number: |                   |
|Date typed:       |31st July 2003                                           |
|Date promulgated: |22nd August 2003                                         |
|                                                                            |
|The IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                   |
|MR.  M L JAMES                                                              |
|MR. ANVER JEVANJEE                                                          |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. M. Halfpenny, of Immigration Aid Unit.
For the Respondent:          Mr. B. O'Leary, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.

1.    The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo
     (formerly Zaire) (DRC), aged about 31 years. She arrived in the  United
     Kingdom on 2nd April 2002. She has appealed, with  leave,  against  the
     determination of Mr. J P McClure,  an  Adjudicator,  who  (following  a
     hearing on 28th February 2003 at Aldine House Manchester) dismissed her
     appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  against  the  Respondent's
     decision of 22nd May 2002 to give directions for her removal to the DRC
     as an illegal entrant.
1.2   The Appellant's asylum claim was  certified.  The  Adjudicator  upheld
     the certificate. Accordingly, the appeal before us relates only to  the
     Appellant's human rights appeal.

2.    The  issue  before  us  is  whether,  given  the  Appellant's  medical
     condition, her removal would be in breach of her rights under Article 3
     and Article 8 (physical and moral integrity). She is an HIV sufferer.

3.    At  paragraphs  40  and  41  of  the  Determination,  the  Adjudicator
     referred to the Tribunal's  Determination  in  the  case  of  Tientcheu
     [2002] UKIAT 05877, where the Tribunal considered the  availability  of
     treatment for those suffering from HIV / AIDS in the Republic of Congo.



4.    It is apparent, from paragraphs 40 and 41 of the  Determination,  that
     the Adjudicator placed reliance on Tientcheu when  considering  whether
     treatment would be available in the DRC (he made specific reference  to
     the observations in that case as to the availability of  hospital  beds
     for those suffering from HIV). However, that case concerned a different
     country. It concerned the Republic of Congo, which has its  capital  in
     Brazzaville, as the first sentence of that Determination  makes  clear.
     The Appellant is, as we have stated, from the DRC, with its capital  in
     Kinshasa, and she would be returned to the DRC.

5.    At the hearing before us, it was common ground that the  Determination
     could not stand, for the reason given above.

6.1   Ms. Halfpenny referred us to the  medical  evidence.  The  Appellant's
     CD4 count is about 220. She is  on  anti-retroviral  treatment  but  is
     shortly expected to change her medication. Ms. Halfpenny  asked  us  to
     consider the Appellant's present condition, the effect  of  withdrawing
     the treatment she  is  currently  receiving  and  the  support  she  is
     currently getting. As her health worsens, she  becomes  more  and  more
     reliant on the support she is receiving. She submitted that the  United
     Kingdom has assumed responsibility for her. She is not responding  well
     to her current treatment and, in a few months' time, she is expected to
     undergo a change in her treatment.

6.2   The Appellant has  an  unusual  type  of  infection,  with  low  blood
     platelets. She is at risk of secondary infection (which means that  she
     is at risk of infections such as tuberculosis) and therefore at risk of
     bleeding to death (page B8 of the Appellant's bundle refers).

6.3   Although the Appellant  is  from  Kinshasa,  it  was  Ms.  Halfpenny's
     understanding that she has lost contact with her family members. At the
     time of her departure from the DRC, her mother and step-father were  in
     Kinshasa, as well as  her  son.  Her  son  was  living  with  relative.
     According to her witness statement, her brother fled the  DRC  and  her
     sister has been  killed.  Her  father  is  dead.  She  has  friends  in
     Kinshasa, but, in Ms. Halfpenny's submission, there  was  no  guarantee
     that they would be willing  or  able  (financially  and  otherwise)  to
     support someone who is suffering from  her illness. Furthermore, HIV is
     stigmatised in the DRC (pages H15 to H33, in particular, H17, refer).

6.4   The DRC is a country which has been through several years of  war  and
     on-going strife. It is still war-torn. There is a complete  absence  of
     medical treatment. Millions of people are displaced. There is a lack of
     shelter, a lack of food and a lack of basic  necessities.  Even  before
     the conflict, the health system was already failing to  provide  health
     care, as is evidenced by the CIPU Report. The system  appears  to  have
     completely disintegrated now.

6.5   Ms. Halfpenny referred us to  various  documents  in  the  Appellant's
     bundle (for example, pages H1, H5, H14), which she submitted show  that
     treatment for HIV is not valuable in the DRC.  Page  H14,  which  is  a
     document from Oxfam, states that 2.5 million people in Kinshasa live on
     less than US$ 1 per day. This means that the  Appellant  would  not  be
     able to purchase the drugs which she needs. Since the Appellant is  not
     going to be  removed  imminently,  her  reliance  on  the  support  she
     receives in the United Kingdom will increase.

6.3   Paragraph 4.38 of the CIPU Report states  that  anti-retroviral  drugs
     can  be  purchased  from  private  individuals.  In   Ms.   Halfpenny's
     submission, this means that the medication would only be  available  on
     the black market  and  does  not  amount  to  "access"  to  medication.
     Furthermore, she requires care and sophisticated monitoring.

7.1   Mr. O'Leary did not dispute that  the  DRC  is  in  a  state  of  war.
     However, the DRC is a large country and the war is in the eastern  part
     of the country. The documents  to  which  Ms.  Halfpenny  had  referred
     relate to the eastern part of the DRC.   These documents were therefore
     not relevant to the Appellant's claim, because she would be returned to
     Kinshasa. Kinshasa itself has not seen conflict since 1998.

7.2   Page H14 refers to an inability of the local  population  to  purchase
     medical treatment or drugs. However, according to the judgement of  the
     Court of Appeal in  ex parte K, an inability to purchase drugs does not
     means that a claim under the ECHR can succeed.

7.3   Mr. O'Leary referred us to the judgement  of  the  European  Court  of
     Human Rights (ECtHR) in D v. United  Kingdom.  He  submitted  that  the
     Appellant does not fall within this exceptional category.

8.1   In reply, Ms. Halfpenny submitted that the applicant  in  ex  parte  K
     was from Uganda. There was clear evidence in that case  that  treatment
     was available in Uganda, although the applicant would not  be  able  to
     afford the treatment.  On the other hand, the CIPU report for  the  DRC
     states  that  anti-retroviral  drugs   are   available   from   private
     individuals, which means that the Appellant would  have  to  pay  black
     market prices in order to obtain them.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the
     Appellant would be able to "access" medication if   the  medication  is
     only available through private individuals.  The  opening  sentence  in
     paragraph 4.38 of the CIPU report states that, in general, there is  no
     medical treatment or care available for persons suffering from AIDS  in
     the DRC.  Some  of  the  drugs  she  requires  have  only  just  become
     available in the United Kingdom. They would not  be  available  in  the
     DRC. In the D case, it was recognised that the applicant  had  a  close
     relative in St. Kitts but there was no guarantee that that person would
     undertake the care of  the  applicant.  People  who  cannot  even  feed
     themselves in the DRC would not undertake the care of the Appellant. To
     withdraw the  treatment  and  support  which  the  Appellant  has  been
     receiving in the United Kingdom would make her situation worse than  if
     she had never received it in the first place.

8.2   Paragraphs 3.8, 5.39 and 5.40 of the  CIPU  report  show  that  it  is
     dangerous for women to move about in Kinshasa at night.  The  Appellant
     is therefore a very vulnerable young person who would be at  risk  even
     in moving around freely. By the time removal takes place, she would  be
     even more vulnerable.

9.    We reserved  our  determination.  We  have  decided  to  dismiss   the
     appeal. We now give our reasons.

10.    As  stated  above,  it  was  common  ground  that  the  Adjudicator's
     Determination cannot stand. We therefore consider  the  Article  3  and
     Article 8 claims ourselves. It is trite law that  we  are  entitled  to
     take into account all of the evidence placed  before  us,  to  reach  a
     decision.

11.1  With regard to the  Appellant's  medical  condition  and  the  medical
     treatment and care she needs, we note that:

      (i)   The letter at page B8 from Dr. F J Vilar, Consultant  Physician,
           shows that she was diagnosed as being a HIV  sufferer  in  April
           2002, when her CD4 count was 210. The normal  range  is  between
           500 and 1500. Her main problem was bleeding  - secondary to very
           low platelets (clotting cells). With treatment,  her  CD4  count
           increased to 320. According to the  letter  dated  5th  February
           2003 (page B9), Dr. Vilar states that her CD4 count was slightly
           lower than previously, at 220. The letter from Dr. Vilar at page
           G1, however, indicates that her CD4 count in March 2002 was 492.



      (ii)  The Appellant is currently  taking  her  second  combination  of
           drugs called Trizivir (Abacavir, Lamivudine and Zidovudine). She
           is already developing evidence of drug  failure.  This  is  very
           suggestive that she is starting  to  have  virological  failure.
           This would mean that she would need to have a complete switch of
           the drugs she is taking and commence her third combination.  The
           time scale Dr. Vilar gives for the  Appellant's  switch  to  her
           third regime is before the end of the current year.

      (iii) The drugs she is likely to need as her  third  combination  will
           include medications such as Tenofovir, Kaletra and Didanosine.

      (iv)  As is  so  often  the  case  with  HIV  sufferers,  the  medical
           evidence before us shows that the Appellant needs medication  as
           well as specialist monitoring.  She  is  more  unfortunate.  Dr.
           Vilar describes her as one  of  the  unlucky  patients  who  has
           developed drug failure.

11.2  If the Appellant  does  not  receive  the  medication  and  specialist
     mentoring that she needs, then Dr. Vilar states (page B8, letter  dated
     30th October 2002) that she would be "most likely" to have the  problem
     with low platelets again, which could lead to  life-threatening  bleed,
     her CD4 count will continue to drop and she "will inevitably catch AIDS
     and die". Her condition will lead to death in the short to medium term.
     At page G1, Dr. Vilar states that doctors who look after  HIV  patients
     without adequate experience have higher  mortality  on  these  patients
     than experienced doctors.

11.3  With regard to the availability of treatment, we note that:

      (i)   Dr. Vilar states (page  G1)  that  he  is  not  aware  that  the
           Appellant's second combination will  be  available  anywhere  in
           Africa and but states that Abacavir in particular  will  not  be
           available.

      (ii)  In relation to the third  combination,  Dr.  Vilar  states  that
           Tenofovir is only very recently available in the United  Kingdom
           and is not available in developing countries; he does not  think
           that  Kaletra   is  available  in  the  DRC  and  he  says  that
           Didanosine is likely to be available at high cost in the  United
           Kingdom.

      (iii) There is a letter at pages G2 to G4 from a Ms. L. Shentall,  who
           is a Specialised Service Manager for  George  House  Trust.  She
           states that it is her experience that the drugs comprised in the
           third combination which the Appellant would receive, as well  as
           the combination she is currently taking, are  not  available  in
           the DRC at all. Nor,  she  says,  would  the  Appellant  receive
           medical care which she  says  must  be  administered  correctly.
           However, we do not know what Ms. Shentall bases her  opinion  as
           to availability on, save that she attached, by way of Appendix 2
           to her letter, various documents about the DRC.  Almost  all  of
           these documents relate to the war-striven areas of the DRC.  The
           only exception is the document  at  pages  G12  and  G13,  which
           mentions the efforts of the DRC government to combat  AIDS/  HIV
           amongst police officers and the army.  These  documents  do  not
           assist the Appellant's case.

            For these reasons, we are not prepared to  place  much  reliance
           on Ms. Shentall's letter.

       (iv)   Ms.  Halfpenny  referred  us  to  various  documents  in   the
        Appellant's bundle, to support her assertion  that  the  medication
        and care which the Appellant would need would not be  available  in
        the DRC. However, we agree with Mr. O'Leary that these documents do
        not  assist  the  Appellant's  case  because  they  relate  to  the
        situation in the war-striven parts of the DRC. For example:

                 -     page H1 refers to  Bukavu,  which  is  right  on  the
               border with Rwanda, which is at the heart  of  the  contested
               area in the civil war. Furthermore, this report  states  that
               the area is war-torn, which Kinshasa is not.
            -    pages H15 and H17 (which refer to  stigmatisation  and  the
               medical consequences) also relate to  the  war-torn  area  in
               eastern DRC. This is evident from the fact that the  document
               refers to Kinyarwanda-speaking attackers. Kinyarwanda is  the
               language of Rwanda.
            -    pages H17 and H18 again refer to soldiers and militiamen.

      Against this, we note that:

      (v)   The CIPU Report (paragraph 4.38) states that, in general,  there
           is no medical treatment  or  care  available  in  hospitals  and
           clinics from people suffering from AIDS in the DRC. There are no
           specialised hospitals or centres for the treatment of  AIDS  but
           some  hospitals  in  Kinshasa  admit  AIDS  sufferers  for   the
           treatment of secondary infections. However, drugs imported  from
           Europe can be bought from private individuals. The treatment  is
           based on the Tri-therapy of the  combination  of  three  of  the
           following drugs: Retrivir, AZT, DDI, Zerit and Stavidine.

11.4  In order to determine whether the  Appellant's  removal  would  engage
     her rights under Article 3, we need to consider  the  decision  of  the
     European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in Bensaid v. The United Kingdom
     [2002[ INLR 325. We think it necessary to repeat what the court said at
     paragraph 40 of the judgement:

      40.   The Court accepts the seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
           condition. Having regard however to the high  threshold  set  by
           Article 3, particularly where the  case  does  not  concern  the
           direct  responsibility  of  the  Contracting   State   for   the
           infliction of harm, the Court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the  applicant's  removal  in  these
           circumstances would be contrary to the standard of Article 3. It
           does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of the  D.  case
           (cited above) where the applicant was in the final stages  of  a
           terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical  care  or
           family support on expulsion to St. Kitts.

      In Bensaid, the Court also  decided  that  removal  would  not  breach
     Article 8 of the Convention.

11.5  Although we acknowledge that the Appellant's condition appears  to  be
     worse than many other HIV sufferers, it has to be borne  in  mind  that
     she  has  not  developed  full-blown  AIDS.  We  appreciate  that   the
     combination  of  drugs  comprising  her  second  combination  are   not
     specifically mentioned in paragraph 4.38 of the CIPU  report  as  being
     available from private individuals.  However,  she  would  be  able  to
     obtain some anti-retroviral treatment, albeit from private individuals.
     This is, of course far from ideal and may well mean that she would have
     to pay a high price for them. However, we consider that it  does  still
     mean that she will have access to medication.  We  bear  in  mind  that
     there is a real risk that a switch in her medication  from  the  second
     combination which she is taking or, indeed, from the third combination,
     to the medication which is available in the DRC  would  result  in  her
     condition deteriorating. We recognise that page H14 of the  Appellant's
     bundle states that 2.5 million people in Kinshasa live on less than US$
     1 per day. We do not know the total population of Kinshasa but we  have
     no reason to doubt that a very high proportion  of  the  population  in
     Kinshasa live on very small earnings. However, a claim under  the  ECHR
     cannot succeed on the basis of an inability to pay for  treatment.   We
     accept that general living conditions in the DRC are very difficult. We
     accept that, in Kinshasa, the Appellant will not  have  access  to  the
     sophisticated monitoring which she  receives  in  the  United  Kingdom.
     Indeed, the likelihood is that her  condition  will  not  be  monitored
     adequately, if at all. However, if the Appellant does develop secondary
     infection, then the CIPU report states that some hospitals in  Kinshasa
     admit AIDS sufferers for the treatment of secondary  infections.  There
     is no reason to suppose that she would not be able to receive treatment
     for secondary infection. We have no reason to doubt that the withdrawal
     of the treatment and support which the Appellant receives in the United
     Kingdom will make her condition worse than if she had never received it
     in the first place.

11.6  We agree with Mr. O'Leary that the Appellant's case  falls  far  short
     of the circumstances of the applicant in D v. U.K.  for  the  following
     reasons:

      (i)   In the D case, the applicant's CD count was at 10 and  had  been
        at that level for 18 months. On the other hand, the Appellant's  CD
        count is at about 220.

      (ii)  In the D case, the applicant had full  blown  AID  with  a  life
        expectancy of 8 months even with medication. On the other hand, the
        Appellant has not developed full-blown AIDS.

      (iii) In the D case, the applicant had been suffering  from  secondary
        infection, with bacterial infections, and weight loss and  fatigue.
        He was clearly weak and close to death. Indeed, death was imminent.
        On the other hand,  the  Appellant  has  not  reached  that  stage.
        Although she might suffer from secondary infection if she is  taken
        off her medication, her case cannot be  compared  to  that  of  the
        applicant in  the D case.

      (iv)  In the  D  case,  there  was  no  treatment  available  for  the
        applicant in St. Kitts.  In this  case,  there  is  some  treatment
        available  in  Kinshasa.  Drugs  can  be  purchased  from   private
        individuals, although this is not ideal. Some hospitals in Kinshasa
        admit patients for the treatment of secondary infection.  In so far
        as support is concerned, the Appellant said at the  hearing  before
        the Adjudicator that she has friends  in  Kinshasa.  Ms.  Halfpenny
        informed us that it was her understanding that  the  Appellant  has
        lost contact with her family in Kinshasa.  However,  this  has  not
        been adduced to us by way of evidence, as such. In any  event,  she
        has friends, by her own evidence. There is  no  reason  to  suppose
        that they would not be willing or able to assist her. We  recognise
        that the applicant in the D case had a close relative in St.  Kitts
        and that the ECtHR recognised that there was no guarantee that that
        person would undertake the care  of  the  applicant.  However,  the
        applicant  in   that  case  was  in  a  very  serious  state.   The
        Appellant's condition is very far removed from that.

11.7  We would make clear that we take into account the fact  that,  by  the
     time the  Respondent  is  able  to  effect  returns  to  the  DRC,  the
     Appellant's condition is likely to deteriorate and that,  consequently,
     her reliance on the support which she receives is likely  to  increase.
     However, given that her present  condition  is  far  removed  from  the
     applicant in the D. case,  that  she  would  be  able  to  access  some
     medication (albeit from private individuals) and that she would be able
     to obtain treatment for secondary infection, we are not satisfied  that
     her removal would be reasonably  likely  to  result  in  her  condition
     deteriorating to such an extent that the high threshold for a breach of
     Article 3 would be reached.

12.1  We now turn to consider  the  Article  8  claim,  physical  and  moral
     integrity. As we have said, there is a real risk that a switch  in  the
     Appellant's medication from the second combination which she is  taking
     or, indeed, from the third combination,  to  the  medication  which  is
     available in the DRC would result in her  condition  deteriorating.  We
     proceed on the assumption that her condition would deteriorate  to  the
     extent that her rights under Article 8(1)  are  engaged.  We  therefore
     consider whether the interference of her rights under Article 8(1)  (by
     way of her removal to the DRC) would  be  proportionate  under  Article
     8(2) - there being no issue as to whether the interference would be  in
     accordance with the law, whether the reason for the interference  comes
     within one of the (exhaustive) list of reason in Article 8(2).

12.2  Neither party at the  hearing  before  us  actually  addressed  us  on
     proportionality, although Ms. Halfpenny said in opening that she relied
     on Article 8. We consider proportionality on the evidence before us.

12.3  Our observations in paragraph 11.5 above apply  in  the  consideration
     of proportionality. We do not repeat those  observations  but  make  it
     clear that we take them into account.

12.4  We also take into account the fact that immigration control is a  very
     weighty  consideration.  Not  only  is  it  the  case  that  this   has
     consistently been mentioned by the Tribunal in  several  cases,  it  is
     also clear, from paragraph 54  of  the  judgment  in  D  v.  U.K.,  the
     importance which the  ECtHR  places  on  a  State's  right  to  control
     immigration. We consider it appropriate to set out paragraph 54 of  the
     judgement:

                 Against this background the Court  emphasises  that  aliens
           who have served  their  prison  sentences  and  are  subject  to
           expulsion cannot in principle claim any entitlement to remain on
           the territory of a Contracting State in  order  to  continue  to
           benefit from  medical,  social  and  other  forms  of  assurance
           provided by the expelling State during their stay in prison.

                 (our emphasis).

12.5  Although the reference in paragraph 54 of the  judgement  was  to  the
     receipt of medical services and other benefits by aliens whilst serving
     a prison sentence in  the  expelling  country,  we  consider  that  the
     principle  is  applicable  by  analogy  where  aliens  receive  medical
     treatment in the United Kingdom whilst  waiting  for  a  resolution  of
     their immigration  status. Where removal has been found not  to  be  in
     breach of Article 3, the immigration status  of  an  individual  whilst
     receiving medical treatment in the United Kingdom which then forms  the
     basis of a claim under Article 8 is a relevant consideration.  However,
     it will be relevant also to bear in mind any delay on the part  of  the
     State in reaching a decision on that person's application for leave  to
     remain in the country.

12.6  In this particular case, we note that the  Appellant  arrived  in  the
     United Kingdom on 2nd April 2002, claiming asylum on the same  day.  In
     the same month, she was admitted into hospital.  The  letter  from  Dr.
     Vilar (page B8) states that her main problem at that time was "bleeding
     - secondary to very low platelets (clotting cells)". This suggests that
     she was already quite  ill  at  that  stage.  She  has  been  receiving
     treatment ever since. This means that, for  almost  the  entire  period
     since her arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  she  has  been  receiving
     treatment as a person  whose  immigration  status  was  uncertain.  The
     decision by the Secretary of State on her application  for  asylum  was
     made on 22nd May 2002 -  that  is,  less  than  two  months  after  her
     arrival. These are relevant  considerations  in  deciding  whether  the
     interference with her  Article  8(1)  rights  strikes  a  fair  balance
     between the demands of the general interest of the  community  and  the
     rights of the individual. We consider that the wider interests  of  the
     community in maintaining immigration control is a very strong factor in
     this particular case.

12.7  We would make clear that,  in  our  consideration  of  the  Article  8
     claim, we have taken into account  the  fact  that,  by  the  time  the
     Respondent is able to  effect  returns  to  the  DRC,  the  Appellant's
     condition is likely to deteriorate and that, consequently, her reliance
     on the support which she receives is likely to increase.   However,  we
     also take into account  the  fact  that  the  difficulty  in  effecting
     removal in this case is caused  by  a  combination  of  two  factors  -
     firstly, the fact that the Appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
     without valid travel documents; and secondly, the fact that  there  are
     difficulties at present obtaining travel documents from the DRC Embassy
     in London.

13.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
     removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
     control.

      Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is DISMISSED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 8th August 2003
