
      KM (Rape - Female Court - Gender Guidelines) Sierra Leone [2003]
UKIAT 00121


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 16 October  2003
Determination promulgated: 30 October 2003


                                   Before:

                                 Ms K Eshun
                                Ms S M  Ward



                                  Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                 Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leone, appeals with leave against  the
decision of an adjudicator, Mr K S H Miller   promulgated on 24 April   2003
 and dismissing her  appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  5  August
2002 to refuse asylum.


2.   At the hearing  before  us  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  P
Ahluwalia and the Respondent was represented by  Ms  Sigley,    Home  Office
Presenting Officer.

3. The Appellant's claim  was that, from 1997 she was a member  of  the  RUF
in Sierra Leone. In 1999 she was captured by a rival  faction  and  detained
until she managed to escape. She was ill treated. After her escape  she  was
arrested by members of the Civil Defence Force on suspicion of  having  been
involved with the rebels.  She  escaped  from  them  too.  Her  husband  had
campaigned with her for the RUF party but he had been shot dead  by  members
of the Civil Defence Force. Her daughter had been mutilated  by  the  rebels
and died. Her son was missing. The  Respondent  did  not  believe  that  the
Appellant had been involved with the RUF as she  claimed.  He  rejected  her
claim.  The Adjudicator, on appeal,  found the central aspects of her  story
to be "wholly incredible" and dismissed her appeal.

4. Before us Ms Ahluwalia submitted that the Adjudicator has been  incorrect
to go ahead with  the  hearing  after  the  Appellants  representatives  had
requested  an  all  female  court.  He  had  failed  to  follow  the  Gender
Guidelines, she submitted.  The  evidence  of  Dr  Turner  showed  that  the
Appellant was disadvantaged  by  not  having  a  female  court  as  she  had
requested. Furthermore, she submitted, the Adjudicator had failed  to  cover
the rape of the  Appellant  in  his  determination.  He  did  not  make  any
findings in respect of this central aspect of her case. He  had  dealt  with
her involvement with the RUF but not with what  occurred  to  the  Appellant
and her family. Importantly he had  made  no  findings  in  respect  of  her
scarring; this was a significant matter because the scarring was a risk  for
her on her return. It marked her out as a person who had aided the rebels.

5. Ms Sigley submitted that  there was no obligation on the IAA  to  provide
an all female court. Furthermore there was no evidence before  the  Tribunal
to show that the Appellant had been in any  way  prejudiced  by  having  her
appeal heard by a male adjudicator. She had not been  questioned  about  the
rape at  the hearing  and there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  this  was
because there was  a  male  adjudicator.  The  Adjudicator  had  made  clear
findings about the rape in the course of his determination -  paragraphs  15
(iii) through to (v). He had concluded that it was  not  credible  that  the
Appellant would have joined the RUF if she and her family had  been  treated
in the way she alleged. Dr Turner did not come to any conclusion one way  or
the other about the rape. He had said in his report that this was  a  matter
for the adjudicator. The doctor's evidence did not assist the  Appellant  in
this  regard.  It  was  clear  that,  in  any  event,  the  Adjudicator  had
considered the doctor's report;  particularly  he  made  mention  of  it  in
paragraph  16.  Regarding  the  scarring,  Ms  Sigley  conceded   that   the
Adjudicator had not set out any conclusions specifically  on  this  subject.
However, he had  clearly  rejected  the  central  plank  of  her  story  and
therefore the scarring made no difference to the outcome of the appeal.

6. Ms Ahluwalia,  in  reply,  submitted  that  the  scarring  was  important
because it marked the Appellant  out as rebel. In response  to  a   question
from  the Tribunal, however, she said that neither she nor her  client  knew
what the letters "AKK" tattooed on the Appellant's arm meant.  She  directed
us, however, to  page 233 of the Appellant's large bundle which referred  to
an incident when RUF rebels had rounded up some 40  young  people  (  mostly
men)  and cut the initials "RUF" into  their  chests  with  a  razor  blade.
Girls had suffered this treatment and had  been  raped  by  the  rebels.  Ms
Ahluwalia also submitted that it would  breach  the  Appellant's  Article  8
rights to return her to Sierra Leone. She had no family there any  more  and
the medical report showed  that  her  health  would  be  prejudiced  by  her
return.

7. We have carefully considered Ms Ahluwalia's submissions and  the  grounds
of appeal and have concluded that there is no merit in any of  them.    This
may be an appropriate opportunity for the Tribunal  to  set  out  its  views
regarding requests  for  "all  female"  courts.  There  is  nothing  in  the
Procedure Rules or elsewhere which requires the IAA to  accede  to  requests
for an "all female" court simply on the basis of  such  a  request.  Nor  is
there anything in the Gender Guidelines to require the IAA to grant  such  a
request. We should point out too  that  it  is  important  to  consider  the
practical difficulties involved in acceding  to  such  requests  -   it  can
present  considerable  organizational  and  administrative  difficulties  to
ensure that the  adjudicator,  court  usher,  interpreter  and  Home  Office
Presenting Officer are all female. That having been said, we wish  to  state
that there may on very  rare occasions be circumstances where   there  is  a
real risk of  a lack of a fair hearing  caused by the gender composition  of
the persons in the hearing room. However we feel  that  such   circumstances
will be rare. In most cases we would expect that even if a female  applicant
were to be embarrassed about giving evidence  regarding a sexual assault  in
the presence of one or more men, it  would  usually  be  possible  for  such
evidence to be given in written form.  As regards cross examination in  such
circumstances, the Presenting Officer may agree not  to  cross  examine  the
appellant  or may agree that questions could be  put  to  the  appellant  in
writing. It will be a rare occasion when justice cannot be  served  by  such
procedures.  If  however  a  presenting  officer  insists  upon  oral  cross
examination in such circumstances  and  it can be shown that  his/her   case
would be prejudiced to a  material  extent  without  it,  he/she  should  be
entitled to do  so  unless   there  is   credible  evidence  from  a  person
suitably qualified to give an opinion that the appellant concerned would  be
likely to suffer some significant adverse  effect  to  her  health  or  well
being if questioned in an environment where one or  more  men  are  present.
Even if such evidence is available prior to the hearing  and  the  personnel
involved include one or more men,  it does not necessarily follow  that  the
lack of an all female court should prevent the hearing from proceeding.   An
adjudicator may in such circumstances continue without cross examination  of
the witness although the lack of such cross examination would  be  a  matter
to take into account when considering the weight  to  be  attached  to  that
evidence.

8. Representatives  should not assume that requests for  all  female  courts
will or should  be met. In any event, anyone making such  a  request  should
not do so without cogent evidence provided in advance to the IAA to  support
such a request. . A simple statement in  a  medical  report  that  a  female
appellant might have difficulty in giving evidence  without  an  all  female
court will not usually be enough. A lot of people,  male  and  female,  find
giving oral evidence a  difficult,  embarrassing  or  stressful  experience.
That is a matter which can be taken into  consideration  by  an  adjudicator
when evaluating the evidence before him or her.  It is  not  in  itself,  in
the normal course of events, sufficient to dictate the  composition  of  any
tribunal from a gender perspective. An applicant, of whatever gender,   must
expect to be required to provide details of his or her  claim  and  to  have
his or her story tested. Whilst it is understandable that  an  applicant  of
either  gender  may  find  it  difficult  to  relate  certain  sensitive  or
embarrassing details of his or  her  claim,   if  that  person  wishes  such
details to be taken into consideration such details must be related  to  the
tribunal hearing the matter. On most occasions  providing  such  details  in
written form should be sufficient to overcome such embarrassment.

9. In this case it would appear that the  Appellant's  representative  asked
for an all female court but one was not  provided.  Thereafter  the  hearing
proceeded as normal. There  is  evidence  before  us  from  the  Appellant's
representative at that hearing in the form of a written statement;  however,
significantly that representative makes no complaint in  that  document   of
any prejudice to her client during the course of the  hearing  by  the  male
adjudicator. There is simply   no  evidence  before  us  to  show  that  the
presence of the male adjudicator in any way resulted in the lack of  a  fair
hearing for the Appellant. There is no evidence of any  kind  to  show  that
the representative was in any way hindered  by  not  having  an  all  female
court or  was  unable  to  ask  any  particular  questions  because  a  male
adjudicator was present. Indeed the only evidence Ms Ahulwalia can point  to
is the statement in Dr Turner's report that  "gender sensitivity is  crucial
 for a balanced hearing". His report continues:

        " She seems to have found it hard in the  past  to  talk  about  the
        alleged rape....Therefore I would submit  that  it  is  particularly
        important that the setting in which her evidence is to be heard is a
        setting in which there are no extraneous barriers to disclosure.. In
        general, however, I think she will find it easier to talk about  her
        experiences in the presence of women rather than men"

Those statements fall far short of providing medical evidence in support  of
the Appellant's claim that she  was  prejudiced  by  the  lack  of  an  "all
female" hearing. Nor  are they of any real use to us  without  any  evidence
from  those  at  the  hearing  (  for  example,  the  Appellant  and/or  her
representative) that the doctor's concerns proved to  be  correct  -  namely
that she was in fact unable to give a full account of her story because  she
was inhibited by the  presence  of  men.   Furthermore,  in  our  view,  the
Appellant would have to show that having been unable to give a full  account
of her story in some way resulted in the lack of a full and fair hearing  of
her appeal. The evidence in this case goes nowhere near demonstrating  that.
 Indeed there is nothing to show that this lady did not get a full and  fair
hearing or that she felt inhibited by the presence  of  a  male  adjudicator
from presenting her case.as she would have wished.

10. We are particularly concerned that the grounds of appeal refer  to   the
Adjudicator's refusal of an adjournment as  a  breach  of  natural  justice.
They also allege that the Adjudicator failed  to  have  regard  to  the  IAA
Asylum Gender Guidelines. At the hearing Ms Ahluwalia was unable to show  us
how the lack of an all female  court  in  this  instance  was  a  breach  of
natural justice. Nor was she  able  to  point  to  anything  in  the  Gender
Guidelines to support her claim that the adjudicator should  have  adjourned
to enable an all female court to be composed.

11. Turning to the matter of  the  Appellant's  scars,   the  only  evidence
before us was that the Appellant has three letters  "AKK"  tattooed  on  her
arm. Neither she nor  her  representative  knew  what  these  letters  mean.
Nevertheless Ms Ahulwalia submitted that there was a real  risk  that  these
letters identified her as a rebel supporter,  and  that  there  was  a  risk
arising out of this on her return.  Without any evidence at all  to  support
this claim, we find there is no merit in it. Who or what AKK is  or  was  we
do not know.  We saw evidence that rebels from RUF had  been  known  to  cut
the initials "RUF" onto the chests of  villagers,   but  in  this  case  the
Appellant had not had such letters cut into her. What she  had  was  a  blue
tattoo with the letters "AKK".  We were also asked to conclude that  a  scar
on her ear was a risk to her. We found the scar  almost  indiscernible,  and
there is no evidence that  this scar would present a risk that she would  be
identified as a rebel on her return and subjected to harm as a result.

12. Ms Ahluwalia also argued that this lady's Article 8  would  be  breached
by returning her. However this was not  part of the grounds for  appeal  and
no leave had been sought to amend  the  grounds  either  before  or  at  the
hearing. In any event, we have concluded that there  is  no  merit  in  this
claim. The medical evidence does not show  that  her  medical  condition  is
such that return would do significant harm to her health which could not  be
treated in her country.   It shows that she has been diagnosed as  suffering
from Depressive Disorder and Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder.  However,  the
doctor's conclusions are in the alternative in his report. If her  story  is
to be believed, he stated, there may be a significant deterioration of  mood
with a moderate risk   of suicide. If, on the other hand, she is not  to  be
believed, it is likely she would become more  depressed  on  being  returned
but there would be no severe suicide risk. The adjudicator's conclusion  was
that her story was not credible. On that basis, the medical  evidence  shows
no reason to believe that to  return  her  would  impact  adversely  on  her
health in a way which could not be treated in Sierra Leone and  which  would
make her return a disproportionate response in this case.

13. This appeal is dismissed

            Ms S Ward
