
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |AS (Article 3 - Country     |
|                           |        |Material) Sierra Leone      |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00080          |
|On  26 June & 20 August    |        |                            |
|2003                       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|18/09/2003                                                        |
|.........................................                         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Chairman)                                       |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mrs E Morton                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the appellant
(At hearing on 26/6/2003):   Mr A Deve, Legal Representative
(At hearing on 20/8/2003):   Mr S Revindran, Legal Representative
For the respondent
(At hearing on 26/6/2003):   Mr B Montilla, Home Office Presenting Officer
(At hearing on 20/8/2003):   Ms L Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leone, appeals with  the  leave  of
      the Tribunal  against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  D
      Garratt) who dismissed her appeals on asylum and human rights grounds.
2.    Leave was granted solely upon Article 3 of the European Convention  on
      Human Rights issues.  In this regard we had before us in  addition  to
      the objective evidence, decisions of the Tribunal in Paul Owen  [2002]
      UKIAT 03285, Sumah [2002] UKIAT 05588 and  Barrie  (HX/26555/2002),  a
      decision promulgated as recently as 18 June 2003.

3.    The Adjudicator in considering the appellant's account concluded  that
      although it contained some embellishment and minor inconsistencies, he
      was satisfied that she was credible in relation  to  the  main  events
      which the appellant had described in support of her claim.

4.    Indeed the appellant's claim for asylum  was  based  upon  her  forced
      association with a rebel officer Colonel Iaku after she was kidnapped.
       The appellant claimed that she was seen as  a  member  of  the  rebel
      group RUF because of her association with Colonel Iaku who was an  RUF
      rebel leader.  She was captured and she lived  with  members  of  this
      group for up to two years and was involved with their activities.  She
      fought alongside them because she claimed she had no choice  and  that
      she regarded herself as a "captured member" of the  RUF.   Nonetheless
      it was the appellant's account that she  fled  with  them  to  Liberia
      where, as far as she knew, Colonel Iaku remained.  However it  is  not
      apparent from her statement as to how she was able to separate herself
      from  Colonel  Iaku.   Nonetheless  the   Adjudicator   accepted   the
      appellant's claim that she was abducted and forced  to  work  for  and
      become the "wife" of a rebel leader who had moved  the  rebels  during
      hostilities and only escaped  from  them  with  the  assistance  of  a
      Liberian when the rebels were based in his country.

5.    For reasons which we do not intend to repeat, given leave was  granted
      on human rights grounds  only,  it  will  suffice  to  note  that  the
      Adjudicator, for reasons which he canvassed in his determination  more
      notably at paragraph 27, concluded there was nothing in the background
      information she had studied to suggest that the appellant was at  real
      risk and that the appellant could:

           "... continue her life in Sierra Leone and in particular in  the
           Freetown area.  I believe that she will be able to  re-establish
           links with the remaining members of her family."

6.    In reaching those conclusions the Adjudicator took  into  account  the
      evidence of the appellant's witness, Sulaiman Jalloh, who had  brought
      to the appellant news of her father's death in May  2002,  who  having
      been captured by rebels and subsequently released, sadly  later  died.
      The Adjudicator continued  however  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
      suggest the appellant's father was at risk  from  the  authorities  on
      account of his capture.  Further there had been no  mention  that  the
      appellant's  siblings  were  affected  by  the  hostilities  and   the
      Adjudicator therefore concluded that the appellant would  be  able  to
      make contact with surviving relatives on her return.

7.    The Adjudicator then considered the appellant's  Human  Rights  appeal
      and concluded at paragraph 31 of his determination as follows:

           "Taking into account the appellant's story I believe that  there
           was, whilst she was in Sierra Leone and Liberia, a risk of  loss
           of life and  rough  treatment.   That  was  on  account  of  the
           appellant's involvement in hostilities and  because  she  was  a
           captive who, at times, was mistreated by Colonel Iaku.  But  the
           issue for me to consider is  whether,  if  returned,  there  are
           substantial grounds for believing that  the  appellant's  rights
           under these two Articles will be infringed.  Taking into account
           my findings of fact and the current situation in Sierra Leone, I
           am not satisfied that there is such a risk. The appellant can in
           my view return to Sierra Leone  and  disassociate  herself  with
           former rebel involvement and the specific risk to her of  coming
           across Colonel Iaku and those of his group who  would  recognise
           her is, in my view, low.  The authorities  would  not,  I  find,
           take an interest in her in the changed situation."

8.    The grounds of appeal contend that the Adjudicator failed to  consider
      the risk to a single young woman with no means of support returning to
      Freetown in the current climate, and reference is made to the decision
      in Paul Owen which was  before  the  Adjudicator  where  the  Tribunal
      stated that a single young man returning  to  Sierra  Leone  would  be
      "placed in a camp where conditions are described  as  "sub-human"  and
      face medical conditions described as some of the worst in the  world".
      They proceeded to allow the appeal under Article 3.

   9. The grounds refer to the US State Department report which states  that
      many women, especially those who have  been  displaced  and  with  few
      resources, are forced to turn to prostitution as a means of support.


10.   The grounds contend that in light of the credible  evidence  presented
      to the Adjudicator, the return to Sierra Leone  would  result  in  her
      being either forced to live in sub-human camps or forced  to  turn  to
      prostitution to support herself.  The Adjudicator failed  to  consider
      this evidence.  There was  of  course  the  Adjudicator's  finding  at
      paragraph 27 of his determination that he believed that the  appellant
      could continue her  life  in  Sierra  Leone,  and  in  particular  the
      Freetown area and  would  be  able  to  re-establish  links  with  the
      remaining members of her family.

11.   When the appeal first came before us on 26 June 2003 reference was  in
      particular made to the  statement  of  Mr  Sulaiman  Jalloh  dated  23
      October 2002 which stated:

           "I was also very close to one  of  Aminata's  (the  appellant's)
           aunties Jamilatu who lived in Freetown  in  another  house.   We
           went to secondary school together  in  Freetown  and  I  visited
           frequently.  Sometimes I  could  see  Aminata  at  her  auntie's
           house."

12.   It was submitted by Mr Montilla who at that  hearing  represented  the
      respondent, that the above extract suggested that the appellant's aunt
      might be in Freetown but that there were no  clear  findings  on  this
      issue and the appellant had adduced no evidence as to whether her aunt
      still lived in Freetown.

13.   Mr Montilla submitted that in those circumstances  the  appellant  had
      not established a real risk of being returned  as  a  single  homeless
      female  and  to  be  subject  to  Article  3  by  virtue  of  such   a
      circumstance.

14.   Further objective evidence had been submitted by the respondent  which
      included that  of  Relief  Web  of  May  2003  headed  "Sierra  Leone:
      Humanitarian Situation Report".

15.   In this regard Mr Montilla invited us to find  (in reliance on  Relief
      Web and other objective evidence, not least that  in  the  Relief  Web
      report sub-headed "Sexual Exploitation and Abuse" where reference  was
      made to the initiatives of working  groups  which  were  in  place  by
      various bodies to combat such a risk), that even if the appellant  was
      returned as a single  homeless  female  her  circumstances  would  not
      engage a breach of Article 3.

16.   Mr Deve who at that hearing  represented  the  appellant,  had  sought
      instructions from his client as to the situation relating to her  aunt
      which the statement of Mr Jalloh had referred, and indeed  as  to  the
      appellant's siblings and step-relatives to which her own letter of  29
      November 2002 referred.  We asked Mr Deve if he had  any  instructions
      as to where they were living, where they were housed, and whether such
      relatives were living with the appellant's aunt in  Sierra  Leone  and
      more particularly in Freetown.

17.   Mr Deve advised us that he had no  instructions  in  that  regard  and
      requested an adjournment to enable  oral  evidence  to  be  called  in
      relation to the appellant and Mr Jalloh.  In granting the  adjournment
      request we made it clear that the evidence given  was  to  be  on  the
      issue with which we were seized, namely whether or not this  appellant
      on return to Sierra Leone as a  single  woman  was  at  real  risk  of
      suffering Article 3 treatment.  We made appropriate directions in that
      regard to include a further statement of the appellant relating to the
      circumstances in which she would  find  herself  if  now  returned  to
      Sierra Leone, to include evidence relating to all family  members  now
      living in Sierra Leone and a  further  statement  from  Mr  Jalloh  in
      relation to these matters.

18.   Prior to the restored hearing on 20 August 2003 the Tribunal  received
      further statements from the appellant and from Mr Jalloh, each  signed
      and dated 8 August 2003.

19.   In the appellant's further statement she explained that  she  had  two
      brothers  and  two  sisters.   Her  brothers  were  aged  18  and   10
      respectively.  Her sisters were aged 16 and 14 respectively.

  20. The appellant's late father had two brothers and one  sister,  all  of
      whom were dead.  The appellant's mother, now deceased,  had  a  sister
      called Jamilatu who used to live in Wellington in the eastern part  of
      Freetown, but the last time the appellant had spoken to her was before
      1999 before the attack on Freetown.  The appellant  claimed  that  she
      had unsuccessfully tried to telephone her from the United Kingdom.


21.   The appellant had met Mr Jalloh in August  2002.   He  was  the  first
      person from Sierra Leone that she  had  got  to  know  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Mr Jalloh's brother, Amadu, used to live in Freetown but had
      to move to a village because his house burned down in  1999.   He  had
      difficulty supporting his own family in his village and Mr Jalloh sent
      him money from time to time to assist.  Occasionally Amadu called them
      from Freetown.

22.   The appellant explained that on one occasion in November 2002 when  Mr
      Jalloh to check on the health of his sister who lived in  Freetown  he
      spoke to Amadu and asked him to check the appellant's aunt's house.

23.    Approximately a month later ,Amadu called  to  state  the  house  was
      partially burned and there was no  further  news  of  the  appellant's
      aunt.  The appellant  maintained  that  she  was  unaware  as  to  the
      location of her siblings and had hoped that she would be able to trace
      them provided that Amadu Jalloh had traced her aunt.  In the event her
      siblings were under 18 and even if she could find them they would  not
      be able to provide the appellant with any support.

24.   Mr Sulaiman Jalloh's  statement  confirms  the  position  and  further
      clarifies that he is unable to speak to his brother very often because
      there are no telephones in  the  village  in  which  his  brother  now
      resides.  However when  Amadu  travelled  to  Freetown  he  called  Mr
      Jalloh.  In that regard Sulaiman Jalloh had spoken to his  brother  on
      one occasion between August and November 2002 but he had forgotten  to
      ask him to speak to the  appellant's  aunt  because  the  conversation
      centred on the fact that their sister had been  taken  seriously  ill.
      In November 2002 Mr Jalloh had called his sister to see  how  she  was
      feeling and Amadu was present and he was able  to  speak  to  him  and
      asked Amadu if he could find the appellant's aunt or her family.

25.   Approximately a month later he heard from Amadu that their sister  had
      died and further that the appellant's aunt's house was half burned and
      uninhabitable.  Mr Jalloh explains he was not surprised at  this  news
      as Jamilatu lived in  Wellington,  an  area  of  Freetown  the  rebels
      entered in 1999 and which had seen some  of  the  worst  incidents  of
      violence especially as they retreated through the same area.

26.   Both the appellant and Mr Jalloh gave oral  evidence  before  us.   We
      have to say that we found it most surprising that according to each of
      them they had been unaware of the possibility that the Red Cross could
      assist the appellant in an effort to locate  the  whereabouts  of  her
      family members in Sierra Leone.   Our conclusion that this  aspect  of
      their evidence was not credible is reinforced by the fact that it  was
      apparent to us that the appellant was  an intelligent  and  articulate
      witness who indeed before coming to this country had trained  for  one
      year in Sierra Leone to qualify as a  nurse.   More  particularly,  Mr
      Jalloh  was  currently  employed  as  a  Court  Interpreter  with  the
      Immigration  Appellate  Authority.   It  was   therefore   even   more
      surprising to us to learn from him that he  had  not  appreciated  the
      potential assistance that the Red Cross  could  provide.  We  did  not
      believe the evidence of the appellant and Mr Jalloh in this regard but
      we are mindful of  the  positive  credibility  findings  made  by  the
      Adjudicator in relation to the appellant's account  and  we  therefore
      approach our deliberations on the issue as to whether the  appellant's
      return would cause a breach of Article 3 on the basis  of  taking  the
      appellant's account at its  highest.   That  account  amounts  to  her
      insistence that she is unaware as to the whereabouts of her  remaining
      family who could be in camps or living in a neighbouring country.

27.   Further it is the appellant's account, supported by  Mr  Jalloh,  that
      she would therefore return to Sierra Leone homeless without any viable
      means of support and as such vulnerable  in  the  current  climate  in
      Sierra Leone, not least as a single young woman.  Mr Jalloh made clear
      to us that his brother's home in Freetown  has  been  destroyed,  thus
      causing him to live in a family home in a village a day's travel  from
      Freetown in the north of the country where  he  has  apparently  eight
      wives and 30 children.  Mr Jalloh explained to us that the only reason
      he was able to make contact with his  brother  Amadu  in  Freetown  in
      order to ascertain the present position was because he was in Freetown
      having undergone an eye operation and was  for  that  purpose  staying
      with their sister.   There would be no  prospect  of  Amadu,  who  had
      apparently been  asked  on  the  matter,  being  able  to  afford  the
      appellant any accommodation in his  village,  however  temporary.   Mr
      Jalloh insisted that the same would apply in relation to his sister in
      Freetown who lived in a  house  together  with  her  husband  and  his
      extended family and their children which  in  turn  they  shared  with
      another family in over-crowded conditions.

28.   We have decided to dismiss this appeal.

29.   We are mindful of the Tribunal decision in Paul  Owen  promulgated  in
      July 2002.  In that case on the issue  of  the  Article  3  claim  the
      Tribunal had before them a CIPU Report of October 2001 which  referred
      to the international  assistance  being  given  to  Sierra  Leone  and
      outlined a number of aid programmes then in operation.  However it  is
      apparent that the Tribunal placed significant weight on the fact  that
      at that time thousands of Sierra Leoneans were returning  from  Guinea
      because of attacks and ill treatment by RUF forces and Guinean forces.
       The CIPU Report went on to state:

           "Some of these IDPs (Internally Displaced Persons)  were  housed
           in camps but many live in Freetown. This large  influx  together
           with a lack of resources  to  deal  with  them,  caused  tension
           between local residents and returning IDPs."


30.   The Tribunal noted that the Country information in  referring  to  the
      problems for returning Internally Displaced Persons  at  border  areas
      did not yet indicate that risks of maltreatment in terms of Article  3
      to returnees (from the RUF still in the border areas) were  below  the
      level of  a  reasonable  likelihood.   In  addition  it  appeared  the
      likelihood  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Owen,  of  finding  a   home   or
      accommodation or any form  of  support  in  his  district  was  highly
      remote.   The  Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  was   a   young,
      independent and fit man:

            "who would be returning to a  city  that  appears  to  be  going
           through the benefits of a period of peace and growing commercial
           activity.  Set against this he is a returnee  with  no  apparent
           home to return to or any other family support systems.  He would
           thus be thrown into the general melee of expecting support  from
           international agencies, along with a mass  of  other  internally
           displaced persons and returnees.  He would  thus  be,  at  best,
           placed in a camp where conditions are described  as  "sub-human"
           and face medical conditions described as some of  the  worst  in
           the world.  Beyond this the possibility of  being  relocated  to
           other camps  outside  of  Freetown  does  not,  on  the  current
           information, look  to  be  a  viable  alternative."  (The  typed
           emphasis is ours).

31.   The Tribunal therefore concluded that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  or
      unreasonable  to  expect  Mr  Owen  to  relocate  to  Freetown.    But
      significantly the Learned  Chairman,  Mr  A  R  Mackey,  concluded  as
      follows:

           "With the improving situation, it may be that within a  year  or
           so our decision would be a different one, however, we must  make
           the decision this time and we conclude that the risks to him are
           still real and that relocation to Freetown would not provide him
           with meaningful protection and it would be unduly harsh."

  32. In common with the Tribunal in Paul Owen,  who  recognised  what  they
      described at the time as an "improving situation" we have assessed the
      situation in Sierra Leone as it stands as at the date of our  decision
      and considered whether the risks to this appellant  on return are real
      such as to engage Article 3. We have concluded that it  would  not  be
      the case in the light  of  the  current  objective  evidence  and  the
      particular circumstances of this appellant.


33.   In this regard we are mindful of the recent decision of  the  Tribunal
      in the unreported case for which we gave  leave  (not  opposed  by  Mr
      Revindran) to Ms Saunders to  tender  in  evidence  in   Barrie  which
      indeed related to the situation of a single female appellant where her
      circumstances were not dissimilar to that of the appellant before  us.
      It is noteworthy that the case of Paul Owen was indeed put before  the
      Tribunal and carefully considered.  Unlike the Tribunal  in  Owen  the
      Tribunal in Barrie had the benefit of more recent objective  evidence,
      not least a CIPU report dated October 2002.

34.    From  this  report  the  Tribunal  noted  that  there  was   a   very
      considerable UN presence in the country of some 17� thousand and  that
      in September 2002 the Security Council had voted unanimously to extend
      the mandate by a further six months,  although  it  felt  sufficiently
      confident in the progress made to agree to a policy  of  reduction  in
      the size of that mission.  The Sierra Leonean government had  welcomed
      that extension of the UN presence.

35.   Reference was made to paragraph 6.58 of the CIPU report in  which  the
      Home Office Guidelines indicated a  considerable  improvement,  though
      clearly much progress had to be  made  particularly  on  the  economic
      front.   Tension with the RUF still remained.  But the government  had
      gained control over most of the country and there had been attempts to
      extend the rule of law and allow people to re-settle.

36.   The Tribunal noted from the report that:

           "Applicants may claim a fear of return  because  of  uncertainty
           regarding the prospects of long term peace, or a fear they  will
           not be safe in government-held areas.   However  cases  on  this
           basis are unlikely to be well-founded."

37.   The Tribunal in Barrie noted that the report of the ICG dated 12  July
      2002 appeared to underline the view of the Home Office  not  least  in
      noting the "great strides towards peace and stability  that  had  been
      made in Sierra Leone".

38.    At  paragraph  23  of  the  determination  the  Learned  Acting  Vice
      President, Mr M W Rapinet, stated there were further extracts  of  the
      ICG report which merely served to underline the view earlier expressed
      that the position in Sierra Leone was one of continued improvement and
      a vastly improved security situation for the ordinary  people  of  the
      country.

39.   Mr Rapinet continued inter alia, as follows:

           "We would conclude on an analysis  of  this  objective  evidence
           that this particular appellant would not  be  subjected  to  any
           further persecution were she to return to her own home are now.


           However we would accept that she may have concerns,  bearing  in
           mind the appalling treatment she has suffered in  the  past  and
           bearing in mind that all the reports which we have  studied  and
           to which we  have  referred  above  do  refer  to  a  continuing
           tension.  It may well be, therefore, that  the  appellant  would
           have a fear for her own safety in her home town.  This being  so
           we would consider that it would not be unduly harsh for  her  to
           relocate to Freetown.   The Home Office Guidelines state at page
           5:


                 "Freetown and the surrounding area are under Sierra Leonean
                 government  control.   The  government  has  extended   its
                 authority to  most  of  the  country  and  whilst  isolated
                 incidents of violence can occur, there does not  appear  to
                 be any attempts by any party or group  to  target  specific
                 individuals or a concerted campaign of violence."

           We bear in mind that the appellant's fear is at the hands of the
           RUF.  It is clear to us from the extract that we  have  referred
           to above but also  from  other  objective  evidence  before  us,
           notably the CIPU report and the ICG report,  that  the  Freetown
           area is one of comparative safety.  It may well be  that  it  is
           overcrowded now by reason of the number of  refugees  that  have
           taken refuge there in the past and it may well be that a  number
           of  refugees   are   still   accommodated   in   camps.    These
           circumstances however do not in our view, make it  unduly  harsh
           for the appellant to relocate to Freetown.  There is no evidence
           that she is in ill health or in any way incapacitated or in  any
           circumstances which would render it unduly harsh for herself  to
           relocate."

  40. The Tribunal dismissed the Article 3 appeal and in  so  doing  pointed
      out they were  following  the  guidelines  set  out  in  the  Tribunal
      determination in Kacaj.


41.   As we pointed out to Mr Revindran in granting leave to the  respondent
      to tender the above unreported case, we were of  course  mindful  that
      each case must be determined on its own particular facts  and  issues.
      Ms Saunders informed us that they were indeed unaware  of  any  recent
      Tribunal decision which on similar facts had reached a  contrary  view
      but we clarified to Mr Revindran that we were nonetheless  mindful  of
      the possibility that there might indeed be  such  decisions  but  that
      notwithstanding them, our considerations focused on  this  appellant's
      particular circumstances.

42.   Those circumstances are that she is a young woman who  appears  to  be
      in good health.  Indeed there was no  medical  evidence  submitted  to
      suggest to the contrary.  She  is  educated  and  indeed  had,  whilst
      living in Sierra Leone, completed  one  year  of  a  Nursing  Training
      Course.

43.   We are of course mindful that whilst in this country she  has  married
      a Sierra Leonean citizen, who did not give evidence before us, but who
      we were told, presently enjoys the benefit of Exceptional Leave  which
      does not expire until 2005.


  44. As Ms Saunders for the respondent rightly reminded us,  the  situation
      in Sierra Leone remained one of ever-increasing improvement and indeed
      one of  optimism,  and  we  have  noted  the  series  of  Humanitarian
      Situation Reports  prepared by Relief Web on Sierra Leone which as  Ms
      Saunders pointed out are updated on a  monthly  basis  and  provide  a
      continuing  picture  of  the  evolution  of  improvement  within  that
      country.


  45.   The Relief Web report of July 2003 notes that the security situation
      in Sierra Leone including border areas remained calm and  stable  with
      social and economic activities at normal level.  It goes on to  report
      inter alia that from 14 to 27 July 2003 the World Food Programme (WFP)
      supported a total of  47,711  beneficiaries  with  917  tons  of  food
      countrywide and that a total of 45.8 tons of food  was  despatched  to
      3,000 beneficiaries at Gondola Camp and 26.6 tons  of  food  to  1,647
      beneficiaries at Tiama Camp.  The report reflects the  fact  that  far
      from Sierra Leoneans fleeing the country, Sierra  Leone  is  receiving
      considerable influx  of  refugees  from  Liberia  seeking  safety  and
      refuge, many of whom  are  being  accommodated  in  camps  across  the
      country.

  46. It is noted in the 18 July 2003 report that countrywide WFP  supported
      a total of 146,235 beneficiaries with 2,088 tons of  food  between  30
      June and 13 July.  There is clearly a committed and worldwide campaign
      to provide humanitarian support and relief  to  Sierra  Leone  and  to
      assist in the restoration of its infrastructure.

47.   The June  2003  report  refers  to  the  announced  intention  of  the
      European Union to provide US$258 million in assistance to Sierra Leone
      in the next five years to help rebuild the country after a  decade  of
      civil war to implement the government's  poverty  reduction  strategy.
      It is meant to contribute to the establishment of  an  efficient  link
      between out-phasing relief action, ongoing  rehabilitation  programmes
      and long out of term development objectives.

48.   Reference is made to a three day partnership meeting held  on  22  May
      in Freetown by the Sierra Leone Red Cross Society  (SLRCS)  where  the
      Secretary General together with other  humanitarian  bodies  including
      the ICRC gave what is described as a "contextual overview"  of  Sierra
      Leone.

49.   The report continues:

           "The  overview  entailed  political,  socio-economic   and   the
           humanitarian challenges  facing  the  nation's  transition  from
           emergency relief to  development.   A  thorough  review  of  the
           strategic  plan  included  the   recruitment,   management   and
           retention of  volunteer  staff,  problem  analysis,  objectives,
           strategies, achievement of programmes and commitment by partners
           to fund programmes."

50.    The  meeting  attracted   partners   from   the   Swedish,   British,
      Netherlands, German, Danish and Spanish Red Cross Societies.  Pages 17
      to 18 of the report relates to the camps and the  efforts  to  improve
      matters within them.

51.   We have noted a detailed US Embassy  Press  Release  on  Sierra  Leone
      issued by the Embassy in Freetown on July 15 2003 which announces  the
      contribution of the United States  of  over  $272  million  to  Sierra
      Leone's recovery during the current  fiscal  year.   The  announcement
      continues:

           "Of  this  amount  $209  million  funds  schools  and   hospital
           construction, police training, humanitarian assistance, economic
           development projects  and  UN  peace  keeping  operations.   The
           remaining $63 million  was  contributed  in  the  form  of  debt
           relief.


           The significant portion of the American contribution  to  Sierra
           Leone's recovery is devoted to housing stability and  long  term
           prospects of peaceful development.  Specifically in fiscal  year
           2003 the US Congress appropriate  $144,850,000  to  support  the
           United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).   That  is  in
           addition to the $516  million  the  US  government  had  already
           invested in UNAMSIL as of January 1 2003."

52.   The report points out that the US government's contribution to  Sierra
      Leone's recovery is not charity and continues:

           "Rather, it is intended as an investment in the people of Sierra
           Leone who are prepared to exert effort to improve their  country
           and to make a better future for themselves and  their  children.
           We are proud to be a partner in that effort.   This  partnership
           involves the entire US Mission (Embassy) to Sierra Leone."

53.   Reference is further made to the  activities  of  the  US  Agency  for
      International  Development  (USAID)  which  operates  three  different
      divisions out of the Embassy dealing with  developments,  humanitarian
      assistance and food relief and is itself contributing over $34 million
      to Sierra Leone in fiscal year 2003 for the use  of  building  schools
      and including rehabilitating health, water and sanitation services  to
      feed refugees, returnees and indeed to re-unite  families,  to  assist
      market women to Improve their businesses.  The report as a whole makes
      for impressive reading.

54.   We find particularly noteworthy a further report of Relief  Web  dated
      9 July 2003 which is sub-headed "Sierra Leone:  Facilitating, the  Re-
      integration of War Affected Women".  It makes reference to the efforts
      of the "Women in Crisis Project" which supports more  than  400  women
      and girls  many  of  whom  suffered  terribly  during  Sierra  Leone's
      recently concluded civil war.  The report acknowledges that  thousands
      of Sierra Leonean women have turned to commercial sex work to  survive
      but there is a consequent rise in HIV/AIDS.  It is explained that  the
      Women in Crisis Project supports women who lost their families  during
      the war and have nowhere else to turn.  It continues:

           "UNFPA is supporting "offering counselling and training, clinics
           offering services  to  prevent  and  treat  sexually-transmitted
           infections and the building of a new vocational training centre,
           where women can learn fabric  tying  and  dying,  tailoring  and
           hairdressing skills.  The three-storey structure will also  have
           a health clinic, staffed with nurses provided by the Ministry of
           Health."

55.   The Relief Web Humanitarian Situation Report of May 2003,  a  detailed
      report, sets out the situation as regards refugee health in the camps.
       Reference is made to the efforts of  the  World  Health  Organisation
      (WHO) in a number of the camps and  that  of  the   Norwegian  Refugee
      Council to reduce housing congestion in Jembe Camp.

56.   Further it is reported that the UNHCR and  the  government  of  Sierra
      Leone have undertaken a refugee census on 19/21 May 2003 which covered
      all eight refugee camps in the country, and put into effect a  process
      of  registration  to  ensure  better  protection  and  assistance   to
      refugees.

57.   Ms Saunders for the respondent drew our attention to  the  Relief  Web
      report of 20 June 2003 which showed that operations had begun for  the
      WFP to provide the second two-month food ration supply to those Sierra
      Leoneans who had repatriated during the month of April.  The  majority
      of the 13,000 Sierra Leonean returnees  returned  to  WFP  operational
      areas in Kilahun District.

58.   In this regard Ms  Saunders  drew  our  attention  to  the  fact  that
      Kilahun Way Station provided wet feeding and accommodation for  mostly
      women and children.

59.   She further drew to our attention the Relief Web  Report  of  30  June
      2003 which reports as follows:

           "All refugees will receive at least two months of WFP  food  aid
           to help them rebuild their lives with further  assistance  given
           to vulnerable populations."

60.   Ms Saunders submitted that such initial aid would indeed be  available
      to the appellant on her return should she require it.

61.   We were also referred to the Relief Web report of  6  May  2003  which
      though mindful of the overcrowding in Freetown with people  "eager  to
      rebuild their lives" and which included many girls and women who  lost
      their families in the war and were struggling to  survive,  refers  to
      the Women in Crisis Project which offers a lifeline to women who  have
      nowhere else to turn.

62.   The report is mindful of the thousands who returned to commercial  sex
      work but points out that since 2001 the United Nations Population Fund
      (UNFPA) has been  providing  support  to  bolster  services  including
      centres offering counselling and training clinics which offer services
      to prevent and treat sexually-transmitted  infections.   Reference  is
      made to a new three-storey  vocational  training  centre  where  women
      continue to learn fabric tying and dying, tailoring  and  hairdressing
      skills. The report continues:

           "There will also be a health clinic to  which  the  Ministry  of
           Health has promised to assign  nurses.   Additional  funding  is
           needed to  complete  construction,  pay  teachers  who  are  now
           volunteering their time said participants."

63.   It was noteworthy that Mr Revindran although urging us  to  find  that
      the appellant as a single young woman returning to  Freetown  in  such
      circumstances would  suffer  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  as  a
      consequence, acknowledged that he had to accept that  the  picture  in
      Sierra Leone was one  of  continued  improvement  but  submitted  that
      although there might well be "a significant change in six months to  a
      year" the situation on the ground at the moment remained  problematic.
      He submitted that although  the  objective  evidence  revealed  worthy
      initiatives these did not constitute real change.

65.   We find that although there is much still to be done, that  since  the
      end of the civil war,  the  peaceful  long  term  development  of  the
      country has continued with marked  improvement,  in  terms  of  living
      conditions and infrastructure, an increasing level of investment and a
      worldwide commitment to enhancing the stability of  the  country.  and
      long term prospects for peaceful development in the country. Therefore
      and though mindful   .  Therefore though  mindful  not  least  to  the
      Human Rights Watch report which  highlights the fact  that  widespread
      social problems still remain regarding the  conditions  for  women  in
      Sierra Leone, despite local and international efforts to address these
      issues, the picture is one of  constant  improvement,  not  persistent
      decline

66.   Freetown may well be a difficult place to live in for the majority  of
      its citizens ravaged as it has  been  by  years  of  civil  war.   The
      quality of life is no doubt far from good for many  of  its  citizens.
      However the appellant is young, healthy and educated. Apart  from  the
      possibility of her relocating members  of  her  family  and/or  indeed
      returning to Sierra Leone with her husband, even as a single woman  in
      Sierra Leone the available evidence does not persuade us that there is
      a real risk of the appellant being subjected to torture or inhuman  or
      degrading treatment and punishment on her return. We conclude that the
      evidence in this case falls short of social hardship of such  severity
      that to remove the appellant would expose her to a  risk  of  hardship
      such as to constitute a breach of Article 3.

67.   We remind ourselves that there is a  high  threshold  to  be  crossed,
      particularly in cases such as this where the allegation is  one  of  a
      lack of social welfare provision in a country to which a person is  to
      be removed.   Although  it  may  prove  initially  difficult  for  the
      appellant to establish herself in Freetown and  involve  a  degree  of
      hardship and discomfort, we do not find that it would be unduly  harsh
      to return her there.

68.   Indeed we note that in Sumah, a decision promulgated in December  2002
      the Tribunal, though  bearing  in  mind  the  report  of  the  Special
      Rapporteur on Violence Against Women of  August  2001  commented  that
      even giving full weight to that  assessment  he  did  not  feel  those
      materials established a real risk of treatment contrary to Article  3.



69.   We find the Adjudicator was right to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
      circumstances did not engage Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights.

70.   The appeal is therefore dismissed.


                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice President
