
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |AN (GIA - Return) Algeria   |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00140          |
|On  2 September 2003       |        |                            |
|Prepared 3 September 2003                                         |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|11 November 2003.......                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Professor D B Casson                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr N Oakeshott of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the respondent:          Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen   of   Algeria,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr A Talbot) who dismissed his appeal
      against  the  decision  made  on  12  November  2000  giving   removal
      directions following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 6  February
      1998 by boat from Calais to Dover allegedly using  a  French  identity
      card that has since been destroyed.  He claimed  asylum  on  12  March
      1998.  His claim was refused by the Secretary of State for the reasons
      set out in a letter dated 26 October 2000.  The Adjudicator heard  the
      appeal against this decision on 21 February 2003.

3.    The Adjudicator summarised the appellant's written and  oral  evidence
      in paragraph 6 of his determination. The appellant is from Algiers and
      is of Berber ethnicity.  He carried out his military service from 1992
      to 1994 and was involved with radio  and  telecommunications  matters.
      He asserted that an incident occurred in November 1993 when he was  on
      home leave.  He was approached by two men from the  GIA  who  demanded
      that he provide them with radio devices  from  the  army  as  well  as
      weapons and ammunition.  They also asked him to provide  them  with  a
      map of the base of his  army  barracks.   He  promised  to  help  them
      although he never in fact  provided  them  with  any  assistance.   He
      reported this incident to his army commander and was told that  if  he
      saw the men again he should report this to the police.

4.    After completing his military service the appellant started work at  a
      supermarket in Algiers.  In June 1995  the  army  barracks  where  the
      appellant had been stationed was attacked by terrorists, a  number  of
      whom were killed in the course of the attack.  In their possession was
      found a plan of the army barracks.  In the morning  after  the  attack
      gendarmes raided the appellant's home.  He was arrested  and  detained
      for about 10 days.  He was questioned about the attack on the barracks
      and although he denied that he was in any way to blame he  was  beaten
      and generally kept in  very  poor  conditions,  although  he  did  not
      sustain any physical injuries.  At the  end  of  this  period  he  was
      released without charge but warned that he would be  questioned  again
      if need arose.  In January 1996 his home was raided again.  He was re-
      arrested and  detained,  this  time  for  about  two  weeks.   He  was
      questioned in connection with a bomb explosion at a bus  station  near
      to where he lived.  He was treated badly in detention and  accused  of
      being a terrorist.  After being released he was required to report  to
      the police on a fortnightly basis.  When reporting he was insulted and
      labelled a terrorist by the police.  In August 1997 he became severely
      depressed and could not bear having to report any  more.   He  stopped
      reporting and stayed at a friend's house.   He  then  heard  that  the
      gendarmes had been round to his house warning that he  had  to  go  on
      reporting to them.  After hearing this, the appellant became terrified
      and decided to leave Algeria.  If returned to Algeria  he  fears  both
      the Algerian government and the terrorists.  He also  fears  that  his
      Berber ethnicity may cause him problems on return.

5.    The Adjudicator has set out his findings in paragraphs 11 - 22 of  his
      determination.  The  evidence  which  he  accepted  is  summarised  in
      paragraph 13.  He accepted the appellant's basic biographical details,
      including his Berber ethnicity.  Despite  some  discrepancies  in  his
      evidence in relation to dates the Adjudicator  accepted  that  he  had
      carried out military service.  He  also  accepted  that  he  had  been
      arrested and detained by the Algerian authorities in  connection  with
      investigations made by them into terrorist incidents.  He was detained
      in  poor  conditions  and  treated  roughly,  perhaps  including  some
      physical violence.  Having been released without charge  he  was  then
      subject to reporting conditions and during his  regular  reporting  to
      the gendarmerie he was  treated  to  verbal  abuse.   The  Adjudicator
      further  accepted  that  these  experiences  had  caused  considerable
      distress to the appellant and that he was now extremely anxious  about
      the prospect of returning to Algeria.

6.    However,  the  Adjudicator  took  the  view  that  the  appellant  had
      exaggerated his account  in  relation  to  the  authorities'  specific
      targeting of himself and in connection  with  events  that  had  taken
      place when he was engaged in military service.  The  Adjudicator  took
      the view that there was a major discrepancy about the approach made to
      him by the two GIA men.  In his initial asylum statement he said  that
      he was approached by two men who identified themselves as  members  of
      the GIA and then when asked to describe the two men he told  his  army
      commander that they were strangers to  him.   In  the  course  of  his
      asylum interview he was specifically asked at question  1  whether  he
      knew these men and he replied that he did not.  At the  start  of  his
      oral evidence he confirmed the truth of these  documents.   In  cross-
      examination when asked how he knew that the two men were from the  GIA
      he answered that he knew one of them as he and the appellant had  both
      been supporters of the FIS and both frequented the same  mosque.   The
      Adjudicator took the view that this discrepancy  was  significant  and
      cast a major doubt on whether the appellant was specifically  targeted
      by  the  authorities  as  opposed  to  being  rounded  up  in  a  more
      generalised investigation into terrorist incidents.  He believed  that
      the latter was the case.

7.    The  Adjudicator  went  on  to  point  out  that  there  were  further
      discrepancies in the evidence in relation  to  the  period  after  the
      appellant had stopped reporting to the gendarmerie and before he  left
      the country.  In his initial asylum statement he had said  that  after
      he ceased reporting he went into hiding at the house of a  friend  who
      then arranged for his departure.  In his asylum interview he was asked
      how long he stayed at his friend's house and he said about 10 days. In
      the course of his oral evidence he was asked where he was living  from
      the time of his last arrest and detention until he  left  Algeria  and
      said that he was  in  hiding  at  his  friend's.   However,  from  the
      sequence and chronology of events as described by him, this must  have
      been for a period of several months and indeed when asked specifically
      about this issue he said that he had stayed with a friend for nine  to
      ten months.  He also said that whilst living  with  a  friend  he  had
      worked in his coffee shop for about  three  months.   The  Adjudicator
      commented that this hardly accorded with his statement that he was  in
      hiding. These discrepancies went well beyond a  confusion  over  dates
      and led the Adjudicator to view that he had distorted his  account  of
      the true events.

8.    The Adjudicator went on to consider whether there would be a  risk  to
      the appellant on return.  In the light of the background evidence  the
      Adjudicator accepted that there were circumstances in which  a  person
      in a particular category, such as a known member or sympathiser of the
      GIA, may have a well-founded fear of persecution on return.   However,
      the appellant was not in such a category. The  authorities  had  never
      charged him with any offence. There was no credible evidence  that  he
      was of any current interest to the authorities on return.  If  he  was
      anxious about returning to his home district where  he  was  known  he
      could move to another area.  The Adjudicator  commented  that  he  had
      spent some nine to ten months living in another area of Algiers at his
      friend's house and there had been no indication  of  any  difficulties
      with the authorities during this period.  He was not satisfied that he
      would be at risk because of his Berber ethnicity for the reasons which
      he has set out in  paragraph 19 of his determination, nor as a  failed
      asylum seeker:  paragraph 20.

9.    In his submissions Mr Oakeshott  argued  that  the  appeal  should  be
      allowed on the basis of the Adjudicator's findings of  fact.   In  the
      alternative, the credibility  findings  were  unsafe  and  the  appeal
      should be remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing.   He  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had accepted that the appellant had been detained  on  two
      occasions.  The details of  the  ill-treatment  are  set  out  in  the
      interviews. The appellant described being  assaulted  and  beaten  and
      being put in an underground prison with no light, no air and no oxygen
      like a coffin:  see question 17.  After he was  released  he  had  not
      sought medical attention  for  his  physical  condition  but  for  his
      psychological condition.  When he was arrested on the second  occasion
      he had been treated in the  same  way.   He  had  been  assaulted  and
      accused:  question 32.  After  his  release  he  had  to  continue  to
      report.  This  indicated  a  continuing  interest  in   him   by   the
      authorities.  Mr Oakeshott referred the Tribunal to  Demirkaya  [1999]
      IMM AR 441 and to the judgments of the ECHR in Pretty (29  April  2002
      2346/02) and Tomasi (27/1991).  The appellant had  been  subjected  to
      treatment contrary to Article 3 and to persecution. There had been  no
      fundamental  change   of   circumstances   in   Algeria.    In   these
      circumstances the passage of  time  did  not  diminish  the  risk.  He
      referred to the Tribunal determination in Guerroub [2002] UKIAT  04965
      where an applicant who was perceived by the Algerian authorities to be
      connected with the GIA and who had escaped from custody  was  accepted
      as being at real risk on return.

10.   The background evidence confirmed that  this  remained  the  position.
      Amnesty International continued  to  have  particular  concerns  about
      people with real or perceived links with armed groups, about  real  or
      perceived opponents of the political system  and  about  human  rights
      activists:  A15.  The US State Department report confirmed that  while
      abuses by  the  security  forces  had  declined  there  was  continued
      evidence of extra-judicial killings,  torture,  beatings  and  general
      abuse of detainees, most such cases being committed against  suspected
      members of armed groups in the context of the  government's  continued
      battle  with  terrorism.   Mr  Oakeshott  argued  that  the  risk  was
      increased for the appellant by the fact that he would be returned from
      the United Kingdom, a place regarded as being a hive of  GIA  activity
      and by the fact that he  was  a  Berber.   The  GIA  had  many  Berber
      members.

11.   He argued that the Adjudicator's findings in  rejecting  part  of  the
      appellant's account were unsafe.  The Adjudicator had put undue weight
      on what he saw as a discrepancy, but the interview had to be read as a
      whole.  The appellant made  it  clear  that  one  of  the  people  who
      approached him realised that he was in the army because the  guerrilla
      said he was missing from the mosque for Friday prayers:   question  2.
      The appellant would be at risk:  he had been detained on one  occasion
      and released without charge but, nonetheless, he had been arrested  on
      a second occasion and required to report.  The GIA were  a  continuing
      threat.  The authorities had been interested in  him  because  of  his
      perceived link with the GIA.

12.   Mr  Sheikh  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  been  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant had been picked up in a general round  up.
      If he had been suspected of being a member of the GIA  he  would  have
      been dealt with severely and not  released  without  charge.   On  his
      account the appellant had been able to remain in Algiers for a  number
      of months after he had stopped reporting and indeed had  worked  at  a
      coffee shop. The Adjudicator's conclusion was properly sustainable  on
      the evidence.  The appellant was not a member of the GIA.  Even on his
      own account he said that he had reported the approach  to  an  officer
      during military service.  Guerroub could  properly  be  distinguished.
      In that case  the  applicant  had  escaped  from  custody  when  being
      questioned about a connection  with  the  GIA.   He  had  also  evaded
      military service and a court order had been made against him.  In  the
      present case the last detention had been in 1996.  The fact  that  the
      appellant was a Berber and would be returned from London would not put
      him at any additional risk.

13.   The Tribunal will deal firstly with the submission that  even  on  the
      Adjudicator's findings of fact, the appeal should have  been  allowed.
      The Adjudicator accepted the account of being arrested and detained on
      two occasions and subsequently being required to report.  He described
      the detention as being in poor conditions and being  treated  roughly,
      perhaps including  some  physical  violence.   He  accepted  that  the
      experience had caused considerable distress  to  the  appellant.   The
      Tribunal accepts that this treatment did attain  a  minimum  level  of
      severity involving physical and mental suffering amounting to a breach
      of Article 3.  We agree with Mr Oakeshott's submission that  the  fact
      that the treatment was at the hands of the  authorities  is  a  proper
      fact or to be taken into account and also that the requirements of the
      investigation and the undeniable difficulties inherent  in  the  fight
      against those involved in terrorism  cannot  result  in  limits  being
      placed on the protection to be afforded in  respect  of  the  physical
      integrity of individuals;  see paragraph 115 of Tomasi.

14.   However, the issue before the Adjudicator  was  whether  there  was  a
      real risk of such  treatment  being  repeated  if  the  appellant  now
      returned to Algeria.  The Tribunal accept that there might be  such  a
      risk if the  appellant  is  perceived  by  the  authorities  as  being
      connected with the GIA.  The nub of Mr Oakeshott's  argument  is  that
      the fact of the detentions and the continued  requirement  to  report,
      taken with the appellant's failure to report, indicates that there  is
      a continuing  risk  in  the  absence  of  any  significant  change  in
      circumstances in Algeria.  There have been change and improvements  in
      the situation in Algeria.  There has been some lessening of the extent
      of human rights abuses but nonetheless such abuses do continue.  It is
      confirmed in the April 2003 CIPU report  that  reported  incidents  of
      torture by the security forces are now  substantially  fewer  although
      victims may hesitate to complain for fear of reprisals.  The  risk  of
      maltreatment  or  torture  is  greatest  with  people   suspected   of
      membership of or sympathy with armed groups:  para  6.14.   A  similar
      view is expressed by Amnesty and also by the US State Department.

15.   It is argued that in the  light  of  Demirkaya  commonsense  indicates
      that there is a continuing risk.  The facts  in  Demirkaya  were  very
      different  from  the  present  appeal.   It  is  authority   for   the
      proposition that  treatment  received  in  the  home  state  prior  to
      departure is an indicator of the fate that may await an applicant upon
      return.  In Demirkaya the appellant had been the subject of  what  was
      described  as  life-threatening  ill  treatment  of   a   particularly
      horrifying kind in the months before he escaped Turkey.  The  Tribunal
      had erred by not referring to these  experiences  when  assessing  the
      risk on return. Unless there had been a major change of  circumstances
      making prospective  persecution  unlikely,  past  experience  under  a
      particular regime should be considered probative of future risk.

16.   The Tribunal were also referred to Guerroub.  That was  an  appeal  by
      the Secretary of State against an Adjudicator's determination allowing
      an appeal. The Tribunal accepted on the facts of that  case  that  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that there was  a  real  risk  on
      return.  At paragraph 24 the Tribunal commented that a  critical  part
      of the applicant's evidence which was believed by the Adjudicator  was
      that he had been arrested, detained and ill treated in June  1999  and
      that he had been accused on that occasion not only  of  draft  evasion
      but of involvement in both the FIS and GIA.  During his  detention  he
      had been ill treated and had to go to hospital.   He  had  escaped  by
      walking out and then returning to his  relatives.   The  Tribunal  was
      satisfied that there was a  serious  possibility  that  the  applicant
      would come to the notice of the authorities on return as  someone  who
      was perceived to be connected with the GIA and to  have  escaped  from
      custody whilst being questioned about such connections.

17.   In paragraph 18 of his determination  the  Adjudicator  accepted  that
      someone who was a known member of sympathiser of the GIA  may  have  a
      well-founded fear of persecution in Algeria.  In  the  grounds  it  is
      argued that the Adjudicator misdirected himself on this evidence as in
      fact the CIPU report states that people who are known to be or who are
      perceived to be active supporters could be at risk.  The  Tribunal  do
      not accept that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  consider  the  issue  of
      whether the appellant would be perceived as a supporter  of  the  GIA.
      He clearly considered the attitude  of  the  authorities  towards  the
      appellant. He commented that the appellant had never been charged with
      any offence and that there was no credible evidence that he was of any
      current interest to the authorities on return.  In our  judgment  this
      conclusion was properly open to the Adjudicator in the  light  of  his
      findings of fact.

18.   There is considerable strength in Mr Sheikh's submission that  if  the
      authorities had any real suspicion of involvement  with  the  GIA  the
      appellant would have been dealt with much more severely and would  not
      have been released. This does not excuse the ill treatment he received
      but it is of relevance in assessing future risk.  It is also  relevant
      to take into account that this  finding  is  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant was rounded up in a generalised investigation into terrorist
      incidents. The Adjudicator clearly rejected  the  evidence  about  the
      appellant being approached by two GIA members.   After  the  appellant
      failed to report he continued to live  in  Algeria  for  a  number  of
      months before leaving for France.   According  to  his  interview  the
      appellant left Algeria on 13 January 1998 and travelled to  Marseilles
      where he remained for about 15 days.  Whilst there  he  hid  from  the
      French authorities and was trying to obtain a false document  so  that
      he could travel.  He then moved to Paris where he stayed for  10  days
      and then a further 10 days at Barbese.  He  obtained  a  false  travel
      document to enable him to travel from France to  the  United  Kingdom,
      arriving some time in March 1998.

19.   Looking at the evidence as a whole the  Tribunal  are  satisfied  that
      the Adjudicator was entitled  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant would not now be regarded by the authorities in  Algeria  as
      having any connection with the GIA.

20.   Mr  Oakeshott  argued  in  the  alternative,  that  the  Adjudicator's
      findings of fact were unsafe and that  he  was  wrong  to  reject  the
      appellant's evidence about the  contact  from  the  GIA  members.  The
      inference is that the appellant was specifically picked up because  he
      had told his army commander that he had been asked to  provide  a  map
      and following the terrorist attack in June 1995 a  plan  of  the  army
      barracks was found on one of the  terrorists.   In  our  judgment  the
      discrepancies in the evidence as to whether the appellant knew one  of
      the GIA members who allegedly approached him in 1993 was an  issue  of
      fact for the Adjudicator to assess on the evidence. It is argued  that
      what the appellant meant was that it was known that  he  was  carrying
      out his military service because he was missing for a long  time  from
      Friday prayers at the mosque.  The proper inferences to be drawn  from
      the evidence were matters for the Adjudicator to assess.  In our  view
      his findings of fact were properly open to him and he has given  clear
      and intelligible reasons for his findings.  He was  entitled  to  take
      into account not only the  discrepancies  about  whether  or  not  the
      appellant knew one of the GIA  members,  but  also  the  discrepancies
      dealing with more general issues as to what  he  was  doing  after  he
      stopped reporting and  before  he  left  Algeria.   The  Tribunal  are
      satisfied that the Adjudicator's findings were properly open to him on
      the evidence for the reasons he gave.

21.   For these reasons, this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

