
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |IS (Adjudicator - Approach  |
|                           |        |to Medical Evidence) Georgia|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00082          |
|On  1 September 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date written Determination notified:                              |
|                                                                  |
|19/09/2003                                                        |
|Given orally in court                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr C P Mather                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr A Lawther, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr I Strongman of Counsel, instructed by Blakemores
                       Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent is a citizen of Georgia born on  1  January  1938.   He
      arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 28 September  2001  and
      claimed asylum on arrival with his wife as his dependant.  There  were
      various documents before the Secretary of  State  in  support  of  his
      claims which included a claim that  not  only  would  his  removal  be
      contrary to the Refugee Convention but would also be in  breach  of  a
      number of Articles of the European Convention including Articles 3 and
      8.  There was a psychiatric report dated 19 July 2002 prepared  by  Dr
      Ahmed E T Farah.  This is  the  only  medical  evidence  available  in
      connection with this appeal at any point and it was, as we say, before
      the Secretary of State prior to his decision.  The medical report says
      this about the respondent's mental state:

           "His mental state examination revealed a 65 year old man who was
           casually dressed.  He appeared extremely anxious and  depressed.
           He had initial and late insomnia.  His mood  was  worse  in  the
           mornings (diurnal variation of mood).  As  mentioned  above,  he
           has feelings of hopelessness and helplessness but denied  active
           suicidal plans or intent.  No delusions  and/or  hallucinations.
           His concentration and attention were impaired leading  to  short
           term memory difficulties.  His appetite is reduced.  He seems to
           have full insight  into  his  condition.   In  my  opinion  this
           gentleman appears to have a  combination  of  features  of  post
           traumatic stress disorder with possible prolonged grief reaction
           and symptoms suggestive of a clinical depressive illness."

2.    The doctor went on to note that he was in receipt  of  anti-depressant
      medication  from  his  General  Practitioner  and  that  in  his  view
      counselling or cognitive behaviour therapy by a clinical  psychologist
      would be necessary.  There is no evidence that any such counselling or
      course of treatment has been undertaken and there is no evidence as to
      whether or not the respondent is currently on any medication.

3.    The Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  for  the  reasons
      contained in a letter dated 15 August 2002.  We note that at paragraph
      10 of that letter the Secretary  of  State  said  that  he  had  given
      careful  consideration  to  the  psychiatric  report  which  had  been
      submitted but was of the opinion that it did not substantially add  to
      the claim.  At paragraph 13 he noted  the  Articles  of  the  European
      Convention on which the  respondent  sought  to  rely,  said  that  no
      explanation how or in what way these Articles were relevant  had  been
      forthcoming but that he had nonetheless given careful consideration to
      whether the respondent should be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a result of the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
      European Convention.  He said he was not satisfied on the  information
      available that  the  respondent  would  qualify  under  any  of  those
      Articles, including Article 10.

4.    On 14 October 2002  the  Secretary  of  State  issued  directions  for
      removal of the respondent to  Georgia  as  an  illegal  entrant  after
      refusal of his asylum application.  He appealed against that  decision
      on both asylum and human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 14
      February 2003 by an Adjudicator, Mr Andrew Alan Wilson, who  dismissed
      his appeal under the Refugee Convention and under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention, but allowed it under Article 8.   It  is  against
      that decision which the Secretary of State now appeals to the Tribunal
      with leave.  There is no cross appeal and we are concerned  only  with
      the finding of the Adjudicator that removal would be in breach of  the
      respondent's Article 8 rights.

5.    As we have noted, the only evidence before the Adjudicator as  to  the
      mental condition of the respondent was that contained in the report to
      which we have referred.  The Adjudicator however went on to  make  his
      own notes of what he assessed as the capacity of the respondent in the
      hearing before him, and he says at paragraph 20 of his determination:

           "In view of the medical condition and of his position  in  front
           of myself when I found that the appellant  was  not  effectively
           capable  of  giving  evidence,  I  had  regard  to  the  written
           statements supplied by the appellant."

6.    At paragraph 28 he returned to this issue in the following terms:

           "The appellant's mental status as already stated as apparent was
           such that he was not a competent witness  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing.  I have therefore had to carry out  the  assessment  by
           reference  to  the  written  statement  supplied.   It  is  also
           apparent, having regard to the quality of those, that there  has
           been a substantial deterioration in the clear detail set out  in
           his first statement on 10 October to a somewhat  simplistic  and
           bare style dated 23 December 2002.  I note that the appellant is
           receiving current medication.  It is of course possible that his
           condition was due entirely to the pressure of  the  hearing.   I
           note, however, the earlier  Consultant's  view  that  it  was  a
           longstanding problem.  The evidence of his wife in  relation  to
           the caring of the appellant was simple, clear, fitted  the  rest
           of the evidence and I accept it."

7.    He then goes at paragraph 29 to say:

           "I therefore formed the view that  the  appellant  is  currently
           suffering from acute mental health problems.   It  would  appear
           that those are of  some  longstanding  of  at  least  since  his
           arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  therefore  entirely
           possible that the whole history of the  appellant  that  he  has
           given is through the somewhat prismatic effect caused by  mental
           illness."
8.    At paragraphs 36 to  45  of  his  determination,  he  returns  to  the
      question of the Human Rights Convention.  At paragraph 37 he says that
      he was satisfied that if the mental health status  of  the  respondent
      was sufficiently fragile that an appearance before him was  sufficient
      to render him effectively incapable of functioning, that at  the  very
      least removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  create  similar  acute
      mental health distress and lack of functioning. He says therefore that
      he approaches the case on that basis rather than any  indication  that
      the actual treatment the respondent would receive within Georgia would
      be such that Article 8 rights  would  be  infringed  within  his  home
      country.  He then formally finds at paragraph 39 that removal  of  the
      respondent would cause  his  physical  and  mental  health  rights  as
      enshrined within Article 8 to be breached and at that stage apparently
      purports to follow the course advised by the Tribunal in the  decision
      in Nhundu & Chiwera [01/TH/001633.  We note at paragraph  41  that  he
      said he draws a distinction between an assessment that would lead to a
      permanent right of stay within the United Kingdom  and  one  which  is
      simply concerned  with  the  position  as  at  the  date  of  hearing,
      rendering it inappropriate for him to be  removed.   We  mention  that
      because it seems to us that at that point there is a  clear  error  on
      the part of the Adjudicator.   His  function  is  simply  to  consider
      whether at the date of the hearing before him removal would result  in
      a breach of the respondent's human rights.  He has no further  control
      over what thereafter would follow.  It would be a matter entirely  for
      the Secretary of State's decision.

9.    The basis of the appeal before us is that the  Adjudicator's  findings
      in relation to Article 8 are unsustainable because of  errors  on  his
      part.  Mr Lawther referred us to the passage in  the  recent  reported
      decision of the Tribunal, 2003 UKIAT  00017  P  (Yugoslavia),  and  in
      particular paragraph 16 of the determination where the point  is  made
      that it is not  the  function  of  an  Adjudicator  to  make  clinical
      judgments.  It is the function of medical experts to do so.  That,  we
      consider, to be worthy of reiteration in this appeal because we are of
      the clear view that the Adjudicator has no expert basis on which it is
      open to him to make clinical judgments as to the state of  the  mental
      health of the respondent at the date of the hearing.

10.   It follows from this that in our view his  approach  is  fundamentally
      flawed on that issue and he should have considered the position solely
      on the basis of  such  medical  evidence  as  was  before  him.   That
      consisted solely of the earlier report from Dr  Farah.  There  was  no
      evidence whatsoever as to current treatment, nor as to what  treatment
      would be available for the respondent, should he need any, in his  own
      country.  That remains the case before us.

11.   Despite Mr Strongman having said all that he could say  on  behalf  of
      the respondent, we are left in no doubt that the Adjudicator's finding
      is unsustainable.  He has not considered first whether there would  be
      a breach of Article 8(1) at all in any structured manner. He  has  not
      considered that the respondent is a recent and illegal entrant to  the
      United Kingdom in receipt of no apparent current treatment and with no
      right to stay here on any other basis  by  reason  of  any  threat  of
      persecution or of treatment contrary to  his  protected  human  rights
      under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention.   He  appears  to  have
      overlooked the fact that even were it possible to say on such evidence
      as was before him that there would be a breach of his Article 8 rights
      by removal, he  would  nevertheless  have  to  consider  whether  such
      removal would be proportionate to the  important  public  interest  in
      maintaining regular enforcement of immigration control.

12.   He deals with this very briefly at paragraph 40 of  his  determination
      in the following terms:

           "I nevertheless have to consider whether it would  proportionate
           [sic] in a democratic society.  I was not particularly addressed
           on any of the  above  points  or  arguments.  In  accepting  and
           considering proportionality I have regard clearly of  course  to
           the fact of the appellant's age, that he  is  receiving  current
           treatment from the NHS and would appear to be of  no  particular
           danger or aggravation to the  community.   I  also  accept  that
           although the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally,
           there would appear to be no actual  deception  in  that  and  he
           claimed asylum immediately after leaving the lorry."

13.   It is on that basis alone that he reaches his view that removal  would
      not be proportionate.  Again, to the extent that it is in issue,  such
      an approach is in our judgment fundamentally flawed.  He has taken  no
      account of the clear guidance of  the  European  Court  in  Bensaid  v
      United Kingdom [2001] INLR 325,  and  more  importantly,  he  has  not
      approached the task on the basis which is now recommended by the Court
      of Appeal in the judgment of Lord  Justice  Simon  Brown  in  Blessing
      Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716.  At  paragraph  20  of  his  judgment  Lord
      Justice Simon Brown says:

           "In cases like the present where the essential facts are not  in
           doubt or dispute, the  Adjudicator's  task  on  a  human  rights
           appeal under Section 65 is to  determine  whether  the  decision
           under  appeal  (ex-hypothesi  a  decision  unfavourable  to  the
           appellant)  was  properly   one   within   the   decision-makers
           discretion; i.e. was it a decision  which  could  reasonably  be
           regarded as proportionate and as striking a fair balance between
           the  competing  interests  in  play.   If  it  was,   then   the
           Adjudicator cannot characterise it is  as  a  decision  "not  in
           accordance with the law" and so even if he personally would have
           preferred the balance to have been struck differently  (i.e.  in
           the appellant's favour) he cannot substitute his preference  for
           the decision in fact taken."


14.   That is, of course, clearly binding authority on us.   We  would  have
      to be satisfied that the original decision of the Secretary  of  State
      taken in full  knowledge  of  all  medical  evidence  which  has  been
      produced at any point in the course of this  appeal  process  was  one
      which was plainly wrong.  If that were not the case, then the decision
      would be within the area of discretion allowed  to  the  Secretary  of
      State in such matters.  That is, in our  judgment,  clearly  the  case
      here. The Adjudicator's finding that removal would be in breach of the
      respondent's Article 8 rights is unsustainable for the  reasons  which
      we have given and the Secretary of State is entitled  to  succeed.  On
      the evidence before  us  we  do  not  find  that  the  respondent  has
      established a family or private life in the United Kingdom which would
      be interfered with by his removal, but if we were wrong  in  that,  we
      are satisfied that it would, on the  basis  of  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State, be proportionate to the important public  interest
      in the maintenance of immigration control.

15.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is accordingly allowed.






                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President

