
ar SS (Immigration Rules - No  Retrospective  Effect)  India  [2003]  UKIAT
00162

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 7 November 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  03/12/2003

                                   Before:

                          Mr R Chalkley (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe
                          Mr J A O'Brien Quinn, QC







            APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



           Mr M. Roscoe, of counsel, instructed  by  G.  Singh,  Solicitor,
           appeared on behalf of the appellant and Mr M. Davidson, a Senior
           Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
           respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The appellant is a citizen of India who appeals,  with  leave  of  the
      Tribunal, against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Ms  Janet
      Baloch, who in a determination promulgated on 13 May 2003, following a
      hearing at Hatton Cross on 23 April 2003,  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the respondent, taken on 29 March 2001,
      to refuse to vary leave to remain under par 322(1) of HC 395.

2.    The appellant was born on 1 April 1970 and is a citizen of  India.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 December 1998 with entry clearance
      as the husband of a person settled in the  United  Kingdom.    He  was
      granted leave to enter until 15 December 1999 as a foreign spouse.  On
      13 December 1999, an application was submitted to the Home Office  for
      indefinite leave to remain as the victim  of  domestic  violence.  The
      respondent refused to vary leave to remain under paragraph  322(1)  of
      HC 395 and before the Adjudicator the appellant appealed that  refusal
      and also relied on Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.

3.    Permission was granted under  Rule  18(4)(b)  of  the  2003  Procedure
      Rules, on the ground that there may be need to clarify the approach to
      be adopted in cases under Paragraph 289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      where the evidence of domestic violence falls short of the  categories
      described  in  the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate   Paper
      mentioned at paragraph 13  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination.   In
      granting leave on that  issue,  the  Vice  President  found  that  the
      Adjudicator had dealt satisfactorily with the  appellant's  Article  8
      claim and refused to grant leave on that basis.

4.     The  proceedings  before  the  Adjudicator  are  somewhat  confusing,
      because she proceeded on the basis that  the  appellant's  application
      was made under what is now Rule 289A of HC  395.   The  Tribunal  note
      that paragraph 289A of HC 395 was inserted from 18 December  2002  (HC
      104).  The appeal before the Adjudicator took place on 23 April  2002,
      but the respondent's decision was, of course, taken on 29 March  2001.
      It appears that in granting leave this fact may have  been  overlooked
      for understandable reasons.

5.    Mr Roscoe submitted  a  legal  bundle  and  a  very  helpful  skeleton
      argument.  He  reminded  us  that  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's
      application and at the time of the respondent's decision, there was  a
      Home Office concession, which  dealt  with  the  victims  of  domestic
      violence.  Neither we, nor it appears the Adjudicator,  were  supplied
      with a copy of the concession but we are advised that  the  concession
      is adequately referred to in a paper entitled  'Women's  Asylum  News'
      which states that foreign national women  who  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom on the basis of marriage, may apply for  settlement  in  their
      own right during or after the one year probationary  period,  if  they
      are trapped in an abusive marriage.  That paper says that those  women
      were required to prove they were  the  victims  of  domestic  violence
      during this time and had left the marriage for  the  same  reason  and
      that the 'proof' required had  to  be  in  a  form  of  injunction  or
      similar. Mr Roscoe confirmed that it applied  both  to  women  foreign
      nationals and to men foreign nationals.

6.    He pointed out that the Adjudicator proceeded on  the  basis  that  HC
      289A applied retrospectively.  This is clear  from  the  determination
      and  in  particular,  paragraph  24  of  it.   He  conceded  that  the
      Adjudicator was not addressed as to the question of whether or not  HC
      289A applied retrospectively but, he said, it was  necessary  for  the
      Tribunal to find that it did apply retrospectively for this appeal  to
      succeed.  He drew our attention to Benyon on Statutory  Interpretation
      Section 98 and submitted that the Immigration Rules were a  procedural
      provision which give effect to the Secretary of State's policy and  as
      such are Procedural Rules, and as such, because a procedural provision
      is expected to be for the general benefit of litigants and others,  it
      is presumed that it applies to pending as well as future  proceedings.
      He drew our attention to the   decision of Queen's Bench Division in R
      v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Dipak Kumar Nathwani  [1979-80]
      ImmAR 9.  There, an appellant wanted to vary his leave to  remain  and
      made an application under paragraph 25 of CMND 571 which was  then  in
      operation.  The  Secretary   of   State   subsequently   refused   the
      application, applying the provision of a later immigration rule  which
      did not come into effect until 22 March 1977.   At  page  13  of  that
      judgment, Stephen Brown J said:

             'In my judgment, it is necessary to consider with the position
             was at the time when the Secretary of State made his  decision
             on 27 May 1977.  It is quite apparent that at that time  -  at
             the time of his decision - the effective rules were  paras  26
             and 26A of HC 239 which had come into  effect  from  22  March
             1977.  It would seem abundantly clear to me that the Secretary
             of State was quite correct in considering this application  in
             the light of the rules which were in force at the time when he
             considered the application, and that accordingly he was  quite
             correct in considering the matter under paras 26 and 26A of HC
             239;  and, furthermore, the Adjudicator was quite  correct  in
             proceeding upon that particular basis.'


7.    On 8 June 1978 the Adjudicator dismissed the appeal and  in  doing  so
      stated that he relied upon paragraph 26 and paragraph 26A of HC 80, as
      amended by HC 239.   The point, submitted  Mr  Roscoe,  was  that  the
      Adjudicator was able to consider it, just as the  Secretary  of  State
      was able to. It follows, therefore, he submitted, that the Adjudicator
      was entitled to apply  the  relevant  rule  as  at  the  date  of  the
      Secretary of State's decision even though it was not in force  at  the
      date of the Secretary of State's decision and had come into effect  in
      the intervening time.

8.    Mr Roscoe emphasised that as Immigration Rules  are  Procedural  Rules
      it follows that they must be capable of  having  retrospective  effect
      unless the  contrary  is  specified.  The  contrary  could  have  been
      specified by the Secretary of State but was not.

9.    The Tribunal drew Mr Roscoe's attention to what Stephen  Brown  J  had
      said later in the judgment, namely:

             'It seems to me that, bearing in mind that the rules  are  not
             statues or statutory instruments  which  give  rights  to  any
             persons there can  be  no  question  here  of  retrospectively
             applying certainly at the time of the application as  distinct
             from the time of the Secretary of State's consideration of the
             application  and  his  decision.  This  is  a  matter,  in  my
             judgment, which is so abundantly clear that no arguable  point
             of law can arise on it.'

10.   Mr Roscoe submitted that the rules had been developed  over  the  last
      twenty-four years to protect the  rights  of  individuals.   They  are
      procedural and the Divisional Court were holding against the  argument
      that the rules  could be given retrospective effect. However, the  law
      has been developed since that case was decided and it  was  clear,  he
      said, that it was desirable that they should  be  given  retrospective
      effect.

11.   The Adjudicator found that the appellant was the subject  of  domestic
      violence. He provided affidavits by way of  evidence  to  satisfy  the
      concession, which was in force at the time.  The rules were  correctly
      applied retrospectively by the Adjudicator and, that being  the  case,
      the Adjudicator should have granted the appeal, because Rule  289A(iv)
      only requires an  appellant  to  produce  'such  evidence  as  may  be
      required by the Secretary of State to establish that the  relationship
      was caused to permanently break down before the end of that period  as
      a  result of domestic violence.'  This appellant did produce evidence.
      It was in the form of  an  affidavit.  The  Immigration  Directorate's
      instructions contain internal guidance and information.  Paragraph 5.2
      (reproduced at page 35 of his bundle) says that in order to  establish
      a claim to domestic violence, evidence should be sought in the form of
      an injunction, a non-molestation order or other protection order  made
      against the sponsor (other than an ex parte or  interim  order)  or  a
      relevant court conviction against the sponsor or  full  details  of  a
      relevant police caution issued against the sponsor.  In  this  appeal,
      unusually, the Adjudicator was dealing with a man who was  the  victim
      of domestic violence rather than a woman.  Additionally, he was a Sikh
      man from a different culture for whom it would have been demeaning and
      shameful to report the matter to the police, or sought the  protection
      of the courts.  What he did do, however, was to  provide  evidence  of
      domestic violence and the Adjudicator  had  unnecessarily  constrained
      herself in her determination by looking at the facts  to  see  if  the
      Immigration Directorate's instructions had  been  complied  with.   He
      invited us to allow the appeal and submitted that the Adjudicator  had
      acted  unlawfully  in  finding  that  the  Immigration   Directorate's
      instructions had not been complied with.

12.   Responding, Mr Davidson submitted that since the  rules  did  not  say
      that they were to be applied retrospectively, they should not be.   In
      any event, the Adjudicator derived her jurisdiction from paragraph  21
      of Part 3 of Schedule 4 of the Immigration and Asylum Act, 1999, which
      requires that an appeal must be  allowed  by  an  Adjudicator  if  the
      Adjudicator considers that the decision or action  against  which  the
      appeal  is  brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  any
      Immigration Rules applicable to the case.  The  jurisdiction  was,  he
      submitted, to look back at the decision to see if it was in accordance
      with the law and relevant Immigration  Rule.  There  is  no  need,  he
      suggested, to  consider  whether  the  rules  have  any  retrospective
      effect. He invited us to dismiss the appeal.

13.   Responding, Mr Roscoe suggested that since the law had changed at  the
      date of the Adjudicator's determination, she should have looked at the
      law current at the date of the determination and decided  whether  the
      Secretary of State's decision or action was in accordance with it.

14.   We reserved our determination.

15.   In paragraph  12  of  her  determination,  Ms  Baloch  says  that  the
      application has been brought under Rule 289A which states:

             'The requirement to be met by a person who is  the  victim  of
             domestic violence and  who  is  seeking  indefinite  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom are that the applicant:


             (i) was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension
                 of stay for a period of twelve months as the  spouse  of  a
                 person present and settled here;  or
             (ii)      was admitted to  the  United  Kingdom  or  given  an
                 extension of say for a period of two years as the unmarried
                 partner of a person present and settled here; and
             (iii)     the relationship  with  their  spouse  or  unmarried
                 partner, as appropriate, was subsisting at the beginning of
                 the relevant period of leave or extension of stay  referred
                 to in (i) or (ii)   ... , and
             (iv)      is able to produce such evidence as may be  required
                 by  the  Secretary  of  State   to   establish   that   the
                 relationship was caused to permanently  break  down  before
                 the end of that period as a result of domestic violence.'

16.   In paragraph 23 of her determination, the Adjudicator found  that  the
      appellant  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence,  which  had
      adversely affected his health and well being and led to the  breakdown
      of the marriage.  However, she  found  that  the  criteria   contained
      within the Rule 289A and the Immigration and  Nationality  Directorate
      Law and Policy Document, setting out the Home Office requirements, had
      not been met.

17.   However, the Tribunal notes that the appellant's application was  made
      on 13 December 1999.  We do not know whether the concession  to  which
      we were referred was in place at the time, although we believe it  may
      well have been, since at page 8 of the appellant's bundle is a copy of
      a letter accompanying that application from his  solicitors  in  which
      they refer to their belief that the  application  can  be   considered
      outside the rules by the respondent. In any event, the concession most
      certainly was  in  effect  on  29  March  2001  when  the  appellant's
      application was refused by the respondent.  The refusal letter  of  29
      March 2001 said:-

             'Your client's application has also been considered under  the
             concession relating to  victims  of  domestic  violence.   The
             terms of this concession are that an applicant who has limited
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
             or unmarried partner of a person who is present and settled in
             the United Kingdom and whose relationship breaks  down  during
             the probationary period as the result  of  domestic  violence,
             may be granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom exceptionally outside the Immigration  Rules  provided
             that the violence occurred during the probation period  whilst
             the marriage or relationship was subsisting and the  applicant
             is able to produce one of the following forms of evidence that
             domestic violence has taken place:


             (i) an injunction, non-molestation order or  other  protection
                 order against  the  sponsor  (other  than  an  ex-parte  or
                 interim order);  or


             (ii)      a relevant court conviction against the sponsor;  or


             (iii) full details of a relevant police caution issued against
                 the sponsor.


             In view that one of the above listed forms of evidence has not
             been provided, the Secretary  of  State  is  not  prepared  to
             exercise his discretion to grant leave under this  concession.
             [sic]


             Your client's case has also been considered on an  exceptional
             basis outside the Immigration  Rules,  but  the  Secretary  of
             State can  find  no  compelling  or  compassionate  reason  to
             exercise his discretion in your client's favour.'

18.   As we have already pointed out, paragraph 289A which  deals  with  the
      requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
      the victim of domestic violence, was  inserted  into  the  Immigration
      Rules until 18 December 2001, some eight months later.

19.   The appellant's notice of appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      refusal was dated 2 April and the grounds given state merely:

             'The decision of the Secretary of State dated 29 March 2001 is
             unreasonable.'

20.    For  some  reason  not  known  to  the  Tribunal,  the   respondent's
      explanatory statement was not prepared  until  20  January  2003.   We
      believe that it was at about this time that the Home Office  sent  the
      file to the Immigration Appellate Authority in order that  the  appeal
      could be listed for hearing. By that time, of course,  Paragraph  289A
      had been inserted in the Immigration Rules pursuant to HC 104.

21.   Paragraph 21 of Part 3 of Section 4 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
      1999 states:

             '21(i) On an appeal to him under Part IV, an Adjudicator  must
                  allow the appeal if he considers -


                       (a)that the decision or  action  against  which  the
                    appeal is brought was not in accordance with the law  or
                    with any Immigration Rules applicable to  the  case,  or
                    (b) if the decision or action involved the exercise of a
                    discretion by the Secretary of State or an officer, that
                    the discretion should have been exercised differently,


                 but otherwise must dismiss the appeal.


              (ii)  subparagraph (i) is subject to paragraph 24 and to  any
                  restrictions on the grounds of appeal.


              (iii)  for the purposes of subparagraph (i), the  Adjudicator
                  may review any determination of  a  question  of  fact  on
                  which the decision or action was based.


              (iv)  for the purposes of subparagraph (i)(b), no decision or
                  action which is in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules
                  is to be treated as having  involved  the  exercise  of  a
                  discretion by the Secretary of State by reason only of the
                  fact that he is requested by or on behalf of the appellant
                  to depart, or to authorise an officer to depart, from  the
                  Rules and has refused to do so.


              (v)   if an appeal is allowed,  the  Adjudicator  :-  (a)must
                  give directions for giving effect to a determination as he
                  thinks are required; and (b) may also make recommendations
                  with respect to   any  other  action  which  he  considers
                  should be taken in the case under any of  the  immigration
                  acts.


              (vi)    the duty to  comply with directions given under  this
                  paragraph is subject to paragraph 22.'

22.   The emphasis in paragraph 21(i)(a) above is ours.

23.   We do not believe it is necessary for us to consider  whether  or  not
      paragraph 289A of HC 395 acts retrospectively.  We  believe  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in proceeding as if the appeal  was  one  against  a
      refusal under paragraph 289A, HC 395. What this Adjudicator had before
      her was an appeal against the concession in  place  at  the  date  the
      Secretary of State made his decision,  which  was  some  eight  months
      prior  to  the  insertion  in  HC  395  of  paragraph  289A.  Had  the
      Adjudicator correctly considered the appeal, we do  not  believe  that
      she could have reached a different  conclusion.  She  found  that  the
      appellant had not provided evidence that complied with the IND Law and
      Policy Document criteria. She found that the evidence before the  Home
      Office 'did not go  any  way  towards  satisfying  the  criteria'.  We
      believe that, had  she  considered  the  appeal  in  relation  to  the
      existing concession, she would have  been  bound  to  reach  the  same
      conclusion in relation to the evidence which the Home Office  required
      should be in the form of an injunction,  a  non-molestation  order  or
      other protection order against the sponsor (other than an ex parte  or
      interim order) or a relevant court conviction against the  sponsor  or
      full details of a relevant police caution issued against the sponsor.

24.   In any event, we find no merit in the argument  that  the  Immigration
      Rule applies retrospectively. Bearing in mind  the  words  of  Stephen
      Brown J to which we have referred above, and further to the  words  of
      Eveleigh LJ at page 14 where he said:-

             '... I think it is important to bear in mind the words of Lord
             Denning MR in R v Secretary of State ex parte Hosenbal [[1971]
             1 WLR 766], where he said:


                 "They are not rules of law. They are rules of practice laid
                 down for the guidance of immigration officers and tribunals
                 who are entrusted with the administration of the Act.  They
                 can be, and often are, prayed in aid by  applicants  before
                 the courts in immigration cases"

             Where one bears that  in  mind,  there  is  no  right  in  the
             applicant to dictate to the Secretary of State  which  set  of
             rules shall be applied at the time of the decision of a  case.
              The rules are essentially rules which have to be regarded  at
             the time of a decision. The argument  of  Mr  Nathan  that  in
             effect this is giving retrospective effect to the  rules,  and
             then by analogy to the interpretation of  statues,  contending
             that this was not permissible, is,  in  my  view,  a  mistaken
             approach.  The rules and their statutory interpretation depend
             very largely on vested rights.There were no such rights in the
             present case.'

25.   For all the above reasons, we find that we must dismiss this appeal.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President



-----------------------
      1


