

SA (Entry clearance - Student - Documentary evidence) Pakistan [2003]  UKIAT
00002


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                  Date heard: 14 April  2003

                                      Date notified:..28.05.03

                                   Before

                            DR H H STOREY (CHAIR)
                              DR A U CHAUDHURY


                                                               Between


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And



                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad, has appealed  with
leave of the Tribunal against a determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  A  C  B
Markham  David,  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,  a  citizen  of
Pakistan, against the decision to refuse  to  grant  entry  clearance  as  a
student. Mr J Morris appeared for the appellant. Mr  of  Counsel  instructed
by  Solicitors  appeared  for  the  respondent.  To  avoid   confusion   the
respondent is hereafter referred to as the "claimant".


2. We have decided to remit  this  appeal.  The  adjudicator  did  not  have
certain documents before him. He considered that, as the claimant  had  said
in his notice of appeal that he  was  sending  12  documents,  including  an
affidavit from his father and evidence of his father's  business,  "he  must
be able to rely on the fact that they will be before  the  Adjudicator  when
the appeal is finally heard". He noted that the Entry Clearance Officer  had
not notified the  appellate  authorities  of  any  failure  to  receive  the
documents. He concluded: "Thus, in my view, the only course I  can  take  is
to act as if the documents were before me and to assume that they  say  what
the appellant sets out in his notice of appeal". At paragraph 8 he stated:


      "In these circumstances I think the only fair  course  is  for  me  to
      assume  that  the  evidence  relating  to  his  father's  business  is
      sufficient to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities  that  he  is
      able to meet the costs of the  course  and  maintain  and  accommodate
      himself without recourse to public funds. The only other  course  open
      to me would have  been  to  adjourn  this  appeal  until  the  missing
      documents were found, which might be an indefinite  period  and  would
      undoubtedly be an injustice to the appellant".

3. We have some sympathy with the position the adjudicator found himself  in
in this case. The Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2000,
which governed this case when he heard it, do not  require  the  immigration
authority (in this  case  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer)  to  send  to  the
appellate authority documents accompanying the notice of  appeal  except  in
specified circumstances not relevant in this case  (see  Rules  10  and  8).
There was no appearance from either party. If there had been  representation
the adjudicator  could  have  clarified  with  the  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer whether the documents had in fact been received. If  the  claimant's
representatives had appeared he could have expected them to  produce  copies
of the documents the claimant sent when  he  appealed.  No  request  for  an
adjournment. Even as a result if the adjudicator still had power to  adjourn
of his own motion, that was subject to the requirement set out  at  Rule  31
that he only do so if  refusal  would  prevent  the  just  disposal  of  the
appeal.

4. Nevertheless it remains that the adjudicator was not entitled  to  assume
that evidence, which he had not seen, established the claimant's  case  just
because the claimant said it did. The burden of proof was  on  the  claimant
to show that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  at  the  date
of decision. The Entry Clearance Officer had decided on  the  basis  of  the
claimant's own account at interview that the claimant had  not  shown  there
would be adequate finances to cover the cost of his studies. He  noted  that
the claimant's studies equated  to  approximately  3  years  income  of  his
father and that the balance of the accounts produced was  "not  enough".  He
recorded  asking  for  tax  and  other  evidence  and  originals   of   bank
statements. He further recorded that the  claimant  said  he  could  provide
these.

5. When the matter came before the  adjudicator,  the  adjudicator  did  not
have before him any further documentary evidence from the claimant.  All  he
knew was that claimant stated he had sent 12 documents with his  grounds  of
appeal,   three  of  which  appeared  to  bear  on  the  father's  financial
position: an  affidavit  from  his  father  and  evidence  of  his  father's
business and a valuation certificate of property.  He  also  knew  that  the
claimant had said in his appeal letter that his father was in a position  to
bear his tuition expense including his living in the UK for  30  months  and
that he had produced an  "affidavit  and  all  the  evidences  according  to
british high commissioners student visa rules".

6. However, the adjudicator did not know whether any of  this  evidence  was
in fact probative of the claimant's case. We cannot see that the failure  of
the claimant to avail himself of the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  appeal
system for him to be represented by a nominated representative should  place
him in a more beneficial position than if a representative had attended

7. The Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules refer  to  the  need
for justice in the disposal of appeal. They  are  not  a  recipe  for  blind
justice. The adjudicator effectively treated evidence as  being  before  him
which was not and he wrongly treated the onus of proof  as  resting  on  the
Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  disprove  that  the  claimant  satisfied  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to students.

8. There is a further reason why we consider that we should allow the  Entry
Clearance Officer's appeal. The claimant and his representatives  were  made
aware through the determination granting leave that  the  issue  of  whether
documents were actually sent  with  the  claimant's  notice  of  appeal  was
central to the case. They  were  also  aware  that  directions  set  by  the
Tribunal required further evidence to be submitted within a  specified  time
period. No such evidence has been forthcoming.

9. Even if we had been satisfied the adjudicator dealt  satisfactorily  with
the issue of financial ability, the decision  before  him  also  included  a
finding that the claimant had not shown he  intended  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom at  the  end  of  his  studies.  The  adjudicator  gave  no  reasons
whatsoever for why he considered the Entry Clearance  Office  was  wrong  to
reach this finding. That in itself was sufficiently  to  fundamentally  flaw
the determination.

10. For the above reasons and in accordance with the provisions of  Rule  22
of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003, the appeal  is
allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  be  heard  by  an  adjudicator
other than Mr A C B  Markham  David.  Plainly  if  no  further  evidence  is
forthcoming from the claimant when the case is heard again, the  adjudicator
will have to dismiss the claimant's appeal on the basis that  he  failed  to
discharge the onus of proof on him to show he met in full  the  requirements
of the Immigration Rules relating to students.


                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT

