
                              DK (Return-Ethic Serb- Upheld SK-
Accommodation) Croatia CG
                              [2003] UKIAT 00153
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 20th October 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            20 November 2003

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                                Mr S Batiste
                                  Ms D Gill

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is another appeal which raises issues concerning  the  return  of
     ethnic Serbs to Croatia.  The Appellant, DK,  is  now  34.   He  is  a
     Croatian citizen of Serb ethnic origin who arrived in this country  in
     March 2000 and claimed asylum.   He  was  interviewed  fifteen  months
     later and in October 2001, his claim was refused.  In  May  2002,  his
     asylum and human rights appeals were dismissed by the Adjudicator,  Mr
     R L Walker, and he appeals with the permission of the Tribunal against
     that decision.  It had been the original expectation of  the  Tribunal
     that there were to be five "test"  cases  from  Sutovic  and  Hartigan
     clients, but for one reason or another, those  identified  cases  have
     not been pursued as test cases.

The Adjudicator's decision

  2. The Adjudicator heard evidence from DK to the effect that he had lived
     his life in Knin.  He had joined the Republic of Serbia Krajna  police
     or army when the fighting between Serb and Croat broke  out  in  1990.
     In 1995, he, with between 150,000 and 250,000 other Serbs, were driven
     from Krajina by the Croat armed forces  in  "Operation  Storm";   they
     were displaced to Serbia and Bosnia.   He  went  to  Serbia  with  his
     parents, his wife and children.   His  grandfather  was  killed.   The
     house in which he lived, which  the  Adjudicator  considered  as  "the
     Appellant's family home" was destroyed.  The family were registered as
     displaced persons.  They are still in Serbia.

  3. He returned to Knin for a short while in 1999, where he said  that  he
     had been  arrested  and  ill-treated  by  the  police;   he  had  been
     recognised as a former Republic of Serbian Krajina policeman.  He left
     Croatia again in late 1999, returning  to  Serbia  for  a  few  months
     before making his way alone to Hungary, then to France and  eventually
     to the UK where he has a brother, also an asylum seeker, and a cousin.
      He could only find low paid work in Serbia, but  in  the  UK  he  has
     trained as a plumber and seeks to continue to support his family.

  4. The Adjudicator accepted that DK and his family, with other Serbs, had
     been driven from Knin in "Operation Storm", that his  grandfather  had
     been killed and that the family house had been deliberately  destroyed
     by the Croats.   The  Adjudicator  said  that  he  had  difficulty  in
     accepting the evidence that DK had been in the  RSK  police  or  army,
     because his evidence had been  very  vague  and  he  had  produced  no
     evidence to corroborate  it.   (The  Adjudicator  did  not  mean  that
     corroboration was required as a matter of principle, but only that  in
     the absence of supporting evidence, what DK himself said was too vague
     to meet the standard of proof.)  The Adjudicator did  not  think  that
     there was any real risk of DK being prosecuted for alleged war  crimes
     because he had been released without charge by the Croatian police  in
     1999, at a time when the Tudjman regime was still in  power.   He  had
     been prepared to go to Knin with his parents in 1999 with the specific
     aim of going to the police station in a small town where he said  that
     everybody knew  everybody  else,  to  apply  for  identity  cards  and
     passports in order to prove to Serbia that they had had some assets in
     Croatia.  This showed that his asserted fear of  persecution  was  not
     genuine.  The Adjudicator did  not  think  that  he  was  at  risk  of
     detention and ill-treatment; there had been no  further  ill-treatment
     as a result of DK's lodging complaints about  his  ill-treatment  with
     the police and an international organisation.

  5. Overall, the Adjudicator, while recognising that there  were  some  of
     the many returning ethnic Serbs who had  been  persecuted  on  return,
     concluded that the Appellant had no well-founded fear of  persecution.
     In any event there were other areas of Croatia to which  he  could  go
     where there were higher percentages of Serbs.   He  thought  that  the
     Appellant was an economic migrant whose return to Croatia would breach
     no rights under either relevant Convention.

  6. The Appellant sought to adduce additional evidence before the Tribunal
     which we looked at without ruling on its admission.  It sought to take
     issue with the adverse credibility findings in relation to whether  DK
     was a member of the RSK forces, if indeed the Adjudicator had  reached
     such a conclusion;  it provided more material about the risk to him of
     an unfounded war crimes prosecution and the  difficulties  experienced
     by his parents in obtaining reconstruction assistance  in  respect  of
     their house.  It provided further  evidence  as  to  the  difficulties
     which he would face in Croatia and which his wife and  children  would
     face if they tried to return to Croatia;  he had no rights in  Serbia.
     He also had two cousins here, recognised as refugees and an  aunt  and
     her family, which is why he had chosen to come  here.   The  Appellant
     also produced an expert Report from Dr Brad Blitz, which we agreed  to
     take into account together with other country material which  in  good
     part post-dated the Adjudicator's determination.

S&K

  7. At the heart of the appeal,  however,  was  the  contention  that  the
     conclusions of this Tribunal in S&K [2002] UKIAT 05613*,  notified  on
     3rd December 2002, should be re-examined.  At the  conclusion  of  the
     determination in S&K, the then President said:

           "However, unless the situation  deteriorates  to  a  significant
           extent or special circumstances can be shown  in  an  individual
           case, no ethnic Serb should be able to establish a  claim  under
           either Convention."

   8. That decision was intended to and did give authoritative  guidance  as
      to the approach to be adopted towards the  position  of  ethnic  Serbs
      returning to Croatia.  Giving such guidance is an  important  part  of
      the Tribunal's function, enabling   the parties  to  know  where  they
      stand and assisting  the  achievement  of  consistent  decision-making
      throughout the asylum and immigration  process.   Although  S&K  is  a
      starred decision, it was not starred  because  of  its  guidance  over
      Croatia, but because of an issue  of  statutory  interpretation  which
      arose in it.  The system of starring decisions relates only to  points
      of law and in that  way  marks  them  as  binding  authority  for  the
      Tribunal and Adjudicators.  The value of the starring process and  the
      giving of authoritative guidance was recognised by the Court of Appeal
      in both S and Others [2002] INLR  416,  and  again  by  Laws  LJ  when
      refusing a renewed application for permission to appeal in S&K on 25th
      May 2003, [2003] EWCA Civ 841.

 21. In Manzeke v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 524 COA, Lord Woolf MR,  dealing  with
     the power the Tribunal to determine an appeal instead of remitting it,
     said:


           "This last provision is of significance,  not  only  because  it
           gives  a  clear  steer  to  Tribunals  that  they  should  avoid
           remitting cases to special adjudicators, no doubt  because  such
           remission will involve delay, but also because it indicates that
           the Tribunal has, where possible, to conduct  any  determination
           which will enable it finally to dispose of an appeal itself.


           Particularly  when  determining  appeals  brought  where  it  is
           necessary to give consideration  to  the  general  situation  in
           particular parts of the world, it is  important  for  Tribunals,
           when appropriate, to give their views as to that  situation,  so
           far as relevant, to claims for asylum in that part of the world.


           In administering the asylum jurisdiction, the Tribunal  (whether
           it be a special  adjudicator  or  an  Appeal  Tribunal)  has  to
           consider not only whether the individual asylum seeker  has  the
           necessary subjective fear to  be  regarded  as  someone  who  is
           entitled to asylum, but in addition it has to be satisfied  that
           that fear is well-founded.  Whether or not that  fear  is  well-
           founded involves applying  an  objective  standard,  a  standard
           which will depend upon the state of affairs in  that  particular
           country as well as the circumstances of  the  individual  asylum
           seeker.


           It will be beneficial to the general  administration  of  asylum
           appeals for special adjudicators to  have  the  benefit  of  the
           views of a Tribunal in other cases on the general situation in a
           particular part of the world, as long as that situation has  not
           changed in the meantime.  Consistency in the treatment of asylum
           seekers is important insofar as  objective  considerations,  not
           directly affected by the circumstances of the individual  asylum
           seeker, are involved."


   9. Mr Mullins, for DK, did not seek to say that S&K was simply  wrong  on
      the material then before it, though he did challenge  the  conclusions
      which had been reached.  He  did  not  put  his  case  so  much  on  a
      deterioration in circumstances, though he  contended  that  there  had
      been a worsening of conditions.  Nor was  his  case  that  there  were
      exceptional circumstances;  almost all of his argument would  be  good
      for any ethnic Serb  returning  to  Croatia,  drawn  as  it  was  from
      generalised evidence about the difficulties faced by Serbs in a number
      of ways, some of which applied to DK and some of which  did  not.   He
      contended that there was now evidence that an  assumption  upon  which
      S&K had proceeded, as to the availability of  benefits  for  returning
      failed asylum seekers from the UK, was wrong.  The UNHCR  was  not  of
      the same encouraging view in relation to such  returning  Serbs.   The
      evidence now showed that the hopeful picture envisaged by the Tribunal
      in S&K was not in reality being  borne  out  at  the  level  of  local
      implementation.  With the benefit of hindsight, it could now  be  seen
      that the good intentions of the new Croatian Government had  not  been
      implemented.  He criticised the Tribunal's approach to Article 3:   it
      should have seen a continuing breach of that Article  where  the  ill-
      treatment, here the burning down of the family house and  the  violent
      displacement, had not been remedied.  It was wrong to take a  snapshot
      of the situation now and to fail to see the current position  as  part
      of a continuum, a continuing breach of Article 3 by Croatia.  In those
      circumstances, it was appropriate to look again at the  whole  picture
      in Croatia;  the new  information  could  not  simply  be  treated  in
      isolation.  He was entitled to ask the Tribunal to  take  a  different
      view from that expressed in paragraph  40  of  S&K.   In  Mr  Mullins'
      submission, given the past and continuing  breach  of  Article  3,  DK
      should only be returned to Croatia if  the  situation  he  would  face
      there is such that his return would be made "with dignity".

  10. Of course, the authoritative guidance given in S&K needs to be  looked
      at again if there is sound evidence that the anticipated position  has
      proved to be significantly different in reality;   that  is  really  a
      form of change in circumstance.  The same would apply to a significant
      misapprehension as to the facts.  The question is whether that is  the
      position, examined through the circumstances of  DK  and  the  general
      country material which has been produced.

  11. Mr Wilken, for the Respondent, submitted  that  it  was  necessary  to
      examine what had been decided in S&K and that the Appellant had failed
      to appreciate its true scope.  The Appellant's points were similar  to
      those in S&K, and were really appeal points  in  that  case;   he  was
      covering  ground  already  well-trodden  up  to  the  end   of   2002.
      Accordingly, we turn to the decision in S&K.


  12. The President pointed out in paragraph 6 that the Tribunal had  chosen
      a number of cases in which the  decisions  appealed  against  included
      both asylum and human rights grounds, so that  a  variety  of  factual
      situations which were likely to recur  could  be  considered  and  the
      determination relied  on  in  other  appeals.   It  is  apparent  from
      paragraph 10 that there is a strong similarity in the arguments  which
      were raised in S&K and again in this case.  The allegations relied  on
      to constitute either persecution  or  contravention  of  a  Claimant's
      human  rights  were,  broadly,  physical   violence,   hostility   and
      discrimination based on ethnicity.

           "Their homes in Croatia have either been destroyed or taken over
           by Croats or any tenancy rights which they  may  have  had  have
           been removed.  They have  lost  and  cannot  regain  employment.
           There is chronic unemployment  and  economic  hardship  but  the
           Serbs are at the bottom of the heap.   The  present  regime  has
           failed to recognise and so to 'convalidate' their pension rights
           which should have continued to accrue while the  Serbs  were  in
           control.  While it is recognised and to an extent accepted  that
           central Government is  trying  to  uphold  minority  rights  and
           encourage the return of ethnic Serbs who had  fled  Croatia  and
           who for good reason failed to return while the HDZ under Tudjman
           was  in  control,  it  is  contended   that   the   Government's
           instructions are being frustrated at local level  by  continuing
           discrimination, by judicial and  bureaucratic  incompetence  and
           failures  and  by  unwillingness  or  inability  to  remedy  the
           situation.  In addition ...   there is, it is said, a real  risk
           that prosecutions for alleged war crimes will be pursued on  the
           basis  of   collective   responsibility   notwithstanding   that
           individuals cannot themselves be proved to  have  done  anything
           which could properly be regarded as a war crime."

 14. Mr Blake submitted for the Claimants in S&K, as recorded in  paragraph
     11, that the Serbs were persecuted and their  human  rights  had  been
     breached by the ethnic cleansing under Tudjman.   They  had  lost  all
     that they had and there was no real prospect of  improvement,  because
     of discrimination and a failure to implement the expressed  intentions
     of the Government.  This constituted degrading treatment;  a sustained
     breach of core human rights did, in  those  circumstances,  amount  to
     persecution.  Reliance was placed on two authorities, to which  we  in
     DK have been referred, namely the East African Asians  case  [1973]  3
     EHRR 76, a decision of the European Commission on  Human  Rights,  and
     Cyprus v Turkey (ECtHR 10th May 2001).  The  Tribunal  considered  the
     issue  of  whether  discrimination  on   racial   grounds   in   those
     circumstances amounted to degrading treatment in breach of Article  3.
     At paragraph  24,  the  Tribunal  recorded  the  extensive  background
     country material and expert reports to which they had been referred.

 15. In paragraph 26 of its determination, the Tribunal in S&K referred  to
     the essential complaints common to all the cases  with  which  it  was
     dealing.  These were the discriminatory loss of homes and  livelihood,
     the discriminatory denial of social and economic rights in  the  areas
     to which return was envisaged, with no special efforts being  made  to
     redress the wrongs suffered and to help their return to  society,  the
     discriminatory denial  of  judicial  assistance  in  reclaiming  homes
     occupied by Croats, and the loss of stability and security because  of
     the prospect of a marginalised and ostracised existence in  a  largely
     ethnically cleansed country, in which only a  small  fraction  of  the
     Serbs who previously lived there now did  so.   One  of  the  specific
     cases raised the issue of the risk that  returning  Serbs  might  face
     unfair war crimes trials.

 16. The Tribunal then set out briefly the history of  ethnic  tensions  in
     Croatia, the ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and the change in  policies
     following the death in December 1999 of Tudjman and  the  election  in
     February 2000 of  a  new  President,  Mesic,  for  three  years.   The
     nationalist Croat Party,  the  HDZ,  was  soundly  defeated  in  those
     elections.  The Tribunal recorded that it was accepted  that  the  new
     Government had made real efforts to overcome the legacy of hatred  and
     had taken positive steps in legislation  and  other  ways  to  try  to
     remove the obstacles  to  return  and  discrimination  against  ethnic
     minorities such as Serbs.  It recorded  next  the  concerns  that  too
     little was  being  done  and  that  the  good  intentions  of  central
     Government were being frustrated by local officials.  It  referred  to
     the concerns expressed in the January 2002 Human Rights  Watch  Report
     and the problems faced by those Croatian Serbs who had returned.   The
     Amnesty International Report of September 2002 noted that  the  return
     of the country's pre-war Serb population continued  to  be  marred  by
     discriminatory laws and political obstruction.  War  crimes  were  not
     investigated or prosecuted thoroughly or  impartially,  in  particular
     against possible Croat Claimants.  The Organisation for  Security  and
     Co-operation  in  Europe,   through   Ambassador   Semneby,   gave   a
     presentation  in  September  2002  in  which   the   difficulties   of
     repossessing private property,  of  receiving  adequate  remedies  for
     terminated occupancy rights and of convalidating  documents  regarding
     pension rights were identified. The conclusions  of  a  visiting  NATO
     delegate and MP in September 2002 were that doubts remained about  the
     sustainability of returns because in many areas hard-line nationalists
     continued to run local  Government  and  would  frustrate  any  return
     policy,  and  that  even  where  that  was  not  so,   the   necessary
     infrastructure was lacking and the inability  of  Serbs  to  repossess
     their properties created problems.  However, the Tribunal  noted  that
     returns were being  encouraged  by  the  UNHCR  notwithstanding  these
     difficulties and, in a letter of 17th May 2002, noted the Government's
     positive steps to assist in reconstruction and  its  plans  to  assist
     those whose tenancy rights had  not  been  determined.   The  Tribunal
     recorded, and it is relevant to Mr Mullins' submissions, that that was
     criticised as "jam tomorrow".  The May 2002  OSCE  Status  Report  was
     issued and difficulties were referred to.

 17. In paragraph 33, the Tribunal concluded as follows:

           "We  have,  we  hope,  cited  enough  to   identify   the   real
           difficulties and discrimination that undoubtedly face  Serbs  if
           returned.  The Government has the right intentions but is  still
           being frustrated at lower levels.  However,  the  Government  is
           undoubtedly taking steps to improve the situation  and  in  June
           2002 the UNHCR/Stability Pact for South  Croatian  Europe  under
           the heading 'Return Programme  of  the  Government  of  Croatia'
           states:


                 'UNHCR continues to support directly the  return  Programme
                 of the Government of Croatia, accepting and assisting  with
                 the processing of return applications. ...'


           While [returning] numbers are small in the context of the  total
           of Serbs  who  fled,  it  is  clear  that  the  UNHCR  is  still
           encouraging return.  And later in the same report it notes  that
           the Government of Croatia has 'agreed to accept all persons  who
           sign a waiver that they will accept collective accommodation  if
           their housing is not habitable or if there is no host  who  will
           accept them.  In particular, the Government of Croatia indicated
           that it would prioritise Croatian Serbs being  evicted  from  BH
           (Bosnia-Herzegovina) for return and provision of accommodation'.
             It  is  further  noted  that  the   Croatian  Government   had
           'undertaken  to  assist  returnees  in  their  reintegration  by
           providing a basic assistance depending on monthly income  for  a
           six-month period following confirmed returnee  status,  although
           in practice, a lack of funds has caused delays.  The  assistance
           includes cash grants,  medical  coverage  and  other  legal  and
           social benefits'.  It may be  said  with  some  force  that  the
           situation on the ground is not so satisfactory since  there  are
           bureaucratic delays and obstructions because of local officials'
           reluctance to follow the Government's lead.  We recognise  that,
           but remain of the view that, whatever the pressures  on  it  and
           notwithstanding its obvious concern  to  cease  to  have  to  be
           concerned to assist those who would otherwise be  refugees,  the
           UNHCR would not encourage return if persuaded that  there  would
           be persecution contrary to the Refugee  Convention  or,  indeed,
           treatment contrary to Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on
           Human Rights.


 18. The Tribunal considered the concerns that the numbers returning  might
     have been exaggerated, that many who returned might  have  left  again
     and that those who remained  might,  in  the  main,  be  elderly.   It
     recognised that the percentage of ethnic Serbs in the  population  had
     reduced from about 12 percent to nearer 4 percent and  considered  the
     implication of that for the likely reaction to returning  Serbs.   The
     draft report from the Department  for  International  Development,  to
     which Dr Blitz contributed, based on his most recent visits to Croatia
     in the summer of 2001,  was  also  referred  to:   there  were  useful
     reforms, but considerable problems  remained  for  minorities  seeking
     access  to  justice  and  in  relation  to  the  return  of  refugees.
     Discrimination in  housing  and  war  crimes  was  seen  as  the  most
     significant barrier to regional stability and put returning  Serbs  at
     risk.  The  Tribunal  commented  that  the  persistent  discrimination
     against non-Croats was recognised, but  the  draft  Report's  comments
     were seen as "now somewhat out of date".  Changes that had taken place
     since 2001 in relation to war crime prosecutions against Croats  under
     the pressure of Croatia's desire to join the EU  and  the  obligations
     which that would entail.  The HDZ, although it was seeing a resurgence
     of support in 2002, was itself  no  longer  as  a  whole  the  extreme
     nationalist and right-wing party of the  Tudjman  era.   The  Tribunal
     regarded  some  of  the  expert  material  placed  before  it  as  too
     pessimistic.  It accepted the Respondent's summary of  the  background
     evidence as set out in Annex 2 to Mr Wilken's skeleton argument.   The
     evidence showed a functioning and fair judiciary, an effective  police
     force, redress in the Courts for breaches of personal security and the
     availability of legal routes for redress through the higher Courts and
     ECtHR.

 19. The Tribunal considered war  crimes  prosecutions  briefly,  it  being
     conceded that unless there was particular reason to  believe  that  an
     individual would be prosecuted, the  war  crimes  prosecutions  system
     could not be relied on as a barrier to return.   It  referred  to  the
     monitoring of prosecutions by the  OSCE  and  the  UNHCR.   Trials  in
     absentia, which arose in that case but which do not arise in DK,  were
     considered.

 20. Overall, in paragraph 40, the Tribunal concluded as follows:

           "As will no doubt be apparent, we are satisfied that  there  has
           been no worsening of the situation since we decided S and in any
           event the material before us does not persuade  us  on  the  low
           standard required that there is a  real  risk  that  in  general
           Serbs if returned to Croatia will suffer persecution or a breach
           of any Article of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   We
           recognise that the  situation  is  far  from  pleasant  and  the
           deprivation and misery that will be faced.  That stems from  the
           war and the destruction caused by it.  But that by itself cannot
           mean that surrogate protection is needed or that there will be a
           breach of human rights.   We  regard  the  steps  taken  by  the
           Croatian Government, despite the difficulties at local level and
           the obstacles that still undoubtedly  exist,  as  sufficient  to
           provide the necessary protection.  It follows that we accept the
           submissions made by Mr Wilken, set out in detail in his skeleton
           argument and more particularly in Annex 2 to  it.   Even  though
           there  is   discrimination   coupled   with   the   difficulties
           particularly of housing, employment and convalidation  to  which
           we have referred, we are satisfied that the threshold of Article
           3, in particular of degrading treatment, has not  been  crossed.
           Equally, although we recognise that the Article 8  threshold  is
           lower, we are not persuaded that it has been crossed.  But  even
           if it has, we are satisfied  that  removal  is  justified  by  a
           proper control of immigration."


 22. There are very strong factual similarities between DK and one  of  the
     specific cases considered in S&K:  SK had lived in  Knin  until  1995,
     when he had been expelled to Bosnia in "Operation Storm";  he had been
     in the RSK military forces;  SK's house near Knin was burnt  down  and
     the flat in Knin taken over by Croats.  His father  had  so  far  been
     unsuccessful in his application for  repossession  of  the  flat;   he
     would have nowhere to live and no resources.

 23. The Tribunal concluded, in relation to S&K, in paragraph 45, that:

           "Despite the hardship that the claimant will undoubtedly  suffer
           resulting from the fighting in his country, he does not show any
           special circumstances which mean that he can establish  that  he
           should be given the  benefit  of  either  Convention.   For  the
           reasons which we have given, therefore, we take  the  view  that
           the adjudicator's conclusion was wrong and this appeal  must  be
           allowed."


 24. The Court of Appeal, Laws LJ, refused permission to appeal.

The new material

 25. For the purposes of this appeal, we have been provided  with  all  the
     background material which was provided to the  Tribunal  hearing  S&K.
     We have not been referred to any passages in it and we have not looked
     at it.  Dr  Blitz's  report  contains  a  summary  of  the  background
     material over the period from 1990 to the present day.  There  may  or
     may not have been a new point of detail in what is said in his  report
     about the treatment of the Serbs by the Croat  majority,  both  up  to
     "Operation Storm" and in  the  subsequent  discrimination  which  they
     faced in seeking to repossess property under the Tudjman  regime.   On
     the other hand, the significant aspect of the Tribunal's  decision  in
     S&K and here relates to the changes that have  taken  place  and  were
     prospectively envisaged under the new regime of Mesic.  Most  of  what
     Dr Blitz has to say about the position in the Mesic/Racan era  relates
     to the position after  2002  or  to  material  available  after  2002,
     although he does refer to the position in 2001.

 26. However, in view of the relatively narrow compass of the points in S&K
     as at the date of its decision, with which Mr Mullins takes issue,  we
     can focus on the new material or subsequent events  in  examining  his
     arguments.  That is because the thrust of his argument relates to  the
     way events have turned out in reality and to new material which it  is
     said shows that a  false  assumption  was  made.   The  issue  of  the
     approach to Article 3 as a continuum and with Article 14 can be looked
     at in the light of our conclusions on the position as it now would  be
     for ethnic Serbs returning to  Croatia,  and  for  this  Appellant  in
     particular.  Mr Mullins confirmed that of the new background material,
     apart from Dr Blitz's report, he had  drawn  our  attention  to  those
     documents and passages which he relied on  in  particular.   There  is
     therefore a certain amount of new background material  which  we  have
     looked at and the material in Dr Blitz's  report  which  is  itself  a
     helpful synthesis of current literature.  He  has  undertaken  limited
     telephonic research, about which we comment later, and has not been to
     Croatia since the summer of 2001.

 27. We now turn to  that  new  material,  starting  with  the  Appellant's
     bundle.  We were referred to an interview of 26th September 2003  with
     Ambassador Semneby, Head of the OSCE mission to  Croatia.   Ambassador
     Semneby had described  himself  as  relatively  optimistic  about  the
     improvements in the position in  Croatia  and  referred  to  important
     developments such  as  the  adoption  of  the  Constitutional  Law  on
     National Minorities.  There had been amendments to the Law on Areas of
     Special  State  Concerns,   incorporating   the   issue   of   refugee
     tenancy/occupancy rights onto its agenda.  "We are seeing things which
     are almost inconceivable a year ago, as well as  significant  advances
     in legislature.  Implementation, however, is poor." Mr  Wilken's  case
     reflected the first sentence,  Mr  Mullins'  the  second.   Ambassador
     Semneby estimated that there were  about  5,000  houses  occupied,  or
     whose owners had not been able to repossess  them.   The  deadline  to
     resolve this issue by the  end  of  2002,  which  the  Government  had
     imposed  upon  itself,  had  not  been  met.   Nor  had  it  fulfilled
     provisions by  which  owners,  who  were  unable  to  repossess  their
     properties, would receive compensation for  the  time  spent  waiting.
     There were almost 40,000 unresolved  reconstruction  requests.   There
     were  problems  of  tenancy  rights  for  those  who  had  left  their
     apartments.  Although there had been a major improvement, in the  fact
     that the Government now had that issue on its agenda and had adopted a
     programme in relation to it, the  OSCE  was  still  waiting  for  that
     project to be implemented.  The cost of the programmes was recognised.
      The state of the economy was very important for "sustainable return".
      They were moving from examining those restrictions which made  return
     impossible to examining those conditions which were required for  this
     sustainable return. "Without economic development, return is difficult
     but not impossible;  however, without housing care it is  impossible."
     The Ambassador considered that security  issues  were,  for  the  most
     part, satisfactory and that progress in resolving the issue of housing
     was visible, following which the OSCE would turn its attention to  the
     economic situation and sustainability of return.  He pointed out  that
     ensuring conditions for economic revitalisation was an important  area
     for the potential return of refugees.   He  emphasised  that  although
     there were certain isolated incidents, physical safety, for  the  most
     part, was  completely  satisfactory  throughout  the  entire  country.
     There had been very close co-operation with the police on this  issue.
     He expressed the view that the return of refugees should not  be  seen
     by public opinion in Croatia as a threat, but as a way  of  overcoming
     the burden of the past and moving towards membership of  the  European
     Union.

 28. The OSCE mission to Croatia  reported  in  August  2003  that  it  had
     recently monitored several failed evictions and failed procedures  for
     repossession  of  private  property  previously   allocated   by   the
     Government to Croats.  It appeared to be the case  that  a  number  of
     evictions, supported by court orders and by  the  presence  of  police
     supposedly to assist  in  repossession,  had  failed  because  of  the
     arrival of a significant crowd in support of the occupants, which  the
     police had not endeavoured to disperse, and the leaders of  which  had
     not been arrested.  There was further material  from  the  OSCE  which
     highlighted the difficulties in property repossession  cases  and  the
     tactics adopted by the  occupier  to  postpone  eviction  through  the
     courts.  One problem relates to money  that  has  been  spent  on  the
     property allegedly and whether the occupant has somewhere else to go.

 29. The Institute for War and Peace, reporting in October 2003,  suggested
     that the HDZ would be likely to run the ruling coalition close in  the
     November 2003 parliamentary elections.  It was thought that  it  might
     even win.  It was feared by that report that the prospect  of  Croatia
     joining the EU was receding as it failed to hand over the  war  crimes
     fugitive,  General  Gotovina.  It  was  suggested  that  there  was  a
     resurgence of the right wing.  It is to be noted, however,  that  that
     report does not suggest that the resurgent HDZ had the  extreme  right
     wing and nationalist views which it had had before 2000.   The  report
     did not  suggest  that  the  change  in  its  broad  outlook  had  not
     continued.

 30. A US State Department Report on religious freedom in Croatia  of  2002
     referred to the challenges which the return of refugees posed for  the
     Croatian Government, which the report said  had  made  progress  in  a
     number of areas.  The report did not suggest that there was  religious
     discrimination as such against Serbs or Serbian Orthodox clergy, but a
     pattern of often open  and  severe  discrimination  continued  against
     ethnic Serbs.  This report was released on 7th  October  2002.   There
     were reports of vandalism of Serb cemeteries and a number of incidents
     of  harassment,  with  the  suggestion  that  there  were  many   more
     unreported incidences, although the number of those which  took  place
     which were reported appeared to be growing.   The  report  said  "Both
     OSCE observers and religious leaders  note  that  overall  ethnic  and
     religious relations are improving slowly".

 31. Mr Wilken criticised the Appellant's reliance on the  DFID  Report  of
     2001 because not only  had  that  been  before  the  IAT  in  S&K  and
     considered by it, but the IAT had held that even in December 2002 that
     report and other material  dealing  with  the  position  in  2001  was
     somewhat out of date.

 32. In addition to the Appellant's background material to  which  we  have
     made reference above, there  is  a  substantial  volume  of  objective
     material running to some 490 pages submitted by  the  Respondent  upon
     which the Appellant also drew.  Most of the material  in  that  volume
     relates to the position after 2002,  or  is  material  which  was  not
     available for the Tribunal hearing S&K.  We  have  read  the  material
     parts of the documents to which our attention has been  drawn  by  the
     parties in their skeleton arguments and oral submissions.  It includes
     OSCE material from November 2002 and July 2003,  US  State  Department
     Reports and notes of March and July 2003, a Human Rights Watch  Report
     of September 2003 and an Amnesty International Report  of  2003.   The
     volume also  contains  Home  Office  Bulletin  1/2003  with  extensive
     annexes from various sources including  Amnesty  International,  Human
     Rights Watch, OSCE, US State Department, UNHCR and other general  news
     reports.  General press reports in relation to housing and the economy
     of Croatia are included, together with general press reports  relating
     to the political situation and elections.

 33. It is unnecessary to set out  all  the  extracts  from  those  various
     documents to which  we  were  referred.   The  relevant  passages  and
     contentions can be seen in annex 2 to Mr  Wilken's  skeleton  argument
     and in paragraphs  17-58  of  Mr  Mullins'  skeleton  argument.   That
     skeleton argument draws together passages from both the  Human  Rights
     Watch Report upon which  he  relied,  and  passages  from  Dr  Blitz's
     report.  It is sufficient for the purposes of  this  determination  to
     summarise the contentions of the parties on the background and  expert
     material.

 34. Mr Mullins contended that the effect of "Operation Storm" had been  so
     extensive in removing Serbs from Krajina that Knin, which  before  the
     war had been a city of 15,000 people and overwhelmingly Serb, now  had
     a population of just over 3,000.  (Other material suggested  that  the
     pre-war population was 30,000, but that  may  relate  to  a  different
     definition of Knin.)  In April 2003,  nearly  250,000  Croatian  Serbs
     remained  in  exile,  according  to  the  UNHCR.   Ethnic  Serbs  were
     subjected, according to the US State Department  Report  of  2002,  to
     sporadic harassment, intimidation and  violence  which,  suggested  Mr
     Mullins, would nonetheless have a disproportionate effect on the  fear
     of Serbs over returning.  He accepted that  the  police  continued  to
     react as they should do to such issues, but there was a concern  about
     the level of reporting to police.  Outside East  Slavonia,  many  Serb
     communities were policed by forces which were 100 percent  Croat.   Mr
     Mullins and  Dr  Blitz  referred  to  the  discriminatory  legislation
     introduced in the Tudjman era to permit the acquisition or  occupation
     of  Serb  homes  and  to  prevent  or  hinder  the  repossession   and
     reoccupation of such properties.  5,200  Serb  properties  were  still
     occupied in July 2003, according to the Human Rights Watch  Report  of
     September 2003.  Yet  more  were  occupied  in  addition  without  any
     Government decision authorising that occupation.   Many  of  the  Serb
     properties were occupied by Croats who themselves had been refugees.

 35. Dr Blitz accepted that, in March 2001, the Croat Government  committed
     itself to addressing key problems including the issue  of  return.   A
     number of important reforms had been introduced between 2001 and 2003,
     including a new constitution and the Constitutional Law on the  Rights
     of  National  Minorities  in  December  2002  to  ensure  proportional
     representation of minorities in administration, the judiciary, but not
     all public institutions such as the police.  The Law  had  yet  to  be
     implemented and was criticised for not reflecting the  fact  that  the
     proportion of Serbs in the population was only one third  of  what  it
     previously had been.

 36. The theme of Dr Blitz's Report and of Mr Mullins' submissions was that
     although there had been expressions of good intent by the  Mesic-Racan
     Government, the practical implementation of the reforms had been  very
     slow.  Thus, the previously discriminatory Tudjman era Law on Areas of
     Special State Concern had been changed so as t o give the  ODPR  power
     to deal with claims made by former refugees and to  give  priority  to
     the claims of returning owners.  The Government  had  urged  Serbs  to
     return. In 2002 Bosnian Croats had begun to be evicted from Serb homes
     in Krajina.  In Zagreb, public money was to be used in 2003 to rebuild
     Serbian  homes.   Dr  Blitz's   Report   did   not   identify   actual
     deterioration in the position of Serbs since mid-2002.

 37. However, the slow pace of change and  continued  discrimination  meant
     that shelter and repossession of housing was  seen  as  a  significant
     barrier to the sustainable return of  refugees;   the  OSCE  estimated
     that one third of returns were unsustainable, but as Mr Wilken pointed
     out, it follows that two thirds are sustainable.  The  Government  had
     only just begun to construct homes for Serbs;  the demand for  shelter
     required 27,000 houses by 2006.  Of  the  few  houses  built  in  Serb
     areas, few were reserved for Serbs. Discriminatory laws were likely to
     prevent the refugees passing on any property to their children as they
     would be unable to repay state loans.  (These  last  two  points  were
     derived from telephone calls by Dr Blitz to OSCE officials, but  there
     was no record of the precise questions asked or of the answers given.)
      The repossession of homes occupied often by Bosnian Croats  has  been
     very slow, although mechanisms are theoretically in place.  The target
     of returning all  houses  by  the  end  of  2003  could  not  be  met.
     Conversely, there had been considerable success in evicting Serbs from
     Croat properties.  Tenancy rights had been lost as Serbs  fled,  their
     accommodation had been occupied by Croats, often displaced themselves,
     and  under  Tudjman  there  had  been  discrimination  over  the   re-
     instatement of former tenants.  It was said in the Human Rights  Watch
     Report of September 2003 that the Government did not regard this as an
     issue.  Legislative changes, made in 2003, were assessed  to  be  very
     unlikely to help the former tenants and only a minority would  benefit
     from subsidised housing construction.

 38. Although the Government claimed to  have  constructed  118,500  houses
     since the end of the war, only a small fraction of those had been  for
     Serbs.  There were 26000 outstanding applications for  reconstruction,
     of which the vast majority were Serbs.  It  was  recognised  that  the
     position had improved since the middle of 2002, as the  reconstruction
     programme for Croats concluded and funds began to  be  spent  on  Serb
     houses.  Until 2000, Serb houses destroyed by Croat  forces  had  been
     ineligible for reconstruction assistance.  It was  only  in  mid  July
     2003 that legislation had been passed, too late to be effective, which
     put Serbs on a better footing to claim reconstruction  assistance  for
     war damage, where, for a number of years damage, to their property  in
     Government controlled areas  could have been described as a  terrorist
     act and thus ineligible for reconstruction assistance.

 39. Unemployment was very high, employment opportunities hard to find  and
     there was discrimination against Serbs who found  themselves  excluded
     from many areas of public sector employment. Social  welfare  benefits
     were available to only a small proportion of  the  population  without
     employment. (The figures relied on for  these  purposes  by  Dr  Blitz
     which appear, like much of Mr Mullins submissions to  have  come  from
     the HRW Report of  September,  are  not  necessarily  self-consistent.
     Knin varies in size from 15,000 to 30,000;   unemployment  percentages
     vary between total and able-bodied population;  "paid  positions"  may
     or may not equate with economically active, and the figures relate  to
     2001 anyway.)  The Serbs who had returned to the Knin area and  stayed
     were generally the elderly and the proportion of Serbs was  very  much
     lower than it had been.  Some of the socio-economic material again  is
     from unrecorded telephone calls.  However, he  says  that  Knin  is  a
     particular  blackspot  for  repossessions  and  there  is  a  lack  of
     temporary accommodation.

 40. Dr Blitz produced an email from someone working at OSCE shortly before
     the hearing.  It said  that  those  returning  should  report  to  the
     Regional Office for Displaced Persons, Returnees and Refugees  (ODPR).
     For six months, the holder of a green ID card issued by that Office is
     entitled to welfare benefits and health care,  after  which  they  are
     eligible for social welfare, if they have no property or income.   The
     deadline for submitting an application for  reconstruction  assistance
     expired at the end of 2001, but there were 10,000 applications and  it
     would be a very long time before all  were  dealt  with.   There  were
     Government housing programmes for those  who  came  within  the  three
     priority groups:  but those whose property was occupied or who had  no
     property were in the lowest category of priority and even those in the
     first category were still having to wait a long time.   There  was  no
     unemployment  benefit.   He  referred  to  the  extensive   employment
     discrimination against Serbs in Knin. The most  vulnerable  returnees,
     in his opinion were those aged between 45 and 55, too old  to  have  a
     job and too young to obtain a pension.  Much  of  what  this  official
     describes reflects the position as it was in S&K.

 41. There was discriminatory enforcement of the  laws  dealing  with  war-
     crimes. As at mid 2003, almost all of the  indictments  involved  non-
     Croat crimes whereas Serbs were facing prosecution for  often  trivial
     assaults.  Group indictments and in absentia  prosecutions  continued.
     General Gotovina, indicted in The Hague, remained at large in Croatia.

 42. Mr Mullins emphasised the view of  the  European  Commission  in  July
     2003, that there had been progress in the return process  and  in  the
     legislative framework necessary to enable Serbs to re-integrate;   but
     it was implementation that was the problem.  Mr Mullins also cautioned
     that the OSCE had an interest in painting an up-beat picture  when  it
     said in its July 2003 Report that only 62 percent of minority  returns
     had proved to be sustainable and that 27 percent  of  those  returning
     were  in  effect  commuting  from  their  country  of   refuge.    The
     difficulties had discouraged more Serbs from returning.


 43. Not long after the Tribunal's decision in S&K,  Sutovic  and  Hartigan
     sent an email to a  senior  protection  officer  in  the  UNHCR  South
     Eastern Europe based in Geneva.  It referred to their proposed  appeal
     to the Court of Appeal.  It referred to the known intention  to  close
     the  collective  centres  and  to  the  fact  that  no  reliance   had
     additionally been placed in S&K therefore on the fact that  they  were
     already full.  They then asked, seemingly as if it had  not  been  the
     issue in the case, as to what would happen to someone who returned  to
     Zagreb without family or  friends  and  had  nowhere  to  stay.   This
     individual was asked if there had been  any  change  since  the  UNHCR
     position as at May 2002.

 44. The Official replied that the  UNHCR  normally  dealt  with  voluntary
     returns and that there still did seem to be space  in  the  collective
     centres for ODPR to provide  temporary  accommodation  for  those  who
     needed it.  He recognised that repossessions were not taking place  at
     the desired speed but that there  was  increasing  pressure  from  the
     international community in  that  regard.   Later  he  corrected  that
     information  to  say  that  the  ODPR  would  not  assist  or  provide
     accommodation for those who were not  returning  as  refugees;   their
     other rights in respect of reconstruction  or  repossession  would  be
     respected and the UNHCR could be approached on a case by case basis in
     respect of  vulnerable  returnees.   If  people  returned  voluntarily
     rather as deportees, they might be regarded as refugees  and  so  have
     access to temporary accommodation.

 45. An official of the CIPU contacted Hans Lunsdorf, UNHCR Assistant Chief
     of Mission in Zagreb, who replied having spoken to  the  head  of  the
     ODPR.  The latter did not think that the implications of this were  as
     far reaching as suggested  by  Sutovic  and  Hartigan.   Although  the
     letter is not very clearly phrased, it confirms that those  who  never
     enjoyed either refugee status or temporary protection (which does  not
     include temporary admission), would  get  no  temporary  accommodation
     upon return.  There appears to be a point about when it was that  such
     persons left Croatia.  Persons who had temporary protection  and  then
     lodged an asylum application would be treated as refugees  on  return.
     UNHCR  would  approach  the  ODPR  on  a  case  by  case  basis  on  a
     humanitarian basis for those who returned as  failed  asylum  seekers,
     especially if they had property which required repossession,  to  seek
     temporary accommodation for them.  This material was not  referred  to
     in the Court of Appeal.

 46. There was a further exchange of emails.  This showed  that  there  had
     been no change in the different approaches  adopted  by  the  Croatian
     Government towards those who returned as refugees and those  who  were
     deported as not in need of international protection,  and  the  latter
     normally fell outside the sphere of the UNHCR.   It  provided  further
     information:  there had been a media campaign in areas outside Croatia
     where Serb refugees were concentrated as a result of which there  were
     19,000 reconstruction applications by the end of  2001  from  Croatian
     Serb refugees out of a total of 38,000.   8,000  properties  had  been
     rebuilt or repaired by the end of 2002 though the process would not be
     concluded by 2003.  It was likely that of the  8,000  built  in  2003,
     6,000 would be Croatian Serb  properties.   The  Croatian  authorities
     were giving priority to those returnees who were  actually  living  in
     Croatia.  Returnees would have to spend a considerable time with  host
     families or in collective  centres  which  was  not  always  feasible.
     There was also a problem  with  the  strict  approach  adopted  toward
     documentation.

 47. Mr Swift of CIPU wrote again to Mr  Lunsdorf  in  June  2003,  with  a
     number of questions about failed returning asylum seekers to which the
     replies were as follows.  They confirmed that  failed  asylum  seekers
     were not entitled to returnee status and that  the  UNHCR,  which  had
     never received a request for help from such a person, had very limited
     resources with which to help.  It would  require  strong  humanitarian
     circumstances for the UNHCR to intervene in such a case.  It  made  no
     difference whether or not someone returning as a failed asylum  seeker
     did so voluntarily or as a deportee.  He would be expected to  arrange
     his own accommodation with friends or family until  his  property  was
     restored.  However,  all  Croatian  citizens  had  access  to  welfare
     benefits as did those aliens with permanent resident status. NGOs  did
     not assist non-refugee returners.  This sequence of emails  underlines
     the importance of seeing what was  asked,  how  it  was  answered  and
     knowing the seniority and authority of the official contacted.

 48. This issue had taxed the UK Government in January  2003.   The  Zagreb
     Embassy sought to discuss how such  a  person  might  have  access  to
     refugee returner benefits;   it  was  thought  that  some  appropriate
     document might be identified.  But that  avenue  is  no  longer  being
     explored and nothing has come of it.

 49.  Dr  Blitz  provided  both  general  and  specific  conclusions:   the
     consequence of years of discrimination and partial reforms meant  that
     the "vast majority" of Serbs would not be able to enjoy a "sustainable
     return" to Croatia.  They remained disadvantaged in  housing,  shelter
     and economic subsistence.  He referred  to  interviews  and  telephone
     interviews with refugee organisations  and  human  rights  bodies  who
     concluded that it  would  not  be  "advisable"  for  someone  in  DK's
     position to return.  It appears that that advice presupposes that  his
     wife and children would join him from the outset.   He  would  not  be
     registered as a refugee;   his  parents  had  been  unable  to  obtain
     reconstruction assistance in four  years  and  returned  regularly  to
     Serbia;  he would have no home, shelter or extended family to whom  he
     could look.

 50. Mr Wilken for the Respondent emphasised different aspects.  First,  he
     said that  all  the  material  which  pre-dated  S&K  was  irrelevant.
     Second,  he  submitted  that  the  background  material   showed   two
     subsequent  changes:   significant  progress  in  the   provision   of
     reconstruction  assistance  to  those  Serbs  whose  houses  had  been
     destroyed in the conflict, and  while  he  recognised  that  returning
     failed asylum seekers would  not  be  entitled  to  collective  centre
     accommodation, provision could be made on a case by  case  basis.   He
     relied in particular on the OSCE report of July 2003, the interview of
     September 2003 given by the OSCE Ambassador Semneby and the June  2003
     letter from Mr Lunsdorf.

 51. We have already referred to the last two items,  and  briefly  to  the
     first.  For much of the debate, it is a question of  which  parts  are
     emphasised rather than one view being right and the other wrong.   One
     emphasises progress and optimism, the other  emphasises  the  problems
     which remain, set backs and a gloomier outlook.

 52. The executive summary to the OSCE July 2003 Report states:

           "During the reporting period from November 2002  to  July  2003,
           the Croatian Government's  efforts  within  most  parts  of  the
           Mission's mandate were characterised by increasing determination
           in comparison to previous reporting periods.  While this  report
           again highlights long-standing Mission concerns in  core  areas,
           there are enough preliminary indicators  to  suggest  that  this
           reporting period could be a turning point  with  regard  to  the
           Government's stated commitment to address the issues within  the
           Mission's mandate.


           There has been progress in the  legislative  and  administrative
           framework for  return,  but  implementation  of  many  decisions
           remains laggard, due in  part  to  the  absence  of  a  suitable
           working  body  for  Government   and   international   community
           interaction.


           There has not been any  significant  increase  in  the  pace  of
           return of  occupied  private  property  after  the  adoption  of
           legislative changes in August 2002.   In  April  the  Government
           adopted a decision on compensation to owners of occupied housing
           who still cannot repossess their homes, but the payment of  such
           compensation had not yet  started  by  the  beginning  of  July.
           Problems remain with regard to multiple  or  illegally  occupied
           properties,  including  cross-border   cases   in   Bosnia   and
           Herzegovina.  Other problems relate to the lack  of  enforcement
           of eviction orders  and  looting  of  properties  prior  to  the
           departure of temporary occupants.


           Government efforts at property reconstruction are advancing well
           and reconstruction assistance is becoming  widely  available  to
           minority  beneficiaries.   The  Mission  and  its  international
           partners  have  encouraged  the  Government  to   complete   the
           remaining 26,000 reconstruction applications by the end of 2003,
           the bulk of which are from Serbs.


           The Government's acknowledgement in early  2003  that  a  remedy
           should be found for returnees who previously lived in apartments
           with  occupancy/tenancy  rights  was  a   significant   positive
           development."


 53. The OSCE Report also contains an overview on return, reintegration and
     restitution of property:

           "Notable action taken by the Government in June  to  initiate  a
           system of housing care for former holders  of  occupancy/tenancy
           rights who wish to return to Croatia is  an  important  step  in
           resolving a significant barrier to return.


           Yet the  return  of  refugees  and  displaced  persons  of  Serb
           ethnicity is now taking place at a slower pace than in  previous
           years.  During the first six  months  of  2002,  6,026  minority
           returnees were registered, while during the first five months of
           2003 the number  was  only  3,070.   Further,  current  research
           suggests that while most  Croat  returnees  have  re-established
           themselves, only about two thirds of  present  minority  refugee
           return can be considered 'sustainable'.  Minority Serb returnees
           and displaced persons cite housing  problems  and  the  lack  of
           employment possibilities along with  legal,  administrative  and
           psychological  obstacles  as  hindrances  to  their  return  and
           reintegration into Croatian society.


           The housing  problems  experienced  by  minority  returnees  and
           potential returnees are largely a consequence  of  the  need  to
           reconstruct up to 20,000 houses for Serb  applicants,  the  slow
           process of private property repossession, and the absence, until
           recently,  of  any  solutions  to  the   issue   of   terminated
           occupancy/tenancy rights.  While the Prime  Minister's  call  in
           June for all refugees to return to Croatia was  a  notable  step
           forward, this needs to  be  followed  up  by  a  more  concerted
           demonstration of political will and action in order to  overcome
           the discriminatory legacy of  the  pre-2000  Government  and  to
           establish a more positive atmosphere conducive to the return  of
           refugees and displaced persons among receiving communities.


           By contrast, the return of the Croat majority to  their  pre-war
           domiciles is essentially completed."

 54. The problems, in particular the legal  problems  associated  with  the
     return of property from occupants to the legal owners,  were  referred
     to.  The OSCE accepted that the slow and incomplete implementation  of
     relevant procedures by administrative and  judicial  bodies,  and  the
     lack of action to enforce eviction rulings meant that it  was  certain
     that the Government would not be able to meet  its  stated  objections
     for the physical return of property by the end of 2003.   In  relation
     to property reconstruction, it was reported that the relevant Ministry
     intended to construct about 8,000 houses in 2003 and thought that most
     of  those  would  be  available  to  minorities  because  most   Croat
     beneficiaries had already received assistance.

 55. The Human  Rights  Watch  Report  of  September  2003  said  that  the
     estimated number of returns of Croatian Serbs, approximately  100,000,
     as given by the Croatian Government and the UNHCR overrated the actual
     number of returnees, because many departed again after a short stay in
     Croatia, and many of those who did  stay  were  elderly.   There  were
     persistent problems at local level, but  it  said  that  the  role  of
     central Government was just  as  important  in  failing  to  create  a
     political climate conducive to return.  However, the material set  out
     in the Report to sustain that conclusion relates to events of 2000 and
     2001.  The Report criticises  the  authority's  consistent  giving  of
     higher priority to the needs of ethnic Croats over the rights of  Serb
     refugees.  But much of this relates to the position in 2000-2002.   It
     recognises that in June 2003, the Prime Minister of  Croatia  for  the
     first  time  publicly  invited  Serb  refugees  to  return.   It  also
     recognises that assistance in reconstruction began at the end of  2002
     for the Serbs, even though  it  had  been  provided  much  earlier  to
     Croats.  This change began in the second  half  of  2002  because  the
     reconstruction benefiting Croat owners had been  virtually  completed.
     It said:

           "In June 2003, the number of heavily damaged or  destroyed  Serb
           properties  under  state-sponsored  reconstruction  was  several
           times higher than in the entire preceding seven post-war years."


     Some 1,500 houses for Serbs were under construction and  it  had  been
     stated by the Deputy Prime Minister in mid-2003 that  Serbs  owned  75
     percent of the houses to be  reconstructed  during  2003.   The  Human
     Rights Watch  Report  welcomed  this  improvement  in  the  previously
     discriminatory process.

 56. Mr Wilken submitted that there was a significant and  positive  change
     since S&K in the numbers of ethnic Serbs now receiving  reconstruction
     assistance.  This was reported in the OSCE July 2003 Report, the  USSD
     and HRW Reports.  So far as the return of  private  occupied  property
     was concerned, Mr Wilken recognised that the OSCE had  concluded  that
     the pace of the return of occupied private property  had  not  changed
     significantly since August 2002 and whilst 2,559 occupied  residential
     properties had been repossessed since August 2002,  5,500  were  still
     occupied.    This   reflected   the   legal   provisions   and    slow
     implementation.  The Human Rights Watch reported that there  had  been
     no material change in repossession by ethnic Serbs since August  2002.
     That report said that in the last year the rate  of  repossession  had
     fallen and only a handful of repossessions were taking place, and that
     was due to the provision of housing care for  temporary  occupants  or
     the reconstruction of their property.

 57. The OSCE reported in July 2003 that returns were impeded by  the  lack
     of redress for  those  Serb  refugees  who  had  previously  lived  in
     socially owned apartments.  Changes in legislation in  2000  and  2002
     had not produced any practical results, because  the  Serb  applicants
     were accorded the lowest priority in the allocation of housing.  A new
     proposal had been adopted in June 2003 which was  intended  to  assist
     and which had been welcomed by the OSCE, some of whose suggestions had
     been incorporated into  the  proposal.   What  remained  to  be  seen,
     however, was how the proposal was implemented in fact.

 58. Mr Wilken emphasised the growing strength  of  the  Croatian  economy,
     drawing upon the US Commercial Service Report,  which  appears  to  be
     2001, which refers to  the  growing  strength  and  diversity  of  the
     Croatian economy.  This,  he  said,  was  important  because  economic
     success provided for employment and the means  whereby  reconstruction
     work and welfare could be financed.

 59. The September 2003  interview  with  the  Head  of  the  OSCE  Mission
     recorded him as saying that security issues were  for  the  most  part
     satisfactory.  "... There are certain isolated incidents, but physical
     safety, for the most part, is completely satisfactory  throughout  the
     entire country.  We have very closely co-operated with the  police  on
     this issue."  He referred to the development of a  community  policing
     programme, changes in the Danube region to the ethnic make-up  of  the
     police to reflect the Serb community there, and the appropriateness of
     the response made to ethnically related incidences.

 60. The Respondent  acknowledged  the  contra-indications  in  the  United
     States State Department Report for 2002 and that it had, in the  past,
     also presented a significantly more pessimistic  picture  of  violence
     against Serbs than provided by the OSCE.  Mr Wilken pointed  out  that
     the criticism of trials in absentia was  that  they  wasted  time  and
     money because if somebody convicted was later arrested, they would  be
     re-tried.  The appeal system for war-crimes, whilst there were delays,
     did show that there were successful appeals against  conviction.   The
     US  State  Department  Report  of  2002  showed  that  some  amnestied
     activities had been wrongly prosecuted, but also  that  amnesties  had
     been granted to several returning ethnic  Serb  refugees.   There  had
     been an endeavour to decrease the political basis behind  prosecutions
     of Serbs for war crimes.

 61. There was recognition in the OSCE Report that  implementation  of  the
     proposals for minority representation in state administration would be
     difficult and the means had not yet  been  identified.   The  December
     2002 Constitutional Law on the Rights of National Minorities had  been
     welcomed by the OSCE and ethnic minority groups generally.

 62. There remained problems for those who sought the  recognition  by  the
     Government of their legal and administrative documents from the period
     1991 to 1996.  This continued to impede the return  and  reintegration
     of ethnic Serb refugees.  It meant  that  a  wide  range  of  problems
     including pensions, disability insurance, and the ability to establish
     their work record could not be resolved.  The State Pension Fund still
     discriminated improperly against ethnic Serbs seeking  recognition  of
     their work experience.

 63. Mr Wilken submitted that once the full scope of the matters considered
     in S&K was understood, it was clear that there had been  no  worsening
     of the position.  Insofar as there had been a change in circumstances,
     the changes were generally  positive.   There  had  been  progress  on
     physical security, reconstruction of  property,  economic  development
     and various forms of discrimination.  As to the position of  returning
     failed asylum seekers, there was no advice from the  UNHCR  that  such
     persons should  not  be  returned.   Their  established  position  was
     available in writing  and  had  not  changed  since  S&K.   They  were
     encouraging Serb refugees to return.  It would be wrong  for  informal
     conversations between Dr Blitz and a UNHCR  official  to  be  used  to
     undermine the public and established position of the UNHCR.   So  much
     would depend on the precise questions asked, the context of  them  and
     the precise answers given.

 64. Mr Wilken characterised DK's case as being that of an economic migrant
     and said that, in effect, Dr Blitz was of that  view  because  he  was
     referring to the  difficulties  which  would  be  faced  in  terms  of
     benefits and housing or employment.  The sustainability of return  was
     not itself the question.  What mattered was whether there would  be  a
     real risk of persecution or whether a real risk  that  the  Article  3
     threshold would be breached.  Otherwise, the United Kingdom  would  be
     compelled to underwrite the standard of  living  in  other  countries.
     Even if there were discrimination against ethnic Serbs, what  mattered
     was whether the way in  which  they  were  treated  reached  the  high
     threshold required for a breach of Article 3.

Article 3 submissions

 65. It was only Article 3 which was relevant in the light of the  decision
     in R (Ullah) v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 1856, [2003] 1 WLR 770.  There had
     been very recent authorities which bore upon the threshold  which  had
     to be met for Article 3 purposes.  In "N" v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1369,
     a decision of the Court of Appeal dated 16th October 2003,  the  Court
     examined the threshold  for  Article  3.   "N"  had  AIDS;   her  life
     expectancy if forced to return to Uganda where there was  no  prospect
     of her receiving adequate therapy would be under twelve  months.   She
     would have access only to a small hospital unable to  deal  with  AIDS
     related illnesses;  she would have to live in overcrowding  conditions
     unable to work.  Her boyfriend was  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  she
     appeared to have no living relatives in Uganda.  The  Adjudicator  had
     concluded  that  her  case  for  protection  under   Article   3   was
     overwhelming in the light of the case  of  D  v  United  Kingdom.   In
     paragraph 38, Laws LJ contrasted a claim to be protected from  torture
     or other mistreatment in violation of Article 3, especially  if  meted
     out at the hands of the state with "a claim to be protected  from  the
     harsh effects of a want of  resources,  albeit  made  harsher  by  its
     contrast with facilities available in the host country  ...  ."   This
     was to his mind something else altogether.  The case of  D,  he  said,
     should be very strictly confined, but he held that the application  of
     Article 3 "where the complaint in essence is a want  of  resources  in
     the applicant's home country (in contrast to what has  been  available
     to him in the country  from  which  he  is  to  be  removed)  is  only
     justified where the humanitarian appeal of the  case  is  so  powerful
     that it could not in reason  be  resisted  by  the  authorities  of  a
     civilised State".  The facts  had  to  be  not  only  exceptional  but
     extreme.   Dyson  LJ  agreed,  notwithstanding  that  her  prospective
     circumstances would be extremely distressing leading to a painful  and
     distressing death.  Carnwath LJ dissented.

 66. In R ("T") v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1285, a decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal dated 23rd September 2003, the Court considered  Article  3  in
     the context of asylum support.  The Court declined  to  lay  down  any
     simple test which could be applied in every case;  each case had to be
     judged in relation to all the circumstances.  It emphasised,  however,
     that the threshold was a high one and the condition of the  person  in
     question had to have the requisite degree of severity.  The  different
     cases of T and S gave some indication as to what was required.  S, who
     succeeded in relation to  Article  3,  had  no  access  to  charitable
     support and had been unable to fend for himself  for  some  time.   He
     slept rough and was forced to beg for food;   there  was  evidence  of
     psychological disturbance and significant weight loss.  He had  become
     unable to eat more than a few mouthfuls of food when it was available.
      T, on the other hand, whose case failed, had had difficulties resting
     or sleeping at Heathrow Airport  because  of  noise  and  light;   his
     washing was confined to public lavatories with limitations which  that
     entailed.  He had minor medical ailments and was worried  about  being
     attacked and having his papers stolen.  However, the  Court  concluded
     that at the relevant time he had shelter, sanitary facilities and some
     money for food.

 67. Mr Wilken also relied on the decision as to admissibility in the  case
     of O'Rourke v United Kingdom, ECtHR, (App 39022/97, 26th  June  2001).
     The claimant had been evicted and was forced to sleep on the  streets,
     notwithstanding a medical condition.  The Court did not consider  that
     the applicant's suffering following eviction  attained  the  requisite
     level of severity for Article 3, but pointed out,  however,  that  the
     applicant was largely responsible for his own deterioration because he
     had  failed  to  accept  offers  of   night   shelter   or   temporary
     accommodation.

 68. Mr Wilken submitted that there was no evidence of  a  lack  of  rental
     accommodation in Croatia and it would not breach the United  Kingdom's
     Convention obligations to return someone to a country where  he  would
     have no socially funded accommodation.  There was a large grey economy
     in Croatia and DK  had  acquired  a  plumbing  qualification  in  this
     country.   This  would  be  of  use  to  him  in   a   country   being
     reconstructed.

 69. Mr Mullins contended that discrimination was a  factor  to  take  into
     account in the assessment of whether  treatment  breached  Article  3.
     That was not the same as saying that with a breach of Article 14,  the
     threshold of Article 3  would  be  reduced.   He  submitted  that  the
     barriers erected in 1995 and 1996 remained and that there had been  no
     serious attempt to remove those barriers.  The AIDS cases were  of  no
     assistance as they dealt with life and death situations.   Mr  Mullins
     drew parallels between the position of ethnic  Serbs  in  Croatia  and
     Greek Cypriots enclaved in the Turkish Republic of North Cyprus.   The
     latter had been considered in Cyprus v Turkey, a decision of the ECtHR
     of 10th May 2001 (App 25781/94).  The Court concluded that  there  had
     been a violation of Article 3 in that certain Greek Cypriots in  North
     Cyprus had been subjected to  discrimination  amounting  to  degrading
     treatment.  The Court and the Commission also took the view that there
     was no need to pronounce separately on a  complaint  of  a  breach  of
     Article 14 in view of the reasoning which led it to find  a  violation
     of Article 3.  In paragraph 314, the Court  said  "It  considers  that
     there is no need to pronounce separately  on  what  is  in  reality  a
     restatement of a complaint which is substantially  addressed  in  that
     finding."  It did, however, appear, from paragraph 306, that the Court
     viewed with favour the Commission decision in the East African  Asians
     case 1973, that differential treatment of a group of  persons  on  the
     basis of race, because of the special affront to human  dignity  which
     that involved, might be capable of  constituting  degrading  treatment
     when differential treatment on some other ground would raise  no  such
     question.

 70. In support of his continuum argument in  relation  to  Article  3,  Mr
     Mullins referred to Dulas v Turkey (App 25801/94), a judgment  of  the
     first section of the ECtHR given on 30th January 2001.  The  applicant
     was over seventy when her home and property had been destroyed  before
     her eyes and, deprived of shelter and support, she had been obliged to
     leave the village and community where she had lived all her life.   No
     steps were taken by the authorities to give her assistance.  The Court
     found that she had been  suffering  of  sufficient  severity  for  the
     actions of the Turkish  Security  Forces  to  breach  Article  3.   Mr
     Mullins submitted that the breach of Article 3 there was akin  to  the
     circumstances faced by DK in 1995.  There had been no redress provided
     because the house remained unreconstructed.   The  breach,  therefore,
     should be regarded as continuing, because  the  current  situation  is
     such that he would not be able to return "with  dignity".   It  should
     not be analysed as if the cause of the  destruction  of  the  property
     were now no longer relevant and a merely prospective view taken of the
     circumstances which he would  face  on  return.   The  fact  that  the
     destruction of the property was at the hands  of  the  Croatian  State
     Forces,  reinforced  by  discriminatory  legislation  enacted  shortly
     afterwards,  distinguished  DK's  circumstances  from  those  of   the
     destitute in cases such as S and T, or indeed N.

 71. Mr Wilken submitted that it would be wrong to approach the application
     of Article 3 to DK's circumstances in the  way  contended  for  by  Mr
     Mullins.  DK would be returning to a country where there was a changed
     regime, both in personnel, in legislation and in outlook.  Many  years
     had passed since the house had been burnt  down  and  there  were  now
     endeavours  to  reconstruct  Serb   houses.    In   any   event,   his
     circumstances would not now approach the Article 3 threshold  and  the
     question to be asked was whether on return he would face circumstances
     sufficiently severe to engage the Article 3 obligations of the  United
     Kingdom.  The possibility of an Article 14  case  did  not  lower  the
     threshold for Article 3, and it was difficult to see, as Laws LJ  said
     when refusing permission to appeal in  S&K,  how  there  might  be  an
     Article 14 case when read with Article 3, but not an  Article  3  case
     standing alone.  Further, the house was not his but his  parents,  and
     it did not appear that any very great efforts had been made  to  press
     for  its  reconstruction.   It  is  obviously  easier  to  press   for
     reconstruction, as the background  material  shows,  if  the  need  is
     demonstrated by the presence of someone in the country.   Even  though
     he might not be entitled  to  the  temporary  accommodation  otherwise
     given to returning refugees, he would still  be  entitled  to  welfare
     benefits as a  Croatian  citizen.   Moreover,  he  had  the  displaced
     persons card which showed that he had been displaced from  Croatia  to
     Serbia.

Conclusions

 72. We now turn to our conclusions.  We deal first with  the  significance
     of S&K. This case  considered  the  position  of  Serbs  returning  to
     Croatia in great depth, less than a year ago, in the course of dealing
     with individuals who were to be regarded as representative of many  of
     the circumstances common to  Serb  asylum  seekers  from  Croatia.   A
     substantial amount of  country  background  and  expert  material  was
     assembled and debated.  The determination itself followed another case
     which, taken with the successfully appealed decision in S and  others,
     considered all the background material. S&K  was  the  subject  of  an
     unsuccessful  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  is   the
     acknowledged function of this Tribunal to give authoritative  guidance
     on the type of issues which arise here, in the interest of consistency
     and fairness.  It is both necessary  and  sensible  for  a  subsequent
     Tribunal  to  continue  to  regard  such  a  decision   as   providing
     authoritative guidance, unless it can be shown no  longer  to  warrant
     being so regarded.  Those who seek to argue for a  different  approach
     may face a heavy task of persuasion.  Authoritative guidance does  not
     cease to be so  upon  any  new  document  being  produced,  or  a  new
     conversation being held with an official.

 73. The Tribunal would expect to see any argument that such a case  should
     be re-examined, as Mr Mullins submitted  should  happen  here,  to  be
     supported by cogent evidence of a change of circumstances,  or  of  an
     assessment as to what would happen in the future being  confounded  by
     actual experience.  Individual circumstances which did not fall within
     the general character of those which had  been  considered  are  in  a
     different category as well.  However, it would be  wholly  undesirable
     if an advocate were to attempt to persuade  the  Tribunal  to  take  a
     different view on the same or insignificantly different material.

 74. Mr Mullins did not so much rely on any deterioration in  circumstances
     but on a changed perspective  or  expectation  now,  compared  to  the
     position when S&K was decided.  Much of the  material  upon  which  he
     relied was not new nor did it show, and it was not intended  to  show,
     that as at the date of the Tribunal's decision in S&K, there had  been
     an erroneous appreciation of the  situation  then  observable  on  the
     ground, with one exception.  This related to the position of those who
     returned from the United Kingdom as failed asylum seekers, with  which
     we shall deal later.  We are not persuaded, and it was  not  suggested
     that we should be, that there was anything wrong with  that  appraisal
     insofar as it related to what was actually  happening  at  that  time.
     Much of Dr Blitz's Report simply reflected  material  which  had  been
     considered and evaluated in S&K.  Much of the background material  had
     likewise been available then, and contained nothing  which  undermined
     the S&K conclusions.

 75. It is apparent from the citations above from S&K that it dealt with at
     least one individual, SK himself, who was in many ways  in  a  similar
     position to DK;  the contrary was not suggested.  The range of  issues
     in S&K covered many  which  arose  or  were  raised  in  this  appeal:
     housing reconstruction, repossession  and  tenancies,  discrimination,
     welfare, the economy, the level of returns  and  the  age  profile  of
     returning refugees, war crimes and so on.  This case did not raise any
     significantly new issue other  than  the  position  of  failed  asylum
     seekers and temporary resettlement assistance.  It is also clear that,
     as with S&K, the background material  was  to  a  very  large  extent,
     entirely general and would  be  applicable  to  very  many  individual
     cases;   this  is  exactly  what  one  would  expect  from  background
     material.  In the absence of special features in any individual  case,
     what was sound for the generality would be applicable to him.   It  is
     entirely sensible for cases to be examined in this  way.   It  can  be
     seen in the way in which Mr Mullins raised  as  part  of  the  picture
     which he wished to  paint  of  serious  continuing  discrimination,  a
     number of housing issues which do not directly apply to  DK,  such  as
     repossessions and tenants' rights.  It is inevitable  that  a  general
     conclusion in relation to  those  arguments  in  this  case,  will  be
     relevant to any case which may  raise  a  different  form  of  housing
     issue.

 76. We consider in the light of the way in which  the  argument  proceeded
     and in the light  of  the  full  material  which  we  have  considered
     relating to the position evolving since S&K, that  this  determination
     can be considered to provide the same authority for Serbs returning to
     Croatia that S&K did.

 77. We have considered  the  background  material,  including  Dr  Blitz's
     report, relied on by both parties and we do not find in it anything to
     suggest that the conclusions reached generally by the Tribunal in  S&K
     should be regarded as unsound or overtaken by  events.   The  Tribunal
     was under no illusions about the real difficulties and hardships faced
     by those who returned.  It specifically  acknowledged  the  continuing
     discrimination in housing, employment and convalidation.  It seemed to
     us that the material by and large  bore  out  what  the  Tribunal  had
     anticipated.

 78. There was no evidence to  suggest  a  resurgence  of  the  HDZ  as  an
     extreme, nationalist party;  the evidence suggests  that  its  journey
     away from those extremes has  not  been  reversed.   There  was  clear
     evidence to show that the physical security of Serbs was  satisfactory
     and that the incidents of violence which  still  occurred  were  dealt
     with appropriately if they were reported.  There are many barriers  to
     Serbs becoming policemen and in a number of areas  where  Serbs  live,
     the police are Croats to a  man.   Religious  freedom  was  reasonably
     respected.

 79. It is clear that a proportion of returning refugees do not stay,  that
     the proportion of Serbs in the population at present is about a  third
     of what it was, that many former Serb areas are  now  no  longer  such
     areas and that there is  preponderance  of  elderly  among  those  who
     return and stay.  But the majority, some two thirds,  make  what  OSCE
     describe as sustainable returns.  There has  been  no  change  in  the
     position of the UNHCR over  its  encouragement  of  Serb  refugees  to
     return, and in mid 2003, the President urged the Serbs to return.  The
     economy seems to be improving, although we  accept  that  tourism  may
     well  not  provide  employment  in  Knin  and  that   there   is   job
     discrimination against Serbs.  But the strength of the economy matters
     because of the resources needed to fund  post-war  reconstruction  and
     there will be a gradual increase in job opportunities.

 80. The principal problem identified in the OSCE Report over  returns  and
     sustainable returns relates to housing.  There has been discrimination
     against Serb refugees and priority given to Croat refugees in a number
     of respects.  However, the picture was one of improvement  and  change
     for the better.  It is clear that reconstruction of Serb houses is now
     where most of the housing reconstruction money  is  going,  and  their
     houses are being rebuilt;  it may well be that  that  is  because  the
     Croat houses have all been rebuilt, which demonstrates discrimination,
     but even so, the reality is that the Serb houses are being now rebuilt
     as the major part of the housing reconstruction programme.   There  is
     evidence that the authorities concentrate their  endeavours  on  those
     refugees who have returned and have a house which should  be  rebuilt;
     there is therefore an iterative process  in  which  returns  encourage
     reconstruction or other housing assistance and that in turn encourages
     sustainable  returns.   There   has   been   discrimination   in   the
     repossession of houses, with very little of the  vigour  displayed  in
     repossessing houses occupied by Croats  which  was  displayed  towards
     those Serbs occupying Croat  houses.   But  there  is  slow  progress.
     There is at least recognition at the level of legislation that  tenant
     rights and convalidation of pension rights and work records need to be
     tackled  and  evidence  that  at  local  level  there  has   been   no
     implementation.  We accept the point that what a  Government  may  say
     can reflect a change in outlook for the better, but that that may  not
     really assist until the  discrimination  or  other  problem  has  been
     removed through effective implementation.  We would see the picture as
     being one of slow progress, with good  intentions  somewhat  ahead  of
     implementation in a variety of aspects, and with  better  progress  in
     the field of reconstruction which  is  the  one  which  most  directly
     affects DK.

 81. The position over war crimes prosecutions has  not  markedly  changed;
     there are still trials in absentia, but that does not prevent a  fresh
     trial upon arrest.  Serbs face  discrimination  in  the  frequency  of
     arrest and prosecution;  some may be trivial  harassing  arrests  from
     which the Croats do not suffer.  They may be  intended  to  discourage
     returns.  However, the increase in arrests in 2003 still only  affects
     a very small number of people;  there is a trial process which is  not
     said to be unfair and there is an appeal system which has led to  some
     convictions being overturned.  Some  Croats  are  prosecuted;   it  is
     necessary to judge that figure in  the  light  of  the  difficulty  of
     persuading Serb victims to give evidence.

 82. One of the problems with both Dr Blitz's Report, and with those  parts
     of Mr Mullins' submissions which rely upon it, is that  it  treats  as
     happening now that which is no longer current.  What  he  has  to  say
     about economic and social welfare and unemployment  relates  to  2001,
     even though it is in a 2003 Report.  Much of what he has to say  about
     war-crimes is historic in nature and he goes  on  to  say  that  since
     2002, a new Prosecutor has reviewed pending war crimes cases  and  has
     not admitted any new in absentia prosecutions.  There is HRW  material
     which shows  that  that  stance  has  not  always  been  followed.   A
     substantial number of Serbs had been released after  a  short  period.
     There continued to be discrimination in the prosecution of war crimes.
      He appears to accept that there have been few cases of Serbs actually
     being sentenced for war crimes and instead referred to the  atmosphere
     of  hostility  surrounding  trials  and  the  intimidatory  tactic  of
     arbitrary arrest and  detention  of  Serbs  so  as  to  reinforce  the
     impression that whatever the Government may say, they are not  welcome
     back.  It is to give the wrong impression for Mr Mullins to  say  that
     group indictments have been used in a  number  of  cases  since  2000;
     there is no example of their use anew since the end of 2001.  True  it
     is that the new activated some of  the  2000  dormant  indictments  in
     2000, but the number activated  was  in  fact  quite  small,  and  the
     numbers arrested fell  in  2002  to  34.   The  arrests  came  because
     prosecutors had been asked to review  outstanding  war  crimes  cases.
     There had been an upsurge of arrests in 2003;  in the  first  half  of
     the year 27 people were arrested, 21 of them were  Serbs.   Trials  of
     Croats have  produced  mixed  results,  partly  because  of  the  fear
     associated with giving evidence in Croatia against Croats.   Again  it
     is right that as at July 2003, there were 1,467 war  crimes  cases  of
     which 99 percent involved non-Croat suspects but the actual experience
     of arrests is quite different in numbers.

 83. We do not therefore consider that the position as set out in paragraph
     40 of S&K has changed in any significant way,  so  as  to  lead  to  a
     different conclusion for those returning as refugees.  It remains good
     nine months on.

 84. We asked Mr Mullins how he put his case that there was a real risk  of
     persecution upon return to Croatia.  He relied upon discrimination  in
     the field of welfare and benefits;  there were few job prospects;  the
     grey economy was not sanctioned by the state and  should  be  ignored.
     Welfare payments were difficult to predict and were very  low.   Serbs
     were targeted in war crimes prosecutions.  Returns were unsustainable.
      We could see nothing in the  generality  of  those  complaints,  even
     though there was force in some of them that could  amount  to  a  real
     risk that on return,  DK  would  face  persecutory  treatment  of  the
     necessary severity.  These factors echo  those  relied  on  as  common
     factors in all the S&K cases;  see  paragraph  39  of  the  Tribunal's
     decision.  Save for his position as a failed asylum seeker,  there  is
     no evidence that the UNHCR is of the view that there  is  persecution.
     His position as a failed asylum seeker goes more to Article 3 ECHR and
     that is how the case was in substance argued.

 85. We have in this context considered the new evidence which  DK  put  in
     concerning war crimes.   Although  we  are  satisfied  that  Serbs  in
     general  may  face  discriminatory  prosecution,   the   numbers   are
     sufficiently small for there not  to  be  a  real  risk  to  Serbs  in
     general;  there is evidence that those  who  are  actually  prosecuted
     face a fair trial process and do so for offences which go  beyond  the
     harassing arrest for the trivial.  It is right that war crimes  should
     be prosecuted.  The complaint  that  the  Croats  are  not  prosecuted
     equally may be justified but it does not  show  that  the  few  trials
     which there are of Serbs amounts to persecution.  DK suggested that he
     would be at a greater risk because his name  appeared  on  a  list  of
     those alleged to have forcibly displaced Croat  villagers  from  their
     village in 1991. This is an internet list of an uncertain date  as  to
     its original posting, from the Croatian Information Centre.  He denies
     that it correctly refers to him because he  has  never  been  to  that
     village and had not heard of it until  he  saw  the  list.   We  shall
     assume that it is a reference to him  and  consider  it,  even  though
     there is no explanation as to why it could not have been  provided  to
     the Adjudicator, other than that it was only discovered by  Dr  Blitz.
     It only emerged in his third statement  prepared  shortly  before  the
     Tribunal hearing.  We do not consider  that  this  advances  his  case
     significantly.  He has been back to Knin in 1999 when he went  to  the
     police in order to  obtain  documents;   he  had  suffered  some  ill-
     treatment but had not been long detained and had felt confident enough
     to complain and there had been no reprisals.   There  is  no  evidence
     that this sort of list plays any part in the prosecution of war crimes
     or in the harassment of Serbs.

 86. DK also produced a supplementary statement after his appeal  had  been
     dismissed by the Adjudicator.  He sought to provide fresh evidence  to
     counter the strong doubts expressed over his claimed membership of the
     RSK police.  He said that he had now been able to obtain documentation
     from his family in Serbia, who had thought that it had been lost.   We
     remain sceptical at this fortuitous arrival and  deprecate  the  ready
     assumption that the Tribunal provides an opportunity to have a  second
     attempt to achieve more favourable credibility findings,  particularly
     in the light of the finding that he was simply  an  economic  migrant.
     However, we have considered it and assumed to be genuine;   after  all
     there is nothing intrinsically surprising in a man of his  age  having
     served in uniform in the conflict in Croatia.  But there is nothing in
     the background evidence which suggests  that  membership  of  the  RSK
     forces would attract discriminatory prosecution  or  harassment.   The
     evidence of trials suggests a far more specific  approach.   We  again
     refer to his experiences in 1999 in Knin, a town where,  as  he  said,
     everybody knew everybody.

 87. Taken with the other  background  evidence  about  the  treatment  and
     physical security of Serbs, and what we have set out over  war  crimes
     generally, we see no reason to disagree with the  conclusions  of  the
     Adjudicator.  DK is an economic migrant who has  no  genuine  fear  of
     persecution and does not face a real risk  of  it  either.   He  would
     prefer not to face the hardships of return.  There is no obligation on
     the  United  Kingdom,  under  either  Convention,  to  underwrite  the
     economic and social difficulties of another country.

 88. We do not accept Mr Mullins' argument that the  burning  down  of  the
     family  house  and  the  continued  absence   of   reconstruction   or
     compensation should be seen as a continuum,  a  breach  of  Article  3
     which continues to this day.  We are  prepared  to  accept  for  these
     purposes that the burning of the house  and  the  subsequent  enforced
     flight would amount to a breach of Article 3, along the lines of Dulas
     v Turkey.  What we reject is the continuance of that  breach.   First,
     the test is not whether the breach continues  or  has  been  remedied;
     the question is whether DK would face a real risk of  treatment  which
     breached his Article 3 rights.  It is by its nature a prospective test
     and although the past can colour the appraisal of the prospect, we  do
     not consider that the want  of  reconstruction  of  his  family  house
     itself constitutes a breach of Article 3, and it is to  that  that  we
     should look  rather  than  to  the  circumstances  which  led  to  its
     destruction.  That is closely related to the second point;  there have
     been changes  in  the  circumstances  which  warrant  looking  at  the
     position as it now is, and which break the continuum.  There has  been
     a change in regime;  the Tudjman regime which carried out  the  ethnic
     cleansing has gone, and one of a very different outlook  and  aim  has
     taken its place.  Significant efforts are now  being  made,  belatedly
     for sure,  to  reconstruct  Serb  houses.   The  return  of  Serbs  is
     encouraged.  Time has passed.  There is no reason to take a  different
     view from that which was applied to SK.  It follows, from what we have
     said in this paragraph, that  we  also  reject  the  suggestion  that,
     unless DK is able to return to Croatia "with dignity", the past breach
     of Article 3 should be regarded as continuing.

 89. Mr Mullins' best point was that it was now clear that the Tribunal had
     proceeded under the misapprehension that there was no  distinction  in
     terms of UNHCR assistance with temporary accommodation  between  those
     returning as refugees and those returning as  failed  asylum  seekers.
     It is correct that no such distinction was drawn either by or for  the
     Tribunal, notwithstanding all the expert assistance with which it  was
     weighed down, and all the earlier discussion of these issues in S  and
     others.  The problem had come to the notice of  Sutovic  and  Hartigan
     before the application for permission to appeal in S&K was  heard,  as
     the date of the email inquiries shows, but  it  was  not  raised.   We
     conclude, however, that the upshot of the various exchanges is what is
     set out in the June 2003 letter from Mr Lunsdorf:  those who return as
     failed asylum seekers do not receive the benefit of  UNHCR  assistance
     prior to return, or temporary accommodation from the ODPR, and  it  is
     highly unlikely that any exceptional humanitarian assistance would  be
     available to DK from UNHCR.

 90. This is a less favourable position than the one assumed  in  S&K.   We
     are not persuaded, however, that there is any  basis  for  reaching  a
     different  conclusion  in   general   for   failed   asylum   seekers.
     (Paradoxically, it would appear that if DK were to succeed,  he  could
     be returned straightaway on this basis, for  he  would  receive  UNHCR
     assistance.)  We are not sure what impact on this his proven Displaced
     Person status in Serbia would  have  were  he  to  return  to  Croatia
     directly, or indirectly via Serbia, but for present purposes we  shall
     ignore it;  it is not a point which the email exchanges address.

 91. Our reasons are as follows.  First, there  is  no  UNHCR  advice  that
     those in DK's  position  should  not  be  returned,  despite  all  the
     exchanges.  We do not regard Dr  Blitz's  references  to  a  telephone
     conversation with the UNHCR Return and Integration Officer Knin  as  a
     sound enough basis on which to infer that the  UNHCR  draws  any  such
     distinction; the conversation, question and answer and  context,  were
     not recorded and there is no follow up correspondence.  This is not to
     question the competence or integrity of Dr  Blitz;   it  goes  to  the
     weight which can be put upon indirect impressions and  interpretations
     of such conversations, when dealing with these issues.  In  any  event
     the report does not make clear whether it is talking of DK alone or of
     DK and his family, returning from Serbia, where his wife and  children
     have been for some time;  it appears to be the latter  but  that  does
     not then allow for DK to return alone and to settle  down  before  his
     family returns.

 92. Second, the  UNHCR  Officer's  view  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the
     "advisability" of the  return  and  the  hardships  faced.   There  is
     nothing in what is said in general to suggest that the high  threshold
     required for a breach of Article 3 would be reached.  Even if one took
     a lower threshold than that implicit  in  "N",  and  saw  a  different
     threshold in "S and T", there is no real risk of DK's Article 3 rights
     being breached.  DK would be entitled  to  the  welfare  rights  of  a
     Croatian  citizen;   there  is   no   evidence   that   Serbs   suffer
     discrimination in that respect.  This may not be what he  would  like,
     but we have seen nothing to suggest  that  someone  in  that  position
     would suffer destitution and a breach of Article 3.  There would be  a
     level of hardship, but not so significantly different degree from that
     rejected in S&K as to be sufficient  to  give  rise  to  a  breach  of
     Article 3.

 93. Turning to DK's particular circumstances,  he  has  a  new  skill  and
     although there is employment discrimination against Serbs and we  make
     no assumption that Knin is a thriving economy, we consider that a  man
     of 34, with a skill or access to benefits should be able  to  get  by,
     however uncomfortable and hard his circumstances may be.  There may or
     may not be employment opportunities elsewhere in  Croatia  other  than
     Knin, but we recognise that it is there that other  factors  may  lead
     him to stay and we make no assumption that he  would  move  elsewhere.
     There is  no  evidence  that  accommodation,  notably  private  rented
     accommodation, including accommodation with Serb  or  other  families,
     would be unavailable even if there is no ODPR temporary accommodation.
      His presence would  be  of  assistance  in  bringing  more  effective
     pressure to bear in gaining priority for  the  reconstruction  of  the
     family house;  it is plain that priority is given to  those  who  have
     returned over those who have not, in the allocation of  reconstruction
     resources.  He is  not  in  that  age  group  described  as  the  most
     vulnerable, too old to have any job prospects and too young to enjoy a
     pension.

 94. We have assumed that the  letter  from  his  father  to  the  Croatian
     authorities from Knin in August 2003, and produced with  DK's  "third"
     statement shortly before  the  IAT  hearing  was  sent  and  correctly
     describes an unacknowledged application  for  reconstruction  sent  in
     1999;  it is surprising that this does not appear to have  been  drawn
     to the attention of  the  Adjudicator  and  no  explanation  for  that
     omission  is  forthcoming.    However,   what   it   shows   is   that
     notwithstanding their visits to Knin, his  parents  have  not  pressed
     their claim;  it has taken four years for a chasing letter to be sent,
     even though the original letter was sent whilst the Tudjman regime was
     in power and it was not until 2003 that there  was  any  communication
     with the more favourably disposed regime of Mesic.  We  do  not  think
     that any conclusions can be drawn that reconstruction assistance would
     be unlikely to be forthcoming, even taking the letter at face value.

 95. DK raised a point in his supplementary witness statement and which  he
     elaborated upon in his third statement  shortly  before  the  Tribunal
     hearing. This was in response to the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  that
     there would be no breach of  his  Article  8  rights  were  he  to  be
     returned to Croatia.  He enjoyed no Article 8 rights here.  There  was
     little further argument from Mr Mullins and it did not  feature  large
     in his case.  It is perfectly clear, allowing for the belated evidence
     even though it could and should have been before the  Adjudicator  and
     there is no explanation for its  omission,  that  there  would  be  no
     breach of DK's Article 8 rights.  His brother was referred to  in  the
     supplementary statement as  an  asylum  seeker  in  the  UK,  but  his
     position is not mentioned in the later statement.  He has two  cousins
     living in the United Kingdom, but gives no details of  any  life  with
     them.  He lives with an aunt and her family.  It can be said  that  he
     has some sort of family life here, but his aim is  to  live  here  not
     with them but with his wife and children whom he has  left  behind  in
     Serbia.  Insofar as he has any family life here, the interference with
     it in his return to Croatia is not disproportionate to the maintenance
     of  effective  immigration  control.   He   also   referred   to   the
     difficulties which his wife and children would face in joining him  in
     Croatia, because of the  absence  of  papers  proving  that  they  are
     Croatian citizens;  he says that the Croatia authorities  are  putting
     obstacles in the way of their obtaining  them.   DK's  explanation  is
     that the Croatian authorities are  insisting  on  both  parents  being
     present in Croatia before citizenship papers will  be  issued  to  his
     children.  If DK were to return, that should  assist  in  solving  the
     problem.  His latest evidence is not very explicit as to  the  efforts
     made or as to the reasons for the difficulties or as to  the  role  of
     the UNHCR, in view of the fact that his family in  Serbia  appears  to
     fall within the scope of those who receive UNHCR assistance, were they
     to seek to return instead of seeking to avoid a return.   Either  way,
     we do not consider that the difficulties which  are  imposed  by  this
     voluntary separation and in the way of their reunion  from  Serbia  in
     Croatia  involve  any  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's   Convention
     obligations.

 96. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

