
Heard at Field House on: | |KS (IFA - Albanian - Blood Feud) Kosovo CG
[2003] UKIAT 00208 | |
|7 October 2003             |        |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Dictated on:               |        |                            |
|9 October 2003             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|05.11.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR P R LANE (CHAIRMAN)                                            |
|MRS A J F CROSS DE CHAVANNES                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|MR KUTJIM SADRIAJ                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


JD


Appearances:

For the Appellant:           Ms S. Jolly, Counsel,  instructed  by  the
                      Law Centre (NI) Belfast.
For the Respondent:     Mr  S  Bilbe,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, Kutjim Sadriaj, a citizen of the Federal  Republic
      of  Yugoslavia  (Kosovo)   appeals   with   leave   against   the
      Determination of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  D  S  Corke,  sitting  in
      Belfast, in which he dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds
      the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to
      give directions for his removal from the United Kingdom.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom without  evidence  of
      lawful entry and sought asylum on 16 February 2000. He said  that
      he had had to leave Kosovo in  1999  because  of  the  Serbs.  He
      further said that he was afraid to return because his  uncle  had
      killed an Albanian man in the Appellant's home village who was  a
      spy working with the Serbs. The Appellant  thus  feared  becoming
      the victim of a blood feud.

   3. As the Adjudicator observed in paragraph 6 of his  determination,
      the Grounds of Appeal :-

        '...acknowledge that there is no 1951 Convention  appeal.  The
        Grounds  of  Appeal  are  that  returning  to  Kosovo  without
        adequate accommodation would be inhuman and degrading in terms
        of Article 3 of the ECHR. In addition, under  Article  8,  the
        expulsion would not be in  accordance  with  the  law  as  the
        Appellant has  a  child  born  on  23  December  2000  who  is
        therefore an Irish citizen who may not be  expelled  from  the
        UK'.


   4. At the hearing, the  Appellant's  representative  'added  another
      ground, that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under Article 3 of the ECHR to return  the  Appellant
      and his family to face a blood feud' (determination paragraph 6).


   5. At paragraph 8 of the determination the Adjudicator sets out  the
      Appellant's account. The Appellant was born in Brekoc, a  village
      near Gjacova in Kosovo. He was of Albanian  ethnicity.  In  1997,
      the army came to the family home and arrested and mistreated  his
      father and uncle. When the father and uncle came  out  of  prison
      they discovered that a fellow Albanian named Palok  Gjeloshi  had
      been responsible for informing the Serb authorities that the pair
      were involved in the Kosovan  independence  movement.  The  uncle
      swore revenge on Palok Gjeloshi. In 1999 the uncle killed Palok's
      brother, Martin, by shooting him dead in the  street.  The  uncle
      then went into hiding, since he was afraid that  the  dead  man's
      family would take revenge on him for his actions.  The  Appellant
      and his brother and father were also afraid. They  hid  in  their
      house until February 1999. On one occasion, Palok  Gjeloshi  came
      to their home with a gun, looking for male members of the family,
      but his mother told him that  they  were  not  there.  Around  18
      February 1999, the family was forced to leave its home  when  the
      Serb army arrived with tanks. In this  incident,  the  uncle  was
      burned to death when the house was  burned  down.  The  Appellant
      thought that his uncle  might  have  been  targeted  for  killing
      Martin Gjeloshi. The Appellant and his wife fled  and  eventually
      arrived in the United Kingdom. The Appellant  said  that  he  was
      concerned about the 'unstable' situation in Kosovo and  also  was
      afraid that the family of the murdered man would try to kill  the
      Appellant, since blood feuds between Albanian families  could  go
      on for generations. The Adjudicator's findings on the question of
      Article 3, (which is the only matter raised  in  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal and subsequently pursued before  the  Tribunal  )  are  as
      follows:-


        '27. I am willing to  accept  as  credible  and  reliable  the
        Appellant's account of past events. He was driven from  Kosovo
        by the actions of the Serbs. I do  not,  however,  accept  his
        reasons for not returning. There has just been  a  civil  war.
        The background evidence does not reveal the level  of  ongoing
        feuds which would be the logical result of  people  acting  as
        the Appellant indicated. Taking his version of events as true,
        the Appellant's  uncle  killed  a  collaborator.  There  is  a
        material inconsistency as to whether that was at  home  or  in
        the street. It is not remotely plausible that the family of  a
        collaborator would be in any position to take revenge.  It  is
        highly implausible that the family of such a person would even
        go back to the same village. If they did,  and  did  make  any
        threats  against  the  Appellant,  then  he  could  seek   the
        protection of UNMIK -KFOR. If he does not  wish  to  do  that,
        then he could live elsewhere  in  Kosovo  without  that  being
        unduly harsh. It is not reasonably likely that the family of a
        collaborator would be able to  seek  him  out  elsewhere.  The
        claim under Article 3 must fail. Insofar as that claim depends
        on inhuman or degrading treatment on return, the act of  being
        returned does not per se amount to  that.  Many  thousands  of
        people have returned. Having  to  return  does  not  meet  the
        minimum threshold for  Article  3,  even  in  the  Appellant's
        circumstances'.


   6. Ms Jolly referred the Tribunal to a  number  of  copy  documents,
      which were before the Adjudicator, on the question of blood feuds
      in Kosovo.


   7. At page 78 of the Tribunal bundle, is an extract from  Kosovo:  A
      Short History by Noel Malcolm. Here, we find the  nature  of  the
      Northern Albanian blood feud described as follows:-

        '[The blood feud] is one  of  the  most  archaic  features  of
        Northern Albanian society resembling  the  codes  that  govern
        other isolated societies in the Mediterranean region (such  as
        Corsica) or the Northern Caucasus. What lies at the  heart  of
        the blood feud is a concept alien to the modern mind, and more
        easily learned about from the plays of Aeschylus than from the
        works of modern sociologists: the aim is not punishment  of  a
        murderer,  but  satisfaction  of  the  blood  of  the   person
        murdered, or initially, satisfaction of one's own honour  when
        it has been polluted. If retribution were the  real  aim  then
        only those personally responsible for the  original  crime  or
        insult would be  potential  targets;  but  instead  honour  is
        cleansed by killing any male  member  of  the  family  of  the
        original offender, and the spilt blood  of  that  victim  then
        cries out to its own family for purification.

        Since honour is of the essence, there  are  strict  rules  for
        every step of the feud: one who 'takes blood'  to satisfy  his
        (or his family's) honour must announce that he has done so;  a
        formal truce or best for a set period must be  agreed  to,  if
        requested for a proper reason  (this  is   a  special  use  of
        'bese' the general term for a man's word of  honour);  and  so
        on...the tradition of the blood feud has  never  died  out  in
        Kosovo: innumerable small-scale feuds  have  combined  in  the
        remoter villages and not all of them were ended by  the  great
        series of mass reconciliations arranged  by  an  inspirational
        settler of blood feuds, Anton Setta in the early 1990s'.


   8. In a further extract from a book, Religion and  the  Politics  of
      Identity in Kosovo, by Ger Duijzings found  at  page  82  of  the
      bundle, we note the following:-


        'The judicial means of regulating property and land sales have
        been ineffective, and  thus  conflicts  over  land  have  been
        endemic, resulting in a rising number of  blood  feuds:  among
        the Albanians in Yugoslavia the number of crimes committed  in
        vendettas  is  not  only  on   the   decline   but   is   even
        rising...there are such feuds  in  almost  every  one  of  the
        Communes of the province of Kosovo, most of them in the remote
        villages'.


   9. The Tribunal was slightly troubled by the strange nature  of  the
      copy at page 82. Although apparently taken from a  printed  book,
      many of the words appear to have been altered. Unfortunately,  Ms
      Jolly was not in possession of the original volume, nor  was  she
      able to shed any light on the matter.


  10. An extract from the Sunday Times  of  August  2001  mentions  the
      murder of almost the entire  membership  of  a  Kosovan  Albanian
      family. This is referred to in the context of the 'lawless  state
      that Kosovo is in', with 245  murders  in  2000,  'many  of  them
      revenge attacks on the  Serbian  minority  by  ethnic  Albanians,
      angered by years of repression'. In 2001, up to the date  of  the
      article, 'the number of  murders  has  dropped  to...77,  but  it
      includes a particular brutal outrage, eleven Serbs  killed  in  a
      bus bombing in February'. As for  the  killing  of  the  Albanian
      family the report notes that ' Albanian  feuds  spare  women  and
      children' and that the killing 'is almost certainly linked to the
      fact that Hamza, Pranvera's 50 year  old  father  used  to  be  a
      policeman under Serbian rule'.

  11. On page 87 we find an UNMIK-KFOR press briefing of February  2001
      where 'two murders were reported overnight, one in  Malishevo-  a
      Kosovo Albanian killed another in an apparent blood  feud  dating
      25 years'.

  12. Ms Jolly also submitted a copy  from  a  website  article  of  21
      August 2003, emanating from an organisation  called  'Reliefweb'.
      The subtitle of the  article  is  'Murders  on  the  increase  in
      Western Kosovo but no-one is prepared to identify  the  killers'.
      The particular incident in question, when a number of people were
      shot in a gun attack on a car and  shop,  appears  to  have  'had
      something to do with rival business interests'. There are said to
      have been 22 murders in the Peja region of  Kosovo  during  1993.
      The causes of the crimes 'vary-  some  of  the  killings  involve
      organised crime and business rivalries, while  others  stem  from
      traditional blood feuds between Albanian families'.  The  article
      goes on to note that 'ethnic violence involving Albanians and the
      pockets of Serbs still living in the area  remains  a  disturbing
      trend. Two young Serbs...were shot  dead  on  13  August'.  UNMIK
      police are quoted as complaining that witnesses to crimes such as
      these are hard to come by. Another report from the  same  website
      of 19 August 2003 notes 'escalating violence  in  Kosovo  [which]
      has led to a new  war  of  words  between  Serbian  and  Albanian
      politicians  and  raised   tension   between   their   respective
      communities'.


  13. Against this background, the Tribunal is in  no  doubt  that  the
      Adjudicator was perfectly entitled to conclude that the Appellant
      would not be at real risk upon return to Kosovo as  a  result  of
      his uncle's murder of the brother of  the  Serbian  informer  and
      Collaborator Palok Gjeloshi.

  14. Reading the documentation in  the  Appellant's  bundle,  and  the
      Kosovo Country Assessment of April 2003, it is manifest that  the
      situation in Kosovo has changed fundamentally since the  time  of
      the events in 1999, when the Serbian authorities held sway in the
      province. According to  paragraph  4.48  of  the  Assessment,  it
      appears that less than half of the former 200,000 or so Serbs who
      were resident in Kosovo, now remain there. Most of the  remaining
      Serbs 'are concentrated in the  Northern  part  of  the  city  of
      Mitrovica'. Ethnic Serbs 'have been  the  principal  targets  for
      ethnically motivated attacks'.

  15. The Tribunal is also aware that  UNHCR  consider  that  potential
      returnees,  with  special  protection   needs,   include   ethnic
      Albanians who may have  been  involved  with  the  previous  Serb
      administration. As paragraph  6.91  of  the  Assessment  observes
      'there have been reports of ethnic  Albanians  being  targets  of
      harassment and violence in retribution with  alleged  association
      or collaboration with the Serbian  regime,  particularly  in  the
      months following  the  war  of  1999-2000.  In  some  cases  such
      accusations may have been based on little more than the fact that
      the person had done business with the Serbs in the past  or  that
      his house was not targeted by Serb forces'.

  16. The Tribunal's attention has not been drawn to any  utterance  by
      the UNHCR, since the end of the Kosovan war, to the  effect  that
      those in need of special protection include those  who  claim  to
      fear retribution from a blood feud.

  17. Before the Tribunal Ms Jolly said that she did not  know  whether
      Palok Gjeloshi was even still in  Kosovo.  Given  his  vulnerable
      status as someone who had very  actively  collaborated  with  the
      Serbs, a significant question mark does, indeed,  hang  over  his
      continued presence there. Even if he remains in Kosovo, there  is
      quite plainly no evidence to show that he poses a  real  risk  to
      the Appellant. The incident when Palok went to the home  'looking
      for male members of the family' was  in  early  1999,  when  Serb
      control still prevailed. With the ending  of  such  control,  the
      massive migration of Serbs from Kosovo, the introduction of  KFOR
      and UNMIK and the recently found ability of the Albanian majority
      to take action against  former  collaborators,  Palok  Gjeloshi's
      ability  to  do  harm  to  the  Appellant  (should  he  have  the
      inclination) is, to put  the  matter  at  its  mildest,  severely
      circumscribed. In any event, with the murder of the  uncle,  whom
      the Appellant  considers  to  have  been  'targeted  for  killing
      Martin', any continued interest on the  part  of  Palok  Gjeloshi
      must be speculative, to say the least.


  18. The evidence on blood feuds in Kosovo clearly suggests  that  the
      practice exists within the more rural, isolated communities.  The
      Tribunal  has  been  presented  with  no  evidence  to  show  any
      significant blood  feuding  within  the  capital,  Pristina,  The
      Adjudicator's finding that, if it were necessary to  do  so,  the
      Appellant could  relocate  there  with  his  family  is,  in  the
      Tribunal's view, wholly justified.

  19. Ms Jolly quite rightly did not seek to argue Article 3 merely  by
      reference to the position which the Appellant, his wife and child
      would face if returned today to Kosovo. The situation  there  has
      continued to stabilise. Many tens of thousands of former refugees
      have returned to Kosovo. No evidence has been put  forward  which
      would bring the case of this Appellant anywhere near  Article  3,
      in terms of his or his  family's  individual  circumstances.  The
      position of the child as a possible Irish citizen  has  not  been
      pursued. In any event, in the light of Mahmood, it would need  to
      be shown to be unreasonably harsh for the child to accompany  the
      parents to Kosovo. No evidence  to  this  effect  is  before  the
      Tribunal.

  20. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President
