

                                                         ZL (Abandonment)
                         Somalia [2003] UKIAT 00085



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date heard:  18 March    2003
                                                      Date notified.23.09.03
                                  Before:-.



                            DR H H STOREY (Chair)
                            HH JUDGE N HUSKINSON


                                                               Between


                                  Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Somalia, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr B W  Dawson,  dismissing
the appeal against the decision by  the  respondent  giving  directions  for
removal following refusal  to  grant  asylum.   Mr  F  Kodagoda  of  Counsel
instructed by Rees Wood & Terry Solicitors represented the  appellant.  Miss
D Prentice appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

3. There are two issues in this appeal. One concerns the correctness of  the
adjudicator's decision to treat the appeal  as  statutorily  abandoned.  The
other issue concerns whether the adjudicator was correct to conclude he  had
no jurisdiction to hear the appeal in view of the provisions of s. 69(3)  of
the 1999 Act.


The s. 69(3) issue

4. To take these issues in reverse order, we see no  basis  for  considering
that there was a s.69(3) appeal before the  adjudicator.  In  Diriye  [2002]
UKIAT 04462, a determination of 29 August 2002  by  a  legal  panel  of  the
Tribunal chaired by the Deputy President it was  decided  that  to  consider
that an appeal under other subsections of s. 69 could automatically  convert
into an appeal under s. 69(3) was contrary to the plain words of s. 58(9).

5. Mr Kodagoda sought  to  argue  that  Diriye  was  wrong  because  it  was
contrary to the approach required by the Court of  Appeal  in  Saad,  Diriye
and Osorio [2002] Imm AR 471. However, that  judgment  was  considered  with
great care by the Tribunal in Diriye who concluded it did  not  support  the
view that there was an implied s.69 (3) appeal.

6. Mr Kodagoda relied in particular  upon  paragraph  65  of  this  judgment
which reads:

      "An interpretation of the Rules which permitted the Secretary of State
      to refuse asylum to a refugee on the ground that he had  been  granted
      ELR would, however, be in conflict with the UK`s  obligations  of  the
      Convention in relation to the treatment of refugees living within this
      country. It would thus conflict with the provisions of Rule 328.  More
      significantly, it would conflict with  section  2  of  the  1993  Act,
      quoted above, because it would  have  the  effect  of  laying  down  a
      practice which would be contrary to the Convention."

7. However, putting to one side that we are not in this case concerned  with
the Immigration Rules, the application of s. 58(9) does not have the  effect
of denying refugee status to a claimant. It would only have this  effect  if
it prevented the claimant from  lodging  a  s.  69(3)  appeal.  But  as  the
Tribunal pointed out in Diriye, s. 58(9)  does  not  preclude  a  claimant's
right to establish that he is to be regarded  as  a  refugee  and  to  raise
those grounds in a new appeal under s. 69(3).


The s. 58(9) issue

8. The adjudicator noted that the appellant  had  been  granted  exceptional
leave (ELR) to remain for a period of 12  months  from  9  August  2002.  He
therefore considered  that  the  appeal  had  to  be  treated  as  abandoned
pursuant to s. 58(9) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  basis  of
the grounds of appeal was that in fact at the date  of  hearing  before  the
adjudicator there had not been a formal grant of ELR and so the  adjudicator
had been wrong to treat the appeal as statutorily abandoned.

9. The adjudicator thought that a formal grant of ELR had  been  made  on  9
August 2002. In actual fact no formal grant of ELR was made until 30  August
2002. It is plain, therefore, that the adjudicator  decided  that  s.  58(9)
was applicable on the basis of erroneous information.   Section  58(9)  only
requires an appeal to be treated as abandoned "if the appellant  is  granted
leave to enter".

10. However the adjudicator did not promulgate  his  determination  until  2
September 2002. By that date the appellant  did  have  leave  to  enter.  By
operation of law the appellant's appeal was abandoned as of 30 August  2002.
Accordingly, although the adjudicator gave wrong reasons for so  concluding,
the appeal was statutorily abandoned by the date of promulgation.

11. Even if we are wrong about that, the appeal is certainly one  which  has
to be treated as abandoned by the Tribunal.  Section 58(9) states:

      "A pending appeal under any provision of this Part other than  section
      69(3) is to be treated as abandoned if the appellant is granted  leave
      to enter or remain in the United Kingdom".

12. Sub-sections 58(5)-(7)  further  define  what  is  meant  by  a  pending
appeal. These make clear that an appeal  that  is  before  the  Tribunal  is
still a pending appeal.

13. Accordingly this appeal has been statutorily concluded  by  abandonment.
We  consider  that  the  adjudicator  was  right  to  treat  the  appeal  as
abandoned, albeit the reasons he gave were incorrect.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




