
BS (Prison Conditions - Evidence) Macedonia [2003] UKIAT 00196

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 6 November 2003
Prepared: 9 November 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                                Mrs R Faux JP




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Miss B. Gill, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr J. McGirr, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The claimant is a national of Macedonia.  The Secretary of  State  for
      appeals  against  the  decision  of  an  adjudicator,  Mrs  N.  Baird,
      following a hearing on 4 December 2002 allowing the claimant's  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  both  the
      claimant's asylum and human rights claims.


   2. The claimant was born on 10 August 1984 and is 19 years old. He is  an
      ethnic Albanian. He entered the United Kingdom on  26  November  2001,
      whilst he was still a minor, and applied for asylum on arrival.

   3. At the hearing before the adjudicator,  the  claimant  referred  to  a
      letter sent to him from the Macedonian authorities  requiring  him  to
      attend for a medical examination  with  the  view  to  his  commencing
      national service.  National service in Macedonia is compulsory.  As an
      Albanian, he said he did not want to have  anything  to  do  with  the
      Macedonians.  Consequently, he did not wish to participate, even in  a
      non-combat role.

   4. The claimant's counsel referred to the  adjudicator  to  the  case  of
      Stojanovski  [2002]  UKIAT  03308  (incorrectly  referred  to  by  the
      adjudicator as Stoganovski) in which  the  Tribunal,  (J.  A.  O'Brien
      Quinn QC, chairman) considered the case of a draft evader in Macedonia
      who faced imprisonment.  The Tribunal considered prison conditions  in
      Macedonia and relied upon the contents of a  report  on  Human  Rights
      Practices in Macedonia for 2001  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the
      Helsinki Committee had visited a prison  facility  at  Idrizovo  where
      prisoners being held in solitary confinement were kept in  cells  that
      measured between 10 and 12 sq m, without heating and with  the  window
      permanently open.  If it is suggested that a cell measuring as much as
      3 m by 4 m is too small for a solitary occupant, we could  not  agree.
      It was also said that food was prepared in unhygienic conditions.

   5.  The  Tribunal  in  Stojanovski  decided  in  paragraph  41   of   the
      determination that a sentence of imprisonment, however long  or  short
      in what was described as the "internationally accepted bad  conditions
      in the Macedonian prisons" would amount to a breach of the appellant's
      rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.  Looking at the determination,  it
      appears that the 2001 report was based on a visit to a  single  prison
      facility and concentrated upon conditions of those  held  in  solitary
      confinement.

   6. In the present appeal, the adjudicator decided that the  claimant  was
      liable to perform military service and did not wish  to  do  so.   She
      made no reference to present prison  conditions  as  set  out  in  the
      background material.  In our view, in failing to  pay  regard  to  the
      background material, the adjudicator was  wrong  in  law.  She  relied
      exclusively on that the Tribunal's decision in Stojanovski and allowed
      the appeal.

   7. The Secretary of State appealed.  In doing so, he relied upon the CIPU
      Report for October 2002 to the effect that prison conditions generally
      meet international standards and prisons need  basic  needs  of  food,
      hygiene and access to medical care.  This assessment  is  repeated  in
      the current background material set out  in  the  April  2003  Country
      Assessment:

      " Prisons


      5.24  Prison conditions generally meet  international  standards,  and
      prisons meet basic needs of food, hygiene and access to medical  care.
      The Ministry of Justice reported two deaths in custody due to  natural
      causes.  Men and women are held separately.  While juveniles also  are
      supposed to be held separately, limited facilities at times result  in
      older juveniles being confined with adults.  Pre-trial  detainees  are
      held separately from convicted criminals.


      5.25  The Government permits prison visits to prisoners by independent
      human rights monitors and the Human Rights Ombudsman.  In February the
      Government signed an agreement allowing the ICRC to visit and register
      convicted prisoners under  procedures  that  the  ICRC  reported  were
      acceptable.


      5.26  The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and inhuman
      or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) released  a  report  on  11
      October 2001 covering the condition of persons being  held  in  police
      custody and two of Macedonia's  prisons.  Regarding  the  prisons  the
      report states, "the delegation received no allegations of  torture  or
      other forms of deliberate ill treatment and gathered no other evidence
      of such treatment of inmates by staff in the  establishments  visited;
      or in other establishments under the  authority  of  the  Ministry  of
      Justice". Of the 4


      5.27  As a result of the Government's  ratification  of  the  European
      Convention the CPT was authorised to visit all places of detention  on
      a regular and ad hoc basis.


   8. Furthermore, the Tribunal has been slow to find that prison conditions
      elsewhere in the world, whilst falling below European  standards,  are
      such as to establish an Article 3 violation.  The Tribunal's  approach
      to non-European prison conditions has  been  shown  in  a  trilogy  of
      cases: Chowdhury [2002] UKIAT 00054,  Akcan  [2002]  UKIAT  01111  and
      Fazilat [2002] UKIAT 00973.  In Chowdhury,  the  Tribunal  (Mr  Drabu,
      Chairman) stated,  in  paragraph  9  of  the  determination  that  for
      mistreatment to be caught by Article 3  "it  must  be  shown  to  have
      attained a minimum level  of  severity  and  the  assessment  of  this
      minimum level of severity is relative and... will  depend  on  factors
      including the duration  of  the  treatment,  its  physical  or  mental
      affects, and the age, sex, vulnerability and state of  health  of  the
      victim."  In considering prison conditions in Bangladesh, the Tribunal
      noted:


           "We also accept that he will be detained in conditions that  may
           well be "extremely poor".  This will undoubtedly result  in  the
           ill-treatment of the appellant.  But ill-treatment must reach  a
           minimum level of severity before there is a breach of Article 3.
            The assessment of this minimum level of  severity  is  relative
           and must depend upon the circumstances of the case."


   9. In Fazilat, the President, Collins J., considered prison conditions in
      Iran that were described in the background  material  as  "harsh".   A
      fuller description is found in paragraph 14 of the determination.  The
      Tribunal concluded:


           "We do not doubt that prison conditions in  Iran  are  far  from
           ideal.  We do not doubt that they may not measure up to what  is
           expected in this country, or perhaps in any country which  is  a
           signatory to the European Convention on Human  Rights.   As  the
           Court at Strasbourg has recognised, it is not for signatories to
           the Convention to impose the standards of the Convention on  all
           the world.  Recognition has  to  be  had  to  the  situation  in
           individual countries and to the standards that are accepted, and
           expected, in those countries.  Of course in relation to  Article
           3, there is a line below which the treatment cannot sink, if  we
           may put it that way.  That is to say that it is always  possible
           that the sort of treatment that may  be  routinely  expected  in
           prison in a particular country falls so far below the  standards
           that would be expected in a civilised  country,  that  it  could
           properly be said to amount to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.
           But, as  again  the  Court  in  Strasbourg  has  indicated,  the
           threshold has to be a high one because, otherwise, it would  be,
           as one recognises, quite impossible for any country to return to
           a non-signatory an individual who faces prosecution, rather than
           any sort of persecution.  The conditions may well be regarded as
           harsh.  That is a value judgment  and  there  is  no  sufficient
           indication from the material  before  us  that  this  respondent
           would run the risk facing treatment which amounted to  a  breach
           of Article 3."
           [Paragraph 15]


  10. Mr McGirr, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,  referred
      us to the decision of the Tribunal in Naumoski [2003] UKIAT 08103, (Mr
      RG Care, chairman).  In  that  case,  the  Tribunal  referred  to  the
      Helsinki Report of the May 2002 Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Macedonia,
      particularly as it related to draft evaders.  Reference was also  made
      to the Tribunal decision in Stojkowski [2002] UKIAT 01106, (not to  be
      confused with Stojanovski [2002] UKIAT 03308, above).  The Tribunal in
      Naumoski concluded that there was no evidence placed  before  it  that
      returning draft evaders  suffer  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  on
      return.


  11. In our judgment, rather than relying  on  Tribunal  decisions,  it  is
      preferable to refer to the background material.  The  only  background
      material before us is the CIPU Report, the material parts of which  we
      have set out above.  On the basis of this material, the  claimant  has
      failed to establish that he will be subjected to a  violation  of  his
      Article 3 rights on return.

  12. We also consider that it is worth noting what  is  said  in  the  CIPU
      report about national service:

           5.17  Citizens of Macedonia were  expected  to  serve  9  months
           military service with no options  for  conscientious  objectors.
           This was changed on 30 May 2001 by the Macedonian Assembly's Law
           on Defence, article 120, section 2.  It  is  reported  to  state
           "every person, due to religious or moral beliefs do not want  to
           use weapon (sic) during military service in the Macedonian Army,
           can serve without using weapon  or  can  serve  in  the  health,
           social, and humanitarian organisations or in the fire  brigades.
           In that case the  military  service  will  last  for  14  months
           instead of nine."

  13. As we understand the position, the claimant accepted that he  had  the
      option of taking on a non-combat role in lieu of military service.  In
      countries in need of re-construction, national service may provide  an
      important means by which citizens contribute to society in the absence
      of an economy that permits the state to pay for  those  services.   In
      the present appeal, the claimant failed to identify any moral  scruple
      justifying his wish to avoid national service.   The  adjudicator  did
      not accept he would  be  persecuted  during  the  course  of  national
      service by reason of being an ethnic Albanian.  In the  circumstances,
      it is difficult to see the basis upon which the claimant  might  argue
      that the penalty for refusing to perform national service  in  a  non-
      combat role might amount to a breach of his human  rights.   The  fact
      that there is a differential between the period  of  military  service
      (nine months) and non-military service (14 months) appears  to  us  to
      reflect an understandable need  to  provide  an  incentive  for  those
      opting for military service.


  14. We are satisfied that the adjudicator's  treatment  of  the  issue  of
      penalties  for  evading   national   service   is   not   sustainable.
      Accordingly, we allow the appeal.


  Decision: The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
9 November 2003
