
JD

|Heard at Field House       |        |_L (Risk - Kabul - Women)   |
|                           |        |Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00092                       |
|On 24 September 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10/10/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|P R LANE                                                          |
|D R BREMMER                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances:
For  the  appellant:  Mr  C.  Fain,  Counsel,  instructed  by   Gill&Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:  Mr G.  Saunders,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, Sofia Latzifada, a citizen of Afghanistan born  on
      3 March 1981 and now aged 22,  appeals  with  leave  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  R  A  Britton,  sitting  at
      Taylor House, in which he dismissed on asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent to refuse to grant  her  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom.


   2. At paragraph 2 of his determination the Adjudicator  records  the
      following:-

        'At the beginning of the hearing Mr Grover on  behalf  of  the
        appellant stated that it was accepted that the  appellant  did
        not have a well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention
        reason. He was relying on Article 8'.


   3. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  December  1999,
      together with her uncle, brother and sister. Of these:-


           a) her brother, Fawad, who is  26  years  old,  was  granted
              exceptional leave to  remain  on  19  April  2001,  which
              expires on 11 April 2005;


           b) her sister, Fozia, who  is  29  years  old,  was  granted
              indefinite leave to remain on 16 May 2002, following  the
              determination of an Adjudicator who allowed her appeal on
              human rights grounds; and

           c) her uncle, Popal Rafial, was granted exceptional leave to
              remain on 8 November 2001, which expires  on  7  November
              2005.

   4. The appellant's mother, other brother, other sister and aunt  (it
      seems the wife of  the  uncle  who  is  in  the  United  Kingdom)
      remained in Afghanistan.


   5. The appellant was raised in Kabul. She and her family left  there
      in 1992. They appear to have lived in Daghlan for two years.  The
      appellant left Afghanistan in 1996.

   6.  These  facts  emerge  from  the   Adjudicator's   determination,
      supplemented by information supplied to the tribunal by Mr Fain.

   7. It is apparent that the Adjudicator got  into  difficulties  over
      the question of whether the appellant knew where her  family  was
      in Afghanistan. Paragraph 16 of the determination  is  thoroughly
      confusing in this regard. The Adjudicator begins by  saying  that
      'the appellant knows where her mother, brother  and  sister  are,
      and she would be able to continue  family  life  in  Afghanistan'
      before immediately saying that 'it would not be right  to  return
      her until her family is located and they are aware of her return,
      through one  of  the  organisations  in  Afghanistan  unless  the
      appellant is willing to give that information'.

   8. Be that  as  it  may  the  Adjudicator  further  found  that  the
      appellant would, in any event, 'be able to return to  Afghanistan
      with her brother, Fawad, who will return  to  Afghanistan  by  11
      April 2005, if not before or her uncle'.


   9. The grounds of appeal contend that the  appellant  has  a  family
      life with the brother, sister and uncle in  the  United  Kingdom,
      but the reality is that the appellant does  not  know  where  her
      family is in Afghanistan, that it would be  'an  unsafe  'crystal
      ball' basis for a finding' that the appellant could  return  with
      her brother in  April  2005  and,  finally,  that  returning  the
      appellant to Kabul would violate her Article 3 rights.


  10. Given the uncertain nature of the Adjudicator's findings  on  the
      issue of the whereabouts of the Afghanistan family, the  Tribunal
      proceeds on the basis that the appellant does not currently  know
      their whereabouts. Even on this basis, however,  it  is  manifest
      that her appeal must fail for the following reasons.


  11. The basis upon which the appellant's case has been  put  is  that
      she enjoys a  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  adult
      siblings and an uncle. Whilst she lives with  these  individuals,
      the Tribunal's attention has not been drawn to evidence  to  show
      that there is between them and the appellant  such  a  degree  of
      emotional dependency as to constitute a family life in the United
      Kingdom. However, even on the assumption that a family life  does
      exist here with those members, the appellant's case falls  within
      the scope of the principles set out by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Mahmood [2001] Imn AR 229.  There  has  not  been   produced  any
      evidence (either to the Adjudicator or the Tribunal) to show that
      the appellant's brother and uncle, who have exceptional leave  to
      remain  for  a  limited  period,   would   face   'insurmountable
      obstacles'  in  returning  with  the   appellant   to   live   in
      Afghanistan, going beyond 'a degree of hardship for some  or  all
      members of the family'  (Phillips  MR,  paragraph  55  (3)).  The
      family have not been 'long established'  in  the  United  Kingdom
      (cf. paragraph 55 (4)).


  12. There is a common misconception that merely because a person  has
      been given exceptional leave to remain, that person cannot in any
      circumstances be expected to leave the United Kingdom in order to
      live elsewhere with a family member.  In  the  present  case  the
      Tribunal has been given no evidence to show that the brother  and
      uncle would face insurmountable difficulties  in  re-locating  to
      Afghanistan.  In  the  absence  of  any  contrary  evidence,  the
      Tribunal considers that the reality of the matter is likely to be
      that the brother and uncle  were  granted  exceptional  leave  to
      remain at a time when the Secretary of  State  had  a  policy  of
      conferring such leave upon those who he accepted to be  nationals
      of Afghanistan but who, at the time, could not be  removed  there
      by reason of the attitude of the Taliban regime.


  13. The Tribunal also notes that the  sister,  Fozia,  has  not  been
      found to be a refugee. The determination of  the  Adjudicator  in
      her case was written on the very day (11 September 2001) when the
      events in Manhattan were unfolding. Those events led directly  to
      the fall of the  Taliban  regime.  The  Adjudicator  who  allowed
      Fozia's human rights appeal did so on the basis that  she  'is  a
      single woman who would be travelling with no documentation  to  a
      country run by the ruthless Taliban' (paragraph 26).


  14. In her case also, therefore, there is  no  evidence  to  show  an
      insurmountable obstacle today to her relocation with her  sister,
      the present appellant, to Afghanistan.


  15. Given the close connection between persecution and Article 3  ill
      treatment,  the  Tribunal  considers  it  significant  that   the
      appellant's representative conceded that the appellant would  not
      be at real risk of persecution within the meaning of the  Refugee
      Convention, were she to be  returned  to  Kabul.  Notwithstanding
      that Article 3 of the  ECHR  is  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the
      skeleton argument of Counsel who appeared before the Adjudicator,
      that point does not appear to have been pursued  before  him.  It
      does, however, feature in the grounds of appeal.


  16.  The Tribunal finds that the contention that the appellant would,
      in the current circumstances prevailing in Afghanistan, face real
      risk of treatment of such severity as to cross the high threshold
      of Article 3, is without merit.


  17. In paragraph 13  of  the  determination,  the  Adjudicator  notes
      country documentation that shows significant improvements in  the
      infrastructure and general  assistance  available  in  Kabul  for
      people  living  there.  The  Adjudicator  also  had   regard   to
      paragraphs 6.75-6.95 of the October 2002  Country  Assessment  on
      Afghanistan. These provisions concern the position of  women.  In
      the latest (April 2003) Assessment, the corresponding  provisions
      are to be found at 6.86-6.120. At 6.88 we note that Human  Rights
      Watch record (as at May 2002) that women and girls in Afghanistan
      have gained greater freedom to participate  in  public  life  and
      access to education, healthcare and employment. 'This is the case
      particularly in Kabul where ISAF has helped to bring much  needed
      security. However even in Kabul women face  constant  threats  to
      their personal security form other  civilians  as  well  as  form
      armed men belonging to various political factions.  Whilst  there
      were no reports of physical attacks in Kabul there  were  reports
      of instances of harassment. The HRW report indicated that outside
      Kabul (where the ISAF does not operate) women and girls  continue
      to face serious threats to their personal security as a result of
      general lawlessness and insecurity'.


  18.  At 6.90 we observe  that  in  May  2002  a  Danish  fact-finding
      mission reported that women can now move around without  fear  of
      the Taliban's religious beliefs. However generally women continue
      to wear the burka for their own safety. In June 2002, journalists
      commenting on the changes in Kabul since the fall of the  Taliban
      reported some women on the streets of  Kabul  in  dresses  either
      with head-scarves or with their heads uncovered.


  19. Paragraph 6.92 records that in Kabul there have been instances of
      women being harassed for 'un-Islamic behaviour' such  as  wearing
      make-up. Nevertheless in paragraph 6.93 a March  2003  report  to
      the UN Security Council reported that 'Afghan women, particularly
      in urban areas, are slowly re-entering public life. Over  30  per
      cent of the students who returned to school in  2002  were  girls
      and a third of the teachers were women'.


  20. Mr Fain sought to place particular reliance upon  paragraph  6.94
      of the assessment. This records UNHCR as having issued a paper in
      April 2003 which stated that 'the following categories  of  women
      should be considered to  be  at  risk  and  exposed  to  possible
      persecution, if they return to Afghanistan:


        i. Single women without effective and/or community support.
       ii. Women perceived to be actively  or  actually  transgressing
           prevailing social mores'.


  21.  At  6.95,  the  Danish  fact-finding  mission  records  'several
      sources' as emphasising 'the need  for  women  to  have  networks
      including male relatives in order  to  obtain  protection.  Women
      without these networks and male relatives to whom they could turn
      for protection may face serious problems'.


  22. In the present case, as the Tribunal has already found, there  is
      no reason to suppose that this appellant would, in the event,  be
      without male  relatives,  were  she  to  be  returned  to  Kabul.
      However, read overall the passages in the Country Assessment fall
      far short in the Tribunal's view, of showing that single women in
      Kabul at the present time risk, as  such,  inhuman  or  degrading
      treatment or punishment. They  may,  indeed,  face  instances  of
      harassment and discrimination. That, however, does not cross  the
      Article 3 threshold.


  23.  Mr  Fain  submitted  that,  having  regard  to  the  appellant's
      statement, her family were not sympathetic to strict  Islam,  and
      that, accordingly, she would be  likely  to  encounter  problems.
      There is, however, no evidence to suggest that the appellant  has
      herself a history in Afghanistan of behaviour which would  excite
      the attention of those of a strictly Islamic persuasion.  Nor  is
      there any reason to assume that, if returned, she would choose to
      behave in such a manner as to arouse such adverse attention.


  24. The Adjudicator was, in the Tribunal's view, correct  to  observe
      that the appellant had grown up in Kabul. Indeed, her association
      with Baghlan, as disclosed in her  statement,  is,  by  contrast,
      insubstantial.


  25. In conclusion, there is no evidence to show that the  appellant's
      rights under Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR would be violated,  were
      she to be returned to Kabul.


  26. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President





