
AH-AG-V1


        JP (Maintenance - Detention Records) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00142

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2003                          |                             |
|Prepared 23 September 2003                    |13/11/03                     |


                                   Before

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                                Mrs S.M. Ward


Between:



                The Secretary of State for the Home Department     Appellant

                                     and




                                                                  Respondent



For the Claimant: Ms P Gandhi, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr S Walker, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka. The Secretary of State appeals
    against the decision of an  adjudicator,  Mr  RL  Walker,  following  a
    hearing on 11 March 2003 allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse both the claimant's asylum
    and human rights claims.  The  adjudicator  allowed  the  human  rights
    claims both under Article 3 and  Article  8.  The  grounds  of  appeal,
    however, are limited to a challenge of the  adjudicator's  decision  in
    the asylum and Article 3 appeal.

 2. The claimant was born on 23 January 1964 and is 39 years old. She is an
    ethnic Tamil. Between 1992 and 1995 she was working in a rehabilitation
    centre that was run by the LTTE. In 1996 the family moved  to  Vavuniya
    where the claimant was subjected to routine  checks  by  the  army  and
    police but, on each of the five occasions when she  was  arrested,  she
    was released on the same day.

 3. On 19 May 1998, the claimant was arrested by the authorities  following
    information provided to the army that she has previously worked in  the
    LTTE rehabilitation centre. She was detained for three days in the army
    camp during which time she was ill treated. She was released on payment
    of the bribe. On the next day she was taken to  Colombo  and  left  Sri
    Lanka on 26 May 1998.

 4. At paragraph  35  of  the  determination,  the  adjudicator  made  this
    finding:

                       "In this particular case I accept that the  appellant
                       was wanted by the authorities and so is most probably
                       still wanted. She was arrested by the authorities  in
                       May 1998. Whilst her release was secured by a tribe I
                       have no doubt she will be  wanted.  Her  evidence  is
                       that all of her details  together  with  fingerprints
                       and photos. This information will therefore be logged
                       with the authorities"

    5. In Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869, the Immigration Appeal Tribunal,
       chaired by its President, Collins J., considered the risk  faced  by
       Tamils in Sri Lanka in the context of the peace negotiations between
       the Sri Lankan authorities and the  LTTE.  In  paragraph  8  of  the
       determination, the Tribunal considered the position in May 2002:

                       "The reality is in  our  judgement  that  it  is  yet
                       premature to accept that  everyone  who  has  claimed
                       asylum in  this  country  would  be  able  to  return
                       safely. We certainly are of  the  view  that  in  the
                       present situation and having regard  to  the  present
                       trends it is only the exceptional cases that will not
                       be able to return in safety. The question is  whether
                       this appellant is such an exceptional  case.  In  our
                       judgement  he  is  for  the  reasons  that  we   have
                       indicated, namely that he is someone  who  is  wanted
                       and is someone in our view who must be  wanted  in  a
                       relatively serious fashion, if we may put it in  that
                       way, because of  the  attitude  in  relation  to  his
                       mother."

    6. Inevitably, cases involving Tamils from the north of Sri Lanka  have
       centred upon what the Tribunal meant by an "exceptional" case.  This
       was considered by the Court of Appeal in Selvaratnam [2003] EWCA Civ
       121. In paragraph 10 of the judgment, Buxton LJ said:

                       That, however, does not conclude the question in  the
                       present case because the situation of this applicant,
                       as the special adjudicator found, is not simply  that
                       he will be a returned asylum seeker on his return  to
                       Sri Lanka, but that he is a person who very  recently
                       has been in detention in that country for a  specific
                       reason,  a  reason  that   is   identified   by   the
                       authorities in that country and is  still  identified
                       as a ground for taking an interest in  its  citizens;
                       and had unlawfully escaped from that custody."

    7. In that case, the adjudicator had found  that  the  authorities  had
       compelling evidence that the appellant had worked for the LTTE.  The
       evidence included a signed confession. The Court of Appeal then went
       on to find that the Tribunal had not sufficiently addressed the risk
       faced by persons who are treated as wanted persons.  In  particular,
       the court relied upon he contents of the fact-finding mission to Sri
       Lanka in March 2002 that a senior superintendent from  the  Criminal
       Investigation Department in Colombo had  told  the  mission  that  a
       computer holds the name, address and age of any wanted person.

    8. Release on payment of a bribe in the absence  of  some  special  and
       credible reason does not amount to an exceptional circumstance - see
       paragraph 8 of Thiagarah [2002] UKIAT 04917.

                       "Bribery  related  releases,  especially  from   army
                       custody, would not, in the absence  of  some  special
                       and credible reason,  be  likely  to  be  treated  as
                       escapees and would not result in the inclusion of the
                       individuals involved on a wanted list."

    9. The issue in this case is whether the adjudicator was correct in his
       assessment that the claimant will be treated on return in 2003 as  a
       wanted person as a result of her 3-day detention in 1998, now some 5
       years ago, when her release was effected by paying a bribe.  On  its
       face, the adjudicator's decision was contrary to  the  reasoning  of
       the Tribunal in Thiagarah [2002] UKIAT 04917 that, in the absence of
       some special and credible reason, she is not likely to be treated as
       an escapee or wanted person.

   10. Ms. Gandhi, who appeared on behalf of the claimant,  submitted  that
       the claimant's case was exceptional because she will be treated as a
       wanted person. The adjudicator, although finding that  the  claimant
       was a wanted person, did not give any reasons save that she accepted
       that the claimant was wanted by the authorities in 1998  and  so  is
       most probably still  wanted  and  that,  although  her  release  was
       secured by bribe, she  would  still  be  wanted.  The  adjudicator's
       finding in paragraph 35 of the determination  does  not,  therefore,
       reveal how she reached her conclusion.

   11. Ms. Gandhi referred  to  a  statement  that  was  submitted  to  the
       adjudicator on 12 February 2003, although it does not feature in the
       material provided to the Tribunal. The adjudicator did not refer  to
       this material in his determination. The claimant stated:

                       "5.   I was only released from detention as  a  bribe
                            was paid. The officer who took the bribe  money
                            did not tell his superiors. He told me that  he
                            was going to say that I had escaped."

                       6.    After I came to the  United  Kingdom  the  army
                            went to my house and they were looking for  me.
                            They beat my father and took  my  brother  with
                            them. As a result of what happened  my  brother
                            was  seriously  mentally   affected.   He   was
                            arrested  in  May  1998  and  kept  for   three
                            months."

   12.  Those persons who are released on a bribe  will  normally  have  no
       reliable information as to what the policeman or prison officer,  to
       whom the bribe was paid, told  his  superiors  to  account  for  the
       departure of the detainee. The evidence of the policeman  or  prison
       officer may well not be a reliable. Prison  officers,  for  example,
       might well accept bribes  in  the  knowledge  that  a  decision  had
       already been made to release the prisoner. The extraction of a bribe
       would not then pose any significant risk of exposure but the  prison
       officer is unlikely to reveal the truth to the person  detained.  It
       is doubtful what weight the adjudicator could have attached  to  the
       claimant's evidence of what the  officer  said  he  would  tell  his
       superiors.

   13. The claimant asserts that, after she arrived at the United  Kingdom,
       she was told the army went looking for her. There  is,  however,  no
       evidence that the claimant is facing  any  outstanding  charges.  It
       would only be speculation whether there are such charges and, if so,
       whether those charges relate to the  claimant's  activities  between
       1992 and 1995 working in the rehabilitation centre, or whether  they
       refer  to  bribing  an  army  officer  or  to  absconding  from   an
       unlawful/informal army detention. It is  to  be  recalled  that  the
       claimant was not in police custody, had not been charged and had not
       appeared before a magistrate. It is only if the claimant's departure
       from custody has resulted in formal  criminal  procedures  that  she
       will appear on the police computer. It is inconceivable, bearing  in
       mind the large numbers of persons who have been  arrested,  detained
       and released in army or police roundups since 1998 that each one  of
       those persons is featured on the police computer.

   14. The Country Assessment prepared by CIPU in April 2003 deals with the
       information held by the CID:

                            "6.63  On  21  March  2002,   a   Home   Office
                            delegation was told in a meeting in  Sri  Lanka
                            with the Director of the Criminal Investigation
                            Department that there are computerised  records
                            in the south of the country  only.  Details  of
                            arrests etc. are sent form  the  north  of  the
                            country, and are then transferred to  computer;
                            paper-based records  are  held  in  the  north.
                            There are no photographs of wanted  persons  at
                            the airport, only computerised records. [35b]

                            6.68  The  Sri  Lankan   Government   made   an
                            announcement  on  8  November  that  they   had
                            directed the police to maintain a  registry  of
                            all persons arrested under  the  PTS  (and  the
                            former  Emergency  Regulations)  that  may   be
                            proclaimed under the Public Security  Ordinance
                            (PSO).The computerised Central Police  Registry
                            was established with  effect  from  1  November
                            2001. Information relating to persons  arrested
                            under the  PTA  has  to  be  submitted  to  the
                            Central Police Registry by  arresting  officers
                            as soon as possible and  definitely  not  later
                            than 6 hours from the time of arrest.  Next  of
                            kin and close family members would be  entitled
                            to receive information regarding such  arrests,
                            the identity of the  arresting  authority,  and
                            the place of detention.  In  order  to  receive
                            such  information,   interested   persons   can
                            contact  the   Central   police   Registry   by
                            telephone 24 hours a day, and enquires  may  be
                            made in Sinhala, Tamil or English. [21]

   15. There is no evidence that the Sri Lankan army maintain  computerised
       or manual records of those  detained  by  them,  especially  if  the
       circumstances suggest that the detention  was  not  carried  out  in
       accordance with lawful practice. Furthermore, there is  no  evidence
       that the Sri Lankan  army  provide  that  information  to  the  CID.
       Indeed, in many cases, it would be difficult to understand what  use
       the information would be. The mere record of  arrest  and  detention
       would mean nothing  if  there  was  no  evidence  of  misconduct  or
       criminal activity on the part of the person detained. The  names  of
       the many thousands of those arrested and detained since  1998  might
       well constitute a hindrance rather than a help.

   16. On arrival in Sri Lanka it is the computerised police  records  that
       are consulted.

   17. The adjudicator had "no doubt" that the claimant was till  a  wanted
       person, that her fingerprints and photographs  were  on  record  and
       this information was logged with the authorities. He went on to find
       that the objective material established that if  "an  individual  is
       wanted in any way then they will be detained  when  they  arrive  at
       Colombo airport." The material that we have set out above  does  not
       support  that  conclusion.  More  importantly,  the  claimant's  own
       evidence does not support a finding that  her  detention  for  three
       days in 1998 at an army camp is reasonably likely to have found  its
       way onto the CID computers and that the claimant is  recorded  there
       as a wanted person. The adjudicator's decision on this aspect of the
       case was plainly wrong.

   18. The adjudicator considered that the case was "very  much  on  a  par
       with Selvaratnam." See paragraph 38 at the determination. Yet, as we
       have set out above, in that  case  the  authorities  had  compelling
       evidence that the appellant had worked for the LTTE and the evidence
       included a signed confession. The evidence  of  escape  was  not  in
       issue. He was a wanted person.  In our view, the adjudicator was not
       entitled to treat this claimant as a wanted person on  the  evidence
       before him. In reaching this conclusion we have paid regard  to  the
       decision in the Court of Appeal in Oleed [2002] EWCA Civ  1906  and,
       in particular, the comments of Schiemann  LJ  in  paragraph  29  and
       paragraph 41 of the judgement of Lady Justice Arden. We accept  that
       the threshold is a high one: plainly wrong, unsustainable,  perverse
       or so inherently illogical as to render the decision flawed. In  our
       judgement, and for the reasons that we have given, we  consider  the
       decision of the adjudicator was so seriously flawed.

   19. For these reasons, we allow the appeal of the Secretary of State  in
       relation to the adjudicator's findings on the asylum appeal and  the
       associated Article 3 claim that stood or fell with it.

   20. In addition, however, the adjudicator made a decision under  Article
       8 of the ECHR. Mr Walker, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of
       State, sought to  argue  that  the  adjudicator's  determination  on
       proportionality was also seriously flawed.  It  is  plain,  however,
       from the grounds of appeal that this is not an issue that is  raised
       there. Mr Walker did not seek to amend the grounds and, had he  done
       so, it is unlikely we would have permitted him to do so  because  Ms
       Gandhi  would  not  have  been  able  to  deal  with  those  issues.
       Accordingly, the adjudicator's decision in relation to article 8  of
       the ECHR remains undisturbed  by  our  findings  under  the  Refugee
       Convention and Article 3.





Signed


Andrew Jordan
Vice President
23 September 2003
