
 jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |MM (risk- failed asylum     |
|                           |        |seekers) Democratic Republic|
|                           |        |of Congo [2003] UKIAT 00071 |
|On  9 July 2003            |        |                            |
|Dictated 10 July 2003                                             |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|15.08.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane (Chairman)                                            |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mr T B Davey                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr K Behbahani of Messrs Scudamores Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms C Hanrahan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo,  appeals
      with leave against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr K W  Brown,
      sitting at Taylor House, in which he dismissed  on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State on 3 January 2001 to refuse him leave to enter  the
      United Kingdom.

2.    The appellant's account was that he had serious difficulties in  (what
      is now) the DRC during the year 1998, as a result of renting rooms  to
      Rwandans.  He also said that his wife had Rwandan connections, in that
      her father was Rwandan, although she herself was a national of  Zaire.
      There were searches of the appellant's house for Rwandans, during  one
      of which he and his wife ran into the  street  and  became  separated.
      The appellant said that in February 1999, when attempting to leave the
      DRC, he was apprehended.  The soldiers holding him saw a photograph of
      his wife which he had about him and asked the appellant where his wife
      was.  Subsequently, however, the appellant was able to  escape.   From
      then until October 1999, he lived with a family in the DRC.   He  left
      the DRC in October 1999.  He produced what was  said  to  be  a  death
      certificate relating to his  wife,  giving  a  date  of  death  of  26
      February 1999.

3.    The Adjudicator heard evidence from the appellant.  He  did  not  find
      the appellant to be credible.  Indeed, at one point,  the  Adjudicator
      considered that "the appellant was making up his story of  the  escape
      and subsequent events as he went along" (determination, paragraph 34).
       The Adjudicator concluded that "I do not  accept  the  appellant  has
      given a credible account".  He did not  consider  that  the  purported
      death certificate was authentic "as providing evidence to support that
      his wife was killed as a result of torture at the  hands  of  the  DRC
      authorities" (paragraph 35).

4.    The Vice President who gave leave to appeal found that

           "The adverse credibility findings are sound.  In particular, the
           Tribunal considers that the Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  find
           implausible the claims that on the one hand the Rwandans on  the
           claimant's premises would not have been discovered on the  first
           occasion when the premises was searched, on the other hand  that
           he would have allowed them to  remain  living  there  given  the
           threat that they posed.  The  findings  about  his  escape  from
           custody and its implausibility are also sound."


5.    Leave to appeal was given on the following basis:

           "However, it is right to make the  point  as  was  done  in  the
           grounds of appeal that there are no findings by the  Adjudicator
           on risk on return as a failed asylum seeker.   It  would  appear
           from the submissions before the Adjudicator that  there  may  be
           contrasting Tribunal determinations on  the  point,  and  it  is
           appropriate therefore  for  the  matter  to  be  considered  and
           clarified by the Tribunal."

6.    Mr Behbahani's submissions were, in essence, that,  on  the  basis  of
      the  latest  information  available  to  the  Tribunal,  including  in
      particular the UNHCR letters to which we shall make  reference,  there
      was a real risk that the appellant, if he returned to the  DRC,  would
      face persecution, the nature of which would also fall within Article 3
      of the ECHR, as being cruel, inhuman or degrading.

7.    Mr Behbahani very properly conceded that it was  reasonable  to  infer
      from the Adjudicator's determination, in particular paragraphs  33  to
      36, that the Adjudicator had not found any aspect of  the  appellant's
      account to be credible.  This would include the appellant's  claim  to
      have been married to a woman whose father was of Rwandan ethnicity.

8.    However, for the purposes of this appeal, the Tribunal indicated  that
      it would proceed on the following basis:

      i)    The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo.


      ii)   He has been in the United Kingdom for  approximately  three  and
           three-quarter years, having arrived on 27 October 1999.


      iii)  If returned, he would arrive in the DRC as someone who had  made
           an unsuccessful claim for asylum in the United Kingdom.


      iv)   The appellant was previously married  to  a  DRC  citizen  whose
           father was Rwandan but who has since died.


9.    The Tribunal would, however, emphasise that there is  no  question  of
      its acceptance that the appellant and his wife  suffered  any  of  the
      problems  described  to  (and  rejected  by)   the   Adjudicator,   in
      particular, that the wife died at the hands of the DRC authorities.

10.   In  addition,  there  is  the  following  matter.   The  Tribunal  was
      concerned to ascertain the basis upon which  the  appellant  would  be
      returned to the DRC by the United Kingdom government.  Ms Hanrahan was
      unable to answer this question immediately, so the Tribunal  adjourned
      briefly so as to enable her to take instructions.

11.   At the resumed hearing, Ms Hanrahan was able to give the Tribunal  the
      following information:

      a)    The UK Government in the past removed persons to the DRC by mean
           of EU travel documentation.


      b)    That practice  has  ceased.   Ms  Hanrahan  was  unable  to  say
           precisely when, but it appears from a Home  Office  bulletin  of
           January 2003 that the practice ceased prior to 30 January 2003.


      c)    A person in possession of a valid DRC passport can currently  be
           removed.


      d)    The UK Government is in negotiation  with  the  DRC  Embassy  in
           London with a view to arranging for those not in  possession  of
           such a passport to be returned to  the  DRC  upon  an  emergency
           travel document.


      e)    Such a document would confirm that the person concerned is a DRC
           national but would not contain any other information as  to  why
           he or she had been present in the United Kingdom.


12.   The recent history of the Democratic Republic of Congo is  well  known
      and the Tribunal does not  consider  that  it  would  be  of  material
      assistance to set it out  in  this  determination.   It  is,  however,
      relevant to mention the following.  On 30 July 2002 a peace  agreement
      was signed in Pretoria, South Africa, by President Kabila of  the  DRC
      and President Kagame of Rwanda.  Under this, the DRC government agreed
      to disarm and arrest thousands of Hutu rebels and send them to Rwanda,
      whilst the Rwandan government was to withdraw  30,000  of  its  troops
      based in Eastern DRC.  Hutu rebels did not  recognise  the  agreement.
      On 6 September 2002 the DRC government and the  government  of  Uganda
      signed the Rwanda Accord, which called for the withdrawal  of  Ugandan
      troops from the DRC and the establishment of  joint  security  patrols
      along the DRC's border with Uganda.  Rebel factions continued to  hold
      sway in the eastern and northeastern areas  of  DRC.   However,  on  2
      April, one rebel organisation, the  Movement  for  the  Liberation  of
      Congo, signed a  power-sharing  agreement  with  the  DRC  government.
      According to a BBC news report of January 2003, the MLC has  installed
      representatives in  Kinshasa,  although  Jean-Pierre  Bemba,  the  MLC
      leader,  has  not  ventured  there.   Reports  of  atrocities  in  the
      northeast continue to be received,  and  there  are  suggestions  that
      dissident MLC commanders have formed  a  splinter  movement.   In  May
      2003, UN troops sought to assist those caught up in  the  violence  in
      the northeast, but large numbers of civilians fled across  the  border
      to Uganda.  In that part of the  DRC,  including  Kinshasa,  which  is
      controlled by the Kabila government, there  are  still  serious  human
      rights problems, as the latest US State  Department  report  observes.
      In particular,  citizens  do  not  have  the  right  to  change  their
      government peacefully and  the  security  forces  were  (during  2002)
      responsible for unlawful killings, torture, beatings, rape,  extortion
      and other abuses.  In general security forces committed  these  abuses
      with impunity.  Prison conditions  in  hundreds  of  smaller  regional
      detention facilities (both legal and illegal) remained harsh and  life
      threatening; however, conditions in some of  the  larger,  centralised
      prisons improved.  Security forces continue arbitrarily to arrest  and
      detain citizens.  Prolonged pre-trial  detention  remains  a  problem.
      The Special Military Tribunal (COL) tried some civilians for political
      offences, although most cases were related to the Kabila assassination
      or to alleged coup plotting.   The  judiciary  continue  to  be  under
      funded, inefficient, and corrupt.  All this we take from page 2 of the
      State Department report,  set  out  at  page  19  of  the  appellant's
      objective evidence bundle.  Altogether,  some  3  million  people  are
      estimated to have been killed during the  course  of  the  civil  war,
      making it the largest conflict, in terms of loss of life, since  World
      War II.

13.   Such is the sorry state of the Democratic Republic of Congo, as it  is
      to be found today.  One point should, however, be  mentioned  at  this
      stage.   It  was  not  argued  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   that,
      irrespective of what might happen to a  person  at  Kinshasa  airport,
      upon arrival from abroad, the  situation  in  the  DRC  is  such  that
      everyone living in  the  government-controlled  part  of  the  country
      (other  than  those  comprising  or  directly  associated   with   the
      government) is as such at  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill  treatment.
      Furthermore, the Tribunal is not aware of any claims to this effect in
      the documentary material on DRC currently available, whether emanating
      from a governmental or non-governmental source.

14.   The situation in the DRC is,  however,  relevant,  in  Mr  Behbahani's
      submission, to the question of whether the appellant, assuming him  to
      be returned to Kinshasa by air as a  failed  asylum  seeker  from  the
      United Kingdom, would as a result thereof be at real risk of coming to
      the adverse interest of the DRC authorities.  If we may paraphrase  Mr
      Behbahani's submissions, they appear to come  to  this.   Against  the
      background of the situation in the DRC today, it does  not  take  much
      for a citizen of that country to find himself or herself  the  subject
      of adverse interest from the authorities.  Returning to the  DRC  from
      Europe, as a failed asylum seeker, is therefore enough to arouse  such
      adverse interest.  Secondly, once a person is the subject  of  adverse
      interest, he or she is likely to be detained.  The objective  evidence
      shows that persons in detention in the DRC are frequently subjected to
      abuse at the hands of the authorities.  Even if they are not, however,
      the conditions experienced by those in  detention  are  in  themselves
      such as to violate Article 3 of the ECHR.

15.   The Tribunal turns to the documentary materials relating  to  the  DRC
      which were before it at the hearing.  With one exception, namely,  the
      April 2003 DRC Country Assessment, these documents were ones submitted
      on behalf of the appellant.

16.   At page 62 of the objective evidence bundle, there is a  letter  dated
      27 June 2002 from the UNHCR to a firm  of  solicitors  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Apparently, those solicitors had  requested  information  on
      the current situation  in  the  DRC  in  relation  to  the  return  of
      unsuccessful asylum seekers.  In that letter, the UNHCR emphasised:

           "The need for a case-by-case approach in  examining  all  asylum
           applications and in assessing whether or not  an  asylum  seeker
           may be  returned  in  safety.   Within  the  particular  country
           context, each case should be examined on its own merits with due
           weight being given to the specific background and profile of the
           applicant."

      The letter  then  went  on  to  look  in  more  detail  at  particular
      categories of persons who might be at risk on return:

           "Against this  backdrop,  persons  originating  from  rebel-held
           territories such as Goma are held in  suspicion  and  liable  to
           adverse attention - sometimes amounting to  persecution  -  from
           the authorities in Kinshasa.  By a  similar  token,  persons  of
           Rwandese origin are also at risk of adverse attention.  This  is
           not least  because  Rwandese  and  Rwanda-supported  forces  are
           prominent among the armed elements ranged against  the  Kinshasa
           authorities.  In this light, persons of Tutsi ethnic origin  are
           known to be among the targets of  extreme  human  rights  abuses
           amounting to persecution.  Tutsis  and  those  perceived  to  be
           Tutsis have  been  subjected  to  arbitrary  detention  and  ill
           treatment and have in certain instances been  tracked  down  and
           killed in Kinshasa.  This  analysis  is  equally  applicable  to
           ethnically mixed Tutsis.


           According to information  available  to  UNHCR,  agents  of  the
           security services frequently interrogate Congolese returning  to
           Kinshasa from abroad, particularly those who are known  to  have
           sought asylum.  UNHCR is aware of instances where  interrogation
           at the airport has been  followed  by  arbitrary  detention  and
           serious ill treatment by DRC security agencies.  If the returnee
           is not already known to the DRC authorities, there is  a  strong
           likelihood  that  were  he  to  be  returned  to  Kinshasa,  his
           background could be revealed in the course of  interrogation  on
           arrival."


17.   It is necessary to observe that this letter  pre-dated  the  agreement
      signed on 30 July 2002 between the Rwandan and DRC governments.

18.   The day after this  letter  was  written,  there  began  in  Vienna  a
      seminar  under  the  auspices  of  ACCORD/UNHCR.   This  seminar   was
      organised in order to assess the then current situation in the DRC, in
      particular, the position regarding human rights of  groups  considered
      to be at  risk.   The  Final  Report  arising  from  this  seminar  is
      contained at pages 64 to 136 of the bundle.

19.   At page 119, there is a passage relating  to  "mixed  marriages".   Mr
      Behbahani sought to rely upon this passage  in  his  submissions.   In
      deference to him, we shall set it out in full:

           "Members of the  very  specific  groups  of  Hemas,  Lendus  and
           Banyanulenges, may hence become victims  of  ethnic  intolerance
           either because of their activities or because they belong to the
           group of mixed-marriage people who  may  be  rejected  by  their
           neighbours and be  forced  to  seek  asylum  in  a  neighbouring
           country.  People belonging to a family of mixed ethnicity should
           be identified as a group at risk.   Particularly  in  the  east,
           those who are approached in the UNHCR in search of help want  to
           leave because none of the two communities will trust them.


           In general, the offspring belong to the ethnic  group  of  their
           fathers.  So if the mother is e.g. Hutu, Baluba or Kongo and the
           father is Tutsi, the child will be described as Tutsi.  Yet, the
           case is not always that straightforward.  Some people have  been
           even killed because of their appearance, because they look  like
           a Tutsi, while in fact they were not.  One group that  is  often
           persecuted, but unfortunately often forgotten are the Hutus  who
           themselves are not safe inside the DRC.  They are persecuted  on
           both sides of the frontlines."

20.    The  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  this  passage  assists  the
      appellant's case.  It is not clear whether  the  reference  to  people
      "belonging to a family of mixed ethnicity" is intended to  cover  more
      than people whose parents were  of  different,  or  mixed,  ethnicity.
      However, even if the passage is to  be  interpreted  as  extending  to
      those who, whilst themselves not of mixed ethnicity,  marry  a  spouse
      who, or into a family that is, of mixed ethnicity, it is common ground
      that this appellant is not now (if he ever was) married  to  a  person
      who had Rwandan connections.  The appellant himself is  not  of  mixed
      ethnicity.

21.   At pages 124 to 127, there is an extensive passage under  the  heading
      "Security Threat for Deported Asylum Seekers".  The opening  paragraph
      reads as follows:

           "In view of the above [namely, the preceding passage  concerning
           the return of refugees from neighbouring countries such as Congo-
           Brazzaville] and describing the very serious  situation  in  the
           DRC, caution should be exercised in the  involuntary  return  of
           unsuccessful asylum applicants from the DRC, and a  case-by-case
           approach is necessary in dealing with these individuals.  Asylum
           seekers who have been  unsuccessful  after  going  through  fair
           eligibility procedures and application  of  correct  eligibility
           criteria may still face problems upon return to their country of
           origin.  Issues such as the individual's place of  origin,  last
           place of habitual residence, family relations, ethnic group  and
           profession are to be considered before the person  is  deported.
           An individual approach based on the circumstances of  each  case
           and a  careful  consideration  of  the  changing  political  and
           security context in the DRC is therefore required.  In any case,
           deportation to the DRC should be avoided."

22.   The Tribunal would make three comments on  this  passage.   First,  it
      appears to be primarily (if not exclusively) focussed upon those being
      returned from countries bordering the DRC.  Secondly, despite the last
      sentence, it falls short of a finding that returning asylum seekers as
      such are at real risk of serious ill treatment.  Thirdly, it  commends
      a case-by-case approach, looking at factors of the individual claimant
      which may be relevant in predicting the attitude towards  him  of  the
      DRC authorities.  Such an approach is clearly correct.

23.   The report then goes on to describe the findings of  a  working  group
      on returnees which was created in  the  United  Nations  Human  Rights
      Office in Kinshasa.  This showed:
           "that a great majority of deportees are escorted by  the  police
           of the deporting country. According to the authorities, when the
           deportee  returns  with  a  travel  document  "tenant  lieu   de
           passport", he/she is referred unaccompanied to  the  immigration
           office in the center of  the  capital  to  complete  immigration
           formalities.  The authorities reiterate that the deportee, while
           he or she  is  completing  immigration  formalities,  is  not  a
           detainee and that as soon as Congolese nationality is  confirmed
           the person is allowed to leave immigration premises.


           A problem arises when the deportee is in  fact  a  non-Congolese
           national.  DRC immigration authorities have indeed  reported  to
           UNHCR and the local office of the UN High Commissioner for Human
           Rights (UNHCHR) in Kinshasa that in several instances  deportees
           holding identity/travel documents issued by the  DRC  Diplomatic
           Missions turn out to be Angolans after a thorough interview.  As
           an example, the DRC immigration authorities  were  "hosting"  in
           their premises for over a  year  an  Angolan  national  who  was
           deported as Congolese by the  Swiss  authorities,  but  who  had
           departed to Switzerland from Angola and not from the DRC.  It is
           therefore recommended that states very carefully  ascertain  the
           nationality of unsuccessful asylum applicants  before  they  are
           processed for return to the DRC.


           While the DRC authorities maintain  their  position  as  to  the
           procedure in place to receive deportees, the UNHCR has  received
           reports  on  deportees  transferred  to  the  DRC   intelligence
           services such as ANR  (Agents  Nationale  des  Renseragnements),
           DEMIAP (Detection Militaire des Activites Anti Patrie)  or  GSSP
           (Garde Speciale de Securite Presidentielle)  for  interrogation.
           The DRC authorities deny such procedures.


           Against this background, it can no  longer  be  said  that  only
           those deportees who are discovered by the  authorities  to  have
           sought asylum abroad undergo interrogation sessions upon arrival
           at Kinshasa airport.  In fact, reports from local  human  rights
           NGO's, victims and eye witnesses show  that  certain  groups  of
           individuals who  are  deported  (having  or  not  having  sought
           asylum), who repatriate voluntarily, may face  serious  problems
           following possible interrogation conducted by security  services
           upon arrival to Kinshasa.  Should the  authorities  in  Kinshasa
           discover that a deportee has a political or military profile, or
           has sought asylum  abroad  owing  to  a  political  or  military
           background, such a person may be at risk of arbitrary  detention
           and  ill  treatment.   People  who  are  returned  without   any
           assurances that the government does not hold any grudge  against
           them could be in serious trouble and get detained  as  prisoners
           of conscience or could even be at risk  of  the  death  penalty,
           always depending on their activities."

24.   The Tribunal makes the following  observation  on  the  passages  just
      quoted.  First, they clearly have to be read  in  the  light  of,  and
      subject to, the opening passage, previously  quoted,  which,  although
      advising  the  exercise  of  caution  in  the  involuntary  return  of
      unsuccessful asylum applicants, does not state that  no  such  returns
      may be made, whatever the circumstances.

25.   The second point relates to the issue of nationality.  In the  present
      case, there is no doubt at all but that the appellant is  a  Congolese
      national.  In particular, there is no evidence at all to show that the
      authorities in Kinshasa would have reason to suspect that he was  from
      Angola.  When interviewed at Kinshasa airport, there is no  reason  to
      suppose that the interviewer would have reason to question the  travel
      documentation issued by the DRC  Embassy  in  London,  describing  the
      appellant as a DRC citizen.  Thirdly, there is  the  question  of  the
      appellant being  an  unsuccessful  asylum  seeker.   Ms  Hanrahan,  as
      previously noted, informed the Tribunal that there was no question  of
      the travel documentation stating the reason why the appellant  was  in
      the United Kingdom.  In any event, the only logical  inference  to  be
      drawn from the paragraphs just quoted is that, even if the authorities
      at Kinshasa airport discover at the interview that  the  person  is  a
      failed asylum seeker, that will not necessarily result in  the  person
      concerned being taken into  detention  and  ill  treated  (whether  by
      torture, other active ill treatment or as a result of  the  conditions
      in which persons are held).  Those who are said by the report to be at
      risk of facing serious problems are  people  having   a  political  or
      military profile or who sought asylum abroad owing to a  political  or
      military background.  The appellant falls into no such category.  Nor,
      as we have said, is he a person of mixed ethnicity.

26.   The final passages of the Report to which reference needs to  be  made
      occur at pages 126 and  127  of  the  bundle.   These  deal  with  the
      question of persecution on the grounds of having sought asylum abroad.
       The following passage is significant:

           "Responding to a question  from  the  audience  whether  seeking
           asylum  itself  could  lead  to  persecution  and  hence  be   a
           sufficient ground for granting  refugee  status,  Mr  Byaruhanga
           [Central Africa Researcher, Amnesty International London] stated
           that he was not aware that people had been detained  solely  for
           seeking asylum.  Usually they are accused of some offence,  like
           alliance with the enemy, as e.g. in  the  case  of  people  from
           Kivu, having fled to Nairobi and subsequently to Europe and then
           being deported to Kinshasa."

27.   Mr Byaruhanga went on to state that if the  returnee  was  alleged  or
      known to be a  supporter  of  the  opposition  "arrest,  and  possibly
      torture and persecution, are likely".  There then  follows  a  passage
      describing the difficulties which have occurred

           "when countries of asylum have deported someone and handed  over
           all the  information  about  this  asylum  seeker  to  the  home
           government.  Informing them that the applicant has e.g.  claimed
           that he was imprisoned and beaten could cause  serious  problems
           for the individual."

      The seminar appears to have agreed that this "is something  that  must
      in all cases be avoided" and that

           "reporting to the authorities of the country of origin about the
           asylum claim obviously could create serious trouble for a person
           who may not have problems otherwise."

28.   The Tribunal observes that there is no  evidence  before  it  to  show
      that the United Kingdom government has had  such  a  practice  in  the
      past, as regards returnees to the DRC, nor that it intends  to  follow
      such a practice once negotiations with the DRC Embassy are  completed,
      on the question of  travel  documentation  for  those  not  possessing
      current DRC passports.

29.   At pages 4 and 5 of the bundle is  to  be  found  a  letter  dated  23
      January  2002  from  UNHCR  to  Mr  Baster  of  Bail  for  Immigration
      Detainees. This letter is in reply to an enquiry  made  by  Mr  Baster
      regarding one of  his  bail  clients.   The  letter  states  that  the
      information available to the UNHCR in 2002  "was  that  DRC  nationals
      returning to Kinshasa by air, including unsuccessful  asylum  seekers,
      were liable upon arrival to be interrogated,  and  in  some  instances
      detained and abused by government agents".  This comment appears to be
      a reference to the passages quoted above from the  ACCORD/UNHCR  Final
      Report.

30.   The letter goes on to note the peace agreement signed in  Pretoria  in
      December 2002 and ends by expressing concern about the attention which
      might be attracted if  asylum  seekers  were  "returned  en  masse  by
      chartered plane".

31.   The question as to the precise means whereby the  appellant  might  be
      returned  to  Kinshasa  was  not  canvassed   before   the   Tribunal.
      Nevertheless, the obvious point to make about the return of a group of
      failed asylum seekers, by means of a chartered plane, is that it would
      clearly be in the interests of the United Kingdom government  to  have
      representatives at the airport to monitor what is likely to be such  a
      high-profile return and that such monitoring would be likely to result
      in the DRC authorities wishing to be seen to do what they say they  do
      at Kinshasa airport (as to which, both the passages at the top of page
      125 of the bundle and the letter of 5  June  2003  are  relevant-  see
      paragraph 23 above and 34 below).

32.   The next  document  to  be  considered  is  the  Home  Office  Country
      Assessment on the DRC of  April  2003.   At  para  5.41  we  find  the
      following:

           "The British Ambassador to the DRC stated in November 2002  that
           he has not seen any evidence  to  indicate  that  failed  asylum
           seekers are persecuted on arrival  in  Kinshasa.   He  has  also
           stated that the French, Belgian  and  Dutch  governments  return
           failed Congolese asylum seekers to the DRC without any problems.
            The only formal requirement needed  to  allow  the  returns  of
           failed asylum seekers are valid travel documents."

33.   As can be seen, this statement by the British Ambassador is  supported
      by the comments of Mr Byaruhanga of Amnesty  International  (paragraph
      26 above).

34.   We turn now to the letter  of  5  June  2003  from  the  UNHCR  to  Mr
      Behbahani.  This is in reply to a letter of 4 June 2003  from  him  in
      which he requested guidance on the return  of  failed  asylum  seekers
      under present circumstances.  Mr Behbahani also supplied the  Tribunal
      with a copy of his letter to the UNHCR.  Because of its recent nature,
      the Tribunal considers that it is necessary to set out  the  substance
      of the letter of 5 June in full:

           "The humanitarian situation  in  the  DRC  continues  to  be  of
           concern  to  UNHCR,  mainly  due  to  human  rights  violations,
           epidemic outbreaks, major nutritional and  health  problems  and
           restrictions on humanitarian access that are exacerbated by  the
           ongoing hostilities.  Over  2.5  million  of  the  estimated  50
           million Congolese citizens are now displaced.  Over 500,000 were
           displaced in 2002 alone, mainly due to intensified violence  and
           renewed fighting.  Almost a million of them  have  not  received
           any aid because of the unstable security  situation,  especially
           in the eastern provinces of DRC.


           With regard to the treatment of persons  returned  to  the  DRC,
           first hand accounts and reports from  local  human  rights  NGOs
           suggest that certain individuals who are deported (regardless of
           whether  they  sought  asylum  abroad),  or   even   repatriated
           voluntarily,  may  face  serious  problems  following   possible
           interrogation conducted by security  services  upon  arrival  in
           Kinshasa.  Should the authorities in Kinshasa  discover  that  a
           deportee has a political or a military profile,  or  has  sought
           asylum abroad owing to a political or military background,  such
           person may be at risk of arbitrary detention and ill  treatment.
           There have also been reports  of  abuse  of  power  by  security
           officers at Ndjaili International  Airport  (Kinshasa).   It  is
           alleged that they intimidate deportees to extort money, and send
           them to detention centres in cases where neither they nor  their
           families can pay.


           However, the DRC authorities  maintain  that  the  deportee  who
           returns with a travel document  "tenant  lieu  de  passport"  is
           required to complete immigration  formalities  upon  arrival  in
           order to confirm his or her Congolese nationality.   He  is  not
           detained and is  allowed  to  leave  immigration  premises  once
           Congolese  nationality  is  confirmed.   The  problem   in   the
           deportation procedure may occur  when  the  deportee  is  not  a
           Congolese  national  and  has  acquired  a  DRC  passport  in  a
           fraudulent manner.  In such cases, there have  been  reports  of
           persons suspected of being nationals of countries considered  as
           "unfriendly" (e.g. Uganda, Rwanda) may be  arbitrarily  detained
           and face ill treatment.   Nationals  of  other  countries  would
           normally be  released  after  interrogation.   It  is  therefore
           recommended that the nationality of rejected asylum  seekers  be
           carefully ascertained before they are processed  for  return  to
           the DRC.


           DRC authorities maintain that the information in  the  preceding
           paragraph correctly reflects the procedure in place  to  receive
           deportees, the UNHCR (UN High Commissioner for Human Rights) has
           nevertheless received reports about deportees transferred to the
           DRC  security  services  such  as  ANR  (Agents  Nationale   des
           Resignaments) and DEMIAT (Detection  Militaire  des  Actives  en
           Anti  Patrie)  for  interrogation.   The  Minister  of  Interior
           recently announced that these two security  services  no  longer
           officially   operate   at   Ndjauli    International    Airport.
           Officially, only the police and the DGM (Direction Generale  des
           Migrations) are currently operating at  this  airport.   Reports
           suggest, however, that the remaining security services have  not
           in fact ceased their operations  and  continue  to  maintain  an
           unofficial presence at Kinshasa airport.


           The above-mentioned  observations,  combined  with  the  serious
           deterioration of the protection and security  situation  in  the
           DRC, raises questions as  to  whether  unsuccessful  DRC  asylum
           seekers may be returned without undue risk.  You  may  be  aware
           that as recently as March of this year, UNHCR's view was that it
           was,  generally  speaking,  possible  for  unsuccessful   asylum
           seekers to return to the DRC provided that they had  been  found
           in fair procedures not to have international  protection  needs.
           UNHCR believe that the validity of that view  has  been  brought
           into question by the recent events in the  DRC.   Therefore,  we
           are keeping the  situation  under  review  and  are  asking  our
           headquarters to provide us with an updated position on  returns,
           which takes into account the most recent developments.


           Please keep us informed of the outcome of this appeal."


35.    The  penultimate  paragraph  of  this  letter   suggests   that   the
      information contained in its preceding paragraphs is in the nature  of
      new material, coming to light since March  2003,  and  that  this  new
      material throws into question the previous  view  of  the  UNHCR  that
      "generally speaking, [it is] possible for unsuccessful asylum  seekers
      to return to the DRC".

36.   However, a close comparison of the letter of  5  June  2003  with  the
      passages from the ACCORD/UNHCR Final Report quoted at paragraphs 19 to
      23 above, demonstrates that the substance of the letter of 5 June  is,
      in fact, drawn from that Final  Report  which,  as  has  been  stated,
      derives from a seminar held in Vienna in June 2002, although the first
      page of the report notes that amendments were made  in  September  and
      November of that year.

37.   As far as the Tribunal can see, the passage in the letter  of  5  June
      relating to instances of extortion by security  officers  at  Kinshasa
      airport is something that may have been identified subsequent  to  the
      preparation of the Final Report.  There is, however, no information as
      to where such reports have originated, let alone how prevalent is  the
      practise of extorting money.  In any event,  the  problem  of  corrupt
      officials, who require bribes in order to remove difficulties from the
      paths of members of the public whom they encounter, is, regrettably, a
      common problem for  the  populations  of  very  many  of  the  world's
      countries.  With respect to the writer of  the  UNHCR  letter,  it  is
      difficult to believe that such a problem has only recently  arisen  in
      the DRC.  In any event, the question is not whether such a practice is
      morally and legally opprobrious but, rather, whether its existence  is
      such as to result in a real risk of this appellant being subjected  to
      persecution or Article 3 ill treatment,  if  returned.   There  is  no
      evidence at all to show that the appellant, if returned  to  Kinshasa,
      would go there without any funds of his  own.   Furthermore,  we  note
      from paragraph 18 of the determination that he has family in Kinshasa,
      with whom he is still in contact.  If the sums of money sought  to  be
      extorted by the corrupt officials were set at levels  which  returnees
      were unable to pay, there would be  no  point  in  the  practice.   In
      short, if faced with the option of paying a bribe or being sent  to  a
      detention centre, the appellant is likely to do the former.

38.   The next passage in the letter which appears to  have  no  counterpart
      in the Final Report is  the  reference  to  people  from  "unfriendly"
      countries facing  the  possibility  of  arbitrary  detention  and  ill
      treatment.  Given that this appellant is not from any such country but
      is indisputably a citizen of the DRC, that problem does not arise.

39.   The next "new" piece of information is that relating to  the  Minister
      of the Interior  announcing  that  the  security  services  no  longer
      officially operate at the airport but that reports suggest  that  they
      maintain  an  unofficial  presence.    In  fact,  this  passage,  upon
      analysis, has nothing new to say, compared with what  is  set  out  at
      page 125 of the bundle (paragraph 23  above).   At  the  time  of  the
      publication of the Final Report, there were reports available  to  the
      UNHCR that certain persons may have been transferred from the  airport
      into security service detention.  The Final Report, however, indicates
      that such persons are likely to be those with a political or  military
      profile.  This appellant has none.

40.   The final passage in the letter of 5 June is  the  reference  to  "the
      serious deterioration of the protection and security situation in  the
      DRC".  What is meant by this is unclear.  It would, however, appear to
      relate to the recent upsurge in the conflict in the northeast  of  the
      DRC which, of course, is not under DRC government control.

41.   The Tribunal finds, accordingly, that the letter of 5 June  2003  does
      not materially assist the appellant.  It should also  be  noted  that,
      were it the case that the UNHCR  considered  that  there  had  been  a
      significant deterioration in the position regarding  returnees,  since
      the end of 2002, it would have specifically and authoritatively stated
      that, in its view, no failed asylum seeker should be returned  to  the
      DRC.  It has not done so.

42.   The final letter, to which reference needs to be made, is that  of  15
      June 2003 from Human Rights Watch to Mr Behbahani.  This refers to

           "continued threats and difficulties faced by those who have,  or
           are presumed to have, Rwandan  connections  or  are  of  Rwandan
           origin in Kinshasa and other parts of the DRC."

      Reference is then made to a continued threat

           "for  those  individuals  who  are  suspected  by  the  Kinshasa
           authorities of having close links to Rwanda."

      Given the findings of the Adjudicator, to the effect that even  whilst
      he was married, the problems described by the appellant did not occur,
      and given that he is not at present married to anyone who has  Rwandan
      connections, Mr Behbahani appeared to accept that this letter could be
      of little assistance to the appellant.

43.   The Tribunal's conclusions are, accordingly, as follows:

      a)    On the information available to it, as at 9 July 2003, it is not
           the fact that a person returned to the DRC is, by reason only of
           being a failed asylum seeker, at real  risk  of  persecution  or
           Article 3 ill treatment;


      b)    In order to run a real  risk  of  being  taken  into  detention,
           following the screening of a returnee at Kinshasa airport, there
           must be something further in the returnee's background, such  as
           past political or military activities or nationality of a  state
           regarded as hostile to the DRC;


      c)    There is nothing in the circumstances of the appellant  in  this
           case to suggest that he would be of any adverse interest to  the
           DRC authorities.

44.    Leave  to  appeal  in  the  present  case  was  granted  against  the
      background that "there may be contrasting Tribunal determinations"  on
      the question of risk on return to the DRC as a failed  asylum  seeker.
      At the hearing, the Tribunal had before it a helpful case  law  bundle
      prepared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  comprising  the   following
      determinations of the IAT:

            Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05308
            Mansende [2002] UKIAT 05052
            Kabuya [2002] UKIAT 07457
            B (DR Congo) [2003] UKIAT 00012.

45.   In Mozu the Tribunal apparently had before it a report of a Dr  Kenne.
       This appears to have contained a reference to the DRC Minister of the
      Interior saying that returning asylum seekers "would  be  arrested  at
      the  airport  and  imprisoned"  (determination,  paragraph  9).    The
      Tribunal in the present case has not seen any similar report.  In  any
      event, the supposed statement of the Minister runs  directly  contrary
      to what the government of the DRC has said to the UNHCR, both in  2002
      and (as it would appear) more recently.  More  importantly,  if  there
      were any evidence to suggest that the DRC authorities were imprisoning
      returnees on  a  wholesale  basis,  such  information  can  have  been
      expected to have come to the attention of the UNHCR and,  indeed,  the
      United Kingdom government.  It has not.

46.   Overall, it would appear that  the  Tribunal  in  Mozu  did  not  have
      before it the extensive information available to the Tribunal  in  the
      present case.

47.   In Mansende, the  Tribunal  concluded  that  "There  is  no  objective
      material to indicate that a person simply returning to the DRC, who is
      of no interest to the authorities, is at real  risk  of  persecution".
      Whilst  the  Tribunal  in  the  present  case  has  reached  the  same
      conclusion, this is based upon materials which were not  available  to
      the Tribunal in Mansende.

48.   Kabuya was heard by the Tribunal on 16 October 2002.   In  that  case,
      the Tribunal allowed the appeal of the  claimant.   In  doing  so,  it
      appears to have placed emphasis upon a UNHCR  letter  of  20  November
      2001.  This noted  that  agents  of  the  security  forces  frequently
      interrogate Congolese returning to Kinshasa from abroad,  particularly
      those who are known to have sought asylum.   It  further  states  that
      UNHCR is aware of instances where interrogation  at  the  airport  has
      been followed by arbitrary detention and serious ill treatment by  DRC
      security agencies.

49.   The Final Report of ACCORD/UNHCR had not been published  at  the  time
      of the Tribunal hearing in Kabuya.  Furthermore, as is  apparent  from
      paragraph 5 of the determination, the appellant in that  case  clearly
      did have a political profile in DRC.  Accordingly, he had a background
      which could well be revealed during  any  questioning  he  would  have
      received at Kinshasa  airport,  with  the  result  that  he  would  be
      identified as of adverse interest to the  authorities,  who  would  be
      likely to place him in detention, with all that that entails.  Kabuya,
      accordingly, cannot in the view of the Tribunal be read  as  authority
      for the proposition that a returning failed asylum seeker is at  risk,
      purely as a result of being such.

50.   Likewise, the appellant in B  (DRCongo)  had,  whilst  in  the  United
      Kingdom, produced an article which had apparently  been  published  in
      Kinshasa, which appears to have been critical of the  DRC  government,
      and he had also been active in "dissident politics of the DRC"  whilst
      in the  United  Kingdom  (determination,  paragraph  3).   Again,  any
      questioning of Mr B at Kinshasa could  well  reveal  this  background,
      with the result that he would be placed in detention.

51.   Upon proper analysis, it would, accordingly, appear  to  the  Tribunal
      that the cases to which we have referred are, with  the  exception  of
      Mozu, not authorities for the proposition that a person being returned
      to the DRC faces a real risk of persecution solely by reason of  being
      a failed asylum seeker.   As  we  have  said,  the  Tribunal  in  Mozu
      involved had before it a  report  of  what  transpires  to  have  been
      doubtful validity.  Be that as it may, this Tribunal's conclusions are
      as set out in paragraph 43 above.

52.    One  final  matter  deserves  mention.  At  the  conclusion  of   his
      submissions, Mr Behbahani requested that, in the event of the Tribunal
      dismissing his client's appeal, something should be  included  in  the
      determination, to the effect that  risk  on  return  could  arise  if,
      contrary to what was currently anticipated, the  travel  documentation
      negotiated between the United Kingdom government and the  DRC  Embassy
      were to reveal that the holder of the documentation had  been  in  the
      United Kingdom as an asylum seeker.

53.   As will be apparent from this determination, the UNHCR do  not  appear
      to place significance on the question of whether  the  authorities  at
      Kinshasa airport discover that a returnee is a failed  asylum  seeker.
      The point is,  rather,  whether  the  authorities  regard  the  person
      concerned as having an anti-government past (whether  in  the  DRC  or
      abroad).  As is apparent from page 127 of  the  bundle  (paragraph  27
      above), what concerns  the  UNHCR  is  where  a  returning  government
      informs the DRC government about the details of the asylum claim,  for
      example, that the claimant said "he was imprisoned and  beaten"  which
      "could cause serious problems for the individual".   Clearly,  if  the
      United Kingdom government were to  divulge  to  the  DRC  Embassy  any
      salient details about the nature of the asylum claim,  that  could  in
      itself lead to "serious trouble for a person who may not have problems
      otherwise" (page 127).

54.   The Tribunal sees no reason why it should not accept  the  information
      given (on instruction) by Ms Hanrahan in the present  case.   However,
      if, once the agreement with the DRC Embassy is in place, it transpires
      that the DRC authorities will in fact be made aware of the details  of
      the appellant's asylum claim, it would be open  to  the  appellant  to
      take legal steps to prevent his removal, were it the case that, in the
      circumstances then prevailing, he would be likely to be at  real  risk
      as a result of that disclosure.

55.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.



                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President









