
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |RA (Appeals Procedure -     |
|                           |        |Immigration and Asylum Act  |
|                           |        |1999) Eritrea [2003] UKIAT  |
|                           |        |00063                       |
|On  29 July 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|5th September 2003                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Professor D B Casson                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
The appellant was represented before us today by Mr A Hutton, Home Office
Presenting Officer.
The respondent was represented by Mrs G Fama of Counsel, instructed by
White Ryland

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  respondent  was  said  by  the  appellant   in   the   statement
      accompanying the notice of appeal to be a citizen of Eritrea  born  on
      27 March 1985 who had arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 October 2002
      and  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.   Following  the  submission  of  a
      statement her application was refused for the reasons  set  out  in  a
      letter dated 2 November 2002.  On 5 November 2002 notice of refusal to
      grant asylum was issued and it is in the following terms.

           "You have applied for asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  but  your
           application has been refused  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the
           reasons for refusal  letter  attached.   It  has  been  decided,
           however, that because of the particular  circumstances  of  your
           case you should be granted exceptional leave to enter the United
           Kingdom.  The Secretary of State therefore grants you  leave  to
           enter until 26 March 2003."

      The form went on to state that the respondent had a  right  of  appeal
      under Section 69(3) of the  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  1999  and  it
      appears that a one-stop notice under Section 77 of the  same  Act  was
      served with that notice of refusal to grant  asylum.   The  respondent
      appealed against that decision  and  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  as
      follows:


           "The decision of the Secretary of  State  is  contrary  to  UK's
           obligations  under  the  Geneva  Convention  and  is   otherwise
           unreasonable.  I also state that my removal from UK  to  Eritrea
           would be in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights."

       It  was  accepted,  both  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  by  the
      Adjudicator before whom the appeal came, that the respondent had lived
      all her life in Ethiopia, although of  mixed  Ethiopian  and  Eritrean
      ethnicity.   It  was  further  found  by  the  Adjudicator  that   the
      appellant's 18th birthday would in fact be on 5 April 2005 because she
      had been born on 5 April 1987 and not in  1985  as  the  Secretary  of
      State had previously thought.  This had arisen because of confusion in
      the transposition of dates, as we understand it, between the Ethiopian
      and the western calendars.

2.    The appeal  was  heard  on  26  March  2003  by  Mr  C  C  Wright,  an
      Adjudicator.  Purely by coincidence that happened to be  the  date  on
      which the exceptional leave to remain which had been  granted  to  the
      respondent expired.  The asylum appeal was conceded by  Mrs  Fama  who
      also appeared  for  the  respondent  before  the  Adjudicator  and  in
      consequence was dismissed.  The Adjudicator then went on to allow  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.  The Secretary of State  has  appealed
      against that decision and his challenge is as follows:

           "It is submitted that  the  Adjudicator  has  erred  in  law  by
           allowing this appeal under Article 3 and 8  when  the  appellant
           had been granted leave to remain.  The Adjudicator has erred  in
           law in allowing the appeal under Articles 3 and 8 when there are
           no current directions to remove the  appellant  to  Ethiopia  or
           Eritrea and the appellant is effectively appealing  against  the
           decision to grant  her  limited  leave  rather  than  indefinite
           leave."

3.    The proper situation in  such  cases  where  a  Section  69(3)  asylum
      appeal has been dismissed, as is the case here, and only human  rights
      grounds remain possibly, as to which  we  shall  deal  later  in  this
      judgment, was considered by the Tribunal in the recorded decision of P
      (Yugoslavia) [2003] UKIAT 00017.  In that case leave had been  granted
      to the claimant to pursue a human rights claim before the Tribunal and
      the Tribunal said this at paragraph 6 of the determination:

           "In our view leave should not have been granted  since  at  that
           time (3 September 2002) the appellant still had limited leave to
           remain which was not due  to  expire  until  18  November  2002.
           Whilst by virtue of the Court of Appeal judgment in Saad, Diriye
           and Osorio [2002] INLR34 the claimant was entitled to  have  his
           asylum grounds of appeal determined on the hypothetical basis of
           whether he would face a real risk of persecution as at the  date
           of hearing, the same considerations cannot apply  in  an  appeal
           based on human rights grounds.   In  any  asylum-related  appeal
           based on human rights grounds there  is  no  link  to  a  status
           recognised  at  international  law  or  indeed  to  any   status
           established by UK domestic law.  Furthermore,  while  Strasbourg
           has identified the proper test as being,  like  that  under  the
           Refugee Convention, one of current risk to be assessed as at the
           date of hearing, the obverse side of this  recognition  is  that
           the risk has to be shown to be an imminent one.  A  risk  cannot
           be imminent if the appellant has available a  further  effective
           remedy,  see  Vijayanathan  and  Pushparajah  v  France   [1992]
           15EHRR62.  In the instant case, since it remained  open  to  the
           appellant as at the date of hearing before  the  Adjudicator  to
           have applied for an extension of limited leave to remain and  to
           have appealed if refused,  there  was  just  such  an  effective
           remedy available."

      That, in our view, correctly identifies  the  legal  principles  which
      are applicable in the present case.  We should add, however, that  the
      Tribunal in P then continued at paragraph 7 as follows:

           "However leave was granted and we are  required  to  decide  the
           appeal on the basis of the situation at  the  date  of  hearing.
           That is critical in this case because by the time of the hearing
           before us (4 February 2003) the appellant no longer had  limited
           leave to remain and so was at imminent risk of removal.  We  are
           informed that the appellant had not been granted  any  extension
           of his exceptional leave to remain.  It would  appear  that  ELR
           was granted because the  appellant  was  a  minor  and  was  not
           renewed once he reached 18 on 18 November 2002."

4.    Not surprisingly, Mrs Fama  has  before  us  sought  to  rely  on  the
      position as recorded at paragraph 7 of P.  It was  conceded,  however,
      that it is somewhat ambiguous because it cannot  be  ascertained  from
      that passage whether the appellant in  P  had  applied  for  and  been
      refused an extension of his exceptional leave to remain, or whether he
      had simply taken no action but, having attained the  age  of  18,  had
      become at imminent risk of removal.  The present  facts  are  somewhat
      different.  There was a misapprehension on the part of  the  Secretary
      of State as to the respondent's correct date of birth. As a result  of
      that misapprehension he granted leave exceptionally  to  remain  until
      what he then believed to be  her  18th  birthday.   It  has  now  been
      decided as a fact that she will not attain the age of 18 until 5 April
      2005, in just under two year's time.  It is accepted that  she  is  an
      unaccompanied minor to whom the stated  policy  of  the  Secretary  of
      State will apply.  That means that she would be removed only if  there
      were adequate reception arrangements for her in  her  own  country,  a
      matter which must necessarily be in some  doubt  since  she  lived  in
      Ethiopia all her life although she may have a right to claim  Eritrean
      citizenship.  For these reasons, in the present case it  seems  to  us
      that there can be no question of imminent removal in any event, but we
      must question what approach should be taken in cases  of  this  nature
      where the appeal is under Section 69(3)  of  the  1999  Act.   Section
      69(3) provides as follows:

           "The person who (a) has been refused leave to enter or remain in
           the United Kingdom on the basis of a claim for  asylum  made  by
           him but (b) has  been  granted  (whether  before  or  after  the
           decision to refuse leave) limited leave to enter or remain, may,
           if that limited leave will not expire  within  28  days  of  his
           being notified of the decision, appeal to an Adjudicator against
           the refusal on the ground that requiring him to leave the United
           Kingdom after the time limited by that leave would  be  contrary
           to the Convention."


5.    Section  69(6)  provides  that  "contrary  to  the  Convention"  means
      contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
      Convention.  It follows therefore that the compass of an appeal  under
      Section 69(3) is necessarily limited to asylum issues and  whether  or
      not the Refugee Convention is arguably engaged.

6.    The right to appeal on human rights grounds  is  provided  by  Section
      65(1) of the same Act which provides:

           "A person who alleges that  an  authority  has,  in  taking  any
           decision under the Immigration Acts relating  to  that  person's
           entitlement to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom,  racially
           discriminated against him  or  acted  in  breach  of  his  human
           rights, may appeal  to  an  Adjudicator  against  the  decision,
           unless he  has  grounds  for  bringing  an  appeal  against  the
           decision under the Special Immigration  Appeals  Commission  Act
           1997."

7.    We have set out the terms of the decision made  by  the  Secretary  of
      State.  We do not see any basis on which  it  can  be  suggested  that
      anything in that decision can be said to have been in  breach  of  the
      respondent's human rights, but this is  a  necessary  prerequisite  to
      ground the right to make an appeal under Section 65.

8.    Mrs Fama drew our attention, in the course of her submissions, to  the
      effect of the service of a one-stop  notice  and  submitted  that  the
      result was that this meant that an Adjudicator had to  deal  with  all
      issues raised by the  claimant  upon  whom  the  one-stop  notice  had
      applied.  That does not seem to us to  be  consistent  with  a  proper
      reading of the provision in question.  It is Section 77  of  the  1999
      Act and subsection 2 is as follows:

           "Subject to Section 72(2) the appellant is to be treated as also
           appealing on any additional grounds (a) which he  may  have  for
           appealing against the refusal, variation decision or  directions
           in question under any other provision of this Act, and (b) which
           he is not prevented  (by  any  provision  of  Section  76)  from
           relying on."

9.    It is apparent from what we have said above that in our  judgment  the
      respondent had no grounds to appeal under Section 65 and therefore any
      issues under Section 65 are necessarily excluded from consideration by
      the provisions of the one-stop notice procedure under Section 77.   In
      any event, the respondent could not  be  prejudiced  in  this  respect
      because there is not inhibition on raising a human  rights  ground  at
      any point, even  though  it  may  not  have  been  raised  in  earlier
      proceedings.  It does not seem to us  therefore  that  the  submission
      made by Mrs Fama in this respect is sustainable.  It may be  that,  in
      considering whether the risk of removal is an  imminent  one,  nothing
      less than the issue of removal directions by the  Secretary  of  State
      will suffice.  That is not a matter which it is necessary  for  us  to
      come to any concluded view on in having regard to the particular facts
      of this case where it is clear that on any basis there is no  question
      of imminent removal, Mr Hutton having made it clear  to  us  that  the
      question of extension of exceptional leave to remain by reason of  the
      factual finding  as  to  the  age  of  respondent  has  not  yet  been
      considered by the Secretary of State simply because these  proceedings
      were pending and remained to be resolved.

10.   For the above  reasons  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      accordingly allowed on the basis that the findings in  favour  of  the
      respondent  on  the  basis  of  breaches  of  human  rights  were  not
      justifiable before the Adjudicator.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
