
TS (Removal - Powers of Adjudicators) Algeria [2003] UKIAT 00193

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 29 October 2003
Prepared: 7 November 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                            Mr D. R. Bremmer J.P.




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Mr R. Martin, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Miss N. Hough, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The claimant is a national of Algeria.  The Secretary of State appeals
      against the decision of an adjudicator, Mr D. J. B. Trotter, in  which
      he dismissed the claimant's asylum appeal but allowed  the  claimant's
      appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR and directed that the Secretary  of
      State grant the  claimant  exceptional  leave  to  remain  up  to  and
      including 1 January 2004.


   2. The claimant was born on 14 May 1975.  He has a wife, born 1  February
      1973, whom he married in Algeria.   They  travelled  together  to  the
      United Kingdom using their own passports and claimed asylum  on  their
      arrival on 14 April 2002.

   3. The adjudicator rejected the claimant's claim for asylum and there  is
      no appeal against that finding.

   4. The adjudicator, however, noted that the claimant  and  his  wife  had
      experienced the tragedy of the death of their child  born  prematurely
      in October 2002.  At the date of the hearing before  the  adjudicator,
      in February 2003, the  adjudicator  saw  a  medical  report  from  the
      Leicester Royal Infirmary confirming  that,  following  an  ultrasound
      investigation, the claimant's wife was eight weeks pregnant.  Happily,
      the couple's son, Adam, was born on 2 October 2003.

   5. Bearing in mind the death of the couple's first child, the adjudicator
      took the view that the claimant  and  his  dependant  wife  and  child
      should not be returned to Algeria until  the  child  was  about  eight
      weeks old.  It was for this reason that he found it would be a  breach
      of the claimant's Article 3 rights to return him to Algeria.  This was
      also the explanation  for  the  adjudicator's  attempt  to  grant  the
      claimant and his family exceptional leave to remain  until  1  January
      2004.   At  the  hearing  before  the  adjudicator,  no  Home   Office
      presenting officer was present.

   6.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Tribunal.   Whilst   the
      adjudicator was, no doubt, prompted  by  humanitarian  considerations,
      the appeal raises the simple but nonetheless important issue as to the
      adjudicator's use of his powers under the Human Rights  Convention  to
      regulate the return of an appellant and members of his family.

   7. The powers of an adjudicator are derived from statute.  An adjudicator
      has no power to grant exceptional leave to remain.   Accordingly,  the
      adjudicator was wrong in his  direction  to  the  Secretary  of  State
      requiring him to grant exceptional leave to remain.

   8. In using his powers under the ECHR, the adjudicator  is  concerned  to
      ascertain whether the claimant's removal from the United Kingdom  will
      involve a violation of the obligations owed to the claimant by the  UK
      government.  The breach may arise because  of  his  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom or it may arise because  of  the  circumstances  he  is
      reasonably likely to encounter in the receiving state.  In the process
      of removal, however,  the  adjudicator  should  not  assume  that  the
      Secretary of  State  will  disregard  ordinary  legal  obligations  or
      humanitarian principles.  Thus, for example, the removal of  a  person
      liable to deportation whilst he is receiving treatment  for  a  broken
      arm in the Accident and Emergency Department of his local NHS hospital
      might well be unlawful (or even criminal)  activity  on  the  part  of
      those seeking to enforce removal.  That arises, however, by reason  of
      the various duties owed by  any  person  when  dealing  with  another,
      arising both under the civil and criminal law.

   9. We have no doubt that there are well-established principles  governing
      the safety of pregnant women who wish, or are required, to fly by air.
       We have no doubt that the Home Office has its own internal procedures
      dealing with the removal of pregnant women.  As we  have  said,  these
      procedures are directed at compliance with the  government's  ordinary
      civil obligations and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.  It is a misuse of the adjudicator's powers under the ECHR
      to seek to use those powers to  require  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      comply with his ordinary obligations.

  10. Whilst it may appear tempting to require  the  Presenting  Officer  to
      give an undertaking that a person should  not  be  removed  pending  a
      critical period, it  should  be  unnecessary.  Quite  apart  from  the
      efficacy of extracting  undertakings,  the  precise  circumstances  in
      which a person liable to removal will be removed  is  likely  to  fall
      within the administrative discretion of the Secretary of State, albeit
      subject to review  by  the  courts.   It  is  best  not  performed  by
      adjudicators.

  11. Neither is it part of the adjudicator's  statutory  function  to  make
      recommendations.   Adjudicators  have,  from  time   to   time,   made
      recommendations but it is for the Secretary of State to decide whether
      he will give effect to a recommendation to act outside immigration law
      or the Immigration Rules. In recent times, the Secretary of State  has
      set out  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  prepared  to  consider
      recommendations made by adjudicators.  In others cases, it may well be
      useful for the adjudicator to note any relevant factor  so  that  when
      the file is being reviewed by a caseworker, he will be alerted to  it.
      The pregnancy of the claimant's wife was a factor that might  properly
      have  been  drawn  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  attention  by  the
      adjudicator, although it seems unlikely the claimant  would  not  have
      given the information directly to the Secretary of State  himself.  No
      more was necessary.

Decision: The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
7 November 2003
