
Heard at Field House         FM (FIS Amnesty - Seddon report) Algeria CG
[2003]                                                              UKIAT
00178
On     13 May 2003
Written 19 May 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . 11/09/2003 . . . . .
. . . . .


                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                Mrs J Harris




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen of Algeria.  The  Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J  G  MacDonald,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 8 June 1999 to issue removal directions and refuse  asylum.  As  the
     decision is dated prior to 2 October 2000, human rights issues  do  not
     arise, as decided by the Tribunal in Pardeepan (00/TH/02414)*.

  2. Mr S Grodzinski represented the Appellant, and Ms N  Finch  represented
     the Respondent.

  3. The specific facts of this appeal, as decided by the  Adjudicator,  are
     not in dispute. On 5 October 1989, the Respondent joined, for the first
     time, in a protest demonstration, during which the army opened fire and
     he was shot in the neck.  The bullet remains in his neck today.   As  a
     result of this he became politicised. He first joined Hamas but  ceased
     his involvement with them after about  a  year.   He  then  joined  the
     Islamic Salvation Front  (FIS).  In  early  1992  he  took  part  in  a
     demonstration organised by them in his home town of Blida. Many people,
     including the Respondent, were arrested. He was held for two  weeks  in
     an army centre in a small room underground in very poor conditions.  He
     was tortured extensively to find out which party he  belonged  to.   He
     admitted nothing and after two weeks was released, on the  intervention
     of a relative who was in the army.

  4.  From then onwards he began to participate  in  military  activity  for
     FIS, via its military wing the AIS. He operated primarily in  the  city
     of Blida and used explosives to  destroy  important  centres,  such  as
     electricity and gas supplies. Public  transport  facilities  were  also
     targeted and on one occasion he helped to burn down a bus  depot.   The
     army arrived and there was an exchange of fire, during which there were
     explosions. He was thereafter involved in a lot of military operations.
     He claims that he never  targeted  or  killed  civilians.  During  this
     period he continued to live at  home  and  go  to  work,  and  by  this
     appearance of normality, managed to avoid suspicion by the  authorities
     of his AIS involvement. He said that one of the main ways of attracting
     adverse attention was to leave home, because the authorities would then
     suspect you had gone to the mountains to join the guerrillas.

  5. After 1995, when there was a change of  leadership  in  FIS,  and  more
     vigorous counter-measures were taken by the government, the  Respondent
     considered that the situation was getting out of  hand.  He  wanted  to
     live a peaceful life. He left Algeria in 1997. He first went to Tunisia
     but did not feel safe there and applied for a visa for the UK, but this
     was refused. He then returned to Algeria and obtained through a contact
     a passport with an Italian visa.  He flew to Italy and spend  one  week
     in Naples where he obtained an Italian identity card.   From  there  he
     travelled through France to the UK and then went to Belfast to join his
     brother, who is married to a British citizen and has  indefinite  leave
     to remain.

  6. He claims he did not apply for asylum then because  he  was  afraid  of
     being sent back to Algeria. His brother  maintained  contact  with  the
     family in Algeria on a regular basis. They told  him  that,  after  the
     Respondent had left, the army had come to look for him, and his  father
     had been held for a day or so.  They continued to make enquiries  about
     him from time to time. His brother returned on a  trip  to  Algeria  in
     1998. He  was  questioned  about  the  Respondent  and  told  them  the
     Respondent was in Italy. The last occasion they came to the  house  was
     in 2000. They did not return or make further enquiries thereafter.

  7. The Appellant was arrested in Belfast in November  1998  for  rape  and
     then claimed asylum.  He later pleaded guilty to rape and was sentenced
     to seven years. He served 50% of  his  sentence  and  was  released  on
     remission in May 2002. He fears return to Algeria and  claims  that  he
     would be persecuted.

  8. The Adjudicator, who heard the appeal over two days, concluding  on  11
     June 2001, accepted the core credibility of the account, whilst  noting
     the Respondent's admission of lying about embellishments concerning the
     destruction of his family home and the death of his sister. His brother
     gave evidence  on  his  behalf,  and  there  was  medical  evidence  to
     corroborate his account of  having  been  shot  and  of  torture.   The
     Adjudicator accepted that the authorities had visited his  family  home
     to look for him from time to time, the last occasion being during 2000.
      On this basis, the Adjudicator concluded that the Respondent would  be
     at real risk of persecution  on  return.  He  considered  Article  1  F
     (concerning exclusion) but concluded that this did not have a  bearing.
     He also considered Article  33  (2)  but,  whilst  accepting  that  the
     Respondent  had  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious   crime,
     concluded that there was no evidence concerning future risk of offences
     in the UK. He allowed the asylum appeal.

  9.  The  grounds  of  appeal,  upon  which  leave  was   granted   without
     qualification, essentially raised three points.
           1. The Adjudicator was in error in not considering  whether  the
              interest of the authorities in  the  Respondent's  activities
              was legitimate and whether  the  Respondent  had  a  fear  of
              prosecution rather than persecution.
           2. The Adjudicator should not have  considered  Article  33  (2)
              because this matter  had  not  yet  been  considered  by  the
              Secretary of State and it would become relevant if  and  only
              if the Respondent won his appeal.
           3. The Adjudicator erred in finding that Article 1  F.  was  not
              relevant.

 10. On 17 January 2002, the appeal  first  came  before  the  Tribunal.  It
     concluded that as the Appellant  had  failed  to  take  the  points  on
     Articles 1F and 33(2) before the Adjudicator, the Appellant would  only
     be permitted to raise arguments on those Articles "on the basis of  the
     matters and arguments put before the Adjudicator." The matter was  then
     adjourned for the Appellant to  consider  the  future  conduct  of  the
     appeal. The Appellant decided that the only ground of  appeal  that  he
     would pursue would be whether the Respondent would face prosecution  or
     persecution on return. The appeal came again before the Tribunal  on  4
     September 2002.  However the notice of hearing had not been  served  on
     the Respondent, whose Representative indicated that he wanted  to  rely
     upon some recent country background  reports  that  had  not  yet  been
     served on the Appellant or the Tribunal.  So the matter  was  adjourned
     again with the direction that the Appellant and  the  Respondent  serve
     all evidence and skeleton arguments, which has been done.

 11. The argument for the Appellant as expressed in  the  skeleton  argument
     and amplified by Mr Grodzinski, can  be  summarised  in  the  following
     terms.
           1. The Respondent undertook criminal activities in Algeria  but,
              after he left, an amnesty was declared, entitling  him  as  a
              former member of FIS/AIS, to an exemption certificate  and  a
              relocation package. He can  apply  for  it  to  the  Algerian
              Embassy in the UK, or in Algeria on return. As a  consequence
              the authorities lost interest in him in 2000 and he will face
              neither prosecution nor persecution on return. This point was
              specifically raised before the Adjudicator, but  he  did  not
              consider it properly or at all.
           2. The Adjudicator did not consider whether the interest in  the
              Respondent by the authorities,  if  any,  would  be  for  the
              legitimate purpose of prosecution.
           3.  Even if the Respondent was prosecuted for some reason, there
              is  nothing  in  the  prosecutory  process  that   would   be
              persecutory.

 12. The Tribunal considers that the Adjudicator's failure  to  address  the
     significance and effect of the amnesty fatally flaws  his  conclusions.
     Ms Finch acknowledged that the amnesty point was raised in  submissions
     to the Adjudicator  and  recorded  by  him  in  paragraph  116  of  the
     determination, but argued that this must have been taken  into  account
     in his conclusions, even though he  made  no  specific  mention  of  it
     there. The Tribunal  does  not  agree.  The  amnesty  raises  important
     matters requiring specific attention, which they did not  receive.  The
     Tribunal also considers  that  the  Adjudicator's  failure  to  address
     whether the Respondent would  face  legitimate  prosecution  flaws  the
     determination as well. Ms Finch did not argue against this.

 13. Therefore the Adjudicator's conclusions are fatally flawed and must  be
     set aside, but as he made clear findings of fact  that  have  not  been
     disputed, the Tribunal can apply these facts  in  the  context  of  the
     current objective material, and this we have done.

 14. We have before us a considerable amount of objective material  and  are
     grateful to Mr Grodzinski and Ms Finch for this. It has enabled  us  to
     reach a broadly based and balanced view of the  situation  in  Algeria.
     Thus from the Appellant we have  the  CIPU  report  of  April  2003;  a
     country report prepared in December 2002 by the Netherlands  Department
     for Asylum and Migration Affairs; the  Europa  Survey  of  Algeria  for
     2003;  a  report  by  the  Canadian  Department  of   Citizenship   and
     Immigration of May 2001; and the US State Department background note of
     February 2002. From  the  Respondent,  we  have  Amnesty  International
     country reports covering 2000 and 2001, together  with  three  specific
     notes by them, and a Human  Rights  Watch  report.  We  also  have  two
     reports by Dr David Seddon, who currently holds a  chair  in  Sociology
     and Politics in the School of Development Studies at the University  of
     East Anglia, who states that he is widely recognised as  an  expert  on
     North Africa affairs and has previously  prepared  reports  for  asylum
     seekers from various North African countries, including Algeria. One of
     those reports was dated 15 November  2000  and  was  prepared  for  the
     Adjudicator.  The other, dated 27 September 2002, was prepared for  the
     Tribunal.

 15. Our assessment of the objective material as a whole can  be  summarised
     as follows. Following the end of colonial rule, the principal  Algerian
     nationalist movement, FLN, formed a government in  1962.  Arising  from
     economic problems due to the collapse of oil prices in the mid-1980s, a
     wave of strikes and riots  culminated  in  considerable  bloodshed  and
     street demonstrations in 1988.  The FIS was established in 1989 in  the
     aftermath of these  problems  and  emerged  as  the  largest  and  most
     influential opposition movement, developing a  nationwide  organisation
     based on mosques and Islamic  organisations.   Its  promise  of  social
     justice and grass roots welfare services appealed to the urban poor and
     unemployed. In the local elections in June 1990 it gained control of 32
     of Algeria's 48 provinces, and 853 of the 1539 municipalities,  winning
     landslide victories in all major cities. By early 1992 it was poised to
     win the general elections to the National  People's  Assembly.  However
     the government declared a state of siege and  suspended  the  elections
     indefinitely. In the widespread unrest that followed,  the  leaders  of
     FIS were arrested and a pattern  of  violence  began.   The  government
     declared a state of emergency and FIS was banned.   Many  regional  and
     local authorities controlled by it  were  dissolved.  After  this,  the
     Islamic opposition to the government became fragmented and radicalised.
      The main armed groups were AIS (the military wing of  FIS),  GIA,  and
     GSPC, a splinter from GIA.  Violence throughout the  country  escalated
     to a  very  serious  degree,  with  targeted  attacks  upon  government
     officials and those deemed to support the regime, as well as  terrorist
     attacks on civilians. By 1997 this became particularly severe. GIA  was
     widely held responsible for the massacres of civilians, and  AIS  began
     to observe a unilateral ceasefire from October 1997.

 16. An appreciation of this history, the initial cause of the conflict, and
     of the distinction between FIS/AIS and the other terrorist  groups,  is
     necessary  to  understand  the  peace  process  initiated  by  the  new
     President, Abduelaziz Bouteflika, when he came to power in  April  1999
     with the declared aims of promoting civil concord, the  reform  of  the
     economy, and the eradication of corruption.

 17. On 6 June 1999, AIS extended its unilateral ceasefire by  declaring  an
     end to its guerrilla struggle against the government. In July 1999  the
     President  pardoned  over  5000  Islamic   sympathisers   and   shortly
     afterwards put forward a new Law on Civil Concord, which  was  approved
     in a national referendum.  He offered amnesty for Islamic militants not
     implicated in mass killings, rapes, or bomb attacks on  public  places,
     and reduced sentences  for  such  crimes,  provided  those  responsible
     surrendered to the authorities within six months  i.e.  by  13  January
     2000. Just before this deadline expired, the leader  of  AIS  announced
     the disbandment of the movement.  Members of  the  GIA  and  GSPC  also
     surrendered under the terms of the Civil  Concord  amnesty  and  others
     continued to take advantage of the amnesty, both before and  after  the
     expiry of the deadline. In return, on 11 January  2000,  the  President
     announced an immediate, full and  unconditional  amnesty  for  all  AIS
     members, as well as financial compensation for their families,  housing
     for those whose homes had been destroyed by the  security  forces,  and
     assistance in securing employment.

 18. Thus AIS  has  discontinued  violence  altogether  and  disbanded,  and
     members of other terrorist groups have  also  taken  advantage  of  the
     amnesty. The numbers of people who have sought and been granted amnesty
     have been put variously at between 5000-7000. Of these about  1000  are
     from  AIS,  which  was  always  the  smaller  of  the  main   guerrilla
     organisations, and the balance has come mainly  from  GIA.  Involvement
     with FIS  is  no  longer  a  ground  for  criminal  or  extra  judicial
     prosecution.  Former FIS members  are  now  in  Parliament.   Some  600
     former militants are  now  in  public  service,  working  as  Imams  in
     mosques.  Those who live abroad and are entitled to the benefit of  the
     amnesty can apply  to  their  local  Algerian  Embassy  and  obtain  an
     exemption certificate and travel back to Algeria undisturbed.   Equally
     they can apply on return to Algeria. Interrogation on return relates to
     military service or outstanding  criminal  proceedings.   There  is  no
     evidence of maltreatment upon return. The Canadian report, confirmed by
     UNHCR, states that if difficulties for returnees had arisen, this would
     now be known, and none have been notified.

 19. Against these positive  developments,  has  to  be  set  the  continued
     terrorist activity by the remnant of the GIA,  who  have  not  accepted
     amnesty, and other  like-minded  groups.   The  level  of  violence  is
     substantially less than in previous years and is more  localised,  with
     the  big  cities  mainly  being  secured  by  the  government   forces.
     Nevertheless the violence  remains  at  a  significant  level  and  the
     security forces bear down on suspected terrorists. In so,  doing  human
     rights abuses by them continue.  There  were  extra-judicial  killings,
     mostly during clashes with armed terrorist groups, though 71  civilians
     were killed by the security forces during 2002, mainly during  protests
     in and around the Kabylie region.  The  Algerian  government  maintains
     that as a  matter  of  policy  disciplinary  action  is  taken  against
     soldiers or policeman who are guilty of violating human rights and that
     some disciplinary action is  taken.   However  they  do  not  routinely
     release specific information about punishments of military and security
     forces personnel and no such data was made public during 2002, although
     the Algerian government indicated that between  350  and  400  security
     officials were punished for human rights abuses in 2000. The current US
     State Department report noted continued reports of police  torture  and
     other abuse of detainees during the  year,  and  Amnesty  International
     stated that  some  persons  died  in  custody  from  torture,  or  were
     executed.  There is evidence to suggest that the risk of abuse  relates
     mainly  to  people  suspected  of  current  terrorist  activities.  The
     International Red Cross noted a decrease in incidents of  torture,  and
     that the severity of such acts  diminished.  However  many  victims  of
     torture hesitate to  make  public  such  allegations  due  to  fear  of
     government retaliation.

 20. Overall, it is our judgment from this that there is a clear distinction
     between the terrorist organisations such as GIA who have  rejected  the
     amnesty  on  the  one  hand,  and  FIS/AIS,  along  with  other  former
     terrorists who now want peace on the  other.  FIS  had  the  legitimate
     expectation of obtaining power  through  democratic  means  before  the
     state of emergency began. AIS declared a unilateral ceasefire when  the
     indiscriminate violence against civilians escalated in 1997  and  later
     disbanded. This was the rationale behind  the  Law  of  Civil  Concord,
     which reflected the genuine wish of the new government to bring FIS/AIS
     members and others back  into  mainstream  political  life.  There  are
     obvious reasons, in the de-escalation of violence, why  the  government
     began this process and why it is committed to continuing  with  it.  We
     conclude there is no direct objective evidence  before  us  that  there
     have been significant material breaches of the amnesty for any  FIS-AIS
     members, and find that if was this was occurring to any material extent
     there would by now be clear evidence of it.

 21. We are aware, in saying this, of the contrary opinion expressed  by  Dr
     Seddon, upon which Ms Finch placed much reliance and to  which  we  now
     turn. As we have said, Dr Seddon is a social scientist,  who  describes
     himself as a widely recognised expert  on  North  African  affairs.  He
     acknowledges that his last visit to Algeria was in 1993  but  maintains
     that he has kept up-to-date by  reason  of  his  reading,  studies  and
     contacts. His first report was written on 15 November 2000 specifically
     to provide assistance for the Adjudicator in this appeal. Mr Grodzinski
     attacked the report, and the weight that should be given to  Dr  Seddon
     as an independent expert, in bluntly critical terms.   The  reason  for
     his criticism is that, although Dr Seddon was writing a specific report
     on behalf of a past member of the AIS/FIS, he failed  to  mention  that
     AIS had declared a ceasefire in  1997  and  that  AIS  had  voluntarily
     disbanded in 2000. Even more seriously,  although  he  was  writing  in
     November 2000 he failed to mention at all the pardon, the Law of  Civil
     Concord, or the continuing amnesty, or the many people  who  had  taken
     advantage of  the  amnesty  by  the  time  he  wrote  that  report.  Mr
     Grodzinski  argued  that  either  Dr  Seddon  was  unaware   of   these
     developments,  in  which  case  his  expertise  must  be  doubted,   or
     alternatively if he was aware of them but failed to mention  them,  his
     claim to be an independent expert  was  undermined  and  he  should  be
     regarded as a paid advocate for the Appellant. Ms Finch said  that  she
     relied upon the second of Dr Seddon's reports, which was written on  27
     September 2002 for the Tribunal and did mention the amnesty. She  could
     not explain why he did not mention the amnesty in his first report.

 22. These omissions are extraordinary. Dr Seddon provided a specific report
     to guide the Adjudicator when hearing this appeal.  The  facts  of  the
     claim were before him and he referred to them. He was plainly aware  of
     the Respondent's involvement with FIS/AIS and the date he left Algeria.
     We consider that by November 2000 no properly informed and  independent
     expert doing his duty to the court, could have failed  to  mention  the
     AIS unilateral ceasefire  in  1997,  the  Law  of  Civil  Concord,  the
     disbandment of AIS, and the amnesty of 2000. Ms Finch  has  offered  no
     explanation. In his second report he had the opportunity to explain why
     he did not mention these matters in his first report but did not do so.
     It is likely that the Adjudicator was seriously misled  by  this  first
     report.  The Appellant's representative in  oral  submissions  referred
     him to the amnesty (as the determination records) but  the  Adjudicator
     ignored it altogether in his conclusions.   It  may  well  be  that  Dr
     Seddon's report and its omissions contributed to this error.

 23. In his second report, dated 27 September  2002,  upon  which  Ms  Finch
     relied before us, Dr Seddon acknowledged that an amnesty was offered to
     all of the armed opposition  groups  in  September  1999,  following  a
     national referendum which supported such action, and  a  Law  of  Civil
     Concord was then introduced,  which  has  resulted  in  an  "undeniable
     reduction in the level of violence; and reports of  arbitrary  arrests,
     prolonged incommunicado detention, torture, disappearances, and  unfair
     trials also diminished markedly." However he  went  on  to  state  that
     Amnesty International was informed by Algerian officials  in  May  2000
     that prosecution had been initiated against some  350  people  who  had
     surrendered under the Law of Civil Concord; also in some  cases  people
     who had given themselves up under the Law  of  Civil  Concord  and  had
     obtained certificates of exemption from prosecution, were  subsequently
     arrested and charged  with  offences  for  which  they  had  just  been
     cleared."  He concluded that the Respondent would  still  have  a  well
     founded fear of what might happen to him on return.

 24. Mr Grodzinski attacked this report also on the basis of its  inadequate
     reference to up-to-date facts and of  unsubstantiated,  misleading  and
     partial conclusions. In particular Dr  Seddon's  key  reference  to  an
     alleged Amnesty International statement of May 2000 that 350 people who
     had been granted amnesty were subsequently charged  with  offences  for
     which they had been cleared, was flawed.  The  statement  from  Amnesty
     International to which Dr Seddon was referring was  not  placed  before
     the Tribunal and the comment could not therefore be assessed as to  the
     accuracy of Dr  Seddon's  observation,  or  in  context.   The  Amnesty
     International country report for the year 2000 was before the  Tribunal
     and states that "some of  those  who  were  granted  certificates  were
     subsequently arrested and charged with offences for which they had just
     been cleared." Mr Grodzinski observed that there was no mention of  any
     number of such cases, let alone 350, and nothing of  this  or  anything
     similar has been repeated by Amnesty International  in  any  subsequent
     report.  There  is  no  information  about  what  any  of  the  alleged
     prosecutions related to, and  such  arrests  as  there  were  may  have
     related to prosecutions begun before the amnesty  became  unconditional
     in its scope on 11 January 2000.  There is no information about whether
     any of these cases related to FIS/AIS members. In any event this  issue
     related to an early stage in the reconciliation process and is now  out
     of date. It was out of date when Dr Seddon wrote his report. Dr  Seddon
     did  not  refer  to  any  of  the  subsequent  evidence  including  the
     continuing use of the amnesty by substantial numbers of former  FIS/AIS
     and GIA  members  without  difficulty.  He  did  not  explain  why  the
     Respondent would  not  be  able  to  benefits  from  the  amnesty.  His
     references to continuing  violence  in  Algeria,  and  actions  by  the
     government to contain it, do not make clear that FIS/AIS had  disbanded
     and have played no part in it for many years.

 25. Ms Finch defended Dr Seddon's second  report  by  saying  that  he  had
     properly explained what was happening in 2000 and 2001 when the GIA was
     active and this had led to a reaction by the government. He  could  not
     deal with FIS/AIS violence because there was none.  He did mention  the
     amnesty, but could not say any more in  respect  of  the  risk  to  the
     Respondent than he did by referring to the  350  cases  of  arrests  of
     persons having previously been granted amnesty certificates

 26. We do not find Ms Finch's  defence  of  Dr  Seddon's  reports  to  have
     substance. As we have indicated, we find the unexplained  omissions  in
     Dr Seddon's first report  to  be  surprisingly  inconsistent  with  the
     standards expected of an independent expert, and especially one of  his
     expertise. By November 2000, the amnesty and the Law of  Civil  Concord
     were important realities on the ground and  no  informed  and  balanced
     assessment of the situation in Algeria by an  expert  could  or  should
     have ignored them. The omissions and weighting in  the  second  report,
     whilst not as blatant, nevertheless add to the impression given by  the
     first report that Dr Seddon has difficulty in reconciling the  role  of
     advocate with that of  independent  expert.  There  is  no  documentary
     support before us for his assertion that 350 people,  granted  amnesty,
     were subsequently arrested  and  charged.   The  Amnesty  International
     annual report for 2000 makes no mention of any specific figure, and the
     whole matter was dropped from subsequent Amnesty  International  annual
     country reports, although claims  for  amnesty  continued.  We  do  not
     consider that an independent expert writing in  September  2002  should
     have placed the weight that Dr Seddon did on a vague assertion relating
     to May 2000, that has no other independent corroboration. Mr Grodzinski
     has argued that either  Dr  Seddon  lacks  the  detailed  knowledge  he
     claims, or he has behaved as an advocate  rather  than  an  independent
     expert. In our view Ms Finch has offered no sustainable defence of  her
     expert witness.  We cannot believe that Dr Seddon was  unaware  of  the
     amnesty when writing his first  report  and  considering  both  reports
     together we conclude that Dr Seddon's advice, in the matters  described
     above, fell  well  short  of  what  we  would  have  expected  from  an
     independent expert. Consequently we find that we can place no  material
     weight upon the opinions expressed by him in them. We  have  before  us
     extensive and properly sourced objective evidence  from  a  variety  of
     international organisations  and  have  based  our  assessment  of  the
     country situation in Algeria upon that.

 27. In that context, we have assessed the specific facts in this appeal and
     have concluded that there is no valid reason why the Respondent, whilst
     he is in the UK, cannot apply to  the  Algerian  Embassy  here  for  an
     exemption certificate from prosecution under the amnesty. Nor is  there
     any reason why it should not be granted without  undue  difficulty.  On
     the facts as established he  was  an  FIS/AIS  fighter  until  he  left
     Algeria in 1997 for the UK. He had no connection with the  GIA  or  any
     other terrorist group. He was not involved  in  indiscriminate  attacks
     upon civilians. He has not been politically active in the UK.  Contrary
     to Ms Finch's submission, the objective evidence shows that there would
     be no difficulty in obtaining an exemption certificate from the Embassy
     on this basis. Indeed a criticism reported in the objective material is
     that exemption certificates have been given too easily.  The main  rush
     of claimants for exemption was during 2000 and at its  strongest  there
     may have been some  limited  transitional  difficulties.   However  the
     objective evidence does not suggest that  it  was  anything  more  than
     this, or that these problems continued to any  material  degree  beyond
     the summer of 2000, or that a  person  with  the  Respondent's  history
     would now be of any continuing adverse  interest  to  the  authorities.
     Many former members of FIS/AIS have  been  reintegrated  into  Algerian
     society and there is a package  of  support  for  them  on  return.  We
     conclude that if the Respondent applies for  an  exemption  certificate
     from the Embassy before returning to Algeria, he will get  it  readily.
     He can demonstrate that he has been in the UK since 1997. His admission
     of AIS involvement can no doubt be confirmed from the evidence of other
     former AIS members who have been granted amnesty. Consequently we  find
     therefore there is no real risk that he will face  prosecution  or  any
     other difficulties with the authorities on return or thereafter,  as  a
     consequence of his previous activities or for any other reason  arising
     on the facts of this appeal. To the contrary, the authorities are  keen
     to reconcile and integrate people such as the Respondent into  Algerian
     society.

 28. Ms Finch has argued that the Respondent might not  wish  to  obtain  an
     exemption certificate from the Embassy. We first note that there is  no
     actual evidence before us to support  that  submission.  Ms  Finch  has
     suggested without any evidential support from the  Respondent  or  from
     the objective material that he might be afraid to do so.  Alternatively
     he may believe that he could extend his stay in the UK if  he  did  not
     so. There is nothing in either of these points. It would be perverse in
     our judgment if the Respondent did not seek an exemption before return,
     as it is clear from the objective evidence that he would have  no  good
     reason to fear to do so, as many  others  have  done  before  him.  The
     passage of time since the amnesty declaration is not as Ms Finch argued
     a cause for concern, but rather a form of security as  the  system  has
     been shown to work well. Even if, for whatever reason,  the  Respondent
     refused to do so, there would still be no real risk of  persecution  on
     return.  On his own evidence he thought that it  was  his  leaving  his
     home in 1997 that attracted the adverse attention of  the  authorities,
     as a result of their suspicion that he had gone to join the  terrorists
     in the mountains. If  that  is  the  limit  of  the  knowledge  by  the
     authorities of the Respondent's  history,  then  he  will  be  able  to
     demonstrate easily that he left Algeria in 1997 and has been in the  UK
     subsequently. Indeed in 1998 his brother told the authorities  that  he
     had left Algeria. If on the other  hand  the  authorities  have  become
     aware  of  his  involvement  with  FIS/AIS,  perhaps  as  a  result  of
     information given by other members who  have  taken  advantage  of  the
     amnesty, then they will still have no continuing  adverse  interest  in
     him, given  the  changes  in  Algeria  since  he  left  and  his  clear
     qualification for amnesty.  The last  interest  in  him  shown  by  the
     authorities was in 2000.  That would suggest that by then they may have
     learned of his involvement with FIS, and  accepted  that  he  had  fled
     abroad as stated by his brother, and therefore had no continuing reason
     to be concerned with him given the disbandment of AIS. Under the  terms
     of the Law of Civil Concord, the Respondent  would  be  entitled  to  a
     resettlement package and as we have said it would be perverse if he did
     not seek to take advantage of it. Thus, whether the authorities know of
     his history or do not, they have no reason for any  continuing  adverse
     interest in him and consequently there will be no real risk to  him  of
     persecution on return. Even if he were held  briefly  in  detention  on
     return whilst enquiries were made, he will be able to demonstrate  that
     he has been out of Algeria since  1997.   The  authorities,  given  the
     information which they now have following the amnesty about  AIS,  will
     be able to check his account and as they have no  reason  to  link  him
     with GIA or other current terrorism, there will therefore  be  no  real
     risk that he would face treatment amounting to persecution during  such
     detention.

 29. For the reasons given above this appeal against  the  decision  of  the
     Adjudicator is allowed, and the appeal by the  Respondent  against  the
     issue of removal directions by the Appellant following the  refusal  of
     asylum is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
