
Heard at Field House                               EN (Article 8 - Nhundu
and Chiwera - Proportionality not Relevant ) Kenya [2003] UKIAT 00102
On      21 October  2003
Written  21 October  2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . .25 October 2003. .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                           Rt Hon Countess of Mar
                       Professor B L Gomes da Costa JP



                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Kenya, appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr P A Spencer, dismissing his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 26  February  2001  to  issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum. This appeal to the Tribunal  lies
     only on human rights grounds, and in practice Article  8,  because  the
     Adjudicator upheld the Respondent's certification of the asylum claim.

  2. Mr S Ravindran represented the Appellant. Mr  G  Elks,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claimed that he arrived in the United Kingdom  on  4  May
     1998 and claimed asylum the next day. His asylum claim was  based  upon
     the an alleged fear of the then Kenyan government, both on the  grounds
     of his ethnicity as a Kikuyu  from  the  Rift  Valley  because  of  his
     sympathies for the opposition Democratic Party.  He claimed  harassment
     and various detentions and beatings. The Adjudicator assessed his claim
     on the basis of the objective evidence relating to Kenya at the time of
     the hearing in April 2003.  By that time, the government of  Kenya  had
     changed. The opposition National Rainbow Coalition had won a  landslide
     victory and took power in December 2002. The Adjudicator dismissed  the
     asylum claim on the basis that the Appellant's claimed  fears  if  true
     could no longer subsist in the changed circumstances.  He did not  make
     a credibility finding concerning the alleged facts as a whole,  but  in
     the context of upholding the Respondent's certificate he concluded that
     the Appellant's claims of beatings in detention were embellishments and
     that there was no realistic likelihood that he  had  been  tortured  in
     Kenya.

  4. The Adjudicator then went on  to  consider  a  freestanding  Article  8
     appeal based exclusively on the Appellant's  family  life  in  the  UK.
     There was no mention of any relevant private life.  The Appellant began
     a relationship with Mrs Rose Busungu at the beginning  of  2002,  which
     has resulted in her  pregnancy,  though  they  do  not  live  together.
     Presumably by now their child has been born, though we  have  not  been
     informed. She had come to the UK in 1999 to  get  married.  She  had  a
     daughter, Candy, born on 12 December 1999. Her  relationship  with  her
     husband ended in April 2001 and she was seeking a divorce.  Her husband
     had denied fathering Candy and showed no interest in her.  Mrs  Busungu
     however had indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  consequence  of  this
     marriage, though she has not as yet sought British citizenship. She was
     a Ugandan citizen, but had lived in Kenya for six years until 1993, and
     went to high school there.  Her mother  lives  in  Kenya  and  she  has
     travelled there recently to visit her.  She has no fear of  persecution
     in Kenya, and there are no insuperable obstacles to prevent her and the
     family returning to Kenya with the Appellant.

  5. The Adjudicator correctly directed himself to the guidance given by the
     Court of  Appeal  in  Mahmood,  and  undertook  a  proper  step-by-step
     approach as recommended  by  the  Tribunal  in  Nhundu  &  Chiwera,  in
     assessing  the  Article  8  claim.  He  first  assessed   whether   the
     Respondent's decision would result in interference with the Appellant's
     family life.  He concluded that there were no obstacles to  the  family
     living together in Kenya, other than the wishes  of  Mrs  Busungu,  and
     hence there would be no such interference. He then went on to  consider
     the issue of proportionality and concluded, having taken  into  account
     all the relevant issues raised with  him,  that  return  would  not  be
     disproportionate having regard to  the  importance  of  maintaining  an
     effective immigration policy. Finally he concluded that if Mrs  Busungu
     did  not  wish  to  return  with  the  Appellant,  it  would   not   be
     disproportionate to expect him to return alone and make an  application
     from Kenya for entry to the UK as  a  spouse  in  accordance  with  the
     Immigration Rules, as described in Mahmood.

  6. The grounds of appeal, upon which permission was granted, were  on  the
     basis that the Adjudicator failed to take  into  account  in  assessing
     proportionality the factor described by the Court of  Appeal  in  Shala
     [2003] EWCA Civ 233.  Schiemann LJ expressed it in the following terms.
           "As I understand it, had his application and been dealt with  in
           the appropriate timescale as it ought to  have  been,  then  his
           application for permission to stay would in all probability have
           been granted.  The fact that it was not, was not his fault.  Had
           it been granted, a further application to remain with  his  wife
           would also in all probability have been granted.  It was  during
           this period that the family relationship was established.  These
           factors should have been considered by  the  decision  taker  as
           well as the interests of his wife and the two boys who have  now
           found a father."

  7. Mr Revindran has argued before us that the principle in Shala should be
     applied even though it was likely that it had not been  promulgated  at
     the time the Adjudicator made his determination, and certainly  it  was
     not raised at the hearing before him.  We agree.   Judge  made  law  is
     inherently retrospective.

  8. Mr Revindran went on to argue that  because  the  Adjudicator  made  no
     findings of fact concerning the credibility of the Appellant's original
     asylum claim, the Tribunal does not know whether  he  would  have  been
     granted asylum on arrival in the UK and not could not therefore correct
     the flaw in the determination itself. It should remit the appeal to the
     same Adjudicator to complete his findings and review his conclusion, or
     alternatively remit the entire appeal to  a  new  Adjudicator  to  hear
     afresh.

  9. There are however a number of fatal flaws in these submissions.

 10. The first  is  that  the  Adjudicator  in  following  the  step-by-step
     approach recommended by the Tribunal in the leading decision of  Nhundu
     & Chiwera 01/TH/00613, reached a sustainable  conclusion  that  because
     the entire family could relocate to Kenya  together,  the  Respondent's
     decision to issue removal directions did not constitute an interference
     with family life. This is  dispositive  of  the  appeal.  Mr  Revindran
     argued that the assessment of interference should  be  subject  to  the
     assessment of proportionality.  We do not agree.  It is inherent in the
     step-by-step approach recommended by the Tribunal in Nhundu and Chiwera
     that the assessment  of  proportionality  is  the  final  step,  to  be
     addressed only if the previous steps are not dispositive of the appeal.
     It would not otherwise be a progressive  step-by-step  approach.  Shala
     relates explicitly to the assessment of proportionality.

 11. Second, the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Shala  reflected
     particular circumstances that distinguish it from this appeal. In 1999,
     it was the published policy of  the  Respondent  to  grant  exceptional
     leave to remain  to  all  ethnic  Albanians  fleeing  from  the  ethnic
     cleansing policy of the Serbian regime in Kosovo. Thus Schiemann LJ was
     able to conclude on the basis of this policy that it was probable  that
     Shala would have been granted leave had  his  appeal  being  determined
     with reasonable expedition after his arrival. There is no  such  policy
     in relation to this Appellant and Kenya.  His claim to  asylum  depends
     upon  individual  assessment  of  his  credibility  and  the  objective
     evidence. Mr Revindran has argued that  the  Adjudicator  was  under  a
     responsibility to assess whether his claim would have been allowed, had
     it been decided within say six months of his arrival.  There is however
     no such obligation on an Adjudicator. It is clear from the decision  of
     the House of Lords in Saad & Osorio  C/2000/3596,  that  the  issue  of
     asylum has to be decided on the basis of the situation as at  the  date
     of the appeal hearing, which  is  what  the  Adjudicator  did  in  this
     appeal.  An  Adjudicator  is  under  no  obligation  to  make  historic
     findings as the Tribunal stated in Dyli 00/TH/02186. Mr  Revindran  was
     unable to direct us to any relevant authority to the contrary.

 12. Third, the Adjudicator did  make  partial  but  very  material  adverse
     credibility  findings  in  the  context  of  his  assessment   of   the
     Respondent's certificate. In the  light  of  his  conclusion  that  the
     claims of torture were embellishments by the Appellant,  it  cannot  be
     said that there is a probability  that  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim
     would have been granted even when he arrived.

 13. Fourth, the decision in Shala can be further distinguished  because  of
     the substantial difference in the length of delay by the Respondent  in
     reaching the decision. In Shala in the delay was over four  years.   In
     this appeal it was well under three years.

 14. In the light of these conclusions, it follows  that  the  Adjudicator's
     decision that return in accordance with removal directions would not be
     an interference with the Appellant's right to family life  is  properly
     sustainable.  It also follows in  the  alternative,  as  Shala  can  be
     distinguished on its facts from this  appeal,  that  the  Adjudicator's
     assessment of proportionality, which has not been otherwise challenged,
     is also sustainable. This applies both to the Adjudicator's  conclusion
     that it would be proportionate to require the  family  as  a  whole  to
     return together and also to the separate conclusion that  it  would  be
     proportionate for the Appellant to return alone to Kenya and apply  for
     entry to the UK as a spouse in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules,
     without queue jumping

 15. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
