
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |FJ (Risk-Return-Tuni)       |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00147                       |
|On 21 August 2003          |        |                            |
|Prepared: 21 August 2003   |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......14th November 2003.....                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms L Sayers, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Maliks, Solicitors
For the  respondent:           Mrs  L  Singh,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen  of   Somalia,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Dr O T C Ransley, who dismissed  his
      appeal against the decision made on 20 April 2002 refusing his  claim
      for asylum but granting him limited leave to remain until April 2003.

2.    The appellant says that he was born in Mogadishu and is a  member  of
      the  Tunni  tribe.   He  went  to  college   after   completing   his
      intermediate school education but did not complete his final year  as
      he left Somali in March 2002.   He says that his father was killed on
      11 September 2001 when a gang  raided  and  robbed  his  shop.    The
      appellant witnessed what had happened.   It was a local gang  and  he
      recognised that some of the members  of  the  gang  belonged  to  the
      Hawiye tribe.   The gang heard that he knew their identities and came
      to his home.   The appellant was at a neighbour's house.    The  gang
      demanded to know where the appellant was and threatened to  rape  his
      wife and his family  members.    The  appellant  was  told  what  had
      happened.   The gang returned the following day and ordered  everyone
      out of the house.   Again  they  threatened  to  rape  and  kill  the
      appellant's wife and mother and hit them with the butt of their guns.
        They threatened to kill  the  appellant  if  they  found  him.   He
      learned what had happened the following morning and decided  that  he
      could not remain there.   He went to another village where he  stayed
      with a relative for 6 days but the relative decided  that  he  should
      leave.   He then returned to Mogadishu and hid with friends who lived
      2 minutes walk away from his home.   His mother sold the family  home
      to raise money to pay an agent to take the appellant abroad.

3.    It was his claim that there is no police force or other authority  to
      whom he could report what happened and seek protection.   He belonged
      to the Tunni, a minority tribe throughout the country  and  he  could
      not move to another part of Somalia where the Tunni may  be  able  to
      offer him protection.   Civil war was raging in Somalia and there was
      no central or local government to maintain law and order.

4.    The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from  the  appellant.    She  had
      before her documentary evidence and in particular  the  CIPU  October
      2002 report and the Report on Minority Groups in Somalia by the Joint
      British, Danish and Dutch Fact Finding Mission (September 2002).

5.    The Adjudicator found  that  the  appellant's  credibility  had  been
      undermined by his insistence that the Tunni were a minority tribe  in
      Somalia and that there was no safe place in  the  country  for  them.
      This was contrary to the objective evidence.   She accepted  that  he
      did in fact belong to the Tunni tribe which she described as a  large
      tribe or a tribal confederacy of mixed clans  including  the  Hawiye.
      His claim that he feared persecution from the  Hawiye  by  reason  of
      being a Tunni was not credible.

6.    The Adjudicator also regarded his credibility as  undermined  by  the
      fact that he was a vague and evasive witness at the hearing.    There
      were inconsistencies  and  implausibilities  in  his  account.    The
      Adjudicator said that he had lived in Mogadishu since  his  birth  in
      1983 but there was no evidence before her that he or his  family  had
      experienced any trouble by  reason  of  their  race.    She  did  not
      believe the account of his father being attacked  and  killed  for  a
      racial reason.  She did not find it credible that the appellant would
      be able to hide in a friend's house for 22 weeks without being  found
      by the local gang.   She went on  to  consider  the  availability  of
      internal  flight.    It  was  her  view  that  there  was   a   local
      administration  in  place  in  Mogadishu  but  accepted  that   state
      protection in Somalia may not be wholly effective across the country.
       However, the appellant made no attempt to seek the protection of the
      authorities   in   Mogadishu.     There    were    effective    local
      administrations in the north east and  north  west  of  the  country.
      The appellant  appeared  to  have  lost  touch  with  his  family  in
      Mogadishu.   Given that he was young, healthy and educated  it  would
      not be unduly harsh for him to relocate to those  regions  with  well
      established local administrations.

7.    In these circumstances the appeal was dismissed on  both  asylum  and
      human  rights  grounds.   The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the
      Adjudicator made a material error in finding that the  Tunni  were  a
      large tribe or tribal confederacy rather than belonging to a minority
      group.   She had failed to consider all the evidence.   The fact that
      the minority report described the Tunni as a "large  tribe"  did  not
      preclude them from being a minority group  or  minority  clan.    The
      Adjudicator had failed to note that the Tunni were also classed as  a
      Bravanese.  The Adjudicator had failed to give proper weight  to  the
      Tribunal determination in Hanaf [2002] UKIAT  05912  that  the  Tunni
      tribe were a minority group in  need  of  international   protection.
      Her findings on credibility were flawed.   She  had  failed  to  give
      reasons for disbelieving the account given by the appellant.    There
      would be no adequate protection in Mogadishu.   The  Adjudicator  was
      wrong to find that the appellant could relocate  in  other  areas  in
      Somalia such as Somaliland or Puntland.

8.    At the hearing before the Tribunal Ms Sayers adopted  these  grounds.
      She relied on Hanaf and the conclusions reached by the Tribunal  that
      the Tunni were part of the Bravanese minority group and were at  risk
      of persecution.   There were  two  further  witness  statements  from
      other members of the Tunni clan who had been granted asylum: A83, 88.
        She submitted that the Adjudicator's findings on  credibility  were
      unsafe.   She had over emphasised the  issue  of  credibility.    Her
      findings on internal flight were  not  properly  open  to  her.   The
      Secretary of State's decision letter had argued  that  the  appellant
      could relocate in Bay  and  Bakool  regions  but  when  evidence  was
      produced to show that those areas were unsafe, it was then  suggested
      that the appellant could relocate in  Puntland  or  Somaliland.   The
      evidence showed that the Tunni in that area lived in  such  appalling
      conditions that it would be unduly harsh to expect the  appellant  to
      relocate.

9.    Mrs Singh submitted that it was for the Adjudicator to assess whether
      the appellant would be at risk on return.   She had accepted that  he
      was a member of the Tunni clan.  She had been entitled to reject  his
      account of events in Somalia and it followed  in  the  light  of  his
      history that he would not be at risk on return.   Even if he  was  at
      risk in his home area there was no reason why he could  not  relocate
      in another area.

10.   The first submission put on behalf  of  the  appellant  in  substance
      argues that once the Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant  was  a
      member of the Tunni clan, it followed that he was entitled to asylum.
       Reliance is placed on Hanaf.   In that case it  was  submitted  that
      the sole issue was whether the appellant was from  a  minority  group
      which was persecuted in Somalia.   The appellant had given a  history
      of sexual assault  and  of  violence  in  1991  and  1992  which  the
      Adjudicator had accepted but then went on to express doubts about his
      description of events between 1993 and 1999.   The Tribunal noted  in
      paragraph 17 that the Adjudicator had accepted at least in  part  the
      appellant's  account  of  being  persecuted.    It  referred  to  the
      objective evidence that members of minority clans were "likely to  be
      able  to  establish  a  need  for  international  protection".    The
      Tribunal looked at the background evidence in  paragraph  26  of  its
      determination and in paragraph 27  found  that  the  appellant  as  a
      member of a persecuted minority clan would  himself  be  at  risk  of
      persecution.  The Tribunal accepted that the Tunni were  a  sub-group
      of the Brava clan.

11.   The Tribunal have been referred to the Report on Minority  Groups  in
      Somalia.   This report confirms how complex the clan structure is  in
      Somalia.   In dealing with the Benadiri in section 7 it  is  recorded
      that elders from Brava told the delegation that they consist  of  two
      sub-groups, the Bravanese and the Tunni.   The  Bravanese  considered
      themselves Benadiri whereas the  Tunni  do  not.   According  to  the
      Bravanese elders the Tunni belong to the Digil clan family  (and  the
      UNCHR overview does classify the Tunni with the Digil: see Annex 3 to
      the report).   The Tunni explain that they were sub-divided into  the
      Tunni Torre plus five sub-groups.  According to one source  in  Brava
      the Arabs from Zanzibar allied with  the  Tunni,  a  Digil  clan,  to
      counter the Hawiye from the hinterland.  Because  of  the  historical
      background in Brava, the races in the city were completely mixed  up.
       Those in the city suffered common hardships and tragedies during and
      after the civil war which reinforced the sentiment of an identity and
      uniqueness but there remain immigrants of Arab origin  while  on  the
      other hand there are Somali of the Brava surroundings whose  minority
      status is more doubtful because they are part of the Tunni lineage of
      the Digil.

12.   The Digil and Mirifle are considered in section  11  of  the  report.
      They are considered a minority group by some experts  but  by  others
      they are regarded as clans related to the major Somali  clans.    The
      report says that they seem to take a middle position between a Somali
      clan and a minority.   The  report  refers  to  mixed  clans  with  a
      founding lineage acting as a thread around  which  successive  groups
      crystallise.   In this way stable  confederacies  bound  together  by
      reciprocal relations of aid and defence are formed.   Such unions are
      first organised on the lineage principle but this usually  disappears
      in their further development.   The end point in the process  of  the
      federation is the mixed village where lineage segmentation no  longer
      corresponds to territorial distribution.   An example  is  the  Tunni
      confederacy which is formed by a number of Hawiye and  Mirifle,  Dir,
      Galla, Gobawein (Bantu) Ashraf, Ajurn and Boon  groupings  with  each
      segment containing an original Tunni lineage.

  13. One source describes the Tunni as a  large  tribe  or  rather  tribal
      confederacy eventually setting in or  around  Brava.    They  have  a
      mixed cattle-cultivation economy.  The Tunni Torre, a  Negroid  group
      were federated to the Tunni of Brava as their vassals.  Section  11.4
      confirms that the Digil and the  Mirifle  have  repeatedly  been  the
      victims of lootings and killings under human rights violations by the
      various militias.   Since 1999 their main home areas, Bay and  Bakool
      have improved and can be regarded  as  zones  of  transition  whereas
      other parts are considered to be zones of conflict.   Many Digil  and
      Mirifle have relocated in north west Somalia where they are a visible
      minority.   These displaced people were well received  in1997-98  but
      are no longer welcome.  In Somaliland, the Digil and Mirifle live  in
      very poor circumstances, in slum conditions and there is no place for
      them in society.   They are not systematically threatened.

14.   From this complex background it is clear  that  the  risks  faced  by
      particular clans or sub-clans  can  only  be  broad  generalisations.
      The Tribunal in Hanaf appears to have proceed on the basis  that  the
      Tunni are a sub-group of the Brava clan without  reference  to  their
      linkage with the Digil.   In the light of the complex clan  structure
      in Somalia and the inter-mixing of the groups  leading  to  what  the
      minorities report describes as a process of federation,  in our  view
      it is impossible to say that membership alone of the  Tunni  clan  is
      sufficient without more to show a well-founded fear of persecution on
      return.

15.   Each appeal must be considered on its own merits.    Clan  membership
      will normally be an important consideration but must  be  taken  into
      account along with the appellant's own history and profile.   In this
      case the appellant was born in 1983.  He  claims  to  have  lived  in
      Mogadishu.  His claim arises from a fear of  reprisals  from  a  gang
      which he says raided and robbed his  father's  shop  and  killed  his
      father.   He says that it was a local gang  and  he  recognised  that
      some members of the gang belonged to the Hawiye tribe.   Even if  his
      account is accepted, the Tribunal find that there is an  insufficient
      evidential basis to move from this account to an assertion  that  the
      appellant is at risk because of his clan membership still  less  from
      members of the Hawiye tribe.  His account in reality is  based  on  a
      fear of general lawlessness not  on  a  fear  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.

16.   It is argued that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
      assessment of credibility.   She described the  appellant's  evidence
      as vague and evasive.   She did not accept that his father  had  been
      killed for a racial reason as alleged.  She commented  that  she  did
      not find it credible that he would be able to hide  in  his  friend's
      house for 22 weeks as he asserted without being  found  by  what  she
      described as a local gang.  One aspect of  her  reasoning  which  has
      caused the tribunal concern was her comment in paragraph 15 that  the
      appellant's credibility had been undermined by  his  insistence  that
      the Tunni are a minority tribe in Somalia and that there is no  place
      in the country for Tunnis.  However, even leaving this  fact  out  of
      account, in the view of the Tribunal the Adjudicator was entitled  to
      reach her conclusions on credibility for the other reasons she  gave.
       Her findings cannot be categorised as wrong or  not  sustainable  on
      the evidence.

17.    The  final  issue  is  the  availability  of  an   internal   flight
      alternative.   In AE and FE [2003] EWCA Civ 1032, the Court of Appeal
      considered the issue of  undue  harshness  in  refugee  claims.    In
      paragraph 64 of his judgment, the Master of the Rolls  said  that  so
      far as refugee status  was  concerned,  a  comparison  must  be  made
      between the asylum seeker's conditions and circumstances in the place
      where he has reason to fear persecution and those he would  be  faced
      with in  the  suggested  place  of  internal  relocation.    If  that
      comparison suggests that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to
      expect him to relocate in order to escape the  risk  of  persecution,
      his refugee status is established.   He  commented  that  the  unduly
      harsh test had been extended in practice to have  regard  to  factors
      which are not relevant to refugee status  but  which  might  be  very
      relevant to whether exceptional leave to  remain  should  be  granted
      having regard to human rights or other humanitarian considerations.

  18. In paragraph 67 of his judgment the Master of the  Rolls,   said   it
      was important that the consideration of immigration applications  and
      appeals should distinguish clearly between (1) the right  to  refugee
      status under the Refugee Convention,  (2)  the  right  to  remain  by
      reason  of  rights  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention   and   (3)
      considerations which may be relevant to a grant of  leave  to  remain
      for humanitarian reasons.  So far as the  first  was  concerned,  the
      consideration of the reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  should
      focus on the consequences to the asylum seeker settling in a place of
      relocation instead of his previous home.   A comparison  between  the
      asylum seeker's situation in this country and what it would be in the
      place of relocation was not relevant for that purpose  although  that
      may be very relevant when considering the impact of the Human  Rights
      Convention or the requirements of humanity.

  19. In the light of those guidelines, in our view,  the  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to conclude that the appellant could relocate in  safety  in
      areas where there were effective local administrations in  the  north
      east and north west regions of Somalia.    It  is  argued  that  this
      would be unduly harsh in the light of the information in the Minority
      Group Report that such displaced people are no longer  well  received
      in Somaliland or Puntland.   It is reported that they  live  in  very
      poor circumstances and  there  is  no  place  for  them  in  society.
      However, in our judgment that is not sufficient without more to  show
      that it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  appellant  to  relocate
      there.  The Adjudicator commented that he was young and healthy.  She
      was entitled to conclude that it would not be unduly harsh for him to
      relocate.

20.   In any event as the  Tribunal  have  already  indicated  we  are  not
      satisfied that the appellant's fears arise for a  Convention  reason.
      His fear is of reprisals arising from lawless behaviour.   His  claim
      did not engage the United Kingdom's obligations under the Convention.
        In so far as it is  argued  that  this  country's  obligations  are
      engaged under the Human Rights Convention, they have been met by  the
      grant of exceptional leave.

21.   Accordingly, for the reasons the Tribunal have given, this appeal  is
      dismissed.



                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President
