
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |HS (Assessment of risk -    |
|                           |        |Standard of proof)          |
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00122                       |
|On  12 September 2003      |        |                            |
|Prepared 12 September 2003                                        |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.30 October 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr P Rogers, JP                                                   |
|Mr N Kumar, JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Ms R Dumbavin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Miss Bayati of Counsel, instructed by Salmons,
                       Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Monica J Pirotta) who  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
      against the decision made on 7 January 2003 giving directions for  his
      removal as an illegal entrant.  In  this  determination  the  Tribunal
      will refer to the respondent to this appeal as the applicant.

   2. The applicant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  23  October  2002
      claiming  asylum  on  8  November  2002.   He  claimed  that  he  left
      Afghanistan via Pakistan spending some time in  Pakistan,  Khazakstan,
      Dubai and a number of other unknown countries.  He made a  clandestine
      entry to the United Kingdom by boat.

   3. The appellant was born in 1962 in Pasheet, Kunar Province.  He  worked
      as a doctor during the Communist regime but moved  to  Nangarhar  when
      the Mujahidin took power.  His problems began in March 2002  when  his
      father and four others were killed, so  the  applicant  says,  by  the
      authorities led by the Governor of Kunar Province.  His father  was  a
      village leader and had participated in the selection process  for  the
      Loya Jirga but found himself in opposition to the governor.

   4. When the applicant's father was killed he suspected that this was  the
      responsibility of the Governor of Kunar.  He went to make a  complaint
      to the authorities in Kabul at the offices of the central  Government.
      He was the victim of an attack in Kabul when he was shot at by men  in
      a car.  After he returned home he was woken up by the noise of  a  car
      stopping outside.  He saw a Datsun pickup truck and decided  to  leave
      by climbing over into a neighbour's property.  Armed men searched  his
      house, assaulting his wife and making threats that they would find and
      kill the applicant.  He then took  his  family  to  Kama  for  safety.
      Arrangements were made for the applicant to leave via  Pakistan  where
      he spent three weeks.

   5. The Secretary of State refused the claim for the reasons  set  out  in
      his decision letter dated 6 January 2003.  The Adjudicator  heard  the
      appeal against this decision on 15 April 2003.   The  Adjudicator  has
      set out her findings of credibility and fact in  paragraphs  23-26  of
      her determination.  She accepted that his  account  demonstrated  that
      the  applicant  was  at  risk  of  persecution.   Local  warlords  and
      governors superficially complied with the interim  administration  but
      had vendettas and power struggles  of  their  own  and  used  violence
      against opponents.  The applicant had been targeted but  only  because
      of his connection with his late father.  She  was  satisfied  that  he
      would be perceived to be opposed to the Kabul  administration  because
      reporting to the authorities the murder of his father by one of  their
      own members.  The  incidents  described  by  the  appellant  were  not
      referable to any other vendetta and only arose after he  reported  the
      murder.  In these circumstances he had demonstrated his  case  to  the
      lower standard of proof.   The Adjudicator found his  evidence  to  be
      credible  and  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence.   She   was
      satisfied that he was liable to be persecuted because of his perceived
      or actual political opinion.   Although  the  security  situation  had
      improved in Kabul since April 2002, in the  regions  there  was  still
      danger  for  certain  individuals  and  significant  danger  for   the
      applicant.  The appeal was allowed on both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.

   6. The Secretary of State appeals on the ground  that  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment of the risk on return is based  on  speculation.   She  had
      accepted that there were two attacks, one in Kabul and the  second  in
      Kunar.  The assailants were unknown.  The applicant's fears were based
      on suspicions.  The Adjudicator had not applied the  correct  standard
      of proof and had erred in law.  It is also argued that the Adjudicator
      was wrong to draw an inference that these events were attributable  to
      a fear of persecution for a Convention reason.  She failed to consider
      that he may have been a victim  of  random  attacks  or  a  victim  of
      criminal  attacks.   The  Adjudicator  was  also  wrong  to  state  in
      paragraph 14 that the applicant had reported  his  father's  death  40
      days after the murder, whereas his uncontested evidence was  that  the
      report was some three months after the murder.

   7. Ms Dunbavin adopted these grounds in her submissions.   She  submitted
      that the Adjudicator had not explained why the applicant would  be  at
      real risk on return.  The fact that two attacks had  taken  place  did
      not necessarily indicate a well-founded fear of persecution.  She  had
      failed to consider whether these were random attacks.   In  any  event
      the Adjudicator's conclusions were based upon a misapprehension as  to
      the facts.  In paragraph 12  of  her  determination  she  referred  to
      Nangarhar as a district of Kabul whereas in fact  it  was  a  separate
      Province.  There was a major error as to the  time  of  reporting  his
      father's death.  It was reported some two to three  months  after  the
      murder, not after 40 days which was the initial period of mourning.

   8. Miss Bayati accepted that there were these errors of fact  but  argued
      that they did not affect the Adjudicator's conclusions.  There  was  a
      proper evidential basis for the Adjudicator's findings.   It  was  for
      her to assess what the likely cause of the subsequent attacks  on  the
      applicant were.  He had not only been attacked in Kabul  but  also  on
      return his home area.  The Adjudicator was entitled  to  rely  on  the
      applicant's evidence that Datsun pickup trucks were vehicles  used  by
      the governor.  He had also said that he knew the men who attacked  his
      home were associated with  the  governor  because  of  their  regional
      accents.

   9. The Tribunal  are  not  satisfied  that  the  factual  errors  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination undermine her findings or conclusions.  In
      paragraph 12 she described Nangarhar as a district of Kabul.   In  all
      likelihood this was a simple  error  or  misunderstanding.   The  fact
      remained that the Adjudicator accepted that there were two  incidents:
      one in Kabul and one at the applicant's  home.   The  Tribunal  attach
      little weight to the Adjudicator's  finding  that  the  incident  only
      arose after he made the report to the government  40  days  after  the
      murder.   This  was  the  period  of  mourning  as   the   Adjudicator
      appreciated:  see paragraph 22  of  her  determination.   The  precise
      timing of the report has no material bearing on the inferences  to  be
      drawn from subsequent events.  Discrepancies of  this  nature  may  be
      relevant to the assessment of credibility but in this case there is no
      dispute between the parties that the applicant's evidence was that  he
      reported the death of his father some two to three months later rather
      than 40 days later.

  10. The Secretary of State argues  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  are
      based upon speculation or  were  not  properly  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence.  She accepted that following  the  report  of  his  father's
      murder the applicant had been the victim of an  attack  in  Kabul  and
      subsequently an attack after he  returned  home.   In  evaluating  the
      reasons for these attacks, the Adjudicator was entitled to  take  into
      account the applicant's evidence that he had no quarrel with any other
      group or individual and his evidence that Datsun trucks were the  type
      of vehicle used by the governor or those acting on his behalf.  It  is
      of course possible that the applicant was  the  victim  of  random  or
      criminal attacks, but it was the applicant's belief that  the  attacks
      were related to his father's death.  This was an issue of fact for the
      Adjudicator to resolve on  the  evidence,  bearing  in  mind  the  low
      standard of proof.  The Tribunal are satisfied that the  Adjudicator's
      findings were properly open to her on  the  evidence.   It  cannot  be
      said, in the light of the objective evidence and the  applicant's  own
      oral evidence, that her findings were based  on  speculation  or  were
      otherwise not properly sustainable.

  11. It follows from the Adjudicator's findings that she  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the applicant would be at risk of persecution on  return
      or a breach of his protected rights under Article 3.  The Tribunal are
      not satisfied that there is  any  basis  which  would  entitle  us  to
      interfere with the Adjudicator's findings and conclusions.

  12. The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
