
MB (Age Assessment - Gorani in Kosovo) Serbia and Montenegro [2003] UKIAT
00105

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On: 8 May 2003                                |29/10/2003                   |
|Prepared: 11 May 2003                         |                             |


                                   Before

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                               Mr P Rogers JP

    Between:


                     (a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro)

                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                             Secretary of State
                                                                  Respondent

    For the claimant:  Ms J. Alexander, counsel
    For the Secretary of State:  Mr G. Elk, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a national of Serbia  and  Montenegro,  formerly
          the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and is a Gorani from  Kosovo.
          He appeals against the decision of an adjudicator, Mr NJ Osborne,
          following a hearing on 6 January 2003 dismissing both his  asylum
          and his human rights claims.


       2. The claimant was born in the village of Gorono Sello (Gorno Selo)
          to the south east of Prizren in Kosovo.  The claimant comes  from
          a family of Gorani.  His father was conscripted in to the Serbian
          army and took part in the hostilities between Serbs and Albanians
          until the intervention of the NATO-led forces in June  1999.   In
          his evidence, the claimant spoke of an incident that  took  place
          on 20 July 2002 when three Albanians forced their  way  into  his
          home and attacked him, apparently in search  of  his  father.   A
          somewhat similar incident was repeated on the following day, save
          that the claimant was threatened by having a gun pointed  at  his
          head.

       3. The adjudicator rejected the claimant's  evidence  of  these  two
          incidents at paragraph 10.12 of the determination.  He  gave  two
          reasons for doing so.  The first was because he did  not  believe
          that the claimant was a minor as he claimed to  be.   He  reached
          that conclusion in paragraph 10.3 of the determination:


                "The appellant produced no documentary evidence  to  support
                his date of birth.  I do not consider that he is  under  the
                age of 18 years.  From looking at  the  appellant  and  from
                hearing him speak, I conclude that the appellant is over the
                age of 18  years.   The  appellant  has  at  each  interview
                consistently maintained his date of birth.  I consider  that
                this damages the appellant's credibility.  I am not prepared
                to give the appellant the benefit of the doubt  and  do  not
                deal with him as a minor."

       4. There will be cases where it is clear that an appellant  is  over
          the age of 18.  This will be at its most obvious when the  person
          is of advanced years.  It cannot,  therefore,  be  said  that  an
          adjudicator must never form his own judgment as  to  the  age  of
          persons  appearing  before  him.   That  said,  it  is  extremely
          hazardous for anybody to speak with certainty about the exact age
          of a person, accurate to, say, two or three years.   Adjudicators
          should not set themselves up as experts on such matters.   Whilst
          the adjudicator had the benefit of hearing the claimant give  his
          evidence, which the Tribunal did not, the general  appearance  of
          the claimant was not such as to entitle the adjudicator  to  find
          that the claimant was lying about his age.  Even if the  claimant
          was not telling the truth on this issue, it did not  entitle  the
          adjudicator to use that fact as one of the principal grounds  for
          rejecting his evidence.


       5. The second reason for disbelieving the claimant was that  he  had
          given evidence that the  Albanians  targeted  males  rather  that
          females.  In paragraph 10.8 of the determination, the adjudicator
          stated that  nowhere  in  the  objective  material  was  it  even
          suggested that Gorani males are at greater risk than  females  of
          the same ethnicity.  He concluded:


                "If that were the case then I am sure it would be so stated.
                 This too damages the credibility of the appellant."


       6. The absence  of  a  reference  to  a  particular  factor  in  the
          objective material does not establish that the claimant  must  be
          telling a lie.  It  is  for  the  adjudicator  to  make  his  own
          assessment.   There  does  not  appear  to  us  to  be   anything
          inherently unlikely in  incidents  of  racial  violence  for  the
          aggressors to select other males  as  their  targets.   No  doubt
          there will be cases, as in the present case,  where  each  family
          member, both male and female, was subjected to attack  or  abuse.
          Nevertheless, the adjudicator's conclusion that the claimant must
          have been lying when he said the Albanians targeted males is  not
          sustainable merely because there is no reference to this  in  the
          background material.


       7. If the adjudicator reached the wrong conclusion in rejecting  the
          claimant's evidence, the claim falls  to  be  considered  on  the
          basis of two incidents, taking  place  within  the  space  of  48
          hours, in which the claimant and his  family  were  subjected  to
          abuse and violence by ethnic Albanians.  It was  these  incidents
          that caused the claimant to flee in July 2002.  Accordingly,  the
          issue raised in this appeal is whether Gorani and, in particular,
          young Gorani males, are persecuted or subjected  to  violence  by
          non-state agents in circumstances where the authorities offer  no
          effective protection.

       8. The adjudicator dealt with the position of Gorani  in  paragraphs
          10.6 and 10.7 of his determination.  He referred to the fact that
          the incidence of violence against the  minorities  had  decreased
          significantly and that there  was  notable  security  improvement
          during 2001.  He specifically referred to paragraph 5.28  of  the
          October 2002 CIPU Report.   The  adjudicator  accepted  that  the
          UNHCR considers that Gorani face security risks but  relied  upon
          paragraph 5.43 of the CIPU report that  UNMIK  police  statistics
          show no murders of Gorani in the year 2000.  On that  basis,  the
          adjudicator concluded that the claimant  had  not  established  a
          claim either under the Refugee Convention or under the ECHR.

       9. There is a wealth  of  material  dealing  with  the  position  of
          Gorani,  who  like  the  Bosniaks,  are  Muslim  Slavs.   At  the
          commencement of the hearing before the  Tribunal,  Ms  Alexander,
          who appeared on behalf of the claimant, accepted that  there  was
          nothing in the claimant's case that  was  exceptional.   Although
          there  was  evidence  that  the  claimant's   father   had   been
          conscripted into the Serbian forces and had  fought  against  the
          ethnic Albanians in the Kosovo conflict, she accepted  that  most
          Gorani were perceived to have sided with  the  Serbs  during  the
          conflict.  Accordingly, this particular claimant was  not  placed
          at any exceptional risk by reason of  his  father's  involvement.
          Ethnic Albanians in the area would have assumed that  all  Gorani
          were in the same situation.  Ms Alexander argued  the  appeal  on
          the basis that all young male Gorani, at least, are in a  similar
          position to that of the claimant and are  at  risk  of  treatment
          that amounts to persecution or a violation  of  their  Article  3
          human rights.

      10. I was referred to the Tribunal decision of  Seferi  (00/TH/02247)
          decided  in  September  2000.   It  goes  without   saying   that
          circumstances have changed to a considerable  extent  since  that
          appeal was decided.  In that case, the appellant and  his  family
          were also Gorani.   The  Tribunal  upheld  the  decision  of  the
          adjudicator that it was not possible for the appellant to  return
          to the Dragash area.  In reaching that conclusion, it relied (see
          paragraph 10) upon the UNHCR Report of 2000 that warned:

                "Lack  of  security  and  freedom  of  monument  remain  the
                fundamental  problems  affecting  minority  communities   in
                Kosovo criminal activity remains unacceptably high,  with  a
                continued shortfall in unmixed police staffing and the  lack
                of a properly functioning and impartial judicial system."

      11. Given the passage of time  since  that  decision  was  made,  the
          Tribunal cannot attach much weight to the Tribunal's findings  in
          Seferi as an indication of the current position and we propose to
          deal with this appeal by considering more recent information.


      12. The April 2003 CIPU  assessment  dealing  with  the  position  of
          Serbia and Montenegro  records  in  paragraph  6.28  that  ethnic
          Albanians make up approximately 90% of the population of  Kosovo.
          It is apparent that, following the war, there  was  a  very  high
          level of violence directed at ethnic minorities, like the Gorani,
          who  were  seen  as  having  collaborated   with   the   Yugoslav
          oppression.  Most  of  the  perpetrators  were  ethnic  Albanians
          seeking revenge or pursuing the aim of a wholly  Albanian  state.
          This caused a large number of minority communities  to  flee  and
          those who remained are mostly concentrated in mono-ethnic  areas.
          The number of incidents of violence against minorities, according
          to paragraph 6.29 of  the  report,  has  decreased  significantly
          since  the  period  following  the  conflict,  with   a   notable
          improvement in the security situation during the year 2001.  This
          improvement continued in 2002 and, although there is still a  low
          background level of inter-ethnic  violence,  most  crime  is  now
          considered to be economically motivated.  There was, however,  in
          the year 2000, evidence that one Gorani was  murdered.   No  such
          evidence exists for the years 2001 and 2002.


      13. In a report to the UN Security Council dated 17  July  2002,  the
          Secretary-General noted:

                "Although difficult to assess over a short period  of  time,
                the security situation of the minority communities seems  to
                have improved.  A year  ago,  attacks  and  intimidation  of
                minority communities were still considered  systematic;  now
                they have decreased significantly and  are  considered  more
                random.      Freedom     of      movement      has      also
                improved...Increasingly Kosovo Serbs now drive unescorted to
                Kosovo Albanian areas, although there  are  still  cases  of
                Kosovo Serbs cars being stoned."


      14. According to Paragraph 6.32 of the CIPU Report, the  UNHCR  noted
          in January 2003 that it detected a continued improvement  in  the
          situation of minorities between April and October 2002, evidenced
          by a decline  in  serious  security  incidents  which  allow  the
          gradual improvement in freedom of movement.  In  spite  of  these
          obvious  improvements,  the  UNHCR  has   noted   that   minority
          communities continue  to  face  varying  degrees  of  harassment,
          intimidation and provocation,  as  well  as  limited  freedom  of
          movement.  There have also been occasional incidents  of  serious
          violence.   Unemployment  is  high  amongst  ethnic   minorities.
          Conditions vary from one part of the  country  to  another.   For
          example, it is noted in paragraph 6.34 of the CIPU report that in
          the  area  of  Prizen,  there  is  a  long  tradition  of  mutual
          acceptance among different communities and Serbian,  Bosniak  and
          Turkish languages are spoken relatively freely.


      15. It appears that Gorani  and  the  Bosniak  experience  a  similar
          position.  The former are considered in paragraphs 6.70  to  6.73
          of the CIPU report; the latter, at paragraphs 6.64 to 6.69.


              6.71 Like Bosniaks, the Gorani community  are  Muslim  Slavs,
              and  experience  similar  difficulties.   The  Gorani  are  a
              distinct group from Bosniaks, with their own language, though
              like Bosniak  language  this  is  similar  to  Serbian.   The
              overall Gorani population is estimated at  10,000  -  12,000,
              most of whom live in the Gora region of Kosovo, though  there
              are small communities in Pristina and  Mitrovica  also.   The
              Gora  region  comprises  18  geographically  linked  villages
              within Dragash municipality inhabited by Gorani.  The  region
              was largely unaffected by the conflict in terms of damage  to
              housing.
              6.72 As with Bosniaks, Gorani  has  been  closely  associated
              with Serbs because of their shared language and  culture  and
              have suffered violent attacks, harassment and discrimination.
               The risk of being mistaken  for  a  Serb  when  using  their
              language has restricted freedom  of  movement  outside  their
              local area and inhibited equal access to social services  and
              economic opportunities.
              6.73 However, as with Bosniaks, the  security  situation  for
              Gorani was  stable  during  2002  with  no  reported  serious
              security incidents.  There have been  no  murders  of  Gorani
              since the  year  2000.   There  have  also  been  significant
              improvements in freedom of movement and the  ability  to  use
              their own language, particularly in the Prizren region.   The
              Gorani are likely to be at greater  risk  of  harassment  and
              intimidation  in  some  other  areas  of  Kosovo,   such   as
              Ferizaj/Urosevac. Approximately half the KPS  [Kosovo  Police
              Service] officers in Dragash are Gorani.


      16.  The  latter  point  addresses  one  of  the  problems  that  was
          identified  by  the  Tribunal  in  Seferi,  namely  "a  continued
          shortfall in unmixed police staffing."


      17. UNHCR issued a statement in April 2002 dealing with its  Position
          on the Continued Proection Needs of Individuals from Kosovo.  The
          position of Minorities was considered in Part II:


             10. Minorities  continued  to  experience  varying  degrees  of
                 threat to their life and  personal  integrity.   They  also
                 endure  significant  restrictions  on  their   freedom   of
                 movement  that,  in  turn,  limit  their  access  to  basic
                 services, reconstruction of residential property,  property
                 restitution  procedures,  employment  and  other   economic
                 activity  is  essential   for   their   survival.    Severe
                 restrictions in the use  of  their  language,  religion  or
                 their cultural traditions is a problem for some minorities.
             11. Improvements in the general situation in Kosovo are  having
                 the gradual impact on some minority communities in specific
                 locations, and some have managed to secure a limited degree
                 of tolerance within certain areas.   This  does  not  imply
                 that the  risk  of  serious  human  rights  violations  has
                 disappeared.  The violent, attention-grabbing incidents are
                 interspersed by periods of calm which can lead to  a  false
                 sense  of  security  or  erroneous   interpretations   that
                 circumstances have fundamentally changed.  It is  important
                 to know that, even during such "quiet" periods,  minorities
                 continued to endure less visible forms of mistreatment that
                 erode the communities will to remain and hence continue  to
                 cause displacement or impede sustainable returns.
             12. Furthermore, the continued presence of minority communities
                 in specific locations does  not  guarantee  the  safety  of
                 returnees of the same group  In  the  current  environment,
                 long-term absence may be the cause of suspicion leading  to
                 protection problems upon return.  Efforts  to  improve  the
                 situation of minorities which are beginning  to  take  hold
                 need to gain  momentum before general conditions which  are
                 conducive to return in safety and dignity are created.
             14. UNHCR stresses that minority returns should take place on a
                 strictly voluntarily basis  and  based  on  fully  informed
                 decisions of the  members  of  this  community.   Any  such
                 voluntary return movements should be properly  co-ordinated
                 and re-integration should be supported  through  assistance
                 to ensure sustainability.  Minorities should not be forced,
                 compelled or induced to return to Kosovo.


      18. Gorani are specifically considered in paragraphs 22 to 23 of  the
          2002 UNHCR statement.  When compared with the  Bosniaks,  certain
          sectors of the Gorani community  are  perceived  to  have  closer
          links with  the  ethnic  Serbs  and  this  has  created  stronger
          tensions between the  Gorani  and  Kosovo  Albanian  communities.
          Most  Gorani  inhabit  a  clearly  defined   geographical   area,
          Goran/Dragash.  Because it is relatively isolated, it is said  to
          be vulnerable to what the  UNHCR  describe  as  "security-related
          incidents".  However, relative  to  other  minority  communities,
          Gorani enjoy some freedom of movement within their area of origin
          and in  Prizren.   Nevertheless,  reports  continue  to  indicate
          harassment  of  Gorani  if  they   travel   outside   this   area
          particularly if they use their own language as this may lead them
          to be mistaken for ethnic Serbs.  The UNHCR statement concludes:


                "The  Gorani  face  discrimination  in  accessing   economic
                opportunities and social services because  of  their  ethnic
                background and the associated issue of the language barrier.
                 A combination of security  concerns  and  uncertainty  over
                there  longer-term  economic  and   social   viability   has
                compelled many Gorani to leave Kosovo."


      19. More recently, UNHCR and OSCE have produced The Ninth  Assessment
          of Ethnic Minorities in Kosovo covering the period from September
          2001 to April 2002.  The position of the Gorani is  described  in
          paragraphs 218-220.  This repeats much of what has been  set  out
          above.  In addition, the Assessment gives, by way of an  example,
          a typical incident of harassment  in  October  2001  in  which  a
          vehicle belonging to a Gorani was unjustly impounded by the  KPS.
          It is said that, as a result  of  incidents  such  as  this,  the
          community experiences a crisis of confidence with regard  to  its
          future viability in Kosovo.


      20.  In  May  2002,  the  Kosovan   Information   Project1   provided
          information about the Dragash municipality.  Before the  war,  41
          percent of the municipality was Gorani.  In November  1999,  this
          had reduced by about 650 people to 40 percent.   By  March  2000,
          however, the Gorani community had reduced to 28 percent.

      21. In January 2003, the UNHCR  published  a  letter  entitled  UNHCR
          Position on the Continued Protection Needs  of  Individuals  from
          Kosovo dealing with,  amongst  other  groups,  the  Bosniaks  and
          Gorani.  See paragraphs 6 to 8.  The letter begins  by  reporting
          that there were improvements on the general situation  in  Kosovo
          during  the  pervious  year.   The  security  situation  for  the
          Bosniaks has improved and has become  more  stable,  albeit  some
          still   face   intimidation,   harassment,   discrimination   and
          occasional violence.  The position of the  Gorani  community  may
          also  be  considered  relatively  stable  (save  for  the  Gjilan
          region), particularly in the rural  communities  of  the  Dragash
          municipality.  There is a problem with jobs and access to  social
          services with the effect that there is a "small scale but  steady
          departure of Gorani families from Kosovo."  See paragraph 7.  The
          UNHCR  advise  that  the  overall  and  general  improvement   in
          conditions favours the voluntary return to these  locations.   In
          addition:


          "Alternatives to  voluntary  repatriation  may  be  examined  for
          members of those groups who  have  no  protection  or  compelling
          humanitarian needs requiring prolongation of their  stay  in  the
          asylum countries, as an option  of  last  resort...financial  and
          development assistance would be required to underpin  sustainable
          returns."


          The letter draws upon the January  2003  Update  referred  to  in
          greater detail in the following paragraph.
    _______________________
    1SCIS Kosovo (KIP) is  an  extension  project  of  the  Source  Country
    Information Systems, jointly implemented  by  ICMPD  and  IOM  and  the
    report was prepared with the support of  the  governments  of  Austria,
    Denmark, German, Liechtenstein,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the  United
    Kingdom.


      22. The Update of the Situation of Roma Ashkaeli Egyptian and Gorani,
          prepared by the UNHCR in 2003  repeats  the  information  in  the
          Kosovan Information Report that the current Gorani population  in
          Dragash municipality, estimated  at  11,000,  is  located  in  18
          villages as well as Dragash town and represents about 30  percent
          of the total population of the municipality.  As has been  stated
          elsewhere, the Gorani tend to enjoy freedom  of  movement  within
          this area and up to Prizren town, although some prefer to  travel
          in groups for safety reasons.  A few Gorani live in Prizren town,
          and enjoy good relations with other communities  there,  probably
          because they speak Albanian.  Gorani travel to Serbia using their
          own collective transport and there are no reports  of  harassment
          in relation to  these  journeys.   Within  Dragash,  inter-ethnic
          relations with Albanians are slowly relaxing.  At present, Gorani
          do not face security  threats.   The  last  ethnically  motivated
          violence against Gorani was on 10  July  2001  when  four  Kosovo
          Albanians attempted to stab a Gorani male, at  which  time  there
          were also frequent  explosions  in  or  near  Gorani  properties.
          Gorani now  enjoy  access  to  public  services  in  Dragash  and
          secondary care at the Prizren hospital.  Leaders do not  indicate
          any instances of discrimination in  public  services.   The  most
          serious threat to the survival of  the  Gorani  is  unemployment.
          The Update reported that there seemed to be no progress  on  job-
          creation  or  income-generation.   The  economy  or  Dragash   is
          virtually non-existent.  The reluctance of Gorani  to  assimilate
          linguistically further consolidates their isolation, and  affects
          their economic sustainability.  There is still  an  uncomfortable
          relationship between the Albanians and Gorani  in  Dragash  where
          the  Gorani  are  marginalised  by  the   municipal   government.
          Discrimination in employment remains a principal source of ethnic
          tension.

      23.   In April  2003,  the  Home  Office  published  its  Operational
           Guidance Note.  When considering  this  material,  the  Tribunal
           exercised proper caution.  Since the assessment is made  by  the
           respondent in asylum appeals, its objectivity is not guaranteed.
            Nevertheless, there is no reason to doubt that the compilers of
           background information upon which Operational Guidance Notes  is
           based attempt to remain objective.


                2.3   Fearing revenge attacks, more than half of the 200,000
                population of Serbs  and  Roma  left  the  province  in  the
                following months.  High levels of  violence  ensued  against
                those Serbs, Roma and other ethnic minorities  who  remained
                in Kosovo.  With the removal of the Serb /  Yugoslav  forces
                there was no longer any fear of persecution for most of  the
                ethnic Albanian population.  But it was clear  that  members
                of all ethnic minority groups would be at risk  from  ethnic
                Albanian extremists if they returned.
                2.5  Levels  of  violence  against  ethnic  minorities  have
                fallen considerably during the last two  years.   There  has
                been a reduction in inter-ethnic tensions, and between them,
                KFOR, UNMIK police and the Kosovo Police Service,  are  able
                to   provide   a   sufficiency   of    protection.     While
                discrimination,  harassment,  limitations  on   freedom   of
                movement and occasional incidents of violence continue,  the
                overall situation has improved to the extent that UNMIK  and
                UNHCR are now encouraging the  voluntary  return  of  ethnic
                minorities in carefully organised schemes.   However,  these
                organisations remain opposed to enforced returns  of  ethnic
                minorities, which they believe could jeopardise the delicate
                reintegration process.
                   13. Bosniaks (Muslim Slavs)
               Treatment
                3.13.1 Bosniaks speak Serbian as their first  language,  but
               unlike Serbs they follow Islam as their religion.  There has
               in the past been persecution of Bosniaks by ethnic Albanians
               because of their cultural and linguistic  links  with  Serbs
               and it has sometimes been dangerous for them  to  use  their
               language in public.  However, Bosniaks generally  appear  to
               be tolerated by both ethnic Albanian  and  Serb  communities
               and their security situation has always been more favourable
               than that  of  Roma.   One  Bosniak  was  murdered  in  2001
               (compared to 9 in 2000) and one was murdered in 2002, though
               it  is  not  clear  whether  the  incident  was   ethnically
               motivated.
                3.13.2  The  security  situation   for   Bosniaks   improved
               significantly during the last two  years.   UNHCR  considers
               their position to have stabilised, with no reported  serious
               security incidents during the six months  to  January  2003.
               In general, UNMIK police and KFOR provide a  sufficiency  of
               protection for Bosniaks and it will not  be  appropriate  to
               grant asylum solely because an applicant is a member of this
               ethnic group.
                  3.13.3  Discrimination  and  harassment  persist   against
               Bosniaks.  But the cumulative effect of these factors  alone
               will not usually amount to persecution or torture or inhuman
               or degrading treatment/punishment.
               Sufficiency of Protection
                3.13.4 In general, there is now a sufficiency of  protection
                for Bosniaks in Kosovo.
                Internal Flight/Relocation
                3.13.5 There  is  sufficiency  of  protection  for  Bosniaks
                throughout  Kosovo.   However,  levels  of  harassment   and
                discrimination vary.  Internal relocation may an  option  be
                for Bosniaks who come from  areas  outside  of  Prizren  and
                Peja/Pec regions (see above) where most Bosniaks reside  and
                experience fewer difficulties.
               Conclusion
               3.13.6 Most cases from Bosniaks will not qualify for  asylum
               or HP and will be clearly  unfounded.   A  grant  of  asylum
               would only be appropriate in  exceptional  cases,  where  an
               individual was able to show that  he/she  remained  at  risk
               because of specific factors related  to  his/her  particular
               personal  history  and  that  because  of  specific  factors
               related to him/her there was not a sufficiency of protection
               available and internal flight was not an option.
               3.14 Gorani
               Treatment
               3.14.1 Like Bosniaks, the Gorani community are Muslim  Slavs
               and have experienced similar difficulties in the past.  They
               are a separate group from Bosniaks, with their own  distinct
               language, which is similar to Serbian but  with  significant
               differences.  Most Gorani live in  the  Gora  region,  which
               comprises 18 geographically linked villages within Dragash /
               Dragas municipality.
               3.14.2 As with other ethnic minority groups,  the  situation
               for Gorani has improved significantly in the last two years.
                There were no murders of Gorani during the last  two  years
               and UNHCR reports that there have been no  attacks  on  this
               community during the six months to January 2003.
               3.14.3  In  general,  UNMIK  police  and  KFOR   provide   a
               sufficiency of protection for Gorani  and  it  will  not  be
               appropriate to grant asylum solely because an applicant is a
               member of this ethnic group.  Discrimination and  harassment
               persist against Goranis, but the cumulative effect of  these
               facts alone  will  not  usually  amount  to  persecution  or
               torture or inhuman or degrading treatment/punishment.
               Sufficiency of protection.
               3.14.4 In general, there is now a sufficiency of  protection
               for Gorani in Kosovo.
               Internal Flight/ Relocation
                3.14.5 Although there is sufficiency of protection for  RAEs
                through Kosovo,  levels  of  harassment  and  discrimination
                vary.  The option of internal relocation may be  a  relevant
                option for any Gorani individuals who live in isolation from
                their  ethnic  community.   In  such  cases,  relocation  to
                Prizren or Dragash municipalities,  where  there  are  large
                Gorani communities, may be considered.
                Conclusion.
                3.14.6  Given  the  general  improvements  in  the  security
                situation for Gorani, most cases will not qualify for asylum
                or HP and can be certified as clearly unfounded.  A grant of
                asylum would only be appropriate in exceptional cases, where
                an individual was able to show that he/ she remained at risk
                because of specific factors related  to  his/her  particular
                personal  history  and  that  because  of  specific  factors
                related to him/her there was not a sufficiency of protection
                available and internal flight was not an option.

     23.   The claimant comes  from  Gorono  Sello,  (Gorno  Selo),  to  the
         southeast of Prizren.  It is not one of  the  38  villages  of  the
         Dragash municipality, which lies to the south of  Prizren.   It  is
         not, therefore, part of the Gora area, principally inhabited by the
         Gorani.  In his statement, the claimant described the population in
         Gorono Sello as consisting of more that 50% Gorani.  The Serbs have
         now departed.  There is both a church and a mosque.   The  claimant
         was taught in both Gorani and Serbian but does not speak  Albanian.
         The claimant has an  aunt  in  Mushnikov  village,  with  whom  the
         claimant's mother is now staying.


     24. The background information does not provide sufficient detail about
         the position  in  Gorono  Sello  or  Mushnikov.   In  view  of  the
         preponderance of evidence that Gorani who  do  not  speak  Albanian
         are, for the most part, safer in their own communities, we have not
         been able to form a view as to whether the community in  which  the
         claimant lived offers him an appropriate level of  protection.   In
         the absence of that material, we are not satisfied  that  it  does.
         The background material has, for obvious reasons,  concentrated  on
         the Gora.  It is apparent that this is an  isolated  area  but  one
         which was not, fortunately, seriously damaged during the  conflict.
         The Gorani community, whilst greatly reduced, remains a substantial
         minority there.  The most serious  problems  faced  by  Gorani  are
         economic  ones,  particularly  high   unemployment.    Inter-ethnic
         tension has reduced  and,  whilst  incidents  of  violence  against
         Gorani have been documented, the level of violence is now low.  The
         risk cannot be categorised as a reasonable likelihood of harm.

     25. For these reasons, we consider that the claimant's  return  to  the
         Dragash area will offer him appropriate security.  The material  we
         have set out above describes a relatively self-sufficient community
         that  has  access  to  public   services   and   healthcare.    The
         discrimination  faced by the Gorani does not establish a  level  of
         severity sufficient to breach the claimant's rights under Article 3
         of the ECHR.  The  Tribunal  has  also  considered  the  claimant's
         return to Prizren but, because he does not speak Albanian, the risk
         he faces there will be appreciably greater and we do  not  consider
         that there is a reasonable likelihood of his integrating within the
         Gorani community there without  risk  of  harm  from  the  Albanian
         community.

     26. The conclusion we have reached is that  Ms  Alexander's  submission
         that all Gorani are persecuted in Kosovo cannot be sustained on the
         evidence.  In particular, we consider that the Gorani community  in
         the Gora region is not at risk  sufficient  to  engage  either  the
         Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Further,  there
         is no reason to suggest that the claimant, as a young  male,  falls
         into an exceptional category of risk.   It  is  accepted  that  his
         father's involvement with the Serbian army  does  not,  in  itself,
         intensify that risk.  For  these  reasons,  we  consider  that  the
         adjudicator reached the correct conclusion in dismissing  both  the
         claimant's asylum appeal and his claim based on a violation of  his
         human rights.

     27. Finally, we should mention that, as we are not satisfied  that  the
         adjudicator was permitted to reject the claimant's evidence that he
         was born on 22 June 1985, the claimant will  not  attain  his  18th
         birthday until next month.  It  is  not,  therefore,  necessary  to
         consider the claimant's position as a minor as a separate aspect of
         this determination because there is no reasonable prospect  of  the
         claimant being returned whilst still a minor.

        Decision:  Appeal dismissed.


                                                               Andrew Jordan
                                                              Vice President
                                                                 11 May 2003











