
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:|YF (Homosexuality |
|                  |                      |                |- not legal but no|
|                  |                      |                |real risk) Eritrea|
|                  |                      |                |CG [2003] UKIAt   |
|                  |                      |                |00177             |
|Heard on:         |25th November 2003    |                |                  |
|Date typed:       |27th November 2003                                       |
|Date promulgated: |  4th December 2003                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS D K GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                      |
|MR. D M FROOME                                                              |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. D De Souza, of Counsel,  instructed  by   Ziadies
                          Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Ms. M. English, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
                          Officer.

1.1   The Appellant (who is  a  national  of  Eritrea)  has  appealed,  with
     leave,  against  the  determination  of  Mr.  H  R  A   Martineau,   an
     Adjudicator, who (following a hearing on 14th March 2003  at  Surbiton)
     dismissed his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds  under  Section
     69(5) and under Section 65 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals  Act
     1999 against the Respondent's decision  of  14th  March  2003  to  give
     directions for his removal to Eritrea and  to  refuse  his  asylum  and
     human rights claims.

1.2   The Appellant's asylum claim was certified. The  Adjudicator  did  not
     uphold the certificate.

2.    This Determination is being reported because we consider:

      (a)   the legality (or otherwise  of homosexual activity  in  Eritrea;
     and

      (b)   whether the  objective  situation  relating  to  homosexuals  in
           Eritrea is such that there  is,  in  general,  a  real  risk  of
           persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

      Our conclusions are set out at paragraphs 17.4 and 18.5  respectively.



3.1   The basis of the Appellant's claim: The Appellant went to perform  his
     national service from 1st September 1999.  During his military service,
     he began a homosexual relationship with a man, one  Tewolde.  Prior  to
     this relationship, he had not had a homosexual relationship because  it
     was difficult to conduct such relationships.  On 15th January 2002, the
     two of them were found in a  compromising  situation  by  two  military
     policemen, who beat and kicked them severely. They were  placed  in  an
     underground prison for 4 months, while having to perform forced labour.
     They were given a strong warning by a colonel that, if found  again  in
     an active homosexual relationship, they would be severely punished  and
     even killed. The two lovers were then sent to separate  establishments.
     They were both publicly  exposed  and  upbraided  before  their  fellow
     soldiers and this  led  to  persistent  mockery.  The  Appellant  found
     himself in a  constant state of terror and decided to escape  from  the
     army. Since this would amount to desertion and he  would  be  shot  for
     that, he had to leave his country. In late July  2002,  he  obtained  a
     week's leave. He found an agent. On 1st August 2002,  he  went  to  the
     police and reported the harassment and persecution he had suffered.  He
     asked if he could take action against the colonel who had belittled and
     threatened him. However, the policeman also abused and mocked  him.  He
     realised that, as a homosexual, he had no hope of being  understood  in
     Eritrea because of the prevailing prejudice, although government policy
     documents state that those with a  homosexual  orientation  are  to  be
     respected. He arranged his departure with the agent and  then  returned
     to his unit, to await the day. He subsequently  left  Eritrea.  At  his
     interview, the Appellant said that he  was  continuously  in  his  army
     until the day he left, which was a period of over  3  years.   In  oral
     evidence before the Adjudicator, the  Appellant  said  that  he  became
     consciously homosexual from the age of 17 years and that he had escaped
     from his national service. He attributed the extension of  his  service
     to the war with Ethiopia. When asked how long his extended service  was
     intended to last, he said that he was not released and  that  his  duty
     was to serve until peace.

3.2    The  Determination:  At  paragraph  14  of  the  Determination,   the
     Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant is a homosexual.

3.3   It is appropriate to set out paragraphs 11(1), 15, 16 and  17  of  the
     Determination, which state:

      11(1) CIPU, para.6.140:     Homosexual activity is legal for  men  and
                            there have been no  reports  of  discrimination
                            [against] or persecution of homosexuals;

      15.   Next, I note that the appellant's claim to have been  victimised
           and publicly shamed for his homosexuality is not matched by  any
           incidents or trends recorded in any of the  country  literature.
           It is directly contrary to the only passage about  homosexuality
           in the literature before me. I note also that by his own account
           the appellant had despaired of life in his country and set about
           engaging an agent before he tried to  obtain  redress  from  the
           police. This is not a logical sequence of events.  At  the  time
           when he set about escaping from his country in order to be  free
           from the military, the  pilot  demobilisation  scheme  had  been
           completed. The appellant  had  produced  to  the  respondent  at
           interview a certificate of military service. Further, I find  it
           hard to believe that if the appellant had had  to  continue  his
           service beyond the minimum 18 months, he  would  have  told  his
           interviewer simply that the period of  service  was  18  months,
           without mentioning at least  the  possibility  of  extension  or
           recall.

      16.    Because  it  is  contradicted  by  the  sense  of  the  country
           information,  I  reject  the  appellant's   account   of   being
           persecuted for his homosexuality. With that there falls also his
           case that he needed to get out of the army in order to  be  free
           of such persecution. Even were his account of persecution  true,
           it would be so exceptional that there is on the material  before
           me no real risk of its being repeated if  he  is  returned.  The
           issue and possession of a certificate of national service,  with
           his answer about the length of service,  suggest  strongly  that
           the appellant is  not  in  breach  of  his  obligation  in  this
           respect. At the time of the appellant's escape,  conscripts  had
           every  reason  to  believe  that  they  were  on  the  verge  of
           demobilisation. That too tells against the  appellant's  claimed
           motivation. So, while the  Appellant  would  in  my  opinion  be
           entitled to asylum if his account were true  and  in  accordance
           with the recorded conditions in his country, I find that he  has
           not sufficiently made out his case as  to  either  the  risk  of
           being persecuted for his membership  of  social  group,  or  his
           status as a defaulter or deserter.  Even if he has deserted from
           the forces,  he  claims  to  have  done  so  after  the  end  of
           hostilities, so that he would not be liable to the  penalty  for
           deserting  in  time  of   war.   That   appears   a   deliberate
           exaggeration, made with intent to deceive.

      17.   As there is no evidence of a general - or  indeed  personal  and
           particular - risk of persecution or mistreatment for homosexuals
           in Eritrea, there is no case made out as to any breach of any of
           the  articles  of  the  ECHR  by  reason  of   the   appellant's
           homosexuality as a reason for mistreatment in breach  of  Art.3,
           or by interference with his private and family  life,  which  of
           course includes his sexuality. None of the other articles  cited
           can avail the appellant, given my findings of fact.

4.    We first heard submissions as to whether  the  Adjudicator  had  found
     that the Appellant is not a deserter.  In the event that  he  had  not,
     then the Tribunal would have had to consider  whether  a  remittal  for
     adequate findings of fact was appropriate.

5.    Ms. De Souza submitted  that  there  is  no  clear  finding  that  the
     Appellant is a deserter. The second and third sentences of paragraph 16
     suggest, in  Ms.  De  Souza's  submission,  that  the  Adjudicator  was
     accepting that the Appellant was a deserter. She asked us to remit  the
     appeal for a fresh hearing.

6.     Ms.  English  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had   rejected   the
     Appellant's claim that he  was  a  deserter.  This  is  clear,  in  her
     submission, from reading paragraphs 15 and 16 as a whole.

7.    We asked the representatives to withdraw from the hearing,  whilst  we
     considered the Determination and the submissions. Having considered the
     matter, we informed the parties that  we  had  benefited  from  hearing
     their submissions and  we  were  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     rejected the Appellant's claim that he was a deserter or defaulter.  We
     give our reasons for reaching this decision,  in  paragraphs  14.1  and
     14.2 below.

8.    We then heard submissions on the risk on  return,  which  we  reminded
     the parties had to be assessed in accordance with the following:

      (a)   that the Appellant had been found by the  Adjudicator  to  be  a
     homosexual;

      (b)   that the Adjudicator had rejected the Appellant's  claim  as  to
           his alleged problems during his military service on  account  of
           his homosexuality;  and

      (c)   that the Adjudicator had rejected the Appellant's claim that  he
           was a deserter or a defaulter.

9.    Ms. De Souza submitted that, even though the Adjudicator had  rejected
     the Appellant's claim that he was a deserter, he would be perceived  by
     the Eritrean authorities as a deserter. This is  because  he  left  the
     army on account of his problems due to his homosexuality. She  referred
     us to specific passages on pages 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 24, 57,  69,  70,  72,
     76, 87 and 88 of the Appellant's bundle. Given  the  overall  objective
     situation as to the human rights record of  the  Eritrean  authorities,
     Ms. De Souza submitted that the  Appellant  would  be  perceived  as  a
     deserter. On arrival in Eritrea, he would be questioned  and  carefully
     scrutinised at the airport. He would have to give  an  account  of  his
     opinions and beliefs and sexual orientation. He would have to say where
     he had been and why. This  would  expose  him  to  the  risk  of  being
     detained  on  arrival  in  Eritrea,  imprisoned  and  persecuted.   The
     Appellant would also be prosecuted for his homosexuality. He would  not
     have a fair trial. He  would  be  subjected  to  inhuman  or  degrading
     treatment or punishment. In Ms. De Souza's  submission,  the  Appellant
     was at risk of persecution on account of being a failed asylum seeker.

10.   Ms. English submitted  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  Appellant's
     circumstances which would draw the adverse attention  of  the  Eritrean
     authorities, on his arrival in Eritrea. He may well be held for a short
     while, so that his identity could be established. However, there was no
     real risk that he would be taken into detention.  He does not have  any
     political affiliation. He is not  of  mixed  ethnicity.  He  is  not  a
     deserter. There is no evidence that failed asylum seekers are  at  risk
     of persecution or inhuman or degrading treatment simply on  account  of
     being  failed  asylum  seekers.  With   regard   to   the   Appellant's
     homosexuality, Ms. English  referred  us  to  paragraph  11(1)  of  the
     Determination and to paragraph 6.123  of  the  Report  of  the  Country
     Information  and  Policy  Unit  of  the  Immigration  and   Nationality
     Directorate (the CIPU Report) dated October 2003, which states

             According  to  the  British  Embassy  in  Asmara,  Penal   Code
           Proclamation of 1957 No. 158/1957 Book V  Title  IV  Section  II
           strictly  prohibits  "Sexual   Deviations",   among   which   is
           performing  sexual  acts  with  someone   of   the   same   sex.
           Confirmation  is  given  that  such  acts  are  prosecuted   and
           punished. However the International Lesbian and Gay  Association
           state that same sex sexual activity is legal for men  and  women
           in  Eritrea,  and  that  there   have   been   no   reports   of
           discrimination or persecution of homosexuals. [43] [14]

      According to  Annex  D  to  the  CIPU  Report,  the  sources  of  this
     information are:

                 [43]  Letter from the British  Embassy  in  Asmara  -  July
     2003.

            [14] The International Lesbian  and  Gay  Association  (ILGA)  -
                 World Legal Survey Eritrea, 1999.

11.1  Ms. De Souza submitted that the two sentences in  paragraph  6.213  of
     the CIPU Report are conflicting. She submitted that the  last  sentence
     of paragraph 6.213 should be given any weight at all. This  is  because
     the ILGA stated, in their Introduction to the World Legal Survey (dated
     1999, last updated 21st July  2002,  on  page  79  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle):

            In the interests of accuracy we have tried,  wherever  possible,
           to quote  original  texts,  whether  of  legislation,  of  court
           judgments or of news stories. However, considerable difficulties
           exist:

             ?     often  the  source  information  is  provided   in   very
                 summarised form, leading to considerable uncertainty  about
                 its meaning;
            ?     apparently  reliable  information  (even  from  expert  or
                 government  sources)  can  subsequently  turn  out  to   be
                 incorrect, or overtaken by later events;
            ?    differing legal and  political  traditions,  together  with
                 the difficulties of translation, can be further sources  of
                 inaccuracy;

            For these reasons  users  of  the  information  should  consider
           carefully the texts and their source (which we have always tried
           to indicate) and be aware that they may not be correct.

11.2  Bearing this in mind, Ms. De Souza  submitted  that  we  should  place
     weight on the first two sentences of paragraph 6.213, which  relate  to
     the proclamation by the Eritrean government itself.

11.3  Ms. De Souza also referred us to paragraph 6.153 of the  CIPU  report,
     which states:

            However Amnesty International report  that  over  200  Eritreans
           who had originally entered Sudan were deported back  to  Eritrea
           from Malta in September 2002 and detained on arrival. They  were
           held incommunicado and without charge  or  further  explanation.
           There were fears for  their  safety  since  many  had  allegedly
           deserted from the army.

11.4  Ms. De Souza submitted that this shows that  the  Appellant  would  be
     detained on arrival in Eritrea, whatever country he is returned from.

12.   We reserved our Determination as to the risk on return.

13.   We have decided to dismiss the appeal. We now give our reasons.

14.1  As we have said above, we are satisfied that  it  is  clear  from  the
     Determination as a whole that the Adjudicator rejected the  Appellant's
     claim that he is a deserter or a  defaulter.  The  sentence  beginning:
     "So, while the appellant would in my opinion ...." in paragraph  16  is
     unfortunately worded.  However, when this sentence is read as a  whole,
     we are satisfied that what the Adjudicator meant is:

      (a)   that if the Appellant's account had been true and in  accordance
           with the recorded conditions of his country, then  he  would  in
           the Adjudicator's opinion be entitled to asylum;

      (b)   however, the Appellant had not sufficiently made  out  his  case
           as to the risk of being  persecuted  for  his  membership  of  a
           social group and, further, that he had not sufficiently made out
           his case as to his status as a defaulter or deserter.

      This construction of his particular sentence is supported not only  by
     the fact that a comma appears after "social group" and  the  words  "or
     his status as a defaulter or deserter"  but  also  upon  a  reading  of
     paragraphs 15 and 16 as whole.

14.2  The words "strongly suggest" in  paragraph  16  might,  on  one  view,
     suggest that the Adjudicator had not made up his mind. However, in  the
     next sentence, the Adjudicator referred to the fact that, at  the  time
     of the Appellant's escape, conscripts had every reason to believe  that
     they were on the verge of demobilisation. He considered that this  "too
     tells against the  Appellant's  claimed  motivation  (for  leaving  the
     army)".  We are satisfied that, in  the  sentence  which  includes  the
     words "strongly suggests", the Adjudicator was simply saying  that  the
     facts he  referred  to  in  that  sentence  -  namely,  the  issue  and
     possession of a certificate  of  national  service  together  with  his
     answers about the length  of  service  -  were  facts  which  suggested
     strongly that the Appellant is not a deserter or a defaulter.  However,
     these facts were not the only facts the Adjudicator took into  account,
     as is evident from  reading  paragraphs  15  and  16  as  a  whole.  He
     considered that it was not logical for the Appellant to have  attempted
     to obtain redress from the police after he set about engaging an agent.
     He noted the lack of any objective evidence, apart from the passage  in
     the CIPU Report he had referred to, about homosexuality in Eritrea.  He
     took into account the fact that, at the time of the Appellant's escape,
     conscripts were on the verge of demobilisation. He then went on, in the
     sentence beginning "So, while ........."   to  reject  the  Appellant's
     claim that he is a deserter or defaulter.

15.   We now consider the risk on return, based on the facts  (a),  (b)  and
     (c) as set out in paragraph 8 above.

16.1  We have no hesitation in rejecting Ms. De Souza's submission that  the
     Appellant would be perceived as a  deserter  or  a  defaulter.  As  the
     Adjudicator noted, he is in possession of  a  certificate  of  national
     service. Any risk of his being suspected as a deserter or defaulter  is
     so far below the low standard of  a  reasonable  likelihood  as  to  be
     speculative and remote.

16.2  Much of the objective evidence to which Ms. De Souza  referred  us  in
     the Appellant's bundle refers to the general human rights record of the
     Eritrean government, the risk of arbitrary detention, the ill-treatment
     of detainees and their prolonged detention. If Appellant is not at real
     risk of being detained, then there is no real risk that he would suffer
     ill-treatment in detention.

16.3  Page 13 of the Appellant's bundle makes reference  to  many  long-term
     Eritrean refugees in Sudan who fear persecution on return to Eritrea on
     account of their links with the ELF (Eritrean Liberation Front).   This
     does not assist  the  Appellant  because  he  does  not  any  political
     association.

16.4  Ms. De Souza also relied on paragraph 6.153 of the CIPU report,  which
     we have quoted at paragraph 11.3 above. However, according  to  Amnesty
     International, most of the deportees were allegedly deserters. Not only
     is the Appellant not a deserter, he is  in  possession  of  a  national
     service certificate. Paragraph 6.123 therefore does not assist him.

16.5  On his arrival in Eritrea, it is reasonably likely that the  Appellant
     would be questioned. We accept that the Eritrean authorities would want
     to establish his identity, nationality and background. The  Adjudicator
     rejected his claims as to his alleged problems  in  the  army  -  which
     means that the Adjudicator found that he had fabricated  these  aspects
     of his claim. He would therefore have no reason to say to the  Eritrean
     authorities that he left Eritrea because he experienced problems in the
     army.  He  is  not  of  mixed  ethnicity.  He  has  had  no   political
     association. He is not a deserter or defaulter. He  is  not  reasonably
     likely to be perceived as a defaulter or defaulter. There is nothing in
     the objective material to suggest that there is a  real  risk  that  he
     would be detained or persecuted or subjected to Article 3 ill-treatment
     simply on account of being a failed asylum seeker. Given  these  facts,
     we agree with Ms. English that there is no real risk that he  would  be
     detained; neither is there any real risk that he would be subjected  to
     persecution or inhuman or degrading treatment. For the reasons we  give
     below, there is no real risk  that,  even  if  his  sexual  orientation
     emerged during any questioning, he would be detained  or  subjected  to
     treatment  which  amounts  to  persecution  or  inhuman  or   degrading
     treatment or punishment.

17.1  We turn now to  consider  whether  there  is  any  real  risk  of  the
     Appellant experiencing treatment amounting to persecution or inhuman or
     degrading treatment on account of his sexual orientation. It  is  clear
     that the first two sentences of paragraph  6.213  of  the  CIPU  report
     contradict the last sentence, in two respects:

      (a)   as to whether homosexuality is legal in Eritrea.

      (b)   as to whether homosexual acts are prosecuted or punished by  the
           Eritrean authorities.

17.2  With regard to issue of legality, the  first  two  sentences  are,  in
     fact, sourced from the letter from the British Embassy in Asmara  dated
     July 2003. The source is  not,  as  suggested  by  Ms.  De  Souza,  the
     Eritrean government itself. The British Embassy  has  relied  upon  the
     Penal Code Proclamation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ILGA  states  (as
     indicated in the last sentence of paragraph 6.213)  that  homosexuality
     is legal. We note the caution the ILGA gives in relying  on  its  World
     Legal Survey. We also note the article on page 88  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle, which is attributed to a BTM Horn of  Africa  Correspondent  in
     Harrow, Johannesburg and which is published on the  "Behind  the  Mask"
     website on gay and lesbian affairs in Africa. The  first  paragraph  of
     this article refers to homosexuality  as  being  legal  under  "Interim
     Eritrean law". The last paragraph on the same page states:

                 "According to the unimplemented Eritrea law,  homosexuality
     is legal ..."

                 (our emphasis)

17.3  We then noted that paragraph 5.1 of the  CIPU  report  states  that  a
     Transitional Constitution was decreed on 19th May  1993,  that  it  has
     since been replaced by a Constitution which was  adopted  on  23rd  May
     1997 but which  has  not  been  implemented.  In  the  same  paragraph,
     President Issayas is reported as saying  that  the  provisions  of  the
     Constitution have not been implemented fully.

17.4  On the evidence before us, we conclude that, under the  terms  of  the
     Constitution adopted on 23rd May 1997, homosexuality is legal. However,
     the provisions of that  Constitution  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to
     homosexuality have not been implemented yet. Whether the provisions  of
     the Penal Code of 1957 No. 158/1957 Book  V  Title  IV  (to  which  the
     letter from the British Embassy refers) is still  in  force  would  (it
     seems) depend on the provisions of the Constitution adopted on 23rd May
     1997. The fact that the British Embassy suggests, as recently  as  July
     2003, that homosexuality  is  prohibited  tends  to  suggest  that  the
     provisions of Penal Code are, at least to the extent that it  prohibits
     "Sexual Deviations", still effective.  We are therefore led to conclude
     (although hesitantly, given the lack of sufficient  objective  material
     before us) that homosexuality is technically not legal in  Eritrea  but
     will become legal when the provisions of the Constitution of  May  1997
     become fully implemented.

18.1  We now turn to consider  whether  the  objective  evidence  before  us
     shows  that  homosexuals  are  at  real  risk  of  receiving  treatment
     amounting  to  persecution  or  inhuman  or  degrading   treatment   or
     punishment. The existence of laws against homosexual activity  do  not,
     per se, engage Article 3. The Appellant must show that there is a  real
     risk that he would be prosecuted (see the judgement  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Z [2002] EWCA Civ 952, reported at [2002] IAR 560.  The  same
     principle applies in considering whether the  Appellant  faces  a  real
     risk of being persecuted on account of his homosexuality.

18.2  We  therefore  have  to  consider  what  treatment  the  Appellant  is
     reasonably likely to face in Eritrea on account of  his  homosexuality,
     regardless of the fact that homosexual activity  is  at  present  still
     illegal.  The evidence before us in this respect is  also  conflicting.
     The letter from the British Embassy states that "Confirmation is  given
     that such acts are prosecuted and punished". It is  not  clear  who  is
     said to be giving the "confirmation" - does the British Embassy confirm
     this from its own  information  or  has  the  British  Embassy  had  it
     confirmed to them by some other source  ?   Furthermore,  there  is  no
     information supplied as to  the  circumstances  in  which  the  persons
     prosecuted were arrested, when the arrests and prosecutions took  place
     (whether before or after the adoption of the Constitution in May 1997),
     the punishments received etc.

18.3  The article on the "Behind  the  Mask"  website  on  gay  and  lesbian
     affairs in Africa dated 5th November 2003 (page 88 of  the  Appellant's
     bundle, which is attributed to BTM  Horn  of  Africa  Correspondent  in
     Harrow, Johannesburg) refers to 6  gay  men  having  been  arrested  by
     Asmara military police in October 2003. The article  states  that  they
     were held in Asmara for some  days  and  then  transferred  to  Diabeto
     prison, outside Asmara to the north. The article states that "no  legal
     case had been brought" against the men - which means that they had  not
     been charged. However, we note that this article refers to the Eritrean
     military police saying  that  those  arrested  were  involved  in  "gay
     behaviour in a public bathroom". The article also refers  to  observers
     saying that, in the previous year, in a similar  case,  the  government
     aired programmes on the dangers of homosexuality and  displayed  5  gay
     men from "the house of detention".  However, we note that  the  article
     does not state who the observers are and we are therefore not  able  to
     assess the reliability of this information.  We also noted  that  pages
     89 and 90 of the Appellant's bundle are a transcript  of  an  interview
     with an Eritrean student in South Africa, He makes various  assertions,
     including that there are gay civilians and military personnel  who  are
     either in prisons or have been executed. However, we are not told where
     he gets his information from, how reliable his sources are, how  recent
     are any incidents he refers to, whether  the offenders in question were
     found engaging in homosexual  acts  in  public  places  or  in  private
     places.  In the circumstances, we are able to  place  very  little  (if
     any) weight on the interview at pages 89  and  90  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle.

18.4  Against the documentary evidence referred to in  paragraphs  18.2  and
     18.3 above, we have to set the following evidence:

      (a)   that the  ILGA  states  that  there  have  been  no  reports  of
           discrimination or persecution of  homosexuals  in  Eritrea.  (We
           bear in mind the caution which the ILGA's  Introduction  to  the
           World Legal Survey" gives and also that  this  is  according  to
           their World Survey of 1999);

      (b)   that the U.S. State Department (USSD) Report  on  Eritrea  dated
           for 2002 dated March 2003 is completely silent on  any  problems
           being faced by homosexuals in Eritrea;

      (c)   that the Appellant's bundle includes reports from  international
           human rights  organisations  such  as  Human  Rights  Watch  and
           Amnesty International. Our attention was not drawn  to  anything
           in these  reports  which  specifically  refer  to  the  problems
           experienced by homosexuals in Eritrea.

            It is inconceivable  that,  if  persons  engaged  in  homosexual
           activity in Eritrea are at real risk of persecution  or  inhuman
           or degrading treatment or punishment, there would  not  be  some
           reference to this in the USSD report or the Human  Rights  World
           reports or the Amnesty International reports.

      We considered that  the  two  articles  at  pages  91  to  96  of  the
     Appellant's bundle do not relate to the  situation  of  homosexuals  in
     Eritrea. Indeed, the first article (at pages  91  to  93)  specifically
     refers to the countries of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Zambia  and
     Zimbabwe. The second article (at pages  94  to  96)  is  about  various
     countries including Zimbabwe, Uganda, Kenya, Nigeria but we can find no
     reference in it to Eritrea.

18.5  We considered that the evidence before us as  to  any  problems  which
     homosexuals may be subjected to in Eritrea is very limited. We conclude
     as follows:

      (a)   that there is no evidence at all that homosexuals  are  at  real
           risk of discriminatory  treatment  by  members  of  the  general
           population in Eritrea.

      (b)   that, provided homosexual activity is engaged in discreetly  and
           in private, it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the  Eritrean
           authorities would be interested in prosecuting the individual or
           subjecting the individual to treatment amounting to  persecution
           or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  We  stress   that   this
           conclusion  has  been  reached  on  the  basis  of  the  article
           mentioned at paragraph 18.3 above which refers to the arrest  of
           6 gay men in October 2003. We see no reason, for the purposes of
           this appeal, to question the reliability or  otherwise  of  this
           article. However, it has to be borne in mind that  this  article
           is obtained from a website on  gay  and  lesbian  affairs.  This
           being evidence from  a  source  which  is  not  apartsian,  this
           article may not be seen as evidence which is reliable  if  there
           is produced other reliable evidence to the contrary.

18.6  We note that the Appellant was consciously homosexual from the age  of
     17 years. On the Adjudicator's findings, he experienced no problems  in
     Eritrea on account  of  his  homosexuality  until  his  departure  from
     Eritrea in September 2002, at  the  age  of  about  33  years.  On  the
     Adjudicator's findings, he did not come to the adverse attention of the
     Eritrean authorities on account of his homosexuality whilst he  was  in
     Eritrea. There is therefore no reasonable likelihood that he  would  do
     so, if returned to Eritrea. The Adjudicator's finding that it  was  not
     credible that the Appellant would have received  the  ill-treatment  he
     claimed to have received in the army is in line with our conclusions on
     the objective evidence. It is not reasonably likely that the  Appellant
     would receive treatment which would amount to persecution or in  breach
     of his Article 3 rights from members of the general population.

19.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that  the  findings  of
     the Adjudicator that the Appellant's removal to Eritrea would not be in
     breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention
     or in breach of his rights under Article 3 are fully  sustainable.  Ms.
     De Souza relied on Article 6 - the right  to  a  fair  trial.  However,
     there is nothing to suggest that  there  are  any  outstanding  charges
     against the Appellant. In any event, given that his removal  would  not
     be in breach of his rights under Article 3, any claim under  Article  6
     cannot succeed (Ullah & Do [2002] EWCA Civ 1856).

20.   It follows that we must dismiss the appeal.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 27th November 2003
