
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |SS (EU Spouse - Article 8 - |
|                           |        |Serious Crime) Angola [2003]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00159                 |
|On  11 November 2003       |        |                            |
|Prepared 12 November 2003                                         |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|26 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Miss B Mensah                                                     |
|Mr D Froome                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
For the respondent:          Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Angola, appeals against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Mr A J Olson, who dismissed his appeal against  the
      decision made on 5 December 2001 Giving  directions  for  his  removal
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

   2. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 16 February
      1999, claiming asylum on 18 February 1999.  He married on 22 September
      1999 and he is the father of twins born on 17 May 2001.  In March 2000
      the  appellant  was  arrested  and   initially   released   on   bail.
      Subsequently he was remanded in custody and on 23 January 2001 he  was
      convicted of rape at Middlesex Crown Court and sentenced to six  years
      imprisonment.

   3. At  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator  the  appellant  gave  oral
      evidence.  The Adjudicator did not accept that the appellant would now
      be at risk of persecution on return to Angola.   There  is  no  appeal
      against this part  of  his  decision.   The  Adjudicator  went  on  to
      consider the issues which arose from the fact that the  appellant  was
      married to an EEA national.  His wife had been born  in  Guinea-Bissau
      but she went to Portugal in 1985 and acquired  Portuguese  nationality
      the same year. She came to the United Kingdom  and  according  to  her
      statement now works part-time for Newham General Hospital.

   4. The Adjudicator was not satisfied that the appellant would qualify for
      a residence permit.  He said that no  marriage  certificate  had  been
      produced.  His wife had made no mention of her  husband  as  a  family
      member in her application for indefinite leave to remain although  she
      had referred to her two children as members of her family.  It was his
      view that the appellant would not qualify within the provisions of the
      EEA Regulations 2000.   He  also  commented  that  the  principles  in
      Mahmood in relation to Article 8 and in particular to the knowledge on
      the part of one spouse at the time of the marriage that the rights  of
      residence of the other are precarious militates against a finding that
      an order excluding the other spouse would violate Article 8.

   5. The lengthy grounds of appeal in  substance  raise  two  issues.   The
      first is that the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  in  his  findings  on  the
      appellant's status under EU law.  He had no jurisdiction  to  consider
      any appeal under EU law.  An application had been made  for  residence
      but no decision had been made.   In  any  event  the  Adjudicator  had
      referred to Regulation 22 instead of Regulation 15.   He  referred  to
      the application for indefinite leave to remain. This  was  irrelevant.
      There had been a proper application for residence.  It was not correct
      that the marriage certificate had not been produced.


   6. The second issue is that the Adjudicator's findings  under  Article  8
      were incorrect.  It is  argued  that  he  failed  to  consider  in  an
      adequate way  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
      exercise of family life in Angola.  In the alternative he  misdirected
      himself as to the consequences of removal.  He also failed to consider
      the effect of EC Treaty rights as they affected  human  rights  issues
      under Article 8.  He  should  have  considered  the  evidence  of  the
      genuine marriage and whether removal would be proportionate when there
      was an EU right to remain.  A residence permit did not grant  a  right
      under the European law but recognised it.

   7. Ms Brown adopted these arguments in her submissions. She said that the
      appellant had the right to remain as the husband  of  an  EU  national
      exercising community rights.  The Adjudicator had been wrong  to  find
      that he had no right to remain.  Even if he had jurisdiction,  he  had
      referred to the wrong Regulation and ignored the marriage certificate.
       When considering Article 8 the Adjudicator had failed to consider all
      the issues which arose.  There was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
      appellant's wife would be admitted to Angola.  It was unfair to expect
      him to return there now that he had a family in the United Kingdom.

   8. Mr Parker accepted that a marriage certificate had been  in  front  of
      the Adjudicator and that he had been wrong to refer to the application
      for indefinite leave to  remain.   However  this  did  not  materially
      affect his conclusions.  He was entitled to take into account  whether
      there was a right to remain  under  EU  law  and  consider  that  when
      assessing proportionality.  He confirmed that the appellant's wife had
      been granted a residence  permit  as  an  EEA  national  exercising  a
      community right, but on 6 November 2003 the  Secretary  of  State  had
      issued a decision to make a deportation order under  Section  5(1)  of
      the 1971 Act on the  basis  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
      conducive to the public good.  There was a  right  of  appeal  against
      that decision.

   9. Mr Parker argued that there was very little family life in the present
      case.  The appellant  had  never  seen  his  children.  There  was  no
      evidence to support a contention that his wife  could  not  return  to
      Angola with him if he wished to do so, still less that  the  appellant
      would be unable to return and make an application for entry  clearance
      in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

  10. During the hearing before the Tribunal the effect of the  decision  to
      make a deportation order on 6 November 2003 was  considered.   It  was
      not  argued  that  the  decision  currently  under  appeal  had   been
      superseded or withdrawn.  The appellant  is  entitled  to  pursue  his
      appeal against that decision regardless of whether or not he exercises
      any further rights of appeal.

  11. The first point taken by Ms Brown  is  that  the  Adjudicator  had  no
      jurisdiction to determine the appellant's status  under  EU  law  when
      there was a pending application before the Secretary  of  State  which
      had  not  been  decided  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before   the
      Adjudicator.  If this is what the Adjudicator was  purporting  to  do,
      clearly he would have been  wrong.   However,  the  issue  before  the
      adjudicator and which is the subject of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  is
      whether removal would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations
      under Article 8.  In considering this issue the Adjudicator was  fully
      entitled, and indeed obliged, to consider and  make  findings  on  the
      appellant's status in the United  Kingdom.   If  he  was  entitled  to
      remain as the spouse of an EU citizen, that  would  undoubtedly  be  a
      relevant factor in assessing proportionality and perhaps even more  to
      the point the interference with family life would not be in accordance
      with the law.

  12. It is argued that in fact the Adjudicator came to the wrong conclusion
      when considering that issue.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  he  would
      qualify for admission under the EEA  Regulations.   The  Tribunal  are
      satisfied that the reasons given by the  Adjudicator  are  wrong.   He
      commented that no marriage  certificate  had  been  produced.   It  is
      common ground that in the bundle of documents before him there  was  a
      marriage certificate.  He referred to the application  for  indefinite
      leave and drew an adverse inference from the fact that the appellant's
      husband was not mentioned.  It is accepted that that  application  had
      no relevance to the application for EU residence and it  follows  that
      the Adjudicator's inferences were wrongly drawn.

  13. It is also argued that the Adjudicator wrongly referred to  regulation
      22 and should have  referred  to  Regulation  15.   The  reference  to
      Regulation 22 comes from the citation of Regulation  15(2)  which  the
      Adjudicator has set  out  in  paragraph  6.12  of  his  determination.
      Regulation 15 is expressed in mandatory terms.  The Secretary of State
      must issue a residence permit to a family member of a qualified person
      provided proper evidence is produced but this is subject to Regulation
      22.  It is this Regulation which permits the  Secretary  of  State  to
      refuse to issue a residence permit if  the  refusal  is  justified  on
      grounds of public policy, public security or public  health.   On  the
      evidence before the Tribunal it is clear that the appellant  is  prima
      facie entitled to a residence  permit  subject  to  the  Secretary  of
      State's discretion to refuse to issue one on grounds of public  policy
      or public security.  The Adjudicator  was  aware  of  the  appellant's
      conviction and the serious nature of that offence.  That factor should
      have been taken into account in assessing whether or not the appellant
      was likely to be granted residence as the spouse of an EU national.

  14. The issue before the Adjudicator was whether there would be  a  breach
      of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  8  if  the  removal
      directions were put into effect.  It is certainly arguable that  there
      would be a breach of his rights to family life even though he has only
      lived with his wife for a relatively  short  time.   He  has  not  had
      contact with his children and has not yet seen them.  Nonetheless,  in
      the light of his marriage, the Tribunal is satisfied that he does have
      family life within the United Kingdom.   In  her  statement  his  wife
      makes it clear that she continues to visit him in prison. She does not
      believe that he committed the offence he has been convicted of and  is
      looking forward to his release so that they can  live  together  as  a
      family. To remove the appellant to Angola  would  be  an  interference
      with his right to family life.


  15. It is argued that his removal would not be in accordance with the  law
      in the light of his right to remain  under  EU  law.   That  right  is
      subject to the qualifications set out in  Regulation  22.   Regulation
      21(3) makes it clear that even if a person is the family member  of  a
      qualified person, if the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  this  his
      removal is justified  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
      security he may be removed. The Tribunal are  satisfied  that  in  the
      light of  the  appellant's  conviction  the  Secretary  of  State  was
      entitled to decide that the appellant's removal would be justified  on
      these grounds.

  16. This leaves the issue of whether removal would be proportionate  to  a
      legitimate aim. We have no doubt that it is.  The appellant  has  been
      convicted of a serious criminal offence.  It is not just a question of
      maintaining an effective immigration policy but protecting the  public
      against those who commit such offences.

  17. It was argued that  the  appellant's  wife  could  not  reasonably  be
      expected to return to Angola.  No evidence was put before  either  the
      Adjudicator or the Tribunal as to whether  the  appellant's  wife  and
      children  would  be  permitted  to  enter  Angola  but  if   she   is,
      understandably, unwilling to go to Angola, no reason is given why  the
      appellant should not return and make a proper  application  for  entry
      clearance.  If such an application is unlikely to succeed  because  of
      the consequences of his conviction, that  is  a  matter  which  arises
      because of his own actions and certainly does  not  make  his  removal
      disproportionate.

  18. The Tribunal are satisfied that removal would be  in  accordance  with
      the law and would be proportionate to a legitimate aim within  Article
      8(2).  The Tribunal agree with the Adjudicator's conclusions  but  for
      different reasons from those on which he based his decision.

  19. It follows that this appeal is dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
