
MO (Freedom of Religion) Eritrea [2003] UKIAT 00108

Heard at Field House
On 24 June 2003

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                         Date Determination notified:

                                                     29.10.03





                                   Before:

                                 Mr P R LANE
                             Mr S S RAMSUMAIR JP

Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:

For the Appellant:           Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr K. McGuire, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
            Ziadies Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, who is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
    appeals with leave against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr C  J
    Bourn, sitting at Mansfield, in which he allowed under Article 9 of the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to give directions for his removal from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Adjudicator dismissed the Respondent's appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    Having heard evidence from the Respondent, the Adjudicator found that

    "there is a reasonable likelihood that the [Respondent] is a  Jehovah's
    Witness" and "that  that  [Respondent]  was  arrested  in  Eritrea  for
    refusing to undertake military service." (Determination, paragraph 21).
     However, at paragraph 22 the Adjudicator had this to say:-

        "There is no evidence that the  [Respondent]  was  unable  to  live
        without problems in Eritrea between his expulsion from Ethiopia and
        his being arrested in his connection with his refusal to  undertake
        military service, a period of two years.  The  civil  disadvantages
        suffered by Jehovah's Witnesses  in  Eritrea  are  not  grounds  of
        persecution in themselves."

 3. The Tribunal notes that, in making that finding,  the  Adjudicator  had
    before him considerable material relating to Eritrea, in  particular  a
    bundle of documents  submitted  by  the  Respondent  (as  he  now  is),
    including the US State Department Report on Eritrea and the Home Office
    Country Assessment on that country, as well as the Human  Rights  Watch
    Report.

 4. The Adjudicator went on to consider whether the Respondent's claim came
    within the Refugee Convention by reason of  his  refusal  to  undertake
    military service, and what the  consequences  of  that  might  be.   At
    paragraph 24 the Adjudicator noted that

      "the Court of Appeal in  Sepet  and  Bulbul  held  that  there  is  no
        Convention right to conscientious objection  to  military  service.
        The  penalty   for   avoidance   of   military   service   is   not
        disproportionate and the objective evidence does  not  support  the
        conclusion that there is discrimination against Jehovah's Witnesses
        in  the  application  of  that  penalty.   I  conclude   that   the
        [Respondent] has not established a well-founded fear of persecution
        on grounds of religious belief in that he has  been  able  to  live
        peacefully for two years prior to his arrest for draft evasion."

 5.  Having  dealt  with  the  claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    Adjudicator turned  to  human  rights.   Before  the  Adjudicator,  the
    Respondent's   representative,   Mr   McGuire,   submitted   that   the
    Respondent's rights under Articles 3 and 9 of the ECHR were engaged.

 6. The Adjudicator considered Article 3.   He  noted  that,  as  found  in
    Ireland v United Kingdom (1979) 2 EHRR 25, ill-treatment must  reach  a
    minimum level of severity in order to breach Article 3.  The assessment
    of this is relative, depending on all the  circumstances  of  the  case
    including duration, physical and mental effects and  the  circumstances
    of the victim.  Applying those  standards  to  the  present  case,  the
    Adjudicator stated as follows:-

      "I conclude  that  the  ill-treatment  consisted  principally  in  the
        circumstances  of  [the  Respondent's]  confinement  following  his
        arrest for refusal of military service, that  is  to  say,  in  his
        prison conditions.  Such conditions are not to  be  judged  by  the
        standards of the European Convention.  One has to  have  regard  to
        what are the expected conditions in  the  individual  country.   No
        doubt the prison conditions are unpleasant, but that in  itself  is
        not a good reason for saying that return is impossible because  the
        [Respondent] is likely to be prosecuted and possibly imprisoned."

 7. The Adjudicator accordingly found that if the Respondent were now to be
    returned to his country of nationality "there is not  a  real  risk  he
    will suffer a breach of his protected rights under Article 3."

 8. The Adjudicator turned finally to Article 9.  He found  that  the  1994
    Eritrean  presidential  decree  restricting  the  rights  of  Jehovah's
    Witnesses "fails to pass the test of being necessary  in  a  democratic
    society for any of the prescribed purposes.  It follows that  Jehovah's
    Witnesses in Eritrea are subject to discrimination under Article 14  in
    respect of their rights to manifest their belief under Article 9.   The
    Appellant's rights under Article 9 would be infringed  were  he  to  be
    returned to Ethiopia [the Adjudicator  clearly  means  Eritrea]."   The
    Adjudicator accordingly allowed the appeal under Article 9 of the  1950
    Convention and purported to  direct  that  the  Respondent  be  granted
    exceptional leave to remain.

 9. The Vice-President who granted leave to appeal noted that "the  grounds
    contend with arguable merit that the Adjudicator was wrong to allow the
    appeal on Article 9 grounds.  They rely on part on the Court of  Appeal
    judgment in Ullah.   Even  on  the  Tribunal  approach  of  considering
    whether there is a flagrant denial of qualified rights, the Adjudicator
    was arguably wrong"

10. At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  Mr  McGuire  applied  for  an
    adjournment.  He said that the case of Ullah and  Do  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
    1856 was due to be heard in the House of Lords in the autumn  of  2003.
    He was seeking an adjournment until after the House of Lords'  decision
    had been made.

11. For the Appellant, Ms Sigley opposed the application.  She said it  was
    unlikely that a decision would be forthcoming before  the  end  of  the
    year.  In any event, if the result were to favour the Respondent,  then
    there were further avenues available to him.

12. The Tribunal  considered  the  application.   In  the  absence  of  any
    compelling reason in the circumstances of  this  particular  case,  the
    Tribunal did not consider that it would be appropriate to  adjourn  for
    what would clearly be a significant period, as a  result  of  the  fact
    that the decision of a higher court on an issue  touching  the  present
    appeal was itself the subject of an  appeal  to  the  House  of  Lords.
    Accordingly, the application was refused.

13. Mr McGuire then sought the leave of  the  Tribunal  to  put  forward  a
    Respondent's notice, in effect cross-appealing against various findings
    of the Adjudicator.

14. The Tribunal asked Mr McGuire to explain how, even if it were minded to
    agree to the application, it was empowered to do so, having  regard  to
    the  wording  of  Rule  19  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum   Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2003.  Rule 19(2) provides that a Respondent's notice
    must be filed:-

        a) within such period as the Tribunal may direct; or

        b) where the Tribunal makes no such direction, within ten days,

    after the Respondent is served with notice that the Appellant has  been
    granted permission to appeal.

15. Mr McGuire submitted that an overriding discretion in the Tribunal,  to
    permit a Respondent's notice to be filed outside the  time  limit  laid
    down in rule 19(2) was to be derived from rule 37 of  the  2003  Rules.
    This provides that the Appellate Authority "may, subject to these Rules
    and to any other enactment, decide the  procedure  to  be  followed  in
    relation to any appeal or application."

16. With respect to Mr McGuire, the problem with  this  submission  is,  of
    course, that the words "subject to these  Rules"  in  rule  37  clearly
    indicate  that  the  discretion   of   the   Appellate   Authority   is
    circumscribed by what is to be found in the  other  provisions  of  the
    Rules, including rule 19(2).

17. Leaving that point to one side, the Tribunal  enquired  of  Mr  McGuire
    whether there were any special circumstances to which he  could  point,
    which might make it appropriate to grant his application, assuming  for
    this purpose that the Tribunal did have power to  permit  filing  of  a
    late Respondent's notice.  Mr McGuire very fairly  replied  that  there
    were not.

18. The Tribunal does not consider that there is power within the Procedure
    Rules to enable it to permit a Respondent's notice to be filed  outside
    the time limit set by rule 19(2).  In any event, even if such  a  power
    existed, it would only be appropriate to exercise  it  if  good  reason
    could be shown for the Respondent not to have filed a notice within the
    requisite timescale.  In the  present  case,  no  such  reason  exists.
    Ullah and Do had been decided in December 2002.  Indeed,  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in that case was a major  reason  why  leave  to
    appeal was granted.

19. For the Appellant, Ms Sigley submitted that the only basis  upon  which
    the Adjudicator had allowed  the  appeal  was  under  Article  9.   She
    referred the Tribunal to paragraph 64 of the judgment of the Master  of
    the Rolls in Ullah.

20. Mr McGuire submitted that it was clear from  paragraphs  19-22  of  the
    Adjudicator's  determination  that  he  found  the  Respondent  to   be
    credible.  On this basis, he drew the Tribunal's attention to  page  B8
    of the Respondent's statement, where it was said  that  the  Respondent
    had been held in a container made of corrugated iron, after having been
    seized and transported to the camp at Sawa for National  Service.   The
    Respondent was held for  two  months  in  conditions  that  "were  very
    difficult" (B9).  Mr McGuire  submitted  that,  having  regard  to  the
    statement, there had in fact been a flagrant breach of Article 9.   The
    case could, accordingly, be distinguished from that of Ullah  where  Mr
    Ullah had been  subjected  to  general  harassment  but  there  was  no
    credible evidence that he had in fact suffered from  serious  incidents
    of violence [paragraph 70, Annex A].  Mr  McGuire  submitted  that  the
    Article 3 threshold had, on the evidence, been crossed.   There  was  a
    direct causal link between the refusal to carry  out  military  service
    because of the Respondent's military beliefs and the treatment which he
    had received as a consequence.

21. Mr McGuire submitted that, had  he  been  allowed  to  pursue  what  in
    substance was a cross-appeal, he would have submitted that the evidence
    showed that the Respondent ought to have succeeded in his asylum claim.



22. Mr McGuire referred the Tribunal to the  US  State  Department  Report,
    including the comment, at page  8  of  the  Respondent's  bundle,  that
    "prison conditions remained Spartan."

23. Finally, Mr McGuire submitted that, if the Respondent had been able  to
    cross-appeal, he would have argued that the removal of  the  Respondent
    would constitute a breach of Article 8, insofar  as  his  private  life
    would suffer an interference.  He submitted that the ratio of Ullah was
    confined to Article 9.

24. In reply, Ms Sigley reiterated that, in the absence of  a  Respondent's
    notice, and given the findings made by the Adjudicator, the only  issue
    was whether the Adjudicator was right to have allowed the appeal  under
    Article 9.  In the light of Ullah, he was not.

25. As has already been indicated, the absence of a Respondent's notice  in
    the present case means that  it  is  not  open  to  the  Respondent  to
    challenge the findings of the Adjudicator.  As  has  been  stated,  the
    Adjudicator found that the treatment which the Respondent received,  in
    consequence of his refusal to perform military service, as set  out  at
    pages B8 to 10 of the Respondent's statement of 21 March 2002, did  not
    cross the high threshold set in relation to Article 3.

26. The Tribunal would merely add that, even if those findings were to have
    been  challenged,  they  are  plainly  ones  which  were  open  to  the
    Adjudicator to  make,  on  the  evidence  before  him.   They  are  not
    perverse, nor do they show  any  relevant  error.   In  commenting,  at
    paragraph 28 of his determination, that prison  conditions  in  Eritrea
    are not to be judged by the standards of the European  Convention,  the
    Adjudicator was perhaps not expressing himself as clearly as he  might.
    However, the fact that prison conditions in Eritrea  fall  below  those
    which may reasonably be expected in European countries  does  not  mean
    that  such  prison  conditions  automatically  cross  the   Article   3
    threshold.   Prison  conditions  may  indeed  be  "Spartan"   and   the
    Respondent may well have been "assigned to do  the  hard  work  at  the
    prison," cutting wood for fires  and  cooking  food  for  the  military
    trainees (statement, B9).  This does not lead to  a  finding  that  the
    Respondent would be subjected to Article 3 ill-treatment, were he to be
    returned to Eritrea.

27. Given these findings, the present case for all relevant  purposes  sits
    on all fours with the judgment of the Master of  the  Rolls  in  Ullah.



28. Although not strictly relevant, in view of the Tribunal's findings  and
    the issues before it, the Tribunal has difficulty with  the  submission
    of Mr McGuire that Article 8 could be invoked in a  case  such  as  the
    present.  As the Tribunal understands it, the submission  involves  the
    Respondent's ability to follow his chosen religion as an aspect of  his
    private life, as conducted in  the  United  Kingdom.   Removal  of  the
    Appellant to Eritrea would constitute an interference with that private
    life, as a result of the constraints imposed upon  Jehovah's  Witnesses
    by the Eritrean authorities.

29. As the Tribunal pointed out, such an approach would directly  undermine
    the ratio in Ullah, since Mr Ullah could make precisely the same point,
    in relation to his ability in the United Kingdom to follow  the  Ahmadi
    faith, in contrast with his ability to do so in Pakistan.  Accordingly,
    even if the Respondent had been able to advance such an argument before
    the Tribunal, it would in our view have been doomed to failure, so long
    as the Court of Appeal judgment in Ullah remains good law.

30. Given that the Tribunal is allowing the Secretary  of  State's  appeal,
    the Adjudicator's Direction falls.

31.   The appeal is allowed.






                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice-President



