
H-DMG-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |IM (Risk-Objective          |
|                           |        |Evidence-Homosexuals)       |
|                           |        |Albania CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00067                       |
|On 15 July 2003            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|08/09/2003                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J BARNES                                                       |
|Mr M L JAMES                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For  the  Appellant:            Mr  J  Reynolds  of  Counsel  instructed  by
                  Duncan Lewis & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  1  November  1980  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 August 2002 and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.   After  submitting   a   Self-Evidence   Form   and   further
    representations his application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    for the reasons contained in a letter dated  14  August  2002.   On  15
    August 2002 the Secretary of State issued directions for his removal to
    Albania after refusal of leave to enter following refusal of his asylum
    application.  He appealed against that  decision  on  both  asylum  and
    human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 7 October 2002  by  an
    Adjudicator, Mr J K H Rintoul, who broadly accepted the credibility  of
    the Appellant's account and that on that basis he would  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in his home area near Kukes  in  north-east
    Albania, but dismissed the appeal on the basis that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for him to relocate to another part of the  country  where
    he would be safe from  the  localised  threat  which  faced  him.   The
    Appellant now appeals against that decision to us with leave.

2.    The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he is a homosexual who  in
    1998 was discovered in a relationship with a  fellow  Albanian  at  his
    partner's home.  This resulted in the Appellant being reported  by  his
    partner's family to his own family, who severely beat him and kept  him
    confined to the house for a short period.  When  he  promised  that  he
    would not continue the relationship he was allowed out but he did  meet
    his partner again and they continued in a relationship until 2002, when
    he was again discovered with  his  partner  by  his  family.   On  this
    occasion he was again beaten and he was locked up in  his  family  home
    for a period of some five months during which he says that he  promised
    to leave and never return again if they would let him go, but was  told
    that he had broken a similar promise  before.   He  remained  in  close
    confinement in his family home until his mother, fearing for  his  life
    at the hands of his father and uncle, let him out  and  gave  him  some
    money, saying that he should go and never  return.   This  occurred  in
    late July 2002 and the Appellant then went to Tirana but  left  on  the
    same night travelling to Italy and thence through Europe to the  United
    Kingdom.  As we say, in  broad  terms  the  Adjudicator  accepted  that
    account and he made certain findings in relation to  the  situation  of
    homosexuals in Albania.  He said  this  about  the  country  background
    evidence at paragraphs 9.2 and 9.3 of his determination:

         "9.2     I note from the background documentation that although it
              is no longer  illegal  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of
              societal discrimination if  not  outright  hostility  towards
              homosexuals in Albania.  This can be seen  from  the  Amnesty
              International report ad (sic) page D58  of  this  Appellant's
              bundle.   I  also  find  that  this   shows   a   degree   of
              unwillingness on the part of the authorities  to  investigate
              attacks against homosexuals.


         9.3      As regards the police force in Albania, I  note  that  at
              paragraph 4.24 of the  CIPU  Report  that  one  of  the  most
              serious problems involving public  order  an  (sic)  internal
              security is that the police officers are  largely  untrained,
              ill-paid and often unreliable. While I note  that,  according
              to the same Report, police officers have received training on
              gender issues and human rights in  general,  the  Council  of
              Europe found that excessive use of force and ill-treatment by
              law  enforcement  officials  continued  to  be  a  widespread
              problem."


      Presumably on the basis of those findings he subsequently  said  this
    at paragraphs 9.18 and 9.19 of his determination:

         "9.18    Each appeal has to be determined on  its  own  facts.   I
              have therefore to consider whether any general sufficiency of
              protection is available to  the  Appellant  on  the  specific
              facts of this appeal.  I find that there is no willingness on
              the part of the police or the courts in  Albania  to  detect,
              prosecute or punish those who  attack  homosexuals.   I  find
              that this is linked  to  a  strong  societal  disapproval  of
              homosexuals in Albania.


         9.19     I also find that there  is  a  substantial  risk  of  the
              police  ill-treating  the  Appellant  on   account   of   his
              homosexuality if he explained  to  them  that  this  was  the
              reason for any attack on him."


3.    We have to say that those general findings are  in  our  view  wholly
    unsustainable on the evidence before the Adjudicator.  At page  D58  of
    the  Appellant's  bundle,  which  is  an  extract  from   the   Amnesty
    International report of 18 May 2001, there is a paragraph headed  "Ill-
    treatment of Homosexuals".  That records  that  until  1995  homosexual
    relations  between  men  constituted  a  criminal  offence  in  Albania
    punishable by up to ten years imprisonment, but in March  1994  Shoqata
    Gay Albania (SGA) was founded in  Tirana  although  shortly  thereafter
    three of its members were detained and severely beaten in Tirana police
    station.  In 1995, however,  homosexual  relations  between  consenting
    adults were decriminalised and the SGA was officially  registered  with
    the Minister of Justice.  It is then said that nonetheless  homosexuals
    continue to suffer from public prejudice and discrimination  which  has
    led some to leave the country.

4.    Apart from that incident in 1994 the only other incident relating  to
    homosexual discrimination which is  specifically  dealt  with  in  that
    passage of the report is an incident on 7 April 2001 when  a  Jordanian
    citizen, who was Secretary General of the SGA, and a friend, who was  a
    transvestite,  were  assaulted  in  Tirana  by  four  members  of   the
    Republican Guards on an occasion when they went to the barracks of  the
    Republican Guards in order to meet a friend who was serving there as  a
    conscript.  When they had enquired for him and were waiting for him  to
    come out to join them they were attacked by four men in  plain  clothes
    and no-one would come to their assistance.  They subsequently sought to
    complain at the headquarters of  the  Republican  Guard  and,  although
    initially denied, they were nevertheless eventually permitted to make a
    formal complaint.  One  of  the  two  then  left  the  country  shortly
    afterwards and the other was able successfully to engage the  attention
    of the Albanian Human Rights Group who issued  a  statement  condemning
    the ill-treatment they had suffered and calling on public  opinion  and
    the  authorities  to  show  tolerance  and  to  put  aside   homophobic
    prejudices and discrimination.

5.    Beyond that there is no evidence whatsoever produced on behalf of the
    appellant to suggest that there is generalised treatment of homosexuals
    in Albania which is of a persecutory  nature  or  in  breach  of  their
    protected human rights, as Mr Reynolds accepted in his  submissions  to
    us.  So far  as  the  question  of  the  treatment  by  the  police  of
    homosexuals is concerned there is equally no evidence at all that  they
    are treated adversely (apart from the single incident in 1994  referred
    to above), and the Appellant says that he never sought  the  protection
    of the police in relation to the difficulties which he encountered with
    his own family in his home village.

6.    Mr Reynolds sought to rely before us on the generalised references to
    a lack of training and discipline  on  the  part  of  the  police.   We
    certainly accept that there is evidence that those who are detained and
    arrested by the police on suspicion of criminal activity  may  be  ill-
    treated, but that is very far from saying that there is any evidence to
    support general ill-treatment by the police of those whom they consider
    to be homosexuals.  Indeed, in the same  Amnesty  International  report
    there is a passage which deals with the progress being made in relation
    to  human  rights  in   Albania.    It   refers   to   non-governmental
    organisations, including the  Albanian  Helsinki  Committee,  providing
    human rights education not only to the police but also to other sectors
    of society including prison staff, schools and  medical  experts.   The
    Ministry of Public Order promoted public awareness of legal  provisions
    relating to the police  in  March  2001  with  a  series  of  full-page
    advertisements in the press, including  key  constitutional  provisions
    such as the right not to be subjected to torture or cruel,  inhuman  or
    degrading punishment or treatment.  There is  extensive  monitoring  of
    human rights issues by non-governmental organisations in Albania  which
    have specific call lines or complaints centres where victims can  bring
    complaints which, where appropriate, are brought  to  the  authorities'
    notice and publicised.  Legal advice is available and in February  2000
    an ombudsman,  the  People's  Advocate,  was  elected,  establishing  a
    further  institution  dedicated  to  the  monitoring  of  human  rights
    observance and to seeking appropriate redress for violations.  His role
    is extensively dealt with in the latest CIPU Assessment of  April  2003
    at paragraphs 6.2 and 6.3.  It is clear that it is a functioning office
    which is increasingly receiving complaints of human  rights  violations
    on the part of the police, the military, lack of enforcement  of  court
    judgments, wrongful dismissal, land disputes and similar matters.   The
    number of complaints is steadily increasing over the  years  since  its
    establishment.  It is said that it has contributed to resolve a  number
    of highly controversial cases concerning property and blood  feuds  and
    helped to improve the conditions of detained people.  In none of  these
    passages is there any reference to there being any specific problems so
    far as homosexuals in Albania are concerned.   If  there  were  such  a
    problem,  given  the  degree  of  reportage   which   now   exists   by
    international bodies, we have no doubt that it would be a matter  which
    would receive publicity in those reports.

7.    For those reasons we are satisfied that the generalised findings made
    by the Adjudicator at paragraphs 9.18 and 9.19 are simply unsustainable
    on the evidence which was before him.  In such  circumstances  applying
    the ratio in Borrisov v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [1996] Imm AR 524, it is not only the power but indeed the duty of  the
    Tribunal to reverse such findings.  We are satisfied  on  the  evidence
    that  there  is  no  country  background  evidence  which  supports   a
    reasonable likelihood that homosexuals as such in Albania  are  subject
    to any action on the part either of the  populace  or  the  authorities
    which would amount to persecution  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention or would be in breach of their protected human rights.

8.    Having said that, however, there is  no  challenge  to  the  findings
    which relate to the specific history of this Appellant.  The  Secretary
    of State has not seen fit to lodge any notice  of  appeal  against  the
    Adjudicator's finding that in his home area, by reason of the behaviour
    of his father and uncle only, he has a localised fear of persecution by
    reason of his sexual orientation.  The Adjudicator then went on to find
    that there was no evidence before him to support  the  contention  that
    the Appellant faced persecution elsewhere in Albania.  He did not  find
    that the Amnesty International report was sufficient as it  dealt  with
    one incident only and  made  a  specific  finding  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant would face ill-treatment serious enough  to
    constitute persecution other than in his home  area,  albeit  he  might
    face some discrimination.  On that basis his  conclusion  was  that  it
    would be safe for the Appellant to live in Albania other  than  in  his
    own home area.  It is apparent from the Appellant's own statement  that
    the primary concern of his father and uncle  was  that  he  should  not
    continue to lead the family into general disapproval locally and  there
    is no evidence that should he relocate there would be  any  attempt  to
    pursue him once he has removed himself from his own home area.

9.    The Adjudicator went on to find that  it  was  not  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the Appellant to do so.  It is right, as claimed in the  grounds
    of appeal, that he makes no specific findings as to why he reaches that
    conclusion but equally the matter was only  put  to  him  in  the  most
    generalised terms in the skeleton submissions filed on his  behalf  for
    the Adjudicator hearing.  It was said that he feared he might come into
    contact with someone who knew his family and that he might not be  able
    to express his sexual orientation without being  subjected  to  further
    ill-treatment generally in Albania.  As we have already said  there  is
    no evidence to support  that  proposition  and  it  seems  to  us  mere
    speculation that his family, having achieved their objective of  having
    him removed from his own home area, would have any further interest  in
    pursuing him elsewhere in Albania.

10.   The Adjudicator did say at paragraph 9.16 of his  determination  that
    he accepted that if the Appellant returned to Albania it  would  become
    known to his family eventually.  There is no indication of the basis on
    which he arrived at that finding but Mr Reynolds urged upon us that the
    population of Albania was only some 3 million and  therefore  it  might
    well occur.  This again, as he accepted, is speculative.   There  would
    have to be a reasonable likelihood at least that this would  occur  and
    that if it did there would be any interest  in  pursuing  him  further.
    For the reasons which we have expressed we do not think that  there  is
    any evidence which discharges the evidential burdens in those  respects
    before us.

11.   For the  above  reasons  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator's
    findings in relation to internal  relocation  are  sustainable  on  the
    evidence which was before him and nothing which  we  have  heard  today
    would lead us to conclude otherwise ourselves.  Accordingly this appeal
    is dismissed.






                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice-President


