
ar
   GH (Former Kaz - Country Conditions - Effect) Iraq  CG [2004] UKIAT 00248



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of hearing: 13/14 July 2004
                                                 Date Determination notified
                                                ...10th Sept 2004......
                                   Before:

                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                       Mr A R Mackey (Vice President)
                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice President)



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Miss S. Naik, Counsel, instructed by Harrison  Bundey  &
Co.
For the  respondent  :  Mr  T.   Weisselberg,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. Whilst this  appeal  relates  to  the  claims  of  an  appellant  from
      Sulaimaniya in Northern Iraq, it  is  intended  to  be  considered  as
      Country Guidance case which will have some relevance also to claimants
      originating from other parts of Iraq. There  have  been  a  number  of
      issues for decision by the Tribunal and this decision is provided with
      sub-headings to differentiate these issues. For ease of  reference  we
      now list the principal issues by reference to their subject-matter and
      their relevant paragraphs

           (a)  the appellant's accepted factual history - paragraphs 5-7;
           (b) the identification of the Islamic group he claims to fear  -
           paragraphs 8-10;
           (c) summary of the determination  of  the  Adjudicator  and  the
           grounds of appeal to us - paragraphs 11-17;
           (d) the interlocutory application of Miss  Naik  for  a  witness
           summons - paragraphs 19-21;
           (e) issues as to  whether  the  burden  of  proof  had  on  Arif
           principles shifted to the Secretary of State - paragraphs 22-26;
           (f) the relevance to risk of matters going to practicability  of
           return and past published policies (the Abdi point) - paragraphs
           27-35;
           (g) the burden on  the  claimant  in  asylum  and  human  rights
           appeals - paragraphs 36-40;
           (h) the relevance of country  conditions  in  asylum  and  human
           rights claims - paragraphs 41-46;
           (i) the objective evidence as to the current  position  in  Iraq
           and the weight to be given to the evidence of Dr  Rashidian  and
           Mr Joffe - paragraphs 47-75;
           (j)  our  findings  as  to  the  objective  situation  in  Iraqi
           Kurdistan - paragraphs 76-95;
           (k) State provision of protection in Iraqi Kurdistan including a
           review of Saber v SSHD and related case law and  the  effect  of
           the handover to the Iraqi Interim  Government  in  June  2004  -
           paragraphs 87-107;
            (l) the UNCHR's  intervention  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
           protection and internal relocation - paragraphs 108-118;
            (m) the relevance of the views of the Iraqi  Interim  Government
           as to repatriation- paragraph 119;
           (m) decision as to the appellant's claim and  dismissal  of  the
           appeal - paragraphs 120-127.

   2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq,  born  on  23  August  1975  in
      Sulaimaniya which is in that part of northern Iraq which was  formerly
      known as the  Kurdish Autonomous Zone (KAZ). The  appellant  lived  in
      Sulaimaniya until his departure from Iraq on  12  February  1999.   He
      arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 1  March  2000,  having
      spent the  intervening  period  in  Turkey,  and  immediately  claimed
      asylum.

3.    Following submission of a self-evidence form on 14  August  2000,  and
      interview on  10  July  2003,  his  application  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State for the reasons set out in a letter dated  16  July
      2003.   On 30 July 2003 the Secretary of  State  gave  notice  of  his
      decision to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom as an illegal
      entrant after  refusal  of  his  asylum  application.   The  appellant
      appealed against  that  decision  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.  By reason of the date of decision of the Secretary of  State
      this  appeal  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.    His appeal was heard on  10  October  2003  by  Mr  M.  Shrimpton,  an
      Adjudicator, who found the appellant to be credible in his account  of
      his personal history in his  home  area  in  Iraq  but  dismissed  his
      appeal.

The appellant's accepted factual history
5.    The appellant comes from a family which has  supported  the  Patriotic
      Union of Kurdistan (PUK), the dominant political  party  in  his  home
      area.  His parents and siblings (one brother and three sisters)  still
      live there and there is another brother  in  the  United  Kingdom  who
      arrived in or about 2001. His father,  a  teacher,  and  his  brother,
      Soran, are both PUK members of long standing who had been detained  by
      the Iraqi authorities on occasion in  the  period  up  to  1991.   The
      appellant joined the PUK Student Movement on 21 March 1990 while still
      at  High School and was promoted to be a member of  the  executive  of
      the Rizgari Branch six months later. This position involved setting up
      secret cells within the city, recruiting new members,  organising  and
      distributing anti-government leaflets and finding safe houses for  the
      Peshmerga, the armed fighters of the PUK. The  appellant  subsequently
      went on to become a member of the PUK. On 7 March 1991 he was part  of
      the  PUK  group  who  attacked  the  Ba'ath  Party   headquarters   in
      Sulaimaniya and succeeded in taking the  building  and  effecting  the
      release of the prisoners detained  there,  including  his  father  and
      brother.   After completing high school education in 1993, he went  on
      to study at Sulaimaniya University until 1998 on obtaining his degree.



6.    In the course of his political activities the appellant  was  detained
      on   four occasions.  The first detention  was  from  11-23  September
      1990 at the Ba'ath Youth Detention Centre  where  he  was  beaten  and
      tortured for possession  of  anti-government  pamphlets  before  being
      released without charge. The second detention was from 6-15  September
      1996 by the Iraqi troops and Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), who  were
      at that time acting in conjunction against the PUK  of  which  he  was
      accused of being a member.  He  was  released  because  all  detainees
      other than the Peshmergas were released.  His third detention was from
      10 November 1997 to 21 February 1998  when  he  went  with  others  to
      recover the bodies of three PUK Peshmergas who had been killed in  the
      conflict with the KDP, but was himself arrested as a PUK members.  His
      release was, he said, procured by  the  influence  of  others  and  by
      payment of a bribe to a senior KDP member. He does not identify  those
      who procured his release.

7.    His fourth arrest was what led him to leave Iraq. He was  detained  on
      1 February 1999 by the Kurdish Islamic Movement (KIM) for organising a
      seminar entitled 'The Kurds and Islam'.  The seminar was perceived  by
      the KIM as being anti-Islamic and he was accused of being blasphemous.
       He was ill-treated in detention but was released on 10 February  1999
      on signing a paper in which he  agreed  not  to  be  involved  in  any
      similar activities in the future.  He said he was warned  that  if  he
      did so, next time he would be killed.  Two days after his  release  he
      left for Turkey where he remained for some eleven  months  because  it
      enabled him to have contact with his father who thought the  situation
      in his home area might improve.

The identity of the Islamic group he claims to fear
8.    There has been some confusion as to the identity of the Islamic  group
      he claims to fear. At interview he was quite clear that it was not the
      Islamic Movement of Iraqi Kurdistan (IMIK) but was a group  he  called
      the  Islamic  Kurdish  Movement  (IKM).   He  described  the  IKM   as
      consisting of five or six Islamic groups centred in Halabja (Q24), the
      control of which they had lost as a result of the  coalition  invasion
      of Iraq which had,  of  course,  taken  place  by  the  time  of  that
      interview.  He claimed they still had  influence  in  most  towns  and
      named their leaders as including Mala Krekar, Ali  Bapir,  Mamos  Ali,
      and He'dar He'dari.  It is clear  from  the  objective  evidence  that
      Komely Islami, translated as Islamic Group of Kurdistan, is led by Ali
      Bapir.  According to the CIPU Report of April 2004, this is  a  fringe
      group centred in  Khurmel in north eastern Iraq  before  the  invasion
      with some 3000  to  5000  local  followers.  It  described  itself  as
      moderate and has been in the past supported by the PUK 'in the hope of
      tempering its radical tendencies' but in early 2003 the PUK decided it
      was too close to  Ansar el-Islam (AI) so that it was included  in  the
      group targeted by the American  cruise  missile  attacks  designed  to
      break up and dislodge radical Islamic groups.  Mala  Krekar,  who  has
      since been arrested in Norway  according  to  the  appellant  (Q25  at
      interview), is recorded  as  the  leader  of  Jund-al-Islam  (Army  of
      Islam), described in the CIPU Report as being  a  radical  faction  of
      IMIK which broke away in 1998 when IMIK allied itself  with  the  PUK.
      It subsequently changed  its  name  to  Ansar-el-Islam  (Partisans  of
      Islam) (AI).  According to  a  United  States  Congressional  Research
      Report in January 2004, this group has connections with Al  Qaeda  and
      six hundred primarily Arab fighters  lived  in  the  AI  enclave  near
      Khurmel.  They are strongly opposed by  the  PUK  and  were  also  the
      subject of the attack on Islamic militants in March 2003 during  which
      their infrastructure was destroyed and  they  were  dispersed.  It  is
      said, however, by US sources, to be returning to Iraq and operating in
      small groups throughout the country;  an  AI  cell  was  uncovered  in
      Baghdad and they are suspected of  having  been  responsible  for  the
      bombing of the Jordanian Embassy in Baghdad in August 2003 as well  as
      the bombing of the United Nations Headquarters in Baghdad in the  same
      month, although they have denied responsibility for the latter attack.
       In late August 2003, AI militants were involved in a gun battle  with
      a large force of Kurdish police which resulted in the death  of  three
      of the militants and the arrest of  the  fourth.  We  note  here  that
      according to the CIPU Report an even more  extreme  group,  Ansar  al-
      Sunna,  broke  away  from  AI  in  October  2003   and   has   claimed
      responsibility for the attacks on the PUK and KDP offices in Arbil  in
      March 2004 in which over one hundred people  died  (and  to  which  we
      shall refer again later) in order to 'punish'  the  PUK  and  KDP  for
      their alliance with the Coalition forces.

9.    The other two Islamic  leaders  to  whom  the  appellant  referred  at
      interview do not appear to be identified by  the  objective  evidence,
      but it is clear that those he claims to fear as IKM   include  extreme
      Islamic groups to whom the PUK are now utterly opposed.

10.   Before the Adjudicator, the appellant's  then  representative  invited
      the Adjudicator to assume that the group to  whom  the  appellant  had
      intended to refer in his self-evidence form and at interview was  IMIK
      because there was no such group as IMK.  The hearing proceeded on that
      basis by mutual  consent  (although  it  is  not  clear  how  far  the
      appellant was consulted).  In the grounds of appeal to  the  Tribunal,
      which were settled by Miss Naik in November 2003, there was an express
      concession that the appellant had 'nothing to fear from IMIK now'  but
      he maintained a subjective fear of AI and the KDP in  his  home  area.
      Before us Miss Naik sought to withdraw that concession  on  the  basis
      that it was factually erroneous insofar as  the  appellant  had  never
      expressed any fear of  or  identified  IMIK  as  those  who  had  last
      detained him.  Mr Weisselberg made no objection and, for  the  reasons
      which we have set out above, that concession is properly withdrawn  by
      Miss Naik as being based on a misconception of the appellant's case.

The determination of the Adjudicator
11.   The Adjudicator dismissed the appellant's claim, in  essence  for  the
      following reasons:  first, that any threat from Islamic extremists had
      been eliminated by the attack upon their enclave  in  March  2003  and
      that there was no objective evidence of  AI  operatives  inside  Iraq;
      secondly, that the Saddam Hussein regime no longer existed;   thirdly,
      that in any event there was a sufficiency of protection although it is
      not clear from the determination who  the  Adjudicator  thought  would
      offer that protection.

12.   He also concluded that he could  not  place  reliance  on  the  report
      before him prepared by Mr E.G.H. Joffe, categorising it as lacking  in
      objectivity, and, in general terms, expressing far too gloomy  a  view
      of the situation in Iraq.  There was also before him a report from  Dr
      Rashidian, which is also before us, but he does not refer to this.

13.   Finally, much of the determination is diverted into speculation as  to
      the practicality of return to Iraq and the status  of  various  bodies
      for  international  law  purposes,  although  these  issues  are  then
      categorised as not determinative of the appeal before him.

The grounds of appeal
14.   The grounds of appeal raise a number of discrete  issues.   First,  it
      is contended that since the appellant must,  on  the  accepted  facts,
      have been in  the  past  entitled  to  human  rights  protection,  the
      evidential burden shifts to the Secretary of State to show that  on  a
      balance  of  probabilities  there  has  been  such  a  change  in  the
      circumstances in his own country as to undermine the appellant's claim
      at the date of hearing, applying the ratio  in  Arif  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [1999] Imm AR 271, or alternatively  the
      approach to such cases in the  Tribunal's  starred  decision  in  Dyli
      (00/TH/02186).  Secondly, it is argued  that  given  his  'subjective'
      fear of AI and the KDP, there is a lack of sufficiency  of  protection
      in the appellant's home area. [Although that is how it was put such  a
      fear would, of course, have to be objectively well-founded.]  Thirdly,
      on the assumption that  the  appellant  would  be  returned  to  'Iraq
      proper' he would be returned to an unstable country where he would  be
      at risk before returning from the point of arrival to his  home  area;
      the UNHCR in its letter of 1 July 2003 advises that by reason  of  the
      'highly volatile and dangerous security environment in many  parts  of
      the country' there should be a ban on deportations to  Iraq  and  that
      host countries should suspend decisions on  asylum  claims  and  offer
      temporary protection to claimants. It is  the  appellant's  case  that
      given these general country conditions as confirmed by the  UNHCR  and
      the appellant's  expert  evidence,  removal  would  be  in  breach  of
      protected human rights under Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
      Human  Rights  (European  Convention).   The  determination   of   the
      Adjudicator fails properly to address either the asylum claim  on  the
      basis of whether Article 1C (5), the cessation clause of  the  Refugee
      Convention, 1951 applies - this reverts presumably  to  the  Arif/Dyli
      point - and whether there is a reasonable internal flight  alternative
      given the current country conditions. Fourthly, the Adjudicator  erred
      in failing to consider the Article 3 claim separately and to recognise
      Article 3 as having extra-territorial effect. Fifthly, the Adjudicator
      erred in making objective findings without reference to the  objective
      evidence which he relied on as well as in his rejection of the  report
      of Mr Joffe and the ignoring of the report of Dr  Rashidian.  Finally,
      that the Adjudicator's determination was  flawed  in  that  it  failed
      adequately to address the issues of fact and law but departed 'into an
      ex-tempore personal essay into the political and military situation in
      Iraq from a singular non-objective perspective.'

15.   Permission to appeal was granted, notwithstanding the  view  that  the
      appellant might well face difficulties, because the grounds of  appeal
      raised a number of issues in respect of which it  was  desirable  that
      the Tribunal should give guidance - that is that  in  accordance  with
      Rule 18(4)(b) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules
      2003 there was some other compelling reason why the appeal  should  be
      heard than that it would have a real prospect of success.  This appeal
      has accordingly been listed as a Country Guidance Appeal  on  Iraq  in
      which the Tribunal has received oral evidence from Mr Joffe as well as
      substantial documentation relating to country conditions generally.

16.   So far as the sustainability of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  is
      concerned, it does not appear that  the  Arif  point  was  ever  taken
      before him so that he had no opportunity  to  deal  with  that  issue.
      Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  us  that  there  are   errors   in   the
      Adjudicator's approach. First, the Adjudicator in our  view  erred  in
      his approach to Article 3.   He says at paragraphs  7  and  8  of  his
      determination that he does not make the assumption that Article 3  has
      "extra-territorial effect".  In that, whatever  views  may  have  been
      expressed in relation to other Articles, the  Adjudicator  is  plainly
      wrong, as Miss Naik contends. It may be that it makes little practical
      difference because, as the Adjudicator observes, there are the Refugee
      Convention reasons of ethnicity and/or  political  opinion  which  are
      capable of engaging that Convention, but it is  nevertheless  somewhat
      disquieting to see such a view expressed in  relation  to  Article  3.
      Claims under that Article cannot always be dismissed in  line  with  a
      failed asylum claim - see, e.g., D v United  Kingdom  [1997]  24  EHRR
      423.  Secondly, whatever his view of the weight to be accorded to  it,
      there was the evidence of Mr Joffe and Dr Rashidian as to their  views
      as to risk to the appellant in his home area from  Islamic  groups  on
      the basis of his past history. That evidence, at  least,  should  have
      been properly addressed in the determination  since  it  went  to  the
      heart of the appellant's claim, but it was not so dealt with. Finally,
      the  Adjudicator  appears  to  have  distracted  himself   with    his
      consideration of methods of transport to Iraq which might be  open  to
      the Secretary of State, and his  views,  finally  abandoned  part  way
      through, on the position of the United Kingdom in International Law as
      an occupying power.  For all these reasons, we have come to  the  view
      that the Adjudicator's determination is unsafe as  being  inadequately
      reasoned. It is therefore for us to consider the claim afresh  on  the
      basis of the accepted factual history of the appellant and the  latest
      objective country evidence as to risk  on  return  for  one  with  the
      appellant's characteristics.

17.   We should note at this point that this appeal  was  heard  jointly  so
      far as objective  country  evidence  is  concerned  with  two  further
      appeals, both by the Secretary of State against the  allowing  of  the
      claimant's appeal under Article 3 by the respective  Adjudicators  who
      heard them. In each case the basis on which  these  two  appeals  were
      allowed followed from the views which each  Adjudicator  expressed  in
      relation to the risk of breach of protected human rights on return  by
      reason of the general situation in Iraq.  Both respondents adopted the
      evidence of Mr Joffe so that, at least in  relation  to  that  general
      issue, there  is  a  common  position  between  all  three  claimants.
      Unfortunately, by reason of time constraints, it was not  possible  to
      hear the Secretary of State's submissions or the  counter  submissions
      of respective counsel for the Respondents although all submissions  in
      the instant appeal were concluded by the end of the second day of  the
      hearing.  We have therefore decided to issue  separate  determinations
      for each appeal but, insofar as Mr Joffe's evidence is common  to  all
      three and subject to  the  individual  submissions  in  the  remaining
      appeals, our conclusions as to the general country situation expressed
      in this appeal  may  later  be  incorporated  by  reference  into  our
      determinations in the other two appeals. In this respect we  have  had
      the advantage of the written skeleton submissions of Mr Weisselberg in
      relation to the two Secretary of State appeals and of Counsel for each
      of those respondents, namely Mr Adler and Mr Jorro. Insofar as they go
      to the general issue indicated,  we  have  taken  into  account  those
      written skeleton submissions as we indicate below.

18.   It will be convenient to deal with certain discrete issues  raised  in
      the  appeal  before  proceeding  to  consider  the  objective  country
      evidence but before we do so there is one interlocutory matter  to  be
      addressed.

Application for Witness Summons against Respondent's Witness
19.   Shortly prior to the hearing the Secretary of State filed  and  served
      a witness statement by Miss Hipwell, the Head of  the  Country  Action
      Team of the Home Office.   This  set  out  the  Secretary  of  State's
      current policy in relation to enforced returns to  Iraq  as  had  been
      previously directed by the Tribunal. The gist  of  the  statement  was
      that  following  agreement  reached  with  the  Coalition  Provisional
      Authority in Iraq, the Secretary of State  announced  on  24  February
      2004 that the United Kingdom was the first country to  begin  enforced
      returns of failed Iraqi asylum seekers.   The  pilot  scheme  for  the
      return of thirty such asylum seekers  monthly  had  been  intended  to
      commence in April but  practical arrangements to put removals in place
      took longer than anticipated. Whilst it was recognised that actions by
      insurgents had caused difficult problems in some areas, this  did  not
      apply to all areas of the  country.   Whilst  humanitarian  conditions
      were still difficult in some areas, they were not  sufficiently  harsh
      in any part of the country that they  alone  would  mean  that  return
      would   lead  to  breach  of  the   United   Kingdom's   international
      obligations under Article 3 of the European Convention.  Returns would
      be on a case-by-case basis and would be directed to areas assessed  as
      sufficiently stable and where the Home Office was satisfied  that  the
      individual concerned would not be at risk. Decisions would be taken on
      the basis of the most current  situation.  Spontaneous  and  voluntary
      returns were interrupted in April because  the  Coalition  Provisional
      Authority closed the route being used but it was reopened in  May  and
      returns then immediately resumed and still continue. They are operated
      on the Secretary of State's behalf by the  International  Organisation
      for Migration.   The Home Office  intended  to  work  with  the  Iraqi
      Interim  Government  in  making   forced   returns.   That   statement
      represented the position of the Secretary of State as at 8 July 2004.

20.   At the commencement of the  hearing Mr Weisselberg made it clear  that
      there was no intention on his part to call Miss Hipwell to  give  oral
      evidence.  Miss Naik made an application for the issue  of  a  witness
      summons pursuant to the powers of the Tribunal under Rule  47  of  the
      2003 Procedure Rules to enable Miss Hipwell to be cross-examined as to
      the mechanics of the return of each claimant. Mr Weisselberg  objected
      on the basis that the witness could add nothing to  the  statement  of
      policy and intent of the Secretary of State as  we  have  recorded  it
      above. In his submission there was no purpose to be served  by  cross-
      examination in those circumstances.  Although this did not affect  our
      views, he also informed us that Miss Hipwell would not  be  physically
      available to give evidence for some time because she was due to  leave
      the country on the following day.

21.   We retired to consider the application which we then  refused  on  the
      basis that since the witness could speak only as to the  Secretary  of
      State's policy it was not in our view appropriate  to  permit  general
      cross-examination going  to  the  practicality  of  return  which  the
      Tribunal has consistently regarded as outside its  remit.   The  issue
      for our determination is the hypothetical one of whether at this  date
      return would be reasonably likely to lead to a breach  of  the  United
      Kingdom's international obligations. This did not, of course, preclude
      submissions as to what weight should  be  attached  to  the  statement
      filed.

The Issue as to Burden of Proof
22.   We are surprised that Miss Naik should have pressed the argument  that
      the burden  of  proof  has  shifted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by
      application of the ratio in either Arif or Dyli. The ratio in Arif  is
      that where it is accepted 'by all sides' that in the past an appellant
      was entitled to recognition as a refugee and to the protection of  the
      Refugee Convention, if the Secretary of State then seeks to rely on  a
      change in the country circumstances to show that  the  need  for  such
      protection no longer exists, then the burden is on  the  Secretary  of
      State to show that return now would not be in  breach  of  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   The  factual
      background in Arif was that Mr Arif had been  detained,  tortured  and
      falsely accused for  political  reasons  of  grave  criminal  offences
      which, after his bail and escape, had led to  his  conviction  in  his
      absence and a sentence  of  seven  years  imprisonment.   Between  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom (but  after  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision and his appeal) his political opponents had lost power to the
      party of which he was  a  member.   The  corruptly  obtained  sentence
      remained effective and there was  evidence  that  the  new  government
      would not automatically seek to quash a conviction so obtained so that
      there remained a real risk that Mr Arif might be wrongly imprisoned on
      the basis of that conviction.  The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
      evidential  burden,  on  those  particular  facts,  shifted  from  the
      appellant to the Secretary of State.

23.   In its starred determination in  Dyli  the  Tribunal  held  that  Arif
      applied only where it is accepted that the claimant was  in  the  past
      entitled to refugee status.

24.   In this appeal, the Secretary of State has  never  accepted  that  the
      appellant was at any point in time entitled to refugee status and  nor
      did the Adjudicator accept that.  Mr  Weisselberg's  position  remains
      that the appellant is not now and never has been so entitled  and  for
      the reasons which we give hereafter we  have  concluded  that  at  the
      present time the appellant is not  so  entitled.  The  essential  pre-
      condition in Arif that it is accepted that the appellant was  at  some
      point in the past entitled to refugee status is not met.

25.   As we  understand  Miss  Naik's  written  and  oral  submissions,  she
      suggested first that the fact  of  past  torture  and  persecution  of
      itself demonstrated entitlement to recognition as a refugee. No  doubt
      it lays the ground for arguing such a claim but it is  not  of  itself
      sufficient to show present real risk or one at any past point in  time
      from the date of arrival in the United Kingdom.

26.   Secondly, in her oral submissions, she contended  that  issues  as  to
      the current practicality of removal and  what  was  set  out  in  Miss
      Hipwell's statement as to the current country conditions both  led  to
      the inference that the appellant could not now be, nor at any time  in
      the past could have been, safely returned and therefore the burden  of
      proof should be reversed for these reasons. Not only would that  would
      require a considerable extension of  the  Arif  ratio,  but  it  would
      elevate the issue of practicability of return now or at  any  time  in
      the past into one which potentially went to the existence of  a  well-
      founded fear. Not only is that wrong in principle for the  reasons  we
      explain below but  it  again  ignores  that  past  recognition  of  an
      entitlement to refugee status  is  a  necessary  precondition  to  the
      reversal of the burden of proof  under  Arif.   It  is  a  fundamental
      precept of our asylum law that the position  of  the  asylum  claimant
      falls to be considered at the date of the making of the  decision  and
      that the decision-maker is not in general concerned with what may have
      been the position at any point in the past (see  Ravichandran  v  SSHD
      [1996] Imm AR 74). Further, the burden  of  proof  is  on  the  asylum
      applicant. We see no merit in Miss Naik's attempt to enlarge the  Arif
      ratio and considerable disadvantage to  the  workings  of  an  already
      overburdened  Tribunal  system  by  a  concentration  for   evidential
      procedural reasons on issues  which are not germane to  the  issue  of
      which the Tribunal is seized - namely  current  risk  on  hypothetical
      removal (see  s.84(1)(g),  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002).  The burden of proof to show that there exists a real risk that
      return would be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  international
      obligations remains on the appellant.

The relevance of the practicability of return
27.   Moreover, Miss Naik's submissions in this respect rely, as  she  said,
      upon the inferences  which  she  invites  us  to  draw  based  on  the
      practicability of an enforced return. That is an issue with which  the
      Tribunal is not concerned for the reasons cogently explained in  Saad,
      Diriye and Osorio v SSHD [2001]  EWCA  Civ  2008  -  see  particularly
      paragraphs 53 to 58 of the judgment of Lord Phillips MR.  That  appeal
      was under s. 8 of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993  but  at
      paragraph 58 of the judgment it was recognised that  the  ratio  would
      apply equally to appeals under s. 69 of the Immigration &  Asylum  Act
      1999 (whose wording is replicated in s.84(1)(g) of the  2002  Act  and
      itself follows the earlier 1993 Act), and holds  that  asylum  appeals
      are hypothetical as being concerned with a removal which  has  not  in
      fact taken place. Our  function  is  to  consider  first  whether  the
      appellant would be at real  risk  of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
      Convention if today returned to his home area in Iraq (see Dyli).   If
      the answer to that question is in the negative, the Convention is  not
      engaged.  Such a finding will usually (but not always - see  below  at
      paragraph 38) mean that the appellant cannot succeed in showing a real
      risk of breach of his protected human rights under Article  3  of  the
      European Convention either, since the risk element must reach the same
      threshold  required  to  amount  to  persecution  under  the   Refugee
      Convention  (see  Kacaj  (01/TH/000634*)  and  R  (Bagdanavicius   and
      Bagdanviciene) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605).  If there is a real  risk
      in the home area, then the practicability of travel to a safe haven in
      his own country may be relevant from the proposed point of  access  to
      that safe haven (the internal flight alternative) but  unless  such  a
      real risk in the home area is established that is not  an  enquiry  on
      which it is either necessary or appropriate to embark for the purposes
      of the asylum claim. A similar position applies in human rights claims
      on the basis that removal will not lead to a prospective breach if the
      claimant chooses not to go to a place of safety  in  his  own  country
      but, again, the  practicability  of  reaching  such  an  area  may  be
      relevant to whether the act of removal will lead to a  breach  of  the
      claimant's protected human rights. In the light of  the  Secretary  of
      State's declared policy as to returns as set  out  in  Miss  Hipwell's
      statement, however, it does not seem to us that this issue  can  arise
      under either Convention in respect of the method of return  envisaged.
      There is no reason for us to think that the Secretary  of  State  will
      not comply with the policy on involuntary return which he has  clearly
      set out in that statement.

Relevance of Secretary  of  State's  previously  published  policies  as  to
      returns
28.   This was the last discrete issue raised by Miss Naik with which it  is
      appropriate to deal before moving  on  to  our  consideration  of  the
      evidential burden on the Appellant in asylum and human  rights  claims
      and the current country conditions in Iraq.

29.   Miss Naik's submission in this respect was that because the  Secretary
      of State had a general policy of granting exceptional leave to  remain
      to Iraqi refugee claimants at the time of the appellant's arrival on 1
      March 2000, the appellant had a legitimate expectation that,  had  his
      claim been timeously dealt with by the Secretary of  State,  he  would
      have been granted such leave so that the failure to do so was  not  in
      accordance with  the  law  (see  s.84(1)(e)  of  the  2002  Act).   In
      addition, she also sought to argue that removal now would be in breach
      of the Secretary of State's general  policy to consider the  grant  of
      discretionary leave and humanitarian protection in accordance with his
      policy published on 1 April 2003.

30.   This submission is, of course, based on the decision of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v D S Abdi [1996]
      Imm AR 148 which was concerned with whether out of country  applicants
      should be granted  leave  to  enter  for  settlement  here  under  the
      Secretary of State's published policy  on  Somali  Family  Reunion  as
      dependants of a Somali citizen who had been recognised  as  a  refugee
      here.

31.   As to the claim in respect of the past  policy  of  the  Secretary  of
      State in relation to Iraq, there was no evidence of any general policy
      either in March 2000 or subsequently.  Miss Naik relied upon a  letter
      dated 12  July  2004  from  Des  Browne,  a  Minister  concerned  with
      immigration and asylum policies, which stated in reply to  a  question
      raised by the appellant's instructing solicitors as to the position of
      enforced return to Iraq and Somalia:

             'In October 2002 the  Home  Secretary  announced  the  end  of
             blanket country specific "exceptional leave"  policies.  Since
             then all asylum claims have been assessed on their  individual
             merits, in line with our obligations under the 1951 UN Refugee
             Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights.'

      That passage does  not,  of  course,  set  out  what  was  the  policy
      previously in relation to Iraqi claimants.  Mr Weisselberg informed us
      that prior to October 2000 there was a practice to  grant  exceptional
      leave to remain to northern Iraqis but it was not  a  blanket  policy,
      simply a practice  which  was  not  of  universal  application.   From
      October 2002 the  practice  changed  and  there  were  occasions  when
      exceptional leave was granted to Iraqis from the south of Iraq without
      any connection with the Kurdish Autonomous Zone.  Again it was  not  a
      general policy and each case was decided on its own facts.  Since  the
      hearing, and in accordance with an undertaking given in the course  of
      the hearing, a letter of 14 July 2004 has been filed  and  served  for
      the Respondent. It states that the practice operating prior to October
      2000 has been confirmed. It originated in the potential difficulty  of
      forcibly removing  failed  asylum  seekers  because  of  the  lack  of
      commercial flights to the KAZ. It had no  reference  to  any  accepted
      risk to failed asylum seekers and  was  discontinued  because  of  the
      increasing numbers of claimants in 2000. Voluntary returns  were  made
      through other channels.

32.   Given that, we are satisfied  that  there  was  no  general  published
      policy under  which  it  could  be  said  that  the  appellant  had  a
      legitimate expectation of being granted leave to remain: so  the  Abdi
      point is not engaged.

33.   Miss Naik's second argument was based  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
      current policy in which it is stated:

             'Discretionary leave may be granted to an applicant  who   ...
             is able to demonstrate  particularly  compelling  reasons  why
             removal would not be appropriate.'

      She construed this as involving the exercise of a  discretion  outside
      the European Convention but this is a misconception because the  scope
      of discretionary leave is then defined  in  the  policy  statement  as
      being applicable to cases where return would be in breach of Article 3
      of the European Convention but which are not considered as appropriate
      for the more usual grant of Humanitarian Protection.  It is clear from
      the context the category is intended to cover situations where Article
      3 is engaged by reason  of  medical  conditions  or  other  compelling
      humanitarian considerations as, for example, in D v United Kingdom.

34.   It is quite clear from the particulars of the  policy  to  which  Miss
      Naik refers in her supplemental skeleton argument that the  policy  is
      confined to cases where Article 3  is  engaged.   All  that  is  being
      explained is why in some cases it should be designated as Humanitarian
      Protection (the majority) or, exceptionally, as  Discretionary  Leave.
      The policy is concerned only with the identification of categories  of
      relief which have now replaced the former Exceptional Leave to  Remain
      which was all that could be hoped for when  Article  3   grounds  were
      made out.  This line of argument does  not  in  any  way  advance  the
      appellant's case.

35.   We do not accept Miss Naik's submissions  on  any  of  these  discrete
      issues. The position is in this, as in almost  all  asylum  and  human
      rights appeals, that the burden is on the appellant to demonstrate  to
      the lower standard of proof  that his return will  lead  either  to  a
      real risk of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason or  treatment
      in breach of his  protected  human  rights  under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention.


The burden on the claimant in asylum and human rights claims

36.     In order to succeed in a claim for asylum  an  applicant  must  show
      that Article 1 A (2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  is  engaged.  This
      provides that a refugee is a person who:

             "owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons
             of race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
             social group or political opinion, is outside the  country  of
             his nationality or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to  avail
             himself of the protection of that country."

37.     Such  a  fear  must  be  referable  to  discrimination  against  the
      applicant either by reason of membership of a particular social  group
      at such general discriminatory risk (see Shah and Islam v SSHD  [1999]
      Imm AR 283 HL) or by reason of his individual characteristics.

38.     The position under the European Convention differs from  that  under
      the Refugee Convention. The claimant is  not  required  to  show  that
      degree of discrimination inherent in establishing a Refugee Convention
      reason in order to show that he is at real risk of treatment in breach
      of his protected human rights under Article 3 which provides, in terms
      from which there may be no derogation:

             "No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment."

39.     The claimant must show that there is a real risk of  such  treatment
      and it must reach a threshold similar to that required  to  amount  to
      persecution under the Refugee Convention. The burden of  proof  is  on
      the claimant and the standard of proof is that of a real risk of  such
      harm eventuating (see Kacaj [00/TH/00634*]). Similarly where the  fear
      test is met the claim will be defeated if there is  a  sufficiency  of
      protection  available  to  the  claimant  from  the   relevant   state
      authority.

40.   The issues as to real risk and sufficiency of  protection  under  both
      Conventions are helpfully summarised in the judgment  of  Auld  LJ  in
      Bagdanavicius at paragraph 55 which we now set out:

                  "The common threshold of risk


             (1) The threshold of risk is the same in  both  categories  of
             claim; the main reason for introducing s. 65 to the  1999  Act
             was not to provide an  alternative  lower  threshold  of  risk
             and/or a higher level of protection against such risk  through
             the medium of human rights claims, but to widen the  reach  of
             protection  regardless  of  the  motive  giving  rise  to  the
             persecution.



             Asylum claims



             (2) An  asylum  seeker  who  claims  to  fear  persecution  is
             entitled to asylum if he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution for  a Refugee Convention reason  and  that  there
             would be an insufficiency of  State  protection  to  meet  it:
             Horvath.
             (3) fear  of  persecution  is  well-founded  if  there  is   a
             'reasonable degree of likelihood' that it will materialise:  R
             v  SSHD  ex  parte  Sivakumaran,   Vathialingam,   Vilvarajah,
             Vathanan & Another, and Navaratnam (UNHCR intervening)  [1988]
             AC 958, per Lord Goff of Cheiveley, at 1000 F-G.
             (4) Sufficiency of State protection, whether from State agents
             or non-state actors, means a willingness and  ability  on  the
             part of the receiving  State  to  provide  through  its  legal
             system a reasonable level of protection from ill-treatment  of
             which the claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear:  Osman,
             Horvath and Dhima.
             (5) The effectiveness of the system provided is to  be  judged
             normally by the systemic ability to deter and/or  prevent  the
             form of persecution  of  which  there  is  a  risk,  not  just
             punishment of it after the event: Horvath, Banamova, McPherson
             and Kinuthia.
             (6) Notwithstanding systemic efficiency of State protection in
             the receiving State, a claimant may still have a  well-founded
             fear of persecution if he can show that the  authorities  know
             or ought to know  of  circumstances  particular  to  his  case
             giving rise to his fear,  but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the
             additional protection for his particular circumstances: Osman.



             Article 3 claims



             (7) The same principles apply to claims in  removal  cases  of
             risk of exposure to  Art  3  ill-treatment  in  the  receiving
             State, and are, in general, unaffected by the approach of  the
             Strasbourg Court in Soering, which, on its facts, was not only
             a State agency case at the highest  institutional  level,  but
             also an unusual and exceptional  case  on  its  facts:  Dhima,
             Krepel and Ullah.
             (8) The basis of an Art 3 entitlement in  a  removal  case  is
             that the claimant, if sent to the country in  question,  would
             be at risk there of Art 3 ill-treatment.
             (9) In most, if not all, Art  3  cases  in  this  context  the
             concept of risk has the same or  closely  similar  meaning  to
             that in the Refugee Convention  of  'a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution', save that it is confined to  a  risk  of  Art  3
             forms of ill-treatment and is not restricted to  conduct  with
             any particular motivation or by reference to  the  conduct  of
             the claimant: Dhima, Krepel and Chahal.
             (10) The threshold of risk required to engage Art 3 depends on
             the circumstances of each case, including the magnitude of the
             risk, the nature and  severity  of  ill-treatment  risked  and
             whether the risk emanates from a  State  agency  or  non-State
             actor: Horvath.
             (11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases of  ill-treatment
             which, but for State protection, would engage Art 3, a risk of
             such ill-treatment will be more readily established in  State-
             agency cases than in  non-State  actor  cases  -  there  is  a
             spectrum of circumstances giving rise to  such  risk  spanning
             the two categories, ranging from a breach of duty by the State
             of a negative duty not to inflict Art 3 treatment to a  breach
             of duty to take positive protective action against  such  ill-
             treatment by non-State actors: Szavas.
             (12) An assessment of the threshold of risk appropriate in the
             circumstances  to  engage  Art  3  necessarily   involves   an
             assessment of the sufficiency of State protection to meet  the
             threat of  which  there  is  such  a  risk  -  one  cannot  be
             considered without the other whether or not  the  exercise  is
             regarded as 'holistic' or  to  be  conducted  in  two  stages:
             Dhima, Krepel and Szavas.
             (13) Sufficiency of State protection is  not  a  guarantee  of
             protection from Art 3 ill-treatment any  more  than  it  is  a
             guarantee of protection from an otherwise well-founded fear of
             persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the  extent  that
             there is any difference, is it eradication or removal of  risk
             of exposure to  Art  3  ill-treatment:  Dhima,  McPherson  and
             Krepel.
             (14) Where the risk falls to be judged by the  sufficiency  of
             State protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according to
             whether it would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm,
             but according to whether it is a reasonable provision  in  the
             circumstances: Osman.
             (15)  Notwithstanding  such  systemic  sufficiency  of   State
             protection in the receiving State, a  claimant  may  still  be
             able to establish an Art 3 claim  if  he  can  show  that  the
             authorities  there  know  or  ought  to  know  of   particular
             circumstances likely to expose him  to  risk  of  Art  3  ill-
             treatment: Osman.
             (16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country is
             or is not a party to the  Human  Rights  Convention,  but,  in
             determining whether it would be contrary to Art 3 to remove  a
             person to that country, our courts should decide  the  factual
             issue as to risk as if Human Rights Convention standards apply
             there ..."


The relevance of country conditions in asylum and human rights claims


41.      In asylum claims country conditions cannot of  themselves  found  a
      claim to refugee status. It is necessary for there to be an additional
       discriminatory element  as we have  explained  above.  This  is  well
      illustrated by the case of Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      v Adan [1998] Imm AR 338 which considered the effect  of  a  state  of
      civil war and concluded:

             'When law and order have broken down and where ... every group
             seems to  be  fighting  some  other  group  or  groups  in  an
             endeavour to gain power ... what the members of each group may
             have is a well-founded fear not  so  much  of  persecution  by
             other groups as of death or injury or loss of freedom  due  to
             the  fighting between the groups.'

      As there explained, 'The individual or  group  has  to  show  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution over and above the risk to life  and  limb
      inherent in the civil war.'  (per Lord  Slynn  of  Hadley).   In  such
      circumstances this is commonly referred to  as  the  need  to  show  a
      differential impact either on the particular social group of which the
      claimant forms part or by the individual  claimant  showing  that  his
      fear is for one of the other reasons referred to in Article  1A(2)  of
      the Refugee Convention. If no Convention reason can be established  he
      cannot bring himself within the Refugee Convention.

  42. Such differential impact or discriminatory  element  is  arguably  not
      essential to found a claim under Article 3 of the European  Convention
      although in practice it will usually exist. In the exceptional case it
      is possible that country conditions of themselves may be so extreme as
      to mean that the act of removal by the  receiving  State  will  be  in
      breach of the absolute duty  imposed  under  Article  3,  although  in
      practice  the  European  courts  usually  look  for  evidence   of   a
      differential impact if  the  claimant  is  to  succeed  -  see,  e.g.,
      Vilvarajah and Others v United Kingdom [1992] 14 EHRR 248 where it was
      held that there was no breach of  Article  3  when  in  the  light  of
      reports  on  the  general  situation  and  the  applicants'   personal
      position, they were in no worse a position than any other  young  male
      Tamil returning to Sri Lanka.

43.     In any case, however, the country conditions  must  themselves  give
      rise to a risk which reaches the same threshold as  that  required  to
      amount to persecution under the Refugee Convention.

44.     This difference in approach between the two Conventions (as well  as
      the  need  to  demonstrate  personal  risk,  albeit  by  reference  to
      treatment of a class  or  group  to  which  the  claimant  potentially
      belongs) is well illustrated in the judgments in the  recent  case  of
      Batayav v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
      1489. Although not directly in point in terms of  its  factual  basis,
      which related to whether conditions in Russian prisons were such as of
      themselves to lead to a potential breach of Article  3  rights,  there
      are certain passages in the judgments which are of  relevance  to  the
      proper approach to claims of a general risk of  breach  of  Article  3
      rights by reason of particular  country  conditions.  In  the  leading
      judgment, Munby J contrasts claims under the  Refugee  Convention  and
      under Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention in the following terms:

             'The appellant's  claim  to  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
             Convention,  although  founded  in  large   measure   on   the
             conditions he might be expected to have to endure if  returned
             to a Russian prison, was based on his fear that  he  would  be
             singled out for persecution  as  a  non-ethnic  Russian  draft
             evader  and  convicted  drug  dealer.     His  claim  to   the
             protection of Article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  in
             contrast, was founded not on his own particular  circumstances
             but on the conditions faced generally by persons,  whether  or
             not the victims of persecution, incarcerated  in  the  Russian
             prison system. The dismissal of his claim to the protection of
             the Refugee Convention accordingly could  not  be  in  an  way
             determinative, nor necessarily even indicative, of  his  quite
             separate claim to the protection of Article 3.'

      At paragraph 6, he summarised the general principles as to why Article
      3 makes it unlawful for the United Kingdom 'to remove an individual to
      a country where he or she is foreseeably  at  a  real  risk  of  being
      seriously ill-treated' in  a  manner  sufficiently  severe  to  engage
      Article 3. He continued at paragraph 7 to  accept  the  submission  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State that:

             "An applicant may  be  able  to  meet  this  test  whether  by
             referring to evidence specific to his own circumstances or  by
             reference to evidence applicable to a class of which he  is  a
             member. The present case falls into the  latter  category.  Mr
             Garnham QC submits, and I agree, that in the  latter  category
             of  case  an  applicant  will  only  be  able  to  demonstrate
             substantial grounds for believing that there is such   a  real
             risk if he can point to a  consistent  pattern  of  gross  and
             systematic violation of rights under Article 3."

      That is a direct reference to what the Tribunal said in  Iqbal  [2002]
      UKIAT 02239 which had been considered by the Court of Appeal in Hariri
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 807  from
      which the following passage in the judgment of Laws LJ was then  cited
      as follows:

             '...  the  points  concerning   the   appellant's   individual
             circumstances had  all  fallen  away  ...  his  case  depended
             entirely upon it being established that there was a real  risk
             that he would suffer unlawful ill-treatment ... as a member of
             a class or perhaps two classes: draft evaders  and  those  who
             had   left   the   country   without   authority.   In   those
             circumstances, as it seems to me, the 'real risk' could not be
             established without it being shown that the general  situation
             was one  in  which  ill-treatment  of  the  kind  in  question
             generally  happened:   hence   the   expression   'gross   and
             systematic'. The point is one of  logic.  Absent  evidence  to
             show that the appellant was at risk because  of  his  specific
             circumstances, there could be no real risk  of  relevant  ill-
             treatment unless the situation to which the appellant would be
             returning was one in which  such  violence  was  generally  or
             consistently happening. There is  nothing  else  in  the  case
             which could generate a real risk. In this situation,  then,  a
             'consistent pattern  of  gross  and  systematic  violation  of
             fundamental human rights' far from being at variance with  the
             real risk test is, in my judgment, a function  or  application
             of it.'

45.     Subject to the cautionary note struck  by  Sedley  LJ  in  observing
      that the above passage in Hariri should not  be  construed  so  as  to
      raise the standard of proof from that of a reasonable likelihood to  a
      probability, we adopt those passages as  correctly  stating  the  test
      applicable to the consideration of whether general country  conditions
      can be regarded as giving rise to the real risk of a breach of Article
      3 rights.

46.    Batayav and most cases in which this 'class' approach is  appropriate
      relate to risks emanating from the state, but in  the  present  appeal
      the risks complained of arise from the terrorist actions of those  who
      would seek to overthrow the Iraqi State as it exists on the  basis  of
      the Law of March 2004 relating to the Iraqi Interim Government and its
      various regional organs of government. We are therefore here concerned
      with the actions of non-State actors so that if there is a sufficiency
      of protection from the State or its organs in  the  way  described  in
      Bagdanavicius the existence of a real risk will  be  negated  by  such
      protection.

The objective evidence as to the current position in Iraq
47.   We have before us a considerable volume  of  objective  material.  The
      Secretary of State has  filed  the  current  April  2004  CIPU  Report
      together with all the source documents identified in Annexe F.  In the
      course of the hearing we  were  referred  to  various  of  the  source
      documents which we have carefully considered. The appellant  has  also
      filed a bundle which includes UNHCR material up to 7 May 2004, reports
      from various other internationally recognised sources including the US
      State Department  Report  for  2003,  the  United  Kingdom  Foreign  &
      Commonwealth Office notes, Amnesty International  reports and  various
      newspaper and broadcasting  media  reports.  In  addition,  there  are
      reports from  Dr Rashidian (4 May 2004 with supplemental letter),  and
      Mr Joffe (7 October 2003, 29 April 2004, and  6  July  2004  with  six
      source documents annexed).  There is also a more  recent  letter  from
      UNHCR. Mr Joffe gave extensive oral evidence during the first  day  of
      the hearing.

The weight to be given to the evidence of Dr Rashidian and Mr Joffe
48.   Both were put forward as  expert  witnesses  for  the  appellant.   An
      expert witness is in a privileged position because he is able to  give
      evidence relying on hearsay and to give his opinion based on his  area
      of expertise drawing on such hearsay evidence as well as his  personal
      knowledge.  But the weight to be accorded  to  such  evidence  depends
      upon demonstrable impartiality and  objectivity  in  addition  to  the
      requisite expertise in his subject. If the witness is partial, so that
      he becomes an advocate for the person  commissioning  his  report,  or
      shows a lack of objectivity in his approach to the body of evidence on
      which he draws to form his opinions, then the weight to  be  given  to
      his opinion as an expert witness will be substantially  diminished  if
      not altogether eroded. Nevertheless,  such  testimony  may  remain  of
      value on a factual basis arising from the witness's  expert  knowledge
      even where the weight to be given to expressed opinions is so  reduced
      or eroded.  For the reasons which we now set out we have come  to  the
      conclusion that neither Dr Rashidian nor Mr Joffe should be treated as
      expert witnesses for the purposes  of  this  appeal  and  those  heard
      jointly with it.

49.   In asylum and human rights appeals there is  one  further  area  where
      the weight to be  given  even  to  evidence  which  is  impartial  and
      objective may be affected. That is in relation to  opinions  expressed
      as to whether risk to an applicant engages  either  Convention  unless
      the evidence makes it  clear  that  the  witness  understands  and  is
      applying the concepts as to what is required to amount to  persecution
      for a Refugee Convention reason or  treatment  engaging  the  relevant
      Article of the European Convention.

50.   Dealing with this second point first, although  both  expressed  views
      as  to  potential  risk,  neither   witness   demonstrated   such   an
      understanding of the legal concepts to be applied in evaluating  risk.
      Both clearly wrote on  the  assumption  that  we  are  concerned  with
      whether safety can be guaranteed. We are not.

51.   Whilst in his principal report  dealing  with  the  situation  of  the
      appellant, Dr Rashidian concluded that in the KAZ 'There is a  serious
      risk that [the appellant] would be targeted and his  life  can  be  in
      danger', this reference to 'serious risk' must be read in the  context
      of his earlier statement as to sufficiency of protection on the  basis
      that his safety 'cannot be guaranteed by the KDP or the PUK' and  that
      'Neither the KDP nor the  PUK  can  provide  full  protection  to  any
      suspect who has been  targeted  by  Ansar-al  Islam'.  This  misplaced
      approach was reinforced in his letter of 10 May 2004 where,  on  being
      asked about  internal  flight,  he  concluded  that  as  a  result  of
      animosity between Iraqi Arabs and the Kurds 'the life of  no  Kurd  in
      the Iraqi Arabs regime can be guaranteed if the life of he or  she  is
      not safe in the Iraqi Kurdish regions.'

52.   In Mr Joffe's case, in his summary at the end of his first report,  he
      said 'It seems that, generally, conditions in Iraq are not  such  that
      individual security and safety can be assured'.   A  similar  approach
      appears at paragraph 13 of the third  report  where  he  says  'It  is
      difficult to argue that, even in apparently secure areas, there  is  a
      situation that approximates to genuine stability and security'.  In re-
      examination when he was asked about security levels  in  the  part  of
      Iraq administered by the PUK, he was asked whether the PUK operated  a
      security system generally to guard against attacks and replied : 'They
      do with  mixed  success  -  probably  not  blanket  control  to  allow
      guarantee of security'.

53.   In our  judgment,  therefore,  neither  witness  can  be  regarded  as
      expressing opinions as to risk based on the concept of real risk which
       it is the duty of Adjudicators and this Tribunal to apply and to that
      extent such expressed  views  must  be  approached  with  considerable
      caution as to the evidential weight to be given to them.

54.   We now return to the issues of the impartiality   and  objectivity  of
      their evidence.

55.     So far as Dr Rashidian is concerned,  we  have  concerns  about  the
      degree to which he may have based his analysis simply on  specualtion.
      He says that 'If [the appellant] as a known secular political activist
      has been targeted by the Islamic movement before, there is the  strong
      possibility that he would still at risk [sic]  of  punishment  by  the
      Ansar-al Islam agents and his life in such an  environment  cannot  be
      guaranteed by the KDP   or  the  PUK.'   The  clear  evidence  of  the
      appellant is that he came to the adverse attention  of  the  IMK  once
      only, in February 1999 and, however  reprehensible  the  treatment  he
      then  suffered  during  his  brief  detention,  was   released   after
      undertaking not to be  involved  in  any  activities  similar  to  the
      organisation of a seminar on the Kurds and Islam which had brought him
      to the adverse attention of the IMK in the first place. The  appellant
      has never said that he would go back on that undertaking and there  is
      no suggestion that any member of his family has been adversely treated
      by IMK or any  of  its  subsequent  emanations  since  his  departure.
      Certainly the report referred to attacks on some high ranking PUK  and
      KDP officials and it makes a generalised statement  that  attacks  and
      assassinations have been widely reported by Kurdish papers  and  radio
      broadcasts in the region, but the only  dated  evidential  source  for
      this is October 2001, and  thus  at  a  period  before  the  Coalition
      invasion. The report concludes this passage (s.4) by saying:

             'The Islamic movement  threat  still  persists  and  the  main
             targets are the coalition forces  and  their  allies,  secular
             writers, artists, intellectuals and those people who disregard
             the Islamic order and virtues.'

      The conclusion as to risk to the appellant follows  immediately  after
      that passage in the terms we have quoted above.  But  nothing  in  the
      report explains on what  evidential  basis  the  appellant  is  to  be
      included  in  those  categories  of  targeted  individuals  given  his
      specific factual history, nor to take into account why the AI (who  it
      is not clear have ever directly targeted him from his account)  should
      now wish to do so when it is  clear  that  their  agenda  has  greatly
      widened to attacks on coalition forces and their allies  generally  in
      Iraq.  With  respect  to  Dr  Rashidian,  it  seems  to  us  that  his
      conclusions in this respect are speculative rather than being based on
      specific evidence to support them and that his  misconception  of  the
      standard of risk to be applied may also have contributed to this.  The
      report also seems to proceed on the basis that all Islamic groups  are
      to be equated to AI and indeed refers to IMIK and AI  as  though  they
      are virtually  interchangeable,  notwithstanding  that  the  appellant
      clearly differentiates between IMK and IMIK.

      There is one further respect in which we have some concern  as  to  Dr
      Rashidian's objectivity.  Part 5 of his report refers to 'The  general
      current situation in Iraqi Kurdistan' and it reads as follows:

             'The situation in Iraq is currently one of great  uncertainty.
             The Iraqi government and governmental agencies have  collapsed
             but sporadic fighting is continuing. Shooting and violence has
             been widespread, and in some areas people have  been  forcibly
             displaced,  further  adding  to  the  hardship  of  the  Iraqi
             population.  The US and UK forces have yet  to  restore  order
             and ensure the provision of humanitarian systems in the  areas
             they control. Beyond immediate concerns, the duration  of  the
             military presence of the USA and UK is unknown, prospects  for
             an effective Iraqi  transitional  authority  are  unclear  and
             there is disagreement over  the  role  of  the  UN.  The  most
             difficult challenge for Iraq lies ahead: to ensure that in the
             post-conflict period human  rights  stand  at  the  centre  of
             reconstruction   effort.    Addressing   impunity   for   past
             violations, building a  fair  and  effective  justice  system,
             ensuring respect for the rights of all without  discrimination
             on grounds of religion, ethnicity  or  gender,  and  insisting
             that the Iraqi people themselves drive the process  forward  -
             all will be of central importance.   The  immediate  challenge
             in Iraq and Iraqi Kurdistan in particular is to ensure respect
             for the  laws and order in the  current  situation.   A  great
             efforts (sic) and time are requires (sic) to ensure  that  the
             human rights is respected (sic),  and  all  political  parties
             comply with their obligations under international human rights
             and humanitarian law.'

56.   It seems clear that the  report  seeks  to  equate  the  situation  in
      Kurdistan with that in the whole of Iraq but what it clearly shows  is
      a situation which is patchy throughout the country, which is confirmed
      by the objective evidence generally.  It is  also  apparent  that  the
      author has clear personal views about the way in which the  governance
      of Iraq should develop which may well colour his views of the  present
      situation. What the report  signally  fails  to  do  is  to  make  any
      evaluation of the situation in Iraqi Kurdistan  although  the  heading
      misleadingly suggest that this is what the quoted  passage  is  about.
      This strikes us as particularly important because, in  the  course  of
      oral evidence, Mr Weisselberg directed the attention of  Mr  Joffe  to
      sources referred to in the CIPU Report which  deal  with  the  general
      situation in the former KAZ.  Mr  Joffe  accepted  that  these  fairly
      reflected the position there: but the clear  implication  of  what  Dr
      Rashidian says is that his description applies to the  whole  of  Iraq
      but, perhaps, to Iraqi Kurdistan in particular.

57.   The first of the source documents to which Mr Joffe was  referred  was
      from the Aljezeera website and is dated 6 Aril  2004.   It  is  by  an
      Aljezeera correspondent in Irbil and we quote certain passages as they
      appear in the source document before us:

             'Kurdistan  comes  straight  out  of  a  US  government  press
             release. It is a place where people look you straight  in  the
             eye and, without a hint  of  irony,  call  foreign  occupation
             forces "liberators".  Unlike most  other  parts  of  Iraq  ...
             Kurds do not feel the strains of occupation ...  Kurds on  the
             street of Irbil condemn anti-US  attacks  [here  referring  to
             recent events in Baghdad] as "terrorism".  A  recent  poll  by
             foreign broadcasters that suggested most Iraqis  were  happier
             since the US-led invasion a year ago was heavily influenced by
             Kurdish respondents.  A survey found only one in  three  Arabs
             believed their country was liberated - compared to four out of
             five Kurds ... The road from Baghdad to Kurdistan is  littered
             with so many checkpoints  you  would  eventually  lose  count.
             After recent bombings in several Kurdish cities that have left
              scores dead, the Kurds clearly do not want  troublemakers  on
             their soil. ... The region itself has a  different  feel  from
             the rest  of  Iraq.   ...  There  are  no  gun-toting  foreign
             soldiers seen elsewhere  in  Iraq,  nor  helicopters  whirring
             overhead.  Dr Sherzad Amin al-Najjar, of Irbil's Salah  al-Din
             University, told Aljezeera.net life in Kurdistan had  improved
             considerably  in  the  past  year.  ...  Al-Najjar  said  that
             ordinary Kurds had particularly noticed the economic  benefits
             of occupied Iraq.  "People's standards of living have gone  up
             in the last year.  The Coalition Provisional Authority has put
             a lot of money into this area as have UN agencies.  There  has
             especially been a lot of construction of roads,  schools,  and
             water facilities.  As a result of  this  political  stability,
             there have been many social and  psychological  benefits.  The
             only negative thing is there is more terrorism here now, which
             didn't exist before."'

58.   The second source was from an article in the Daily Star by  the  Chief
      Editor of Radio Free Iraq and is dated 27 April  2004.  It  summarises
      the general  economic  and  social  position  in  Iraqi  Kurdistan  as
      follows:

             'Thanks to hundreds of millions of US dollars  made  available
             to the two Kurdish administrations in Irbil and Sulaimaniya by
             the Coalition  Provisional  Authority  (CPA)  the  economy  is
             bustling, unemployment  is  down  and  livings  standards  are
             almost 90%  better  than  a  year  ago.  For  example,  school
             teachers' salaries have increased from the equivalent  of  $70
             per month to $400 per month and manual labourers are paid  $17
             - $20 for a seven hour working day, compared  to   $4  a  year
             ago.  Cities in Iraqi Kurdistan are big construction sites.


             Furthermore,  law  and  order  exists.    Kurdish  police  and
             security forces are efficient and the  security  situation  in
             the self-ruled Kurdish region is a far cry from  that  in  the
             rest of Iraq.  Exemplary relations  between  coalition  troops
             and  the  population  further  enhanced  stability,  including
             political  stability.  The   US   and   British   forces   are
             particularly welcomed by the Kurds. Only in the Kurdish region
             are cities and towns bedecked with US and  British  flags  and
             portraits of President George W. Bush and Prime Minister  Tony
             Blair.


             Contributing to efforts  by  the  Coalition  to  confront  the
             ongoing  insurgency  in  Iraq,  the  Irbil   and   Sulaimaniya
             administrations, led by Masood Barzani's Kurdistan  Democratic
             Party   (KDP)  and  Jallal  Talibani's  Patriotic   Union   of
             Kurdistan (PUK) have deployed some 60,000 -  70,000  Peshmerga
             fighters along the borders between the Kurdish-controlled  and
             neighbouring  Iraqi  provinces.   Kurdish  forces   are   also
             involved in protecting vital public installations in  northern
             Iraq.   Thanks  to  fully  fledged  Kurdish  operations,   the
             Americans have little to worry about when  it  comes   to  the
             security situation in the north.'

       Even if the figures  quoted  in  the  first  paragraph  are  somewhat
      surprising,  the  general  tenor  is  of  a   substantially   improved
      situation.

59.   As we have noted above, Mr Joffe readily  agreed  when  these  reports
      were put to him that Kurds feel that they have never had it  so  good;
      the economy is bustling and unemployment down and that law  and  order
      existed in the manner described in the second paragraph in  the  Daily
      Star article.  He said that was  well known and investment in the area
      had been going on for some twelve years.

60.   This is not, however, reflected  in  Mr  Joffe's  first  report  of  7
      October  2003  either  where,  in  the  section  dealing  with   Iraqi
      Kurdistan, he says:

             'It is certainly the case that economic conditions are now far
             worse than they were before the conflict. First of all, 60% of
             the 3.8 million strong population cannot feed  themselves  and
             depend on food provided through  the  oil-for-food  programme.
             This is supposed to be in operation but $400 millions of funds
             due to Kurdistan have been frozen as  nationwide  distribution
             is arranged. The Kurds have thus felt  severely  discriminated
             against.  Nor has remedial work to cope with the  one  hundred
             thousand families who live in severely substandard  conditions
             continued, electricity supplies  are  still  intermittent  and
             public services are still in disarray.  Around  three  hundred
             thousand persons depend on the state  sector  for  payment  of
             salaries, out of  a  population  of  twenty-one  million  with
             unemployment levels running at least 30%, and these were  only
             paid for the first time at the end of May  when  $30  millions
             was made available for salaries in Kurdistan.'

61.   In his report of April 29, 2004, he confirms  what  was  said  in  his
      first report still applies save as modified,  but  the  second  report
      does not seek to modify what he  said  about  economic  conditions  in
      Kurdistan.  In his third report in the passage at paragraphs 24 and 25
      where he deals with reconstruction, there is no attempt to distinguish
      between Iraqi Kurdistan and the remainder of Iraq and the picture that
      is painted is not markedly different from that in the earlier reports.

62.   Given his answers in cross-examination, however, it seems to  us  that
      what was said in the first report does not fairly reflect the  general
      economic situation in the former KAZ and that, but for the concessions
      made  in  cross-examination,  the  clear  inference  as  to   economic
      conditions in the appellant's home area  was  that  reflected  in  the
      first report in the passage which we  have  quoted.   Given  that  the
      appellant was known to Mr Joffe to be from Sulaimaniya and that it was
      his situation there with which  the  Immigration  Appellate  Authority
      would be primarily concerned, the report gives a misleading picture of
      economic conditions relevant to him as a native  of  the  former  KAZ.
      Since Mr Joffe deals separately with Mosul and Kirkuk earlier  in  his
      report, it seems to us that his  reference  to  Kurdistan  is  clearly
      intended to refer only to the former KAZ.

63.   Mr Joffe in his first report also categorises the  security  situation
      in Kurdistan as 'not good' and comments that the  Kurdish  authorities
      'are loath to allow non-local persons to move into the area', although
      quite what relevance this has  to  the  appellant's  situation  as   a
      native of Sulaimaniya is not made clear. He goes on to  say,  however,
      that the KDP and PUK leaders  remain  in  absolute  control  of  their
      respective fiefs and that such control  is  probably  more  firm  than
      before 'despite the deaths of two American soldiers on July 20  [2003]
      near Tal Afar in Kurdish-controlled regions.'  He says the PUK and KDP
      are immensely powerful and 'do not tolerate the presence of  strangers
      there'.  He says the Kurdish forces are variously estimated at between
      sixty-three thousand and one hundred thousand strong  and  have  heavy
      weaponry and armour of a kind they never possessed before.  He sums up
      the position as follows in his first report:

             'As far as Kurdistan is concerned, its status in international
             law has not changed as a result  of  the  war;   it  is  still
             legally  a part of Iraq and has no independent status, nor  do
             its two administrations, run independently by the PUK and  the
             KDP, despite the former agreement to unify the  administration
             there.  In practice, of course, both leaders  enjoy  virtually
             total authority in the  areas  they  administer  and  are,  in
             effect, more powerful now than they were before the  war.  The
             overall impression is that the situation in Kurdistan is still
             not secure and that 'government' - the administrations of  the
             KDP and the PUK - power is still repressive - particularly  as
             far as members of minority parties are concerned. Aid agencies
             have pulled back their members, the United  Nations  now  only
             operate in Arbil. Other agencies, led by the Red  Cross,  have
             simply removed foreign personnel from Iraq.'

64.   In his second report he  says  that  security  in  Kurdistan  has  not
      changed save in relation to the fear that AI  has  resumed  operations
      (in respect of  which  he  cites  the  bombing  of  the  KDP  and  PUK
      headquarters in March 2004 [which are claimed to be the actions of  an
      even more extreme splinter group from AI - see paragraph 8 above]) and
      the effect of the law bringing into effect a  veto  by  the  Kurdistan
      provinces in relation to the intended new constitution of Iraq.   What
      effect the latter issue currently has on security issues in the former
      KAZ is not explained.

65.   In his third report, he says that  his  previous  reports  are  to  be
      considered still to  be  reflecting  the  current  situation  save  as
      modified by that report. In dealing with the security situation, which
      he considers to have deteriorated generally, it is clear that this  is
      a generalised judgment and not specific to the areas of northern  Iraq
      relevant to the position of   the  appellant.  He  says  in  terms  at
      paragraph 6 of this report that it is 'very difficult to be precise as
      to where insecurity reigns' because of the  difficulties  of  movement
      for journalists but expresses the following tentative  conclusions  at
      paragraph 7 of the report:

             'It seems to be the case that most violence is located  within
             the Sunni triangle of Northern Iraq, with significant  pockets
             of violence elsewhere, including the Kurdish city of Arbil and
             the Mosul region.  There  are  also  major  security  problems
             around Kirkuk but these reflect the on-going struggle  between
             displaced Kurds and migrant Arab populations.  It is certainly
             the case that up to three hundred thousand people are involved
             in this situation and that tensions  are  running  very  high,
             occasionally exploding into open violence  and  involving  the
             Turcoman minority - which, in turn, upsets Turkey  and  Ankara
             has warned that it might intervene if their security is really
             threatened.'

66.   At paragraph 54, he says this of the situation  in  Kurdistan,  having
      said at the conclusion of  the  preceding  paragraph  that   if  Iraqi
      forces are not competent to act alone there is every  reason  to  fear
      that instability and insecurity would intensify and spread:

             'This would include the situation in Kurdistan, where, despite
             the autonomous administrations of  the  two  Kurdish  parties,
             there has been sporadic violence in the past. There  are  also
             claims that the Ansar al-Islam, a group  that  was  supposedly
             eliminated during the invasion of  Iraq  last  year,  has  now
             revived and is engaged in  the   recent  series  of  bombings,
             including the two massive bombs in March which  killed  up  to
             one hundred people, including senior Kurdish  politicians.  As
             recently as June 26, 2004, a car  bomb  severely  injured  the
             Kurdish Culture Minister,  Mahmad  Muhammad,  and  killed  his
             bodyguard in Arbil. Four Peshmergas were killed  at  Mosul  on
             the same day and two headless corpses were  found  at  Kirkuk,
             apparently the  bodies  of  two  collaborators  with  American
             forces. In these circumstances, it is difficult to argue that,
             even in apparently secure areas, there  is  a  situation  that
             approximates to genuine stability and security.'

67.    In  the  course  of  cross-examination  it  became  clear  that   the
      references to violence in Kurdistan were principally to the  two  bomb
      attacks in the KDP and PUK headquarters respectively and otherwise  to
      isolated attacks against specific individuals. Asked if there had been
      any such incident in Sulaimaniya, he said there has been two  attempts
      to bring a car bomb into the centre of the city,  both  of  which  had
      been foiled by the PUK authorities. He was referred to  the  following
      extracts from the Kurdish Observer of 9 August 2003 (which  ante-dated
      all the reports filed by the appellant) dealing with the  contrast  in
      the situation in Kurdistan from other parts of Iraq, thus:

             'Once over the Jebel Hanrin ridge, you can begin  to  breathe.
             Welcome to Iraqi Kurdistan, reads a hand painted sign  by  the
             road.  Technically this is still Iraq but it is like  entering
             another country.  The land, largely untouched by  the  ravages
             of the recent war, is a world away  from  the  lawlessness  of
             Baghdad and its surrounds.  Here  they  practice  a  different
             culture, speak another language, live  a  different  way,  and
             spend a different currency. And for the  most  part  they  are
             pretty happy.


             To the visitor from the south, the streets of Sulaimaniya  and
             Irbil, the two main Kurdish cities, are not quite  paved  with
             gold but they are a stark contrast to the sullen intensity  of
             Baghdad and Fallujah. There is no curfew at  night;  no  nervy
             American soldiers follow your movements down the  sight  of  a
             gun barrel. Electricity and water are reasonably constant, and
             there are mobile telephones, satellite dishes  aplenty.  Shops
             brim with food and imported consumer goods. And there is scant
             need to look over  your  shoulder  when  speaking  of  matters
             political.'

68.    Mr  Joffe  accepted  that   was   currently   applicable   with   the
      qualification that freedom of speech would not apply if discussing the
      KDP, PUK or Islamic issues in an Islamic area.   He  further  accepted
      that  insurgents  in  Kurdistan  were  regularly   captured   by   the
      authorities there and that 'they always  did'  effect  such  captures.
      When asked whether he could  point  to  any  targeting  of  low  level
      individual members of the KDP or PUK, Mr Joffe replied that  he  would
      require notice of that question. Given that he had  been  prepared  to
      assert that the appellant would be at such risk in the  reports  which
      were adopted for  his  evidence-in-chief,  we  find  this  a  somewhat
      surprising response.

69.   Mr Joffe's third report was written specifically by way of  commentary
      on the CIPU April 2004 Report on Iraq. In evidence-in-chief he made it
      clear that he had no problem with the sources on which the report  was
      based, which in his  third  report  he  categorised  as  'considerable
      supporting information', but he  said  this  at  paragraph  2  of  his
      report:

             'The [CIPU] report was clearly drawn up before  the  beginning
             of April 2004 and, given the rapid pace of events in Iraq,  is
             already outdated  in  many  important  respects.  Furthermore,
             although it seeks to give an objective review of  the  current
             situation and does not overtly take  any  position  about  the
             future, there is an implicit assumption that, overall,  as  Dr
             Pangloss would have said, 'All is for the best in the best  of
             all possible worlds'. In other words,  given  the  passage  of
             time,  the  trend  in  Iraq  is  towards  the  restoration  of
             stability and security, alongside the innovation of prosperity
             and individual rights, now that the Ba'athist system has  been
             overthrown..

      He is factually incorrect  in  saying  it  was  drawn  up  before  the
      beginning of April 2004 because the annexe quoting the sources for the
      report clearly identifies a number of sources dating up  to  24  April
      2004.

70.   In relation to the accuracy of his reports, we note  more  importantly
      that he says in his initial  summary  of  the  appellant's  situation,
      which he continues to adopt, that the PUK was not prepared to  provide
      protection to the appellant.  It is  certainly  correct  that  in  the
      self-evidence form and at interview, the appellant  said  he  did  not
      think that they would have provided protection to him at the  time  he
      left Iraq but there is no suggestion on his part that  he  sought  and
      was denied such protection or  that  his  view  in  this  respect  was
      otherwise than subjective and speculative.  Mr  Joffe  has  apparently
      treated such a subjective assertion as meaning that there had  been  a
      denial of protection to the Appellant when sought. We note that in the
      following paragraph, based on  his  opinion,  he  puts  the  issue  of
      provision of protection no higher than saying that it is 'by no  means
      certain  that  the  PUK  would  have  been  prepared  to  offer   such
      protection' because 'it has been very ambivalent about  its  relations
      with the mainstream Islamist groups, although it is very  antagonistic
      to the extremist organisations.'

71.   There are three final matters which we have taken into account in  our
      assessment of the reliability of  Mr  Joffe  as  an  impartial  expert
      witness. First, in the passage dealing with the  general situation  in
      his first report he says:

             '... The United States and Britain have  now  recognised  that
             their occupation was fundamentally misconceived and  they  are
             seeking   United   Nations   support   over    security    and
             reconstruction, whilst seeking to place more troops there  and
             retain overall military and civilian control ...'

      Whilst it may be that many hold such a view, and  Mr  Joffe  expressly
      said  he  regarded  the  intervention  as  illegal  and  inappropriate
      (although that did not mean he thought the Saddam  regime  should  not
      have been removed), he was unable to point to any  published  evidence
      at the date of his report that either administration has made  such  a
      statement, although he initially relied  on  what  he  understood  Sir
      Jeremy Greenstock to have said in a television programme  a  fortnight
      before this hearing as the authority for the passage quoted. When  the
      date of his report was drawn to his attention, he then amended this to
      say that he had relied on confidential sources. But the fact that some
      unidentifiable sources may have said  as  much  on  an  unattributable
      basis, does not seem to us to lend support for such a statement  being
      put forward as objectively factually accurate when it is  contrary  to
      all publicly available evidence form the very authorities whose  views
      it purports to summarise. It is in  our  view  an  illustration  of  a
      tendency to present opinion as verifiable  fact  and  to  that  extent
      misleading.

72.   Secondly, in his third report he quotes extensively  from  an  article
      by someone he describes as a 'highly respected  American  commentator'
      in the part of his report dealing with  issues  of  reconstruction  in
      Iraq. A footnote reveals that it is an extract from an article  of  12
      January 2004 'After Saddam: Assessing the Reconstruction of Iraq'  but
      the passage quoted is concerned solely with what might be colloquially
      termed the 'downside'. Mr Joffe makes no reference at all to the  fact
      that the passage quoted was preceded by a  passage  headed  'The  Good
      News', which opened:

             "There is enough going well in Iraq that there is no reason to
             believe that the U.S.-led reconstruction effort is  doomed  to
             failure. Indeed, quite the opposite. There is so much good  in
             Iraq, even in the face  of  numerous  and  crippling  American
             errors,  that  pessimists  need  to  be  cautious  in   making
             prognostications of doom. Four  positives  stand  out  as  key
             elements on  which  the  reconstructions  of  Iraq  should  be
             founded:  [the  writer  then  identifies  these   as   largely
             favourable Iraqi public opinion with the majority wishing  the
             United States to remain; that most leaders  have  shown  great
             patience and urged their followers  to  co-operate;  that  the
             insurgency   is   not   by   itself   likely   to    undermine
             reconstruction; and that there has been  considerable  success
             to date with the reconstruction  works  undertaken  'from  the
             ground up']

      The omission of reference to these positive aspects, whilst  they  may
      not have assisted  Mr  Joffe's  thesis,  hardly  supports  a  balanced
      approach to the source on which he was placing reliance  and  we  were
      unimpressed by his answer in cross-examination that we could, had   we
      wished, have gone to the source material identified in the footnote to
      see what this 'highly respected commentator' had actually said.


      Finally, in the course of his oral evidence he took  us  on  what  may
      aptly be described as  a  'whistle-stop'  tour  of  the  districts  in
      Baghdad in order to emphasise the impossibility  of  relocation  there
      for a Kurd but omitted to say that of the 1 to  2  million  Kurds  who
      live outside the former KAZ, there is a substantial Kurdish population
       ordinarily resident in Baghdad  itself  (see  CIPU  Report  paragraph
      6.65).

73.   Dr Rashidian says that he is an Iranian Kurd who has  studied  Iranian
      and Kurdish social and political affairs for more  than  forty  years.
      He is an Honorary Fellow at the  Department  for  Middle  Eastern  and
      Islamic Studies at Durham University.  He  does  not  appear  to  have
      visited Iraq, nor to have published academically on Iraq  although  he
      says he has written numerous articles (which would not therefore  have
      been the subject of  peer  review  as  would  academic  publications),
      reviewed books,  carried  out  research  and  supervised  postgraduate
      students  at  the  department  referred  to.   He  adds  that  he  has
      'provided hundreds of expert reports regarding  the  Afghani,  Iranian
      and Kurdish asylum seekers for Appeal and Tribunal Courts in the UK.'

74.   Mr Joffe has no permanent  professorial  post  but  is  affiliated  to
      Kings  College  in  London  University  where  he  holds   a  Visiting
      Professorship in Geography.  He teaches  an  undergraduate  and  post-
      graduate course relating to the Middle East and North Africa  and  was
      formerly associated in a like capacity at the School of  Oriental  and
      African  Studies.    He  is  a  Research  Fellow  at  the  Centre  for
      International Studies at Cambridge University where he is  a  director
      of the Centre for North African Studies.  Until March 2000 he was also
      Deputy Director and Director of Studies  at  the  Royal  Institute  of
      International Affairs and is an Associate Fellow of the  Royal  United
      Services Institute  for  Strategic  Studies.   He  has  not  published
      academically on Iraq since 1995 although he continues  to  comment  in
      the media.   He has provided reports for asylum applicants extensively
      in relation not only to  Iraq  but  also  to  Iran,  Kuwait,  Lebanon,
      Palestine, Syria, Yemen,  Egypt,  Libya,  Tunisia,  Algeria,  Morocco,
      Mauritania and Chad.

75.   We have no reason to doubt that both Dr Rashidian and  Mr  Joffe  have
      considerable knowledge of the countries to which they refer and  on  a
      factual basis there is much of assistance to us  in  their  respective
      reports. For the reasons which we have set out at some length  in  the
      preceding  paragraphs  of  this  determination,  however,  we  do  not
      consider that either of them ought  properly  to  be  relied  upon  as
      impartial expert witnesses  in  this  appeal.  We  have  reached  this
      conclusion  because  we  find  their  reports  selective,  lacking  in
      objectivity and  seeking  to  promulgate  opinions  on  matters  which
      neither reflect a proper  appreciation  of  the  stated  and  accepted
      evidence of the appellant, nor the full range of  available  objective
      evidence, nor the legal nature of the issues for  decision  in  asylum
      and human rights appeals. Mr Joffe in particular laid  great  emphasis
      on  the  practicability  and  logistics   of   return   as   well   as
      misunderstanding the nature of the risk to be demonstrated  by  asylum
      applicants.

The objective situation in Iraqi Kurdistan
76.   We have quoted extensively earlier in this  determination,  both  from
      what Dr Rashidian and Mr Joffe say, as well as  from  source  material
      derived from local media commentary which seeks to paint a picture  of
      life currently in the areas under the direct control of  the  PUK  and
      the KDP.

77.    In considering this area of Iraq it is in our view important to  keep
      in mind that it is properly to be viewed as historically divided  from
      the area formerly under the control of the  former  Ba'athist  regime.
      The current CIPU April 2004 report provides the following information.
      There are some 3.7 million Kurds in the predominantly  Kurdish  former
      KAZ of whom the majority are Sunni Muslims. Outside  that  area  there
      are a further 1 to 2 million Kurds, mainly in Baghdad, Mosul  and  the
      part of Iraqi Kurdistan outside the  former  KAZ.  Sunni  Muslims  are
      predominant in northern and central Iraq although taken over Iraq as a
      whole they are outnumbered two to one by  Shia  Muslims.  The  Kurdish
      Diaspora, which extends over the mainly  mountainous  area  where  the
      borders of Turkey, Iran Iraq and Syria converge, had been promised its
      own national state after the break-up of the Ottoman Empire under  the
      1920 Treaty of Sevres but the offer was rescinded three years later in
      the Treaty of Lausanne. Nevertheless each of those countries has since
      been concerned to repress the nationalist and separatist tendencies of
      the Kurds. The Kurdish desire for  autonomy  has  led  to  significant
      periods of open revolt in Iraqi Kurdistan since the 1960's  and  harsh
      measures of repression against them. The last major revolt against the
      Saddam Hussein Ba'athist regime was crushed  shortly  after  the  1991
      Gulf War but  this  led  the  Western  led  coalition  to  take  steps
      effectively to establish a temporary  haven  in  northern  Iraq  which
      became known as the KAZ. Both the KDP and PUK have  stated  that  they
      see the future of Iraqi Kurdistan as part of  a  federal  Iraq  rather
      than as an independent state in  its  own  right  to  be  governed  in
      accordance with the Law of  March  2004  pending  the  full  elections
      envisaged in that Law (see further at paragraph 105 below).

78.    There have been periods of rivalry and of  co-operation  between  the
      KDP and the PUK  which  was  formed  after  a  split  within  the  KDP
      following the 1975 Algiers Accord between Iraq and  Iran  which  ended
      the Iranian sponsored revolt of that period in Northern Iraq.

79.     CIPU quotes from a Unites States  Congressional  Report  of  January
      2004 at paragraphs 4.13 and 4.14 as follows:

             "In the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War, the KDP  and  the  PUK
             agreed in May 1992 to  share  power  after  parliamentary  and
             executive elections. In May 1994, tensions between them flared
             into clashes, and the KDP turned to Baghdad  for  backing.  In
             August 1996, Iraqi forces helped the KDP capture  Irbil,  seat
             of the Kurdish regional government; Iraqi forces acted at  the
             KDP's invitation. With U.S.  mediation,  the  Kurdish  parties
             agreed  on  October  23,  1996,  to  a  cease-fire   and   the
             establishment of a 400-man  peace  monitoring  force  composed
             mainly of Turkomens (75% of the force). ... Also set up was  a
             peace supervisory  group  consisting  of  the  United  States,
             Britain, Turkey, the PUK, the KDP, and Iraqi Turkomens.


             A tenuous cease-fire held after November 1997, and the KDP and
             PUK leaders ... signed an agreement in Washington in September
             1998 to work towards resolving  the  main  outstanding  issues
             (sharing of revenues and control  over  the  Kurdish  regional
             government).   Reconciliation   efforts   showed   substantial
             progress in 2002 as the Kurds perceived that the United States
             might act to  overthrow  the  regime  of  Saddam  Hussein.  On
             October 4, 2002, the two Kurdish factions  jointly  reconvened
             the Kurdish regional parliament for the first time since their
             1994 clashes.


             In post-Saddam Iraq, both Barzani and Talabani  were  part  of
             the major-party grouping that has now been  incorporated  into
             the Governing Council, and both  are  part  of  the  Council's
             rotating presidency. Talabani  was  Council  president  during
             November 2003. The KDP and PUK are  said  to  be  increasingly
             combining  their  political  resources  and  efforts  to   re-
             establish the joint governance of the Kurdish regions that was
             in place during 1992-1994. The Kurdish  parties  are  also  in
             negotiation with  U.S.  authorities  to  maintain  substantial
             autonomy in northern  Iraq  in  a  sovereign,  post-occupation
             Iraq, although clashes have flared  in  December  2003-January
             2004 between Arabs and Kurds in the city of Kirkuk as  Kurdish
             leaders have sought to politically incorporate that city  into
             the Kurdish regions."


80.    Although it was accepted by Mr Joffe in oral evidence that  there  is
      increased cooperation between the KDP  and the PUK, it  was  his  view
      that it would not currently be right to regard  them  as  operating  a
      unified control of the area in the sense that they have  merged  their
      separate  identities  into  a  single  autonomous  unit  of   regional
      government. We do not agree that matters can be put as high  as  this.
      It may be that on individual  issues  there  will  remain  differences
      between  the  two  parties  but  there  is  increasing   evidence   of
      cooperation  following  the  reconvening  of  the   Kurdish   Regional
      Parliament on 4 October 2002 for the first time since the  differences
      which led to its suspension in 1994.  There is said to be  freedom  of
      movement in the former KAZ and both  parties  enacted  laws  prior  to
      April 2003  establishing  an  independent  judiciary  for  each  area,
      providing for freedom of religion, freedom of the  press,  freedom  of
      assembly, and the right  to  form  political  parties.  The  US  State
      Department Report for 2003 published on 25 February 2004 records  that
      according to press reporting and independent observers  both  the  PUK
      and KDP generally observe such laws in practice.  It  adds  that  both
      established  human  rights  ministries  'to   monitor   human   rights
      conditions, to submit reports to relevant international bodies, and to
      recommend  ways  to  end  abuses'.   We  note  also  that  there   are
      differences between commentators as to the degree to  which  there  is
      now unified control in the former KAZ. For  example,  a  report  of  5
      January  2004  by  Dr  Rabwah  Fatah  Associates  contained   in   the
      appellant's bundle asserts in paragraph 54 (p. 62):

             "The two Kurdish administrations, controlled by the ...  (PUK)
             and ... (KDP) have united. Therefore internal flight is not an
             option any more. Kurdistan is under one administration now."

81.     Whilst it may be the case that personal differences still  exist  on
      the basis of what took place during the periods when the KDP  and  PUK
      were opposed to each other during the mid-1990s, so that in individual
      cases it may be that some from the PUK area could not live in the  KDP
      area and vice versa, the degree of current co-operation and the common
      cause which the  parties  have  does  not  in  our  view  support  the
      contention that there cannot be a general freedom of  movement  within
      the area of Iraqi Kurdistan capable of being exercised safely.

82.     Again, the  general  stability  within  the  area  is  reflected  at
      paragraph 5.40 of CIPU which records:

             "The effectiveness of internal security varies greatly between
             the  Kurdish  Regional  Government  administered   areas   and
             elsewhere. According to Lebanese newspaper The Daily  Star  on
             27 April 2004:


                 "Furthermore, law and order exists [in the Kurdish Regional
                 Government administered area]. Kurdish police and  security
                 forces are efficient and the security situation in the self-
                 ruled Kurdish region is a far cry from that in the rest  of
                 Iraq. Exemplary relations between coalition troops and  the
                 population   enhance   stability,    including    political
                 stability."

      What is said there seems  to  us  to  be  strongly  supported  by  the
      provisions  as  to  devolved  government  in  the   Kurdish   regional
      government area contained in the March 2004 Law of Administration  for
      the State of Iraq for the Transitional Period to  which  we  refer  in
      more detail below. The above extract also reflects what Mr Joffe  said
      in cross-examination as we have recorded above.

83.      The general picture which emerges is one of  comparative  stability
      in a region under a common administration with a functioning  security
      and judicial system. Insofar as Mr Joffe  and  Dr  Rashidian  seek  to
      argue to the contrary, we do not  find  that  the  generality  of  the
      evidence before us supports their views.

84.    It seems to us that the more alarming of  Mr  Joffe's  references  to
      the situation in the former KAZ were derived from the large numbers of
      Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs)  there,  whose  situation   may
      properly be contrasted with the relative affluence and settled life of
      the indigenous inhabitants.

85.     We accept that there are some 800,000 IDPs in  Iraqi  Kurdistan  but
      those in the former KAZ have been there  since  before  the  Coalition
      invasion and comprise primarily those of Kurdish  ethnicity  who  fled
      for safety from the Ba'athist regime. The  CIPU  report  at  paragraph
      6.154 notes that according to  UNHCR  sources  the  collapse  of  that
      regime did not cause the massive internal displacement that  had  been
      anticipated so that at least in  Kurdistan  the  problem  of  internal
      displacement ante-dates the Coalition invasion.

86.   We accept that there are specific areas of Iraq where  those  formerly
      displaced by the Ba'ath Party policies have sought to return in  order
      to reclaim their properties. So far as northern Iraq is concerned this
      applies particularly to Irbil, Kirkuk and Mosul where in the course of
      the former 'Arabisation' policies ethnic Kurds had been  displaced  in
      favour of ethnic Arabs.

87.     Nevertheless, the problem has been recognised and  steps  are  being
      taken to deal with recovery of property on a formal legal  basis.  The
      Coalition  Provisional  Authority  had  created  an   Iraqi   Property
      Reconciliation Facility (IPRF) in June 2003 to be administered by  the
      International Organisation for Migration in order  to  receive  claims
      and to provide voluntary dispute resolution  (CIPU  paragraph  6.147).
      Nor was there a lack of realism by some parties  on  the  ground.  The
      British-Danish Fact-Finding Mission reported in August 2003  that  the
      disputes between Kurds and Arabs related particularly to the Al  Jabur
      and Al Jabudi clans but continued at paragraph 6.146:

             "Leaders of Arab tribes in these areas have approached KDP and
             PUK and informed them that the  former  regime  brought  these
             Arab tribes to the Kurdish  areas  under  pressure.  The  Arab
             tribal  leaders  acknowledged  that   they   inhabit   Kurdish
             properties and assured the Kurdish  parties  that  they  would
             leave but asked for this  process  to  be  implemented  in  an
             orderly way. The Kurdish  parties  had  agreed  to  this  but,
             according to UNHCR in Amman, to  date  no  mechanism  for  the
             orderly and peaceful resolution had been put in place."

88.      According to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in a letter  dated
      26 April 2004, the Iraqi Governing Council had established a  Ministry
      for Displacement and Migration and an Iraqi Property Claims Commission
      (IPCC) providing a formal  mechanism  to  register  property  disputes
      arising between July 17 1968 and 9 April 2003.  The  letter  said  the
      IPCC had opened offices all over Iraq during March and April 2004  and
      would continue to receive applications until 1 January 2005. Whilst it
      was thought it would  take  over  5  years  to  process  and  rule  on
      individual cases this clearly represents an  Iraqi  Governing  Council
      initiative to establish the appropriate legal  mechanisms  to  provide
      rulings on individual complaints.

89.     The Law of 8 March 2004 under which  the  Iraqi  Interim  Government
      receives its sovereign powers (which is set out at appendix E  to  the
      current CIPU report) contains specific provisions going to such issues
      at Articles 49 and 58. Article  48  confirms,  amongst  other  interim
      bodies previously set up, the establishment of the  IPCC;  Article  58
      provides that the Transitional Government and its organs, 'especially'
      the IPCC:

             "shall act  expeditiously  to  take  measures  to  remedy  the
             injustice  caused  by  the  previous  regime's  practices   in
             altering  the  demographic  character  of   certain   regions,
             including Kirkuk, by deporting and expelling individuals  from
             their places of residence, forcing migration in and out of the
             region, settling individuals alien to  the  region,  depriving
             the inhabitants of work, and correcting nationality."

       In four sub-paragraphs the  Article  then  goes  on  to  specify  the
      particular steps to be taken  to  remedy  such  injustices,  requiring
      restoration of homes and property or the payment of compensation where
      this is not  feasible;  resettlement  of  those  newly  introduced  to
      specific regions with the provision by the state of  land  near  their
      former  residences  and  appropriate  state  compensation;   and   the
      promotion of  new  employment  opportunities  for  those  deprived  of
      employment or support in order to force migration in the past.

90.      Although  attempts  to  recover  property  will  doubtless   create
      tensions in the particular  areas  concerned,  there  is  no  specific
      evidence  that  such  issues  are  causing  widespread   violence   or
      disruption currently. Mr Joffe refers to three specific  incidents  in
      Kirkuk, one in May 2003 and the other two in  late  August  2003,  the
      third being in a small neighbouring town. In his latest  report  which
      we have quoted at paragraph 56 above he puts the matter no higher than
      saying that the tension in Kirkuk 'occasionally'  explodes  into  open
      violence but gives no further specific examples  than  those  we  have
      referred to.

91.    Apart from these specific situations  relating  to  people  who  have
      been internally displaced since the  fall  of  the  Ba'athist  regime,
      which has largely been  caused  by  the  return  of  those  themselves
      previously displaced - the majority being Iraqi Kurds  returning  form
      the former KAZ  or other areas within northern Iraq to which they  had
      been dispersed  (CIPU paragraph 6.155) - the  remaining  IDPs  in  the
      north had been there since well before 2003. Those in the KAZ were  in
      camps which had been provided with international support following the
      end of  the  first  Gulf  War  in  the  early  1990s.  Although  their
      circumstances may in many cases be Spartan there is no  evidence  that
      they live in destitution or impinge to any extent on the lives of  the
      indigenous Kurds in the former KAZ other than that there has  been  an
      increasing cost to  the  local  administrations  during  periods  when
      international aid has been interrupted.

92.     One of the bases on which Mr Joffe sought to  advance  arguments  as
      to general instability  in  Iraq  in  his  comments  on  the  security
      situation was set out at  paragraph  5  of  his  final  report.  After
      detailing the numbers of  Coalition  troops  recorded  as  killed  and
      injured, he continued

             "Iraqi losses as the result of military action or  during  the
             resistance since 1 May 2003 are far higher but are unknown  as
             the military authorities in Iraq keep no tally of those caused
             by Coalition action. Estimates of  deaths  range  from  20,000
             dead and 25,000 injured to 55,000 dead from March  2003  until
             the present. The only count of attested losses  suggests  that
             the figure by July 6,  2004  was  between  11,143  and  13,096
             dead."

      It is not stated where these higher estimates come from or whether any
      reliance can be placed upon them. In situations such as that  in  Iraq
      currently it is all  too  easy  to  pluck  figures  out  of  the  air.
      Nevertheless, there is one source which deals with attested losses and
      this is a website entitled 'Iraq Body  Count'  a  copy  of  which  was
      annexed as a source document by Mr Joffe.  It  describes  the  figures
      which it quotes as being the minimum and maximum of civilians reported
      killed by military intervention in Iraq and it explains its provenance
      and what it means by this in more detail in the following terms:


             "This is a human security project to establish an  independent
             and comprehensive public database of  media-reported  civilian
             deaths in Iraq resulting from military action by the  USA  and
             its allies. This database includes up to  7,350  deaths  which
             resulted from coalition military  action  during  the  "major-
             combat" phase prior to May 1st 2003. In the current occupation
             phase the database includes all  deaths  which  the  Occupying
             Authority has a binding responsibility to  prevent  under  the
             Geneva  Conventions  and  Hague  Regulations.  This   includes
             civilian deaths resulting from the breakdown in law and order,
             and deaths due  to  inadequate  health  care  and  sanitation.
             Results  and  totals  are  continuously   updated   and   made
             immediately available on this page and on various IBC counters
             which may be freely displayed on any website, where  they  are
             automatically updated without further  intervention.  Casualty
             figures are derived solely  from  a  comprehensive  survey  of
             online  media  reports.  Various  sources   report   differing
             figures, the range (a minimum and a maximum) are  given.   All
             results are independently reviewed and error-checked by  three
             members  of  the  Iraq  Body   Count   project   team   before
             publication."

      The emphasis above is not ours but  that  appearing  on  the  website.
      Although there is nothing to indicate the agenda of this  project,  it
      purports to be checked for its accuracy and for the purposes  of  this
      appeal  it  is  the  only  such  evidence  which  makes  that   claim.
      Interestingly, since it derives its information from media reports  it
      is quite clear that comparisons  show  reporting  on  a  significantly
      differing numerical basis  which  may  well  account  for  the  higher
      'estimates' from unidentified sources to which Mr  Joffe  refers.   In
      order to put these figures into perspective, we note that according to
      Whitakers Almanack for 2003, the estimated population of Iraq in  2001
      was 23,331,985 people. The only attested figures show that the  deaths
      of Iraqi civilians in the period 1 May 2003 to 8 July 2004  (the  post
      "major-conflict" period) was, adopting the maximum  figure,  5769  and
      this includes an unquantified number who were said to have  died  from
      medical failures. That  figure  represents  0.025%  of  the  estimated
      population. Mr Joffe says the number of deaths demonstrates widespread
      insecurity in Iraq. We cannot agree. If that is to be regarded as  the
      proper percentage risk of death throughout the country to civilians by
      reason of terrorist  activities  taken  against  the  Iraqi  Governing
      Council and the Coalition  forces,  then  it  seems  to  us  that  the
      Secretary of State is right in his submission that  the  risk  to  the
      civilian population arises from the chance of being in the wrong place
      at the wrong time. Moreover the website does not make it clear whether
      the figures which they quote include Iraqi citizens who have seen  fit
      to take up arms against the authorities and so have themselves  become
      combatants. If they are included then the  small  percentage  risk  to
      innocent civilians will be reduced even further.

93.      Finally, this small percentage risk does not  apply  evenly  across
      Iraq. The Kurdish regional government area is, for  example,  accepted
      as being safer than are some other parts of the  country.  Insofar  as
      the population density may be lower in this area, it seems to us  that
      the general increased safety of the area  more  than  offsets  such  a
      consideration so that the percentage risk in terms of general  country
      conditions must remain so  small  that  it  cannot  be  classified  as
      amounting to  a  real  risk  absent  specific  characteristics  in  an
      individual claimant which heighten potential risk.

94.     In summary there is no sustainable evidence that in Iraqi  Kurdistan
      the generality of people living there do so in conditions which  could
      arguably engage Article 3 of the  European  Convention  as  comprising
      inhuman or degrading treatment  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  in
      general  they  are  subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
      punishment. There is certainly a less settled situation in that  there
      has been an increase in terrorist activity aimed at destabilising  the
      authorities, although perhaps less than in some parts of  central  and
      southern Iraq, but, as we have said,  there  is  clear  evidence  that
      security and criminal law systems are in  place  and,  in  face  of  a
      terrorist threat, no government can guarantee the safety  of  all  its
      citizens. The appropriate legal mechanisms for dealing  with  property
      disputes arising from the past forced actions  of  the  former  regime
      have been further developed in the Law of 8 March 2004.

95.    Much has been made on behalf of the appellant  of  the  threat  posed
      in Iraqi Kurdistan by AI in particular. Both Dr Rashidian and Mr Joffe
      refer to it in passages which we have quoted and in  Mr  Joffe's  case
      also in his oral evidence.  We are by no means satisfied that it is as
      widespread as suggested. Certainly, the bombings of the  KDP  and  PUK
      headquarters in two separate incidents on the same  day  constitute  a
      major terrorist attack and had a devastating impact on those  present,
      but recent events throughout  the world have shown  that  no  civilian
      government can successfully guard against all such attacks and, as  Mr
      Joffe said, this has resulted in tighter security measures.  There  is
      no question of the resolution of the Kurdish  authorities  to  prevent
      such attacks by Islamic extremists  to  whom  they  are  now  bitterly
      opposed, however far in the past they may have sought  to  accommodate
      certain of such groups in order  to  reach  a  peaceful  solution.  In
      Sulaimaniya itself they have so far been  successful  in  intercepting
      and destroying two intended car bombs. Such problems do not,  for  the
      reasons set out above, arguably engage either  Convention unless there
      is a real risk that the appellant himself will be  directly  targeted,
      and there is a current lack of sufficiency of  protection  in  general
      terms in his home area by the legitimate authorities there.

96.   We shall return in due course to those specific issues as they  relate
      to the appellant but it is now appropriate we consider the legal basis
      for provision of State security in Iraqi Kurdistan and then the  UNHCR
      Guidance upon which Miss Naik placed reliance.


State provision of protection in Iraqi Kurdistan


97.    In his reports and in her submissions Mr Joffe  and  Ms  Naik  raised
      the issue of the legal status of the authorities in the former KAZ and
      their ability as a matter of international law to provide security  to
      their inhabitants.

98.   The view has  been  expressed  that  it  is  only  a  state  which  is
      internationally recognised as being able to confer citizenship  status
      and so can be held to be internationally accountable that can  provide
      such a sufficiency of protection in order to satisfy  the  'protection
      test' where the 'fear test'  is  met  in  the  claimant's  home  area.
      According to the cases to which we refer below  this  is  said  to  be
      derived in part from views expressed in  a  paper  by  Professor  J  C
      Hathaway  and  M  Foster,  published  in  1999,   (following   earlier
      publication of the Michigan  Guidelines  on  the  Internal  Protection
      Alternative with which Professor Hathaway was  also  concerned  -  see
      below) and in particular the following passage:

             "... the fundamental premise that  refugee  protection  is  an
             interstate system intended to deliver surrogate or  substitute
             protection assumes the right of at-risk persons  to  access  a
             legally  accountable  state  -  not  just   some   (hopefully)
             sympathetic or friendly group - if and when  the  individual's
             own state fails fundamentally to  protect  his  or  her  basic
             rights. ..."

99.    The Michigan Guidelines and that subsequent  paper  are  specifically
      concerned with issues arising in internal  relocation  cases  where  a
      clamant has been able to satisfy the 'fear test' in  relation  to  his
      home area. If he does not do so, he is not a refugee and there  is  no
      need to consider the 'protection test' (see Fadal Dyli [00/TH/02186*],
      a starred decision of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  cited  with
      approval in Cannaj v SSHD [2001] EWCA  Civ  782).  As  will  be  seen,
      however, Dyli dealt also with  the  protection  test  in  relation  to
      Kosovo, a province of the former Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia.  In
      Vallaj v a Special Adjudicator (heard jointly by the Court  of  Appeal
      with Cannaj)  the  principal  argument  which  had  been  advanced  on
      judicial review before Dyson J was  that  because  the  protection  in
      Kosovo was not provided by the  country  of  nationality  it  was  not
      capable in law of amounting to protection for the purposes of  Article
      1 A (2) of the Refugee Convention. Simon  Brown  LJ  deals  with  this
      argument as follows at paragraph 9 of his judgment:

             "This argument was rejected below on each of the three grounds
             advanced by the  respondent  ie  because  'that  country'  [in
             Article I A (2)] encompasses either (a) any  entity  which has
             the obligation in international law within Kosovo  to  provide
             the protection envisaged by the Convention, alternatively  (b)
             any entity which in fact provides  such  protection  with  the
             consent of the 'country of nationality' (as UNMIK and KFOR  do
             here with  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia's  consent),
             alternatively (c) any  entity  which  in  fact  provides  such
             protection with or without  the  consent  of  the  country  of
             nationality (this being the view  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
             Tribunal in their starred determination in [Dyli]). It was, of
             course, unnecessary for the judge to choose between the  three
             alternatives: it was sufficient to accept that Article 1 A (2)
             would certainly be satisfied were protection  in  fact  to  be
             provided by an entity which had  both  the  international  law
             obligation and the country of nationality's consent."

100.  In Gardi v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  750,  a  case  concerning  an  Iraqi
      claimant from the KAZ who had been held not to satisfy the 'fear test'
      in his home area, Keene LJ went on to deal obiter with the 'protection
      test' and said he would have been "inclined to find in favour  of  the
      appellant on  the  'protection  test'"  for  the  reasons  he  briefly
      advanced at paragraph 37 of his judgment in the following terms  where
      he dealt "only shortly with the submissions on that aspect":

             "The reference in Art 1A(2)  is  to  an  asylum  seeker  being
             unable or unwilling to avail himself  'of  the  protection  of
             that country', a reference to the earlier phrase 'the  country
             of  his  nationality'.  That  does  seem  to  imply  that  the
             protection has to be that of an entity  which  is  capable  of
             granting  nationality  to  a  person  in  a  form   recognised
             internationally. That indeed was a point made in the Thje Kwet
             Koe case at p.11. The KAR does not meet that criterion. I  see
             force also in the point made by Hathaway and Foster  in  their
             paper, at p. 46, that protection can only be  provided  by  an
             entity capable of being held responsible  under  international
             law.  The decision in [Vallaj by Dyson J] is not  inconsistent
             with that proposition , since the UNMIK regime in  Kosovo  had
             the authority of the  UN  plus  the  consent  of  the  Federal
             Republic of Yugoslavia. Yet no one suggests that  the  KAR  or
             any part of it is such an entity under international law."

101.  That decision was subsequently declared a  nullity  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal for want of jurisdiction (Gardi v SSHD (no 2)  (Declaration  of
      Nullity) [2002] EWCA Civ 1560) but the argument was again  run  before
      the Court of Session in Scotland in Saber v SSHD [2004] INLR  222.  In
      that case neither the findings of the Tribunal in Dyli  nor  those  of
      the Court of Appeal in Cannaj (which expressly left open the issue  of
      whether the decision in Dyli was correct in law) appear to  have  been
      referred to and it was clearly not appreciated that the Tribunal  from
      whom the appeal lay to the Court of  Session  was  following  its  own
      binding starred decision in Dyli in holding that the KAZ was an entity
      capable  of  providing  a  sufficiency  of  protection.  Moreover  the
      attention of the court does not appear to have been drawn to what  the
      Tribunal had said in Faraj [2002] UKIAT 07376, where  it  pointed  out
      that when Keene  LJ  was  asked  to  follow  the  views  expressed  by
      Professor Hathaway it did  not  appear  to  have  been  drawn  to  his
      attention that the paper written by Professor Hathaway and  Ms  Foster
      was then of recent origin and did not reflect the position  which  the
      same Professor had taken with several refugee law experts in  the  far
      more widely accepted Michigan  Guidelines.  These  stated  that  where
      return to a region controlled by a non-state entity  was  contemplated
      this might be acceptable if there  was  compelling  evidence  of  that
      entity's ability to deliver durable protection. There  is  nothing  to
      show in the short passage at paragraph 32 of Saber that the court  did
      anything more  than  adopt  the  provisional  obiter  views  expressed
      shortly by Keene LJ in Gardi but, whatever respect should be  accorded
      to his obiter view, it is clear that it did  not  stem  from  a  fully
      reasoned judgment after full argument. Further it is arguable in Saber
      that the appeal leading to a remittal  was  actually  decided  on  the
      narrower point that the PUK was not capable of  providing  appropriate
      protection in its own sphere of influence in part of the KAZ  in  what
      was described as a situation of unrest.

102.   Moreover, the paper relied on does not, as was pointed out in  Faraj,
      represent a settled  and  accepted  view  of  the  law  applicable  to
      internal relocation  and  does  not  purport  to  deal  as  such  with
      protection issues in a claimant's home  area.  As  noted  in  Dyli  at
      paragraphs 17-18 in Thje Kwet Koe v MIEE  [1997]  FCA  912,  cited  in
      Gardi (no 1) and Saber,  Tamberlin  J  had  made  it  clear  that  his
      interpretation of Article 1 A (2) was confined to the situation  where
      the claimant was stateless. Further, the decision of Decary J in Ahmed
      Ali Zatzoli v MEI [1991] 3  CF  605  does  not  appear  to  have  been
      considered in any of the cases referred to above.  In  that  case  the
      Canadian Court had accepted that it was practical protection that  was
      relevant to refugee status rather than the protection of the  official
      government in circumstances of civil war and the passage we quote must
      be considered in the context that nothing in  the  judgment  suggested
      that there might be various entities capable of granting  nationality.
      He expressed the proposition more widely in the following terms:

             "The 'country', the  'national  government',  the  'legitimate
             government',  the  'nominal  government'  will  probably  vary
             depending on the circumstances and the evidence and  it  would
             be presumptuous to attempt to give  a  general  definition.  I
             will simply note here that I do not rule out  the  possibility
             that there may be several established authorities in the  same
             country which are each able to provide protection in the  part
             of the territory controlled by them, protection which  may  be
             adequate though not necessarily perfect."

103.   It seems to us therefore that not only are  the  views  expressed  in
      Saber arguably obiter but that the issue in relation to protection has
      never been fully argued in respect of the  home area of  the  claimant
      or of a situation where internal relocation is in point. It is an area
      where  there   remain   potentially   conflicting   views   from   the
      international jurisprudence point of view. The decision  in  Saber  is
      persuasive only so far as the English  divisions  of  the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal and  Immigration  Appellate  Authority  at  least  are
      concerned. In those circumstances the Tribunal and Adjudicators should
      regard themselves as still bound by the starred decision  of  Dyli  on
      this issue until such time as there is an  authoritative  decision  to
      the contrary following full argument.

104.   Although what we have said in this respect relates  to  the  position
      as it was at the date of the hearing before the Adjudicator, there has
      in any event been a fundamental change in the legal situation in  Iraq
      in the intervening period.

105.  Since 27 June 2004 the legal authority in Iraq is  the  Iraqi  Interim
      Government operating under the provisions of the Law of Administration
      for the State of Iraq for the Transitional Period enacted upon 8 March
      2004.  The new government has received international recognition - see
      Resolution 1546(2004) of the United Nations Security Council of 8 June
      2004 - pending the formation of an elected government  pursuant  to  a
      permanent constitution. Article 4 of the law provides as follows:

             'The  system  of  government  in  Iraq  shall  be  republican,
             federal, democratic, pluralistic, and power  shall  be  shared
             between the federal government and the  regional  governments,
             governorates, municipalities, and local  administrations.  The
             federal system shall be based  upon  geographic  and  historic
             realities and the separation of powers and  not  upon  origin,
             race, ethnicity, nationality, or confession.'

       So far as Kurdistan is concerned, Articles 53(A) and  54(A)  and  (B)
      are of direct relevance:

               'Article 53(A)

             The  Kurdistan  regional  government  is   recognised  as  the
             official government of territories that were  administered  by
             that government on 19 March 2003 in the governorates of Dohuk,
             Arbil, Sulaimaniya, Kirkuk,  Diyali  and  Neneveh.   The  term
             "Kurdish Regional Government" shall  refer  to  the  Kurdistan
             National assembly, the Kurdistan Counsel of Ministers, and the
             regional Judicial Authority in the Kurdistan region.


                Article 54(A)

             The Kurdistan Regional Government shall  continue  to  perform
             its current  functions  throughout  the  transitional  period,
             except with regard to  those  issues  which  fall  within  the
             exclusive competence of the Federal Government as specified in
             this Law.  Financing for these functions shall come  from  the
             Federal Government, consistent with  current  practice  an  in
             accordance with Article 25(E) of  this  Law.    The  Kurdistan
             Regional  Government   shall  retain   regional  control  over
             police forces and internal security,  and  it  will  have  the
             right to impose taxes and fees within the Kurdistan region.

               Article 54(B)


             With  regard  to  the  application  of  Federal  laws  in  the
             Kurdistan region, the Kurdistan  National  Assembly  shall  be
             permitted to amend the application of any such law within  the
             Kurdistan region, but only to the extent that this relates  to
             matters that are not within the provisions of Article  25  and
             43(B)  of  this  Law  and  that  fall  within  the   exclusive
             competence of the Federal Government.'

106.  It follows that the PUK and KDP acting through the Kurdistan  National
      Assembly are the legitimate delegated government in  the  former  KAZ.
      Miss  Naik's  submissions  regarding  their  alleged  lack  of  formal
      authority in relation to the provision of protection within  the  area
      no longer - if they ever did - have any application to  the  situation
      which now exists.  Whatever  she  might  be  able  to  make  of  legal
      uncertainty before that date it is clear that since  that  date  as  a
      matter of law the Kurdish Regional Government and its organs  are  the
      lawful delegated government there.


State provision of protection in the remainder of Iraq

107.  In terms of the existence of  a  legitimate  state  and  the  regional
      apparatus in the remainder of Iraq, what we have said in the preceding
      paragraphs now clearly also applies equally throughout the country  as
      is apparent from a reading of the Law of 8 March 2004.

The position of the UNHCR
108.  The appellant has filed a letter of  6  May  2004  from  Mr  Kingsley-
      Nyinah, the Deputy Representative of the UNHCR in the United  Kingdom,
      to which the UNHCR Guidelines on Internal Protection of 23  July  2003
      and  Mr  Kingsley-Nyinah's  Update  on  the  International  Protection
      Response to Asylum Seekers from Iraq dated 4 March 2004 are annexed.

109.  The letter of 6 May 2004 was written  to  the  appellant's  solicitors
      for the express purpose of providing the comments of the UNCHR on  the
      issues raised in the present appeal on the basis that  UNHCR  regarded
      this appeal as engaging its mandate responsibilities as  well  as  its
      responsibility to supervise the application of the provisions  of  the
      Refugee Convention.  Its purpose was to express their views on  issues
      of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation in Iraq.   It was
      written on the basis that both the respondent and the Adjudicator  had
      accepted the appellant's claim of former difficulties  from  IMIK  and
      KDP and that his asylum claim was dismissed on  the  ground  that  the
      present situation in Iraq is safe for him.

110.  The writer expressed UNCHR's view on sufficiency of protection in  the
      following terms:

             "UNCHR's view is that  the  outcome  of  any  "sufficiency  of
             protection" analysis should be consistent with the objects and
             purposes of the 1951 Convention,  which  are  to  ensure  that
             persons are not returned to a country where  their  lives  and
             freedoms would be threatened for a Convention-related  reason.
             It is pertinent to emphasise that the protection of  the  1951
             Convention is intended to enable refugees to avoid the  threat
             or incidence of future persecution.    This suggests that  the
             correct approach to "sufficiency of protection" should examine
             whether a given system  of  national  protection  is  in  fact
             capable of preventing  the  reasonable  likelihood  of  future
             persecution against a particular  applicant.    We  would  add
             that any analysis should also bear in mind the  definition  in
             Article 1A(2) comprises one  holistic  test  of  inter-related
             elements.    How the elements relate to  each  other  and  the
             importance  to  be  accorded  to  one   or   another   element
             necessarily falls to  be  determined  on  the  facts  of  each
             individual case.

             In  UNCHR's  view,  the  correct  approach  to  questions   of
             "sufficiency  of  protection"  is  to  assess   the   domestic
             protection  system  only  as  a  starting  point  for  a  more
             comprehensive analysis.  The aim of this assessment should  be
             to enquire into much more  than  the  mere  existence  of  the
             system and  the  willingness  of  the  state  to  utilise  it.
             Additional consideration should include whether the system  is
             accessible and available to the applicant, and the  extent  to
             which - and  the  timeliness  with  which  -  it  succeeds  in
             delivering  protection.    The  critical  question  should  be
             whether  state  protection  is  effective  in   averting   the
             incidence of persecution".

       Whilst  we  understand  the  objectives  behind  these  views,   they
      represent in our judgment a substantial extension of  the  obligations
      of signatories to the Refugee  Convention  into  far  broader  general
      humanitarian considerations.    They ignore the fundamental  principle
      that the burden of proof is on the asylum claimant and that the effect
      of the judgments in Horvath v SSHD [2000] INLR 149 is directed to  the
      general question of whether the relevant state  authority  provides  a
      general system of protection to its citizens which it  is  willing  to
      enforce by  appropriate  criminal  sanctions  without  discrimination.
      What the  writer  is  proposing  is  a  system  which  guarantees  the
      protection of an individual claimant but  that,  as  we  have  already
      explained, seeks to  impose  far  too  high  a  burden  on  the  state
      authority.

111.  To that extent, the views of UNHCR  do  not  reflect  the  asylum  and
      human rights jurisprudence of the United Kingdom courts.  This  is  in
      our view emphasised by the statement that UNCHR's  concerns  regarding
      security situation in Iraq are reflected in UNCHR's continued  request
      to states to suspend, until further  notice,  forced  returns  to  all
      parts of Iraq, which is clearly intended to relate to those who  have,
      after due process, been found not to qualify for protection under  the
      Refugee Convention  since, if they did, it necessarily follows that no
      refoulement could lawfully take place.

112.  The document of 4  March  2004  which  gives  UNHCR's  update  on  the
      internal protection response to asylum  seekers  from  Iraq  makes  it
      clear that their current exhortation against forced returns of  failed
      asylum seekers is based on the following concerns:

      (1)   The generalised climate of instability and insecurity;

      (2)   A potential for increased  violence  given  the  persistence  of
           extremist elements and tensions among Iraq's various ethnic  and
           religious groups;

      (3)    A lack of housing, the irregular provision  of  basic  services
           and other infrastructure problems so that sustainable return  to
           Iraq,  adequately  monitored  by  the  UNHCR,  remains  severely
           limited.


113.  For the reasons which we have already explained, such advice,  to  the
      extent that it is based upon broad humanitarian considerations,  is  a
      matter  for  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary   of   State.   These
      difficulties of themselves are not relevant to or determinative of the
      decision which we are required to make on the  hypothetical  issue  of
      whether this appellant has a current well-founded fear of  persecution
      in his home area for a Refugee Convention reason.

114.  Although on the facts the question of  internal  relocation  does  not
      arise in the case of this appellant for the reasons we explain  below,
      we have also considered the UNHCR guidelines  on  internal  flight  or
      relocation.

115.  Whilst we agree that the consideration of internal  flight  may  be  a
      part of the holistic process of consideration of whether  there  is  a
      well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason, that
      question does not arise if there is no such fear  in  the  home  area.
      What we do not accept is the principle expounded in paragraph  A.6  of
      the  paper  that  for  internal  flight  a  particular  area  must  be
      identified and the claimant provided with an adequate  opportunity  to
      respond, insofar as that may be construed as an attempt to  shift  the
      burden of proof on to the host country. Under United Kingdom  law  the
      burden of proof remains throughout on the asylum claimant.   Whilst it
      may be helpful for the Secretary of State to raise the issue (which he
      customarily does in the reasons for refusal letter) we do not consider
      that in all cases an area for relocation needs to be identified before
      the appellant can fairly deal with the issue.  For example,  in  cases
      where the fear of persecution in the home area is of a localised  non-
      State actors or in vast countries such as India, it is axiomatic  that
      the asylum claimant will need to deal with why internal relocation  is
      not open to him as  an  issue  obvious  on  the  face  of  the  claim.
      Whether or not it is raised by the Secretary of State directly  or  is
      obviously an issue to be addressed on the face of the claim,  what  is
      quite clear is that the burden of proof remains on the claimant.

116.  Whilst it is not appropriate to seek to analyse in  depth  this  paper
      in the present  appeal,  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  UNCHR's
      propositions on internal relocation do  not  accord  with  the  United
      Kingdom jurisprudence on the subject and again  stray  into  areas  of
      general humanitarian concern which have no place in the  consideration
      of internal  relocation  under  our  own  case  law  which  imposes  a
      significantly higher standard before relocation  can  be  regarded  as
      unreasonable because unduly harsh - see, e.g. Robinson v  SSHD  [1997]
      Imm AR 568 and AE and FE v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1032.   The  following
      passage from the judgment of Lord Phillips MR in the  latter  case  is
      particularly relevant in this context:

             "The failure to provide (as opposed to a discriminatory denial
             of) the 'basic laws of civil, political, and  social  economic
             and human rights' does not constitute  persecution  under  the
             Refugee Convention.   An asylum-seeker who has no well-founded
             fear of persecution but has left his home country  because  he
             does not there enjoy those rights, will  not  be  entitled  to
             refugee status.  When considering whether it is reasonable for
             an asylum-seeker to relocate in a  safe  haven,  in  the  sole
             context of considering whether he enjoys  refugee  status,  we
             cannot see how the fact that he will not there enjoy the basic
             norms of civil, political and  social-economic  human  rights,
             will normally be relevant.   If that is the  position  in  the
             safe haven, it is likely to be  the  position  throughout  the
             country.  In such circumstances it will be  a  neutral  factor
             when considering whether it is reasonable for him to move from
             the place where persecution  is  feared  to  the  safe  haven.
             States may chose to permit to  remain,  rather  than  to  send
             home, those whose countries who do not  afford  these  rights.
             If they do so, it seems  to  us  that  the  reason  should  be
             recognised as humanity or, if it be the case, the  obligations
             of the Human Rights Convention and not the obligations of  the
             Refugee Convention".


117.  In our view it would  be  an  error  of  law  for  an  Adjudicator  to
      consider internal relocation by reference to this UNCHR paper.

118.  We should perhaps add that there was a further letter from  the  UNCHR
      dated 8 July 2004 from the Senior Legal Officer in the United  Kingdom
      specific to this appellant's case but it does not in our judgment  add
      anything to the totality of the evidence  going to the issues which we
      have considered in the course of this determination: there is no  need
      for it to be dealt with separately as was appropriate in the  case  of
      the other documents we have referred to which were intended  to  state
      the UNCHR's formal position.

The effect of the interim Iraqi Government's expressed views as  to  current
returns

119.  Ms Naik also placed reliance  on  a  report  of  the  Iraqi  press  in
      Baghdad of 10 June 2004 which recorded that the new interim government
      had urged Iraqi refugees abroad not to return and had asked  countries
      hosting them not to send them home.  We assume that the  reference  to
      refugees is intended to include also those who have been  unsuccessful
      in their asylum applications.   It does not seem to us that  this  has
      any relevance to the issues with which we are here concerned.   It has
      at most  relevance  to  the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      discretion as to when and where to  effect  returns  of  those  failed
      asylum seekers who have exhausted their appeal rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom.   Looking at Ms Hipwell's statement, it seems clear that  the
      Secretary of State will take such matters into account since she  says
      that "the Home Office continues to monitor developments  in  Iraq  and
      will take decisions on the basis of the most current  situation".   It
      is an issue which again goes to  the  practicality  and  logistics  of
      return with which we are not concerned.

The situation of the appellant

120.  We turn finally to  our  consideration  of  whether  on  the  accepted
      personal history of the appellant he can demonstrate  that  on  return
      now he will be at real risk of persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention
      reason or of breach of his protected human rights under Article  3  of
      the European Convention.   Since we have  found  the  general  country
      situation not to be determinative in establishing a claim on  a  class
      basis, it follows that the outcome of this appeal will  be  determined
      by his personal characteristics.

121.  In this  connection  we  do  not  consider  that  he  can  succeed  in
      establishing a present objectively founded fear on the  basis  of  his
      past detentions by the KDP.    The first of them related to a specific
      period when there was a short period of co-operation between  the  KDP
      and the former Ba'athist regime but  that  no  longer  applies.    The
      second arose  in  the  specific  circumstances  of  on-going  conflict
      between the KDP and the PUK and that no longer applies either.  On the
      second occasion the appellant's release was  procured  by  payment  by
      persons he cannot identify.    It seems to us that it  was  likely  to
      have been the intervention of the PUK on his  behalf  because  he  had
      been detained in the course of a PUK mission for the recovery  of  the
      bodies of three Peshmergas killed in that conflict.   It  occurred  as
      long ago as 1997/98 and the appellant has never suggested that it  had
      any relevance to his decision to leave Iraq in February 1999.   In any
      event, there is current co-operation between the KDP and the PUK as we
      have recorded above.

122.  The thrust of his claim has consistently been that  he  fears  Islamic
      extremists, and specifically AI.    It seems to us pertinent, however,
      that there was only  one  occasion  that  he  fell  foul  of  what  he
      described as IMK of which we accept on his evidence  AI  formed  part.
      He was released on a promise not to repeat what had drawn him to their
      attention but he left the country too soon after his release  to  test
      whether there was any continuing interest in him.    There  has  never
      been any suggestion that AI or anyone  else  has  enquired  after  his
      whereabouts  or  that  his  family  have  ever  received  any  adverse
      attention from them.

123.  He and his family have been closely associated with the PUK  which  is
      the dominant political party in his area.   He makes it clear that  he
      was personally very active on their  behalf  both  as  a  student  and
      subsequently.    In particular he was trusted with a mission to remove
      the bodies of the killed Peshmergas in late 1997.    As  a  native  of
      Sulaimaniya he can in our view expect  at  least  the  same  level  of
      protection from those representing the authority in his area, the PUK,
      as  the  generality  of  his  fellow-citizens.   There  has  been   no
      suggestion at any time that his  family  experience  any  difficulties
      living in Sulaimaniya.

124.  It is the AI whom he  claims  to  fear  but  they  and  all  extremist
      Islamic organisations are now bitterly opposed by the PUK and KDP  and
      there is heightened security against their attacks in his  home  area.
       Moreover, the form of the AI has changed since their  expulsion  from
      the Iraq/Iran borders as a result of the attack on  their  enclave  in
      2003.  We accept that they have regrouped but it is now on  the  wider
      agenda that, with the aid of foreign  terrorists,  they  are  mounting
      attacks against the authorities and those  assisting  them  throughout
      Iraq, and in particular  against  the  Coalition  forces.    They  are
      sought and under pressure wherever they are.

125.  Whilst we accept that his return would  probably  become  known  quite
      quickly in his home area, he was released by those  who  detained  him
      over five years ago and there is no evidential basis for  saying  that
      those concerned have any current adverse  interest  in  him.    Whilst
      such a possibility cannot be ruled out, we do not  regard  that  as  a
      real possibility on the totality of the evidence.  As we have  earlier
      said, neither Dr Rashidian nor Mr Joffe gave any reasoned  explanation
      as to why they said such a real possibility  currently  existed.    It
      was no more than speculation on their respective parts.

126.  We are therefore satisfied that the appellant fails to  establish  any
      such  real  risk  as  he  contends  for.    Apart   from   that,   and
      independently of our primary finding, we are also satisfied that those
      representing the lawful authorities in his  home  area  are  currently
      providing a sufficiency of protection against the  Islamic  extremists
      and terrorists and we see no arguable reason why such protection would
      not be equally available to the  appellant.    Whilst  the  terrorists
      have been successful on occasions in carrying out terrorist atrocities
      that does not mean that there is currently a lack  of  sufficiency  of
      protection in his  home  area.     That  concept  does  not  import  a
      guarantee of safety for the individual as we have  been  at  pains  to
      make clear.  On the facts relevant to  his  claim  he  has  failed  to
      discharge the burden of proof on him of showing that  he  is  at  real
      risk either of persecution by  reason  of  his  ethnicity  or  imputed
      political opinion, or of treatment in breach of  his  protected  human
      rights under Article 3.   It follows that his appeal must  be  and  is
      dismissed.



                                                         J Barnes
                                                   Vice President

























-----------------------
      1


