
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |OD (Kurd - PKK - Internal   |
|                           |        |Flight) Turkey [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00023                       |
|On 18 August 2003          |        |                            |
|Prepared 18 August 2003    |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|12 February 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, of counsel instructed by J R  Jones
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Steve Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Turkey appeals against  the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Mr D R Garrett), who dismissed his  appeal  against
      the decision made on 24th July 2002 giving directions for his  removal
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.


   2. The appellant left Turkey on 9th July 2002 travelling across Europe in
      the back of a lorry. He made a clandestine entry in to the  UK.   Once
      the lorry had been opened by Immigration Officers he  claimed  asylum.
      He said that he had been arrested and detained on four  occasions,  on
      suspicion of helping the PKK. He had  also  promoted  the  pro-Kurdish
      Hadep party. His village in Kayseri province was constantly visited by
      soldiers who accused him and other villagers of  supporting  the  PKK.
      After his last detention in March 2002, his  family  decided  that  he
      should go and live with his maternal uncle in Ankara. He stayed  there
      until July 2002. He said that he decided to leave  Turkey  as  someone
      had informed the Turkish authorities that he had a false ID  card  and
      his uncle's house had been raided. For the  reasons  set  out  in  his
      letter dated 24th July  2002,  the  Secretary  of  State  he  was  not
      satisfied that the appellant was entitled to asylum.

   3. The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 27  November
      2002. He has summarised the appellant's case in paragraphs 8-22 of his
      determination and set out his analysis of the evidence  in  paragraphs
      30-37.

   4. He accepted that the appellant had been arrested on  4  occasions.  It
      was his account that his first arrest was in November 1998  and  there
      were subsequent arrests in April 1999, November 1999  and  finally  in
      March 2000. The Adjudicator was satisfied that the appellant had  been
      arrested and detained because of suspicions that he was involved  with
      the PKK, but he was not satisfied that the appellant received  serious
      ill-treatment as he had described. The Adjudicator commented that  the
      appellant's evidence was that he  was  not  associated  with  the  PKK
      although he was a sympathiser with  Hadep,  the  legitimate  political
      party  supporting  Kurdish   interests.   The   Tribunal   note   that
      subsequently Hadep was banned by the Constitutional Court in Turkey in
      March 2003: see paragraphs 18-21 of A (Turkey) [2003] UKIAT 00034  for
      a summary of the current situation in respect of Hadep.

   5. The Adjudicator commented that it appeared to him that the interest of
      the authorities in the appellant was a matter of routine  and  not  on
      account of any specific suspicions they may have had  about  him.  The
      first arrest occurred when he was visiting a cousin who was in  prison
      for  membership  of  the  PKK.  The  appellant  did  not  explain  the
      circumstances in which he came to be arrested on the second and  third
      occasions but in relation to the fourth occasion he said it  was  when
      soldiers raided his home in March 2000.  The  appellant  was  released
      without  charge  on  each  occasion  through  lack  of  evidence.  The
      Adjudicator commented that he found it improbable that the authorities
      would wish to detain and severely ill-treat the appellant  when  after
      the first arrest they discovered that he had no information  of  value
      to give them or that he had any connection with the PKK.

   6. Although the Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had been arrested
      and detained he believed it was for a shorter period than claimed  and
      that the treatment described by the appellant had been exaggerated. He
      was satisfied that there had been some ill-treatment but not  that  it
      amounted to torture.

   7. After the final arrest the appellant had moved to live with  an  uncle
      in Ankara. The Adjudicator did not believe that he had only been  able
      to live there under a false identity. He believed that he was able  to
      relocate here to avoid the harassment he had been receiving  from  the
      authorities in the Kurdish region in which he  was  living.  He  noted
      that there was no evidence that his uncle had been harassed in  Ankara
      and this supported his view that the appellant had been able to lead a
      life free from harassment  there  for  almost  two  years  before  his
      departure for the United Kingdom.

   8. The Adjudicator when on to consider the involvement of  other  members
      of the appellant's family and his  assertion  of  Kurdish  rights.  He
      accepted that a number of his relatives had been able to claim  asylum
      but that alone did  not  satisfy  him  that  the  appellant's  account
      entitled him to asylum status.  The  Adjudicator  commented  that  his
      family associations may  have  drawn  him  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities and that accounted for the harassment he had  received  in
      his home area. He was satisfied that the appellant  had  a  subjective
      fear of persecution because of the treatment he had  received  in  his
      home region but he was not satisfied that those fears were in his mind
      when he left Ankara for the United Kingdom in  2002.  Looking  at  the
      Appellant's circumstances in the light of the background evidence, the
      Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be  at   risk   of
      persecution if he returned to his family in the Kayseri province,  but
      he did not believe that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  to
      relocate and live in Ankara, as he had done for a  substantial  period
      prior to his departure from the country. It  was  his  view  that  the
      appellant had never sought  publicly  or  politically  to  assert  his
      Kurdish ethnic identity and  he  noted  that  the  appellant  had  not
      described any attempts to do so, whilst living in Ankara.


   9. In  considering  the  issue  of  what  would  happen  on  return,  the
      Adjudicator noted the CIPU report at paragraph 6.87 and the fact  that
      those who had criminal records may face  difficulties.  The  appellant
      had not been involved in criminal activities and had been released  on
      each  occasion  that  he  was  arrested.  There  were  no  outstanding
      proceedings against him. He was not satisfied that the appellant would
      be under suspicion when he was returned and so would not be at risk of
      persecution. In summary, although the appellant  may  be  at  risk  of
      persecution  in  the  region  of  Turkey  from  which  he  comes   the
      Adjudicator was not satisfied that there was a risk of persecution for
      a convention reason if he returned to live in Ankara as  he  had  done
      previously. It would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate there.


  10. Mr Collins argued that in the light of the finding that the  appellant
      would be at risk of persecution in his home  area,  it  followed  that
      internal relocation would not  be  a  viable  option.  If  he  was  of
      interest  to  the  Turkish  authorities  he  would  be  at   risk   of
      interrogation  and  persecution  upon  arrival.  He  referred  to  the
      determination in Suleyman Okur (00/TH/00436). The appellant  had  been
      involved with leftist politics. His situation would  be  analogous  to
      that of the appellant in Suleyman Okur. Internal flight would  not  be
      an option because of his profile. There would be a risk  of  detention
      and torture on return.


  11.  In the light of the Tribunal determinations in  Hayser  [2002]  UKIAT
      07083 and A (Turkey) [2003] UKIAT 0034 the appellant would be at  risk
      on return. He had been a supporter of Hadep. He had been arrested  and
      detained on four occasions. His cousin was a member of  the  PKK.  His
      father had been a supporter of the TDKP who had been  imprisoned.  His
      brothers and  one  sister  had  left  Turkey  because  they  had  been
      harassed. Other relatives had also been granted refugee status abroad.

  12. Mr Walker argued that the appellant's involvement with Hadep had  been
      at a low level: putting up  posters  and  distributing  leaflets.  The
      Adjudicator found that he had been released  without  charge.  He  had
      never had any involvement with the PKK. It  was  a  question  of  fact
      whether  he  could  relocate  and  live  in  safety  in  Ankara.   The
      Adjudicator's conclusions in this respect were properly open to him.

  13. The  issue  at  the  heart  of  A  (Turkey)  is  whether  the  Turkish
      authorities will  suspect  a  returnee  of  separatist  tendencies  or
      sympathies. In paragraph 46 the  Tribunal  identified  factors  to  be
      taken into account when assessing whether the authorities  would  hold
      such  suspicions.  The  Tribunal  emphasised  the  importance  of  not
      treating these factors as some kind of checklist and  emphasised  that
      the assessment of each claim must be in  round  bearing  in  mind  the
      particular matters set out and must  follow  a  careful  scrutiny  and
      assessment of the evidence.

  14. In this appeal the appellant argues that he would be at  risk  firstly
      because he had promoted Hadep. The appellant accepted that he not been
      associated with the PKK. The Adjudicator came to  the  view  that  the
      interest of the authorities in him had been a matter of routine.  Even
      though Hadep has now been banned  in  Turkey,  the  Tribunal  are  not
      satisfied that the appellant's previous links  with  Hadep  would  now
      either be known to the authorities or would put him at any  additional
      risk. The appellant also relies on the fact that he has been  arrested
      on  four  occasions  between  November  1998  and  March   2002.   The
      Adjudicator  dealt  with  these  issues  in  paragraph   31   of   his
      determination. He found that he was released without  charge  on  each
      occasion through lack of evidence, and that it was improbable that the
      authorities would wish to detain and severely ill-treat the  appellant
      when they discovered that he had no information to give  them  and  no
      evidence of any connection with the PKK. Mr Collins criticised the use
      of the word "improbable" as possibly indicating that  the  Adjudicator
      had not applied the appropriate standard of proof,  but  in  our  view
      this must be  read  in  context.  The  Adjudicator  properly  directed
      himself on the standard of proof and there is  no  reason  to  believe
      that he did not apply it.


  15. When considering the issue of the arrests the Adjudicator came to  the
      view that the authorities had been satisfied that the appellant was of
      no continuing interest to them. He also found that the  appellant  had
      exaggerated both the length of his detentions and the  extent  of  his
      ill-treatment. The last arrest took place over two  years  before  the
      appellant's departure from Turkey and the  causal  connection  between
      his last arrest and his subsequent departure is tenuous indeed. It was
      following his last arrest that he went to live in Ankara. He  did  not
      leave Turkey at that stage.

  16. The Adjudicator took into account the fact that a number of  relatives
      had left Turkey  and  successfully  claimed  asylum.  The  Adjudicator
      accepted that this  may  have  drawn  him  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities and accounted for the harassment, which he had received in
      his home area but he concluded that the appellant  had  been  able  to
      avoid further problems by relocating.

  17. The Adjudicator came to a conclusion that the appellant had been  able
      to live in safety in Ankara. He did not believe that he had only  been
      able to live there by using a false identity.  He  took  into  account
      that his uncle lived in Ankara without being harassed. In our view the
      Adjudicator was fully entitled to take these factors into account when
      considering both the appellant's reasons for leaving and what the risk
      would be on return.

  18. The Adjudicator found that there may be a risk of persecution  in  the
      appellant's home area but was satisfied that  he  could  relocate  and
      live in Ankara. Whether or not the appellant is able  to  relocate  in
      Ankara can in our view be tested by the fact that he has been able  to
      live there safely for two years before leaving  Turkey.  That  is  not
      determinative of the issue but is certainly a  relevant  consideration
      which the Adjudicator was entitled to take into account.

  19. It is argued that if the appellant is at risk in  his  home  area,  it
      must follow that he is at  risk  of  detention  and  ill-treatment  on
      return at the airport and if he is at risk from the authorities he can
      not reasonably be accepted to relocate in Ankara. In Suleyman Okur the
      point made by the President was that internal flight was not an option
      as the applicant in that appeal would be  interrogated  on  return  to
      Istanbul. This leads to the issue of whether  this  appellant  in  the
      light of his background and  general  profile  would  be  at  risk  of
      detention on return at the airport.

  20. The Adjudicator was not satisfied that he  would  be  under  suspicion
      when he was returned: see paragraph 36 of his  determination.  In  our
      judgment  in  the  light  of  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of   the
      appellant's detentions and the relevance  of  his  family's  political
      activities, this finding was properly open to him.  The  treatment  of
      returnees is considered in  paragraph  6.89-108  of  the  CIPU  report
      (April 2003). It is said in paragraph 6.93 that  anyone  suspected  of
      having committed criminal offences  is  transferred  to  the  relevant
      investigative authority. Anyone suspected of membership  of  the  PKK,
      left wing radical organisations such as the DHKP/C or TKP/ML, militant
      Islamic groups or anyone suspected of giving support or shelter to one
      of those organisations is handed over to the anti-terrorist branch for
      further investigation.

  21. In our judgment it follows from the Adjudicator's findings that  there
      is no real risk of the appellant being suspected of membership nor  of
      giving support or shelter to any such group. Even  if  his  detentions
      are recorded, the last one was in 2000 and any enquiries would  reveal
      that he had lived in Ankara. The Adjudicator's assessment of the  risk
      on return at the airport was properly open to him and his  conclusions
      are sustainable on the evidence.

  22. The Tribunal are not satisfied that it is arguable that the option  of
      internal flight is not open to the appellant because  of  the  finding
      that he might be at risk in his home area.  The  Adjudicator  accepted
      that there might be such a risk there. That arose from the  particular
      situation in the Kayseri province and the behaviour of local officials
      there. The appellant has not sought to assert publicly or  politically
      his Kurdish ethnicity in Ankara. In the  light  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings there is no real risk of the authorities having  any  adverse
      interest in the appellant in Ankara.

  23. In summary, the Tribunal are satisfied that the Adjudicator  carefully
      examined the appellant's evidence and looked at whether there would be
      a risk to him in the light of his  background  and  his  personal  and
      family political profile. His conclusions that there would be no  real
      risk of persecution or treatment contrary to article 3 on return  were
      properly open to him on the evidence for the reasons which he gave.

  24. In these circumstances this appeal is dismissed







                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President


