
ar         TC (One child policy - prison conditions) China [2004] UKIAT
00138



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing  : 27 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                10 June 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
Ms J.  Rothwell,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Christine  Lee  &  Co.  for  the
appellant;   Mr M. Raj, Home Office Presenting Officer, for the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national of China, appeals  against  a  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Mr S.S. Chohan, dismissing his appeal  against  the
      decision refusing leave to remain under the Human Rights Act.

2.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant, who  had  four  children,
      had been fined 30,000 Yen for breaching the  One Child policy. He  had
      been beaten by the police.   Officials had damaged his house and taken
      his furniture.  In the course of his encounter with the police he  had
      hit a police officer. Being unable to pay the amount of the  fine,  he
      had gone into hiding and eventually left  China  illegally.   However,
      like the Adjudicator (Miss A. Cheales) who had dismissed  his  earlier
      asylum appeal based on the  same facts, he did not consider  that  the
      appellant would face a real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return.  His
      reasons appear to have been four-fold.  Firstly,  he  noted  that  the
      appellant's wife who had remained in China, had not been detained  and
      harassed in any way. Secondly, he found that breaches of the One Child
      policy were looked upon as breaches of  administrative  policy,  which
      would not attract  more  than  fines  and  confiscation  of  property.
      Thirdly, despite a report from Professor Palmer to  the  contrary,  he
      did not consider it was reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  would
      face imprisonment or sterilisation for his failure  to  pay  the  fine
      imposed on him in  respect  of  breaches  of  the  One  Child  Policy.
      Finally, although accepting  that  the  appellant  had  hit  a  police
      officer, he did not consider it would result in his being arrested  or
      detained. He went on:

             "Even if  I  were  to  accept  that  the  appellant  would  be
             imprisoned on return on either a charge of assault of a police
             officer or under the One Child policy then  any  ill-treatment
             which he may receive has  not  been  shown  to  be  reasonably
             likely to amount to his being killed or to amount  to  such  a
             degree of severity as  to  amount  to  inhuman  or   degrading
             treatment which would bring it within the scope of Article 3."

3.    This was the Adjudicator's  decision  on  Article  3.  In  respect  of
      Article 8 he accepted that the appellant since his arrival in 1998 had
      established a private life in  the  UK.  He  also  accepted  that  the
      appellant had applied for a work permit and a  decision  was  awaited.
      However, since he considered that the appellant could return to  China
      and apply for entry clearance from there,  he  did  not  consider  his
      removal would be disproportionate.

4.    We have some difficulties with the Adjudicator's treatment of  Article
      3.  We  can  find  no  basis  in  the  objective  evidence   for   the
      Adjudicator's assessment that the appellant would not be arrested  and
      detained for assaulting a police officer. His reference in the passage
      quoted above to  "any ill-treatment..." misunderstands the  fact  that
      "ill-treatment" is one of the synonyms used by the European  Court  of
      Hunan Rights to describe treatment contrary to Article 3.

5.    However, it does not seem to us  that  these  shortcomings  undermined
      the  Adjudicator's   principal   conclusions.   Dealing   first   with
      disciplinary measures for breaches  of  the   One  Child  policy,  the
      Adjudicator's assessment was consonant with   the  October  2003  CIPU
      Report,  which  describes  disciplinary  measures  against  those  who
      violate the  One Child policy as being relatively  limited  in  scope.
      Such measures are   said  to  include  fines,  withholding  of  social
      services, demotion and other administrative punishments that sometimes
      result in loss of employment.

             'Levels of fines vary by  region.  The  highest  noted  is  in
             Shanghai where the fine for violating birth  quotas  is  three
             times the combined annual salary of the parents. Unpaid  fines
             have sometimes resulted  in  confiscation  of  destruction  of
             homes and personal property by local authorities (6.346).'

6.    In addition  the  Adjudicator  took  into  account  the  circumstances
      specific to the appellant's case. The fact that the appellant's   wife
      had not met with adverse consequences since his departure was  rightly
      treated by the Adjudicator as a strong indication that the authorities
      were not continuing to pursue his family  for  violation  of  the  One
      Child Policy.  We note that on the appellant's own  account  officials
      had already taken furniture from his home away, so this was not a case
      where the state had yet to obtain  any  reparation.   If  nevertheless
      there would upon the  appellant's  return  be  a  renewed  requirement
      placed on him to pay the fine, we do not  consider, even if  it  would
      amount to a significant proportion of a  person's annual wage, that it
      could be considered to be so disproportionate as to  give  rise  to  a
      violation of Article 3.

7.    We recognise that  Professor  Palmer's  report  expresses  an  opinion
      about the operation of the  One  Child  Policy  to  different  effect.
      However, over the past ten years of so the   courts  and  Tribunal  in
      this country and abroad have considered the  implication  of  the  One
      Child  policy  in  considerable  depth  and   in  the   light   of   a
      comprehensive  examination  of  objective  country  materials.  Unlike
      Professor Palmer, they have had to evaluate these matters by reference
      to specific legal tests contained with the   1951  Refugee  Convention
      and international human rights treaties and to consider in  particular
      whether persons adversely affected by this policy face a real risk  of
      serious harm. Professor  Palmer's evaluation does not establish  that,
      in China there has been or is  in relation to the One Child Policy,  a
      consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of the  human
      rights of persons who have breached the policy.  Following  the  Court
      of Appeal judgment in Harari [2003] EWCA Civ 807, it cannot  therefore
      be said that a real risk of serious harm has been established.

8.    There remains in this case, however,  the  question   of  whether  the
      appellant's assault of a police officer would result in his  receiving
      treatment contrary to Article 3.  We have already  indicated  that  we
      think the Adjudicator was wrong to reason that this assault would  not
      have rendered the  appellant liable to arrest and  detention.  However
      even assuming arrest and detention as a consequence, it does not  seem
      to us that these measures in themselves would constitute a  breach  of
      Article 3.  In the first place, the Chinese authorities were  as  much
      entitled as any state authorities to arrest and detain a person for an
      offence of assault on a police officer.

9.    Secondly, we do not consider that the resultant  pre-trial  detention,
      the sentence and the post-trial detention the appellant would  receive
      would give rise to serious harm to the appellant.

10.    Miss  Rothwell  sought  to  persuade  us  otherwise.   She  drew  our
      attention to Amnesty International  materials and (again) to Professor
      Palmer's report which warned of the dangers of sentencing to a  labour
      camp (for re-education) and of abusive prison conditions.

11.   However, insofar as  the  appellant  may  face  imprisonment  for  his
      assault on  a  government  official,  we  do  not  consider  that  the
      objective evidence  considered  as  a  whole  demonstrates  that  such
      imprisonment would give rise to a real risk of  serious  harm.  It  is
      correct  that  conditions  in  both  the   prison   system   and   the
      administrative detention system facilities are  described  by  the  US
      State Department Report for 2001 as "harsh and frequently  degrading".
      The CIPU Report for October 2003 at paragraph 5.44 states that:

             'Facilities are often over-crowded with poor sanitation and of
             poor constructional quality. Prisoners often  rely  upon  food
             and medicine supplements  from  relatives,  with  a  very  low
             standard of medical care available.  Prison discipline  relies
             upon guards  appointing  "cell  bosses"  with  many  attendant
             abuses.  Forced labour is common. (see also 6.164).'

12.    Similar  conditions  are  found  in  the  systems  which  exist   for
      administrative  detention.  This  same  report  refers  elsewhere   to
      concerns about  the  torture  and  mistreatment  of  detainees  (6.1),
      although it also records steps taken to improve police  practices  and
      introduce further legal reforms.  At 6.8 it is stated that an  Amnesty
      International  (AI) report of February 2001 alleged  that  torture  is
      widespread and systematic in PRC.  Further paragraphs record   ongoing
      AI concerns.  However, we note that the  AI   report does not indicate
      what proportion of prisoners in China are  estimated  as  experiencing
      ill-treatment.   Given  that  China  is  one  of  the  most  populated
      countries in the world, this constitutes  a   significant  lacuna.  We
      come back to the need, in order  to be satisfied there is a real risk,
      for the objective evidence considered as  a  whole  to  demonstrate  a
      consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of the  human
      rights of prisoners. If there was such  a consistent pattern, we would
      expect to find more evidence than there is of the  scale and frequency
      of human rights abuses against prisoners in  China.

13.   Turning to the Article 8  grounds  of  appeal,  we  do  not  think  in
      respect of a claim based on the right to respect for private life that
      the same force attaches to the need to remain in the  UK  to  continue
      private life as can attach to the need to continue family life in  the
      UK. Furthermore, the appellant's private life  relationships  and  his
      working history in the UK have been built up  in  his  full  knowledge
      that his immigration status has been precarious.  We do  not  consider
      it can be seriously argued that it would amount to interference (or  a
      disproportionate interference) in his right  to  respect  for  private
      life  to expect him to apply from abroad for entry clearance. Although
      the Adjudicator made loose reference to  the  appellant  awaiting  the
      outcome of a work permit application, it is clear that as a matter  of
      fact the appellant has never had valid leave to remain in the  UK  and
      thus any application by  him  for  approved  employment  can  only  be
      considered by the Secretary of State as a matter of discretion outside
      the Immigration Rules.

14.   In any event, even assuming  the  decision  to  refuse  him  leave  to
      remain amounted to an interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for
      private life, the Adjudicator did not err in concluding he would  have
      the viable option of applying from abroad for entry clearance.

15.   Ms Rothwell sought to persuade us that  to  expect  the  appellant  to
      make an entry clearance application  from  China  would  be  erroneous
      since there was real likelihood the appellant  would  be  forced  upon
      return to serve some period of imprisonment.  However, where a  period
      for  delay  in  an  entry  clearance  application  is  caused  by  the
      appellant's being punished under national law for breaking  that  law,
      we do not consider  that  this  normally  constitutes  an  exceptional
      circumstance justifying a person in not being required  to  return  to
      his own country.  It is in the interests of the state  in  pursuit  of
      the legitimate aim of maintaining  effective  immigration  control  to
      acknowledge  and  respect  the  right  of  other  states  to   require
      performance by their citizens of legal obligations imposed on them  by
      national law. There may be cases where a legal obligation imposed by a
      state is itself  so  oppressive  or  abusive  that  its  citizens  are
      entitled to disregard them, but that has not been shown in this  case.
      In calculating periods of delay, the Secretary of State is entitled in
      cases such as this to disregard the period of time  during  which  the
      appellant serves his sentence of (likely) imprisonment.

16.   For completeness we should mention that the grounds  also  raised  the
      issue of practical difficulties to the  appellant  being  returned  to
      China due to documentation  problems  with  the  Chinese  authorities.
      However, we do not see that any such difficulties advance the  Article
      8 case of this appellant. If the appellant cannot be returned  because
      of difficulties in agreeing valid travel documents with  the   Chinese
      authorities, then the appellant will not face return and so  will  not
      be faced with any imminent threat to his human  rights  :  see  [2003]
      UKIAT 00016 L (Ethiopia).  If on the other hand  (and,  as  now  seems
      established by evidence of recent changes in  policy  as  regards  the
      return of Chinese nationals to  China)  the  appellant  would  receive
      valid travel documents  and  so  be  eligible  for  return,  then  the
      question of risks arising from such a return is then  reduced  to  the
      very question examined earlier in this decision : would the  appellant
      be at risk of violation of Articles  3  and  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.

17.   In relation to this question,  we  are  satisfied  that  despite  some
      shortcomings in the Adjudicator's determination, the Adjudicator  very
      properly concluded that there would be no real risk to this  appellant
      of serious harm.

18.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
