
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 21 May 2004             |        |XM (Albania - Victims of    |
|Dictated 21 May 2004       |        |extortion - Sufficiency of  |
|                           |        |protection.) Albania [2004] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00178                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|2 July 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Richard Chalkley, Vice President                               |
|Ms V S Street                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


      Mr A Deve, of  Refugee  Legal  Centre,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant and Miss J Sigley, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,
      appeared on behalf of the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania.  He was  born  on  22  February
      1963 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 June 2002.  He applied for
      asylum on 4 July 2002.

   2. The Appellant  appeals,  with  Leave  of  the  Tribunal,  against  the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Mrs R Woodhouse, who dismissed his  Appeal
      against the decision of the Respondent, taken on  2  August  2002,  to
      refuse to grant Asylum.

   3. This decision is being reported because of what we have to  say  about
      the availability of protection and its  sufficiency,  for  victims  of
      extortion.

   4. The Adjudicator set  out  the  basis  for  the  Appellant's  claim  in
      paragraph 5 of her determination, as follows:-

             "The  Appellant  claims  to  have  a  well-founded   fear   of
           persecution in Albania from the Mafia because he  reported  them
           to the police after his daughter Viola, aged 15,  was  kidnapped
           by them on 22 April 2002.  She was released on  26  April  2002.
           Having reported the kidnapping to the authorities,  one  of  the
           two kidnappers was arrested  before  [the  Appellant]  left  the
           country.  As a result of reporting this gang which the Appellant
           claimed was linked with the Mafia, he received death threats and
           decided to leave Albania on 18 May 2002, obtaining  visit  visas
           to the United Kingdom on 28 May 2002 and  he  left  on  his  own
           passport on 2 June 2002."


4.    There were three challenges to the Adjudicator's  determination.   The
      first ground was that the Adjudicator failed to properly consider  the
      objective background evidence as  to  the  sufficiency  of  protection
      available in Albania and failed to give any reason why the  Appellant,
      as a former policeman, would be in  a  better  position  to  obtain  a
      sufficiency  of  protection.   The  second  ground  asserts  that  the
      Adjudicator gives no reason for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  account,
      that there was a link between the  abduction  of  his  niece  and  the
      abduction of his  daughter,  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's  own
      evidence, which is supported by the expert evidence. The third  ground
      was that the Adjudicator misdirected  herself  factually,  in  finding
      that the Appellant embellished his claim, by referring  to  the  Mafia
      links for the  first  time  in  oral  evidence,  having  already  made
      reference to his fear of gangs and a specific reference to  the  Mafia
      having kidnapped his daughter and niece in answer to questions  during
      his interview.

5.    Mr Deve told us that  he  relied  on  the  grounds.   The  Adjudicator
      rejected the Appellant's claim that there was a  link  to  the  Mafia,
      because the Adjudicator believed that the Appellant had only mentioned
      this at the hearing.  However, in his statement at B2,  he  refers  to
      the Mafia and specifically referred to  the  Mafia  in  answering  the
      questions 46, 47 and 48 at his asylum interview.  It is clear that  he
      referred to the  Mafia.   Additionally,  pointed  out  Mr.  Deve,  the
      Secretary of State's reasons for refusal letter also acknowledges that
      reference was made to the Mafia.  There was simply no reason  for  the
      Adjudicator to find as she did at paragraph 91  of  her  determination
      and the flawed finding should be set aside.

6.    The Adjudicator accepted most of what had happened  to  the  Appellant
      and his daughter, but simply says that as  a  former  policeman  there
      would be a sufficiency of protection for him.  According to the expert
      evidence  before  the  Adjudicator,  there  is   no   sufficiency   of
      protection.  He referred us to the objective  material  and  submitted
      that the appeal should be allowed to  the  extent  that  the  Tribunal
      should direct it to be heard afresh by another Adjudicator other  than
      Mrs R Woodhouse.

7.    Ms. Sigley suggested that the Adjudicator's findings  in  relation  to
      whether or not  those  who  abducted  the  Appellant's  daughter  were
      members of a gang, or were part of the Mafia,  were  sustainable.   In
      paragraphs 41, 42 and 43, the Adjudicator deals with the  evidence  in
      chief.  At paragraph 53 the Adjudicator deals with evidence  given  by
      the Appellant during cross-examination.  The appellant,  in  referring
      to a gang called the "Vengeance" gang, which he has  previously  heard
      of, had described one of the leaders of the "Vengeance" gang as  being
      called  "Koldaci".   What  troubled  the  Adjudicator  was  that   the
      Appellant had never previously mentioned the name of the gang, nor  an
      individual member of it, before he gave evidence to  the  Adjudicator.
      The Adjudicator referred to a newspaper report in paragraph 79 and  80
      of the determination.  In paragraph 80,  the  Adjudicator  notes  that
      there is no reference in the newspaper report  to  a  gang,  or  to  a
      group, in addition to the two abductors,  who  are  referred  to.   In
      paragraph 38 of the  determination,  the  Adjudicator  says  that  she
      concluded that the Appellant's account of this particular  armed  gang
      was an embellishment to his original claim.  It was wrong to say  that
      there were no reasons for the Adjudicator's findings in paragraph  91,
      but she did not believe  the  Appellant's  evidence,  that  those  who
      abducted his daughter were members of the gang, or that they were part
      of the Mafia group.

8.    The Adjudicator did  not  place  terribly  much  weight  on  what  the
      Appellant had claimed he had been told by the Chief of Police.  In any
      event, he simply suggested that, simply because the  police  may  have
      implied that the Appellant ought to leave his home, does not mean that
      the police were either unable or unwilling to  protect  him.   Someone
      suffering a similar threat in the United Kingdom might be  advised  by
      the authorities to  leave  home,  but  that  did  not  mean  that  the
      authorities were either unable, or unwilling to offer protection.  The
      Adjudicator had dismissed the claim made  by  the  appellant,  that  a
      letter was written by the Ministry of  Public  Order  to  the  British
      Embassy on behalf of the Appellant in support of his application for a
      visa; that finding, reminded Ms. Sigley, had not been challenged.

   9. We were asked to note that the police had arrested one  kidnapper  and
      had been able to identify the other.  The Appellant was, suggested Ms.
      Sigley, given support and protection.  The Adjudicator's finding, that
      the Appellant would have a sufficiency of protection in Albania,  was,
      Ms. Sigley urged, sustainable.  According to the  Appellant's  expert,
      no one has a sufficiency of protection in Albania.  The "expert" is  a
      "D. Phil." research student.  At the foot of page 1 of his report,  he
      refers to members of the special police  commander  unit,  who  always
      wear masks and this, suggests the expert is,


                 "...so as to protect the unit from reprisals".


      The report goes on to suggest that should their identities  be  known,
      it is widely acknowledged that they would have been assassinated.  The
      expert says,


                 "The Government has no way to offer adequate protection  to
                 its own  elite  police  units,  let  alone  regular  police
                 officers or witnesses."

      Ms Sigley asked us to note that members of the United Kingdom  Special
      Forces and police units, when on active duty, often wear masks  simply
      to protect their identity.  It is not suggested that the reason is  to
      protect them from assassination, neither  is  it  suggested  that  the
      United Kingdom Government is not able to  offer  protection  to  them.
      She submitted that the "expert" report had wholly ignored the help and
      assistance given by the Albanian Authorities to this Appellant, before
      he left Albania.  She asked us to  note  the  difference  between  the
      comments on trafficking in persons in the US State  Department  Report
      for 2002, and those for 2003.  In 2003, at the end of paragraph  4  on
      the first page, the US State Department reported that,


                 "...trafficking in persons remained a  problem,  which  the
                 Government took steps to address." (our emphasis)

      It was clear, the Presenting Officer submitted, that there  have  been
      improvements in the time between the dates of the  two  reports.   She
      asked us to note paragraphs 6.24 to 6.49  of  the  CIPU  Report.   The
      problem of corruption amongst Police officers is being tackled by  the
      Government of Albania.  Prosecutions are taking place against  corrupt
      officers and against trafficking and trafficking has  decreased.   The
      objective material  does  support  the  Adjudicator's  findings.   She
      invited us to dismiss the Appeal.

10.   By way of response, Mr Deve suggested  that  in  the  absence  of  any
      witness protection programme in Albania, it was difficult to see where
      the Appellant could have gone to and where he would  have  been  safe.
      Paragraph 6.46 of the CIPU shows that any witness protection programme
      there is in existence in Albania, is in its fledgling state and it  is
      far too early today, to assume that an effective witness programme  is
      in place.  Whatever is in place now, is not effective enough for  this
      Appellant.  He invited the Tribunal to allow the Appeal.

11.   We reserved  our  determination.   We  have  concluded  that  we  must
      dismiss this Appeal.

12.   Dealing first with the  assertion  that  the  Adjudicator  misdirected
      herself factually in finding that the Appellant embellished his  claim
      by referring to the Mafia links for the first time in  oral  evidence,
      we find that the Adjudicator did not  say  this.   What  she  said  in
      paragraph 91 was:

                 ".....while I  have  in  the  main  found  the  Appellant's
                 Account of his experiences to be genuine, I do not  believe
                 his evidence that those who  abducted  his  daughters  were
                 members of a gang or that  they  were  part  of  the  Mafia
                 group.  I do  not  believe  that  there  was  a  connection
                 between those who abducted his niece and this abduction.  I
                 do not accept the  Appellant's  evidence  of  a  connection
                 between those who abducted his daughter with the individual
                 he named as part of a greater gang as this information came
                 only in his oral evidence and I concluded  that  it  was  a
                 further embellishment of his claim."


13.   The challenge to this paragraph 91 in the  second  ground  of  appeal,
      asserts that the  Adjudicator  gives  no  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      Appellant's account that there was a link between the abduction of his
      niece and  the  abduction  of  his  daughter,  in  the  light  of  the
      Appellant's own evidence, which was supported by the expert  evidence.
      What the Adjudicator found in Paragraph 79 and 80 was this:-

           "79.  The Article does not name the Appellant's  family  however
                 it describes a man ending up in handcuffs after  defrauding
                 his neighbour for prostitution and continues by saying:


                 "Mentor  Daci  was   arrested   from   police   agents   of
                 Commissariat Number 2 in Tirana.  His arrest is done  after
                 a denunciation from the parents of a 15 year old  girl  who
                 has been (eligible) from Mentor Daci and  his  collaborator
                 Xhelil Koldoshi.  These two people have tried  to  traffick
                 the  teenager  for  prostitution.   Immediately  after  the
                 denunciation to the police forces of Sariet  Number  2  are
                 set and have arrested the  33  year  old  Daci.   Meanwhile
                 Xhelil Koldoshi is declared a wanted person from the police
                 because his arrest was not made possible".


           80.   There is no reference in this Article to a gang or a group
                 in addition to the two abductors and  the  Account  records
                 vigorous action by the Police, the arrest and the detention
                 of one of these men and the pursuit of the other."


14.   In Paragraph 83 the Adjudicator goes on to find:-

                 "The Appellant has  asserted  that  these  two  individuals
                 named in the report are part of a greater  gang  led  by  a
                 person who abducted his niece.  In  his  oral  evidence  he
                 called it the Vengeance Gang which the  Appellant  had  not
                 previously stated and I concluded that his account of  this
                 particular armed gang was an embellishment to his  original
                 claims.


15.   It is clear that in paragraph 91, the Adjudicator did  give  a  reason
      for not believing the Appellant's evidence that those who abducted his
      daughters were members of a gang, or that there were part of the Mafia
      group.  It was because  the  Appellant's  evidence,  of  a  connection
      between those who abducted his daughter and the individual he named as
      part of a greater gang, only came out during his oral  evidence.   She
      concluded that it was  a  further  embellishment  of  his  claim.   At
      paragraph 53, the Adjudicator  records  the  fact  that  during  cross
      examination, the Appellant had said that as a Police  Officer  he  had
      heard of the "Vengeance" gang previously -  one  of  the  leaders  was
      called Koldaci, the same person who abducted his niece.  He  knew  him
      because he lived nearby - although he had never spoken to him.

16.   So far as the first ground is concerned, we reminded ourselves of  the
      speech of Lord Clyde, at Page 510 E-H, in the House of Lords  decision
      in Horvath [2001] 1AC.  Where Lord Clyde said:-

                 "I do  not  believe  that  any  complete  or  comprehensive
                 exposition  can  be  devised  which  would  precisely   and
                 comprehensively define the relevant  level  of  protection.
                 The use of words  like  "sufficiency"  or  "effectiveness",
                 both of which may be seen as relative, does not  provide  a
                 precise solution.  Certainly no one would be entitled to an
                 absolute guaranteed immunity.  That  would  be  beyond  any
                 realistic practical expectation.  Moreover it  is  relevant
                 to note that in Osman v United Kingdom (1998) 29 EHRR  245.
                 The European Court of Human Rights recognised that  Account
                 should be taken of  the  operational  Responsibilities  and
                 constraints on  the  provision  of  police  protection  and
                 accordingly  the  obligation  to  protect  must  no  be  so
                 interpreted as to impose an impossible or  disproportionate
                 burden upon the Authorities.  At the least, as is noted  in
                 condition (iii) to Rule 344 which I  have  quoted  earlier,
                 the person must be able to show that if he is  not  granted
                 asylum he would be required to go to a  country  where  his
                 life and freedom would be threatened.   There  must  be  in
                 place a system of domestic protection and machinery for the
                 detection, prosecution and punishment of acting contrary to
                 the  purposes,  which  the  Convention  requires  to   have
                 protected.  More importantly, there must be an ability  and
                 a readiness to operate that machinery.  But precisely where
                 the line is drawn beyond that generality is  necessarily  a
                 matter of the circumstances of each particular case."


  17. We have very carefully read the expert Report of Mr John Davies,  a  D
      Phil research student.  We were unimpressed by it.  Unfortunately,  he
      gives very little detail of his previous experience, although we  note
      that he has been a regular speaker and presenter on "trafficking harm"
      and has been invited to present (present what is not  made  clear)  to
      such agencies as the UNDP, Unicef, US Aid, Norad, ADB, as well as at a
      number of international conferences on trafficking.  He has lived  and
      worked in the Balkans region for 10  years  and  was  chief  technical
      advisor to the Government  of  Bangladesh's  largest  anti-trafficking
      project and is a Consultant to a number of Agencies seeking to  reduce
      trafficking harm.  It is  not  clear  whether  he  has  even  been  to
      Albania, but, for the purposes of this decision,  we  assume  that  he
      has.  We have noted that he believes that the Appellant's daughter and
      her family,


                 "...will continue to experience harassment and  threats  in
                 Albania until they withdraw their  complaints  against  the
                 traffickers involved in  her  forcible  kidnap.   Therefore
                 they will likely suffer an escalating campaign of violence.
                  The Albanian Government has no capacity  to  protect  them
                 from such a sustained campaign."

      He is also of the opinion that the capacity of the Albanian police  to
      deal with violence against women is "extremely limited".  He  goes  on
      to say:-


                 "..it could be considered that the  Albanian  police  have
                 been negligent in their duty of care towards such women  as
                 Ms Muca."


      We have considered his report together with  the  Country  Information
      and Policy Unit assessment.  We were  provided  with  the  April  2004
      assessment.

18.   It shows that in November 1998, the  Albanian  electorate  approved  a
      new constitution, which came into force 6 days  later.   The  improved
      and more detailed version of the 1993 Law of Human  Rights  became  an
      integral part of the constitution.  It provides for the Office  of  an
      Ombudsman, working for more effective implementation on Human  Rights.
      The constitution makes the clear distinction between the roles of  the
      President, National Government, Regional Government and the  Judiciary
      (Paragraph 5.1 of the CIPU).  Albania is a  Parliamentary  Republic  -
      the fundamental political economic and social rights and  freedoms  of
      Albanian citizens are guaranteed under the  Constitution  (5.2).   The
      Constitution provides for an independent judiciary, but  according  to
      the European Commission, the Albanian judicial  system  remains  weak.
      The infrastructure is generally poor; rulings are not always executed;
      magistrates, prosecutors, lawyers and administrative staff are not yet
      sufficiently  trained.   (5.16.)  Corruption  remains  widespread  and
      affects  both  judges  and  prosecutors.   During  2002,   Parliament,
      undertook a  number  of  legal  initiatives  aimed  at  improving  the
      functioning of the judicial system.  A new law  was  adopted  in  June
      2002 and the criminal procedures code was  amended  with  the  aim  of
      enhancing the fight against corruption  and  organised  code.   During
      2002, Albania ratified a number of international instruments,  notably
      the statute of Rome on the International Criminal Court,  the  Council
      of Europe (CoE) Convention on Cyber-Crime and additional Protocols  on
      Mutual Juridical Assistance (5.18).

19.   The Albanian Police Forces  come  under  the  general  directorate  of
      Police in the  Ministry  of  Public  Order  and  are  divided  into  4
      Departments, Public Order Police, Crime  Police,  Traffic  Police  and
      Special Forces.  In addition, the Judicial Police are responsible  for
      investigating crime under  the  direction  of  a  prosecutor's  Office
      (5.30).  Local Police Units report to the Ministry of Public Order and
      are responsible, principally, for internal security.  Since  September
      2000, Police Officers have received training on issues of  gender  and
      been  provided  with  guidance  under  International  Conventions  and
      domestic law, on the  treatment  of  women  who  are  the  victims  of
      domestic violence and trafficking.  An Advisory Board consulted in the
      development of the course and included members from local NGOs  and  a
      Human Rights specialist  from  UNHCR.   It  has  become  part  of  the
      International Criminal Investigative  Training  Assistance  Programme,
      sponsored  by  the  United  States  State  Department,  which   trains
      supervisory and mid level manager police officers (5.32).  Most of the
      country's 13,000  member  Police  Force  remained  largely  untrained,
      despite  assistance  received  from  foreign   Governments.    Foreign
      Governments continued Police Training Programmes  aimed  at  improving
      technical expertise, operational  procedures  and  respect  for  Human
      Rights.  The Albanian  National  Police  Office  of  Internal  Control
      received authority to  review  all  police  appointments  and  pursued
      investigations leading to the conviction of 16 police  officials,  and
      the dismissal of 172, for various degrees of misconduct.

20.   According to the Albanian Helsinki Committee,  police  violence  could
      largely be attributed to the lack of adequate training, the  tradition
      of police brutality, as well as to insufficient internal  supervision.
      On the positive side, the AHC noted that state  bodies  have  recently
      been more active in reacting to reports  of  police  violence  and  in
      condemning them (5.34).

21.    In  February  1999,  the  Albanian   Government   ratified   enabling
      legislation for a "Peoples'  Advocate"  (Ombudsman)  and  elected  the
      first  Ombudsman  in  February  2002.   The   Ombudsman   investigates
      inappropriate,  inadequate,  or  illegal  actions  on  the   part   of
      Government.  During 2002,  the  Ombudsman  Office  administered  about
      4,600 complaints, representing nearly 70%  increase  over  2001.   The
      Peoples' Advocate was  reported  to  have  the  full  backing  of  the
      Government and had authorised access to information from all agencies.



22.   Amnesty International noted in May 2001, that there has been a  growth
      in civil society in Albania, including  a  range  of  non-governmental
      organisations with expertise  in  many  of  the  problems  facing  the
      country, including the field of Human Rights.  (6.5).

23.   The US State Department Report on Human Trafficking 2003,  noted  that
      the Government of Albania does not meet the minimum standards for  the
      elimination of trafficking; however, it is making significant  efforts
      to do  so.   In  the  past  year,  the  Government  improved  its  law
      enforcement efforts, particularly in co-operation with  Italy.  Police
      significantly  reduced  clandestine  speedboat  traffic   across   the
      Adriatic, and the number of foreign women  transited  through  Albania
      for  Western   destinations   decreased   measurably.    Nevertheless,
      corruption and lack of protection for  vulnerable  children,  remained
      problematic.  It further noted that the  Government  Inter-Ministerial
      Commission on Human trafficking co-ordinates its National Action Plan,
      now in its second phase of completion.  Part of this plan includes the
      appointment of a Minister of State who serves as the  country's  anti-
      trafficking Co-ordinator.  In  this  role,  the  Minister  works  with
      various Ministries, NGO's and the International Community  to  redress
      trafficking in Albania.  The Ministry of Education  participated  with
      NGO's to train teachers and to produce and disseminate information  in
      schools on the dangers and mechanics of human trafficking.   A  series
      of 12 programmes on Public Awareness was broadcast  on  television  in
      2002.  The Ministry of Public Order  completed  a  significant  study,
      indicating  that  more  than  5,000  Albanian  women  and  girls  were
      trafficked into prostitution in the last  decade.   The  report  noted
      that the Chief  of  the  Ministry  of  Public  Order  anti-trafficking
      sector, has a unit in each prefecture and  recently  created  a  Delta
      Force to enhance operations.  Prosecution of traffickers has increased
      in the  past  year,  as  did  efforts  to  punish  corrupt  Government
      officials for involvement in  trafficking  however,  corruption  is  a
      major problem with little follow through on most investigations.   The
      Government continues to  show  inadequate  conviction  and  sentencing
      rates,  with  most  defendants  released  for  lack  of  evidence,  or
      ultimately charged with a lesser crime.  The  organised  crime  sector
      and  the  Office  of  Internal  Control  also  conducts  civic   anti-
      trafficking actions.

    24. Unicef, in their 2003 Report, noted that,


                 "The recent actions of the Albanian Government had as  huge
                 impact in  lowering  the  numbers  of  trafficking  victims
                 transited through Albania in the previous year."

25.   At 4.46 of the CIPU Report, we noted that through its nationwide anti-
      trafficking units, police  refer  victims  to  victim  assistance  and
      protection  centres  through  Albania.   These  centres  provide   re-
      integration and education for domestic victims  and  repatriation  for
      foreign victims.  Phase II of the National Action  Plan  mandates  the
      creation of a Witness Protection Programme that, at the  time  of  the
      report, was described as currently  lacking.   In  the  absence  of  a
      Witness  Protection  Programme,  the  Government  has  taken   limited
      measures to protect witnesses, mostly ad hoc and relying on  NGOs  and
      Foreign Governments.  With funding by IOM,  six  Police  Commissariats
      opened temporary witness protection shelters in 2003.  The  Government
      hosted the third Regional Ministerial forum that produced  a  regional
      Government  declaration  on  the  legislation  of  victim  status   in
      destination countries.  We noted from paragraph 6.47 of the CIPU, that
      a bill on Witness Protection is said to be  pending  in  the  Albanian
      Embassy.  We also noted that OSCE was responsible for setting  up,  in
      2002, the Victims Assistance  Project  to  provide  legal  advice  and
      appropriate counselling for victims of trafficking who are repatriated
      to Albania.  Albania's  Serious  Crime  Court  was  inaugurated  on  1
      January this year.  It provides a parallel structure to  the  ordinary
      Court system and deals specifically with criminal offences carrying  a
      minimum sentence of 15 years.

26.   Finally, we noted paragraphs  6.125  to  6.129  of  the  CIPU  Report,
      dealing with organised crime and corruption.  The Human  Rights  Watch
      Report for 2001 noted  that  despite  the  highly  partisan  political
      atmosphere, the Albanian Government  has  made  some  sincere  efforts
      since 2000, to confront Official corruption and  to  establish  public
      order in the country.  The Prime Minister  has  re-affirmed  that  the
      police belong to the state, not to political parties and  that  it  is
      the duty of the Albanian  Government,  the  governing  coalition,  the
      Opposition and of all society, to support the police, so that they are
      more successful in their fight against crime in any form  it  appears.
      The then Minister for public order said that, clearing the police  and
      other structures of the Public Order Ministry from the  corrupted  and
      incriminated elements remains one of the priorities of the  Government
      Programme.  The Public  Order  Ministry  has  drafted  a  strategy  to
      uncover and send to Court such elements.  According to paragraph 6.127
      of the CIPU Report, Freedom House, in their report, noted that in  its
      2002 anti-corruption plan,  the  Albanian  Government  identified  the
      fight against corruption as a top priority.  The  objective  being  to
      reduce corruption to a  point  where  it  no  longer  undermines  what
      Albania tries to achieve.  While Albania has  strengthened  its  anti-
      corruption  legal  framework  and  ratified   relevant   international
      agreements,  the  Government  acknowledged   that   implementing   and
      enforcing legislation remains a challenge.

27.   We have carefully examined the objective material in  the  Appellant's
      bundle and note that, in June 2003, a Memorandum of  Understanding  on
      the establishment of the task force on Witness Protection  was  signed
      by a member of the  Albanian  Ministries  and  International  Agencies
      operating in the country.  The Albanian Minister of  State  recognised
      that witness testimony was crucial to the  fight  against  trafficking
      and organised crime.  In May 2002, an International Task Force chaired
      by the OSCE presence in Albania was  established,  to  handle  witness
      protection situations, until a legislative framework was put in place.



28.   Mr Deve suggested that it  is  too  early  today  to  assume  that  an
      effective witness programme is in place.  However,  this  ignores  the
      creation of the  International  Task  Force,  which  was  specifically
      designed to deal with  the  situation  on  a  temporary  basis,  until
      legislation was enacted.

29.    Unfortunately  a  large  part  of  the  objective  material  in   the
      Appellant's bundle was old and pre-dated the April 2004  CIPU  Report.
      We have, however read it, but feel better able to place  much  greater
      weight on the more recent CIPU  Assessment,  which  draws  of  a  wide
      variety of objective material.

30.   Our consideration of all the objective material leads  us  to  believe
      that the Government of Albania is both able  and  willing  to  provide
      adequate protection for the Appellant.  The authorities responded when
      the Appellant sought their assistance following his daughter's  kidnap
      and they assisted in securing her release and in arresting one of  the
      kidnappers.  The other kidnapper has been identified.  The adjudicator
      was correct to find, on the evidence before her,  that  there  was  no
      evidence that these two individuals were part of  a  larger  gang,  or
      that they were in any  way  connected  to  the  Mafia.   Subsequently,
      following the shooting at the Appellant's home, the  police  responded
      when the Appellant called them for assistance.  We believe that on his
      return to Albania they will continue to be able and willing  to  offer
      him and his family members protection, if it is  thought  that  it  is
      necessary.

  31. For all these reasons we have concluded  that  we  must  dismiss  this
      Appeal.


Appellant's appeal dismissed.



                                             Richard Chalkley
                                             Vice President








































