
ar
         AI (Jehovah's Witness - risk if "committed") Eritrea [2004]  UKIAT
00147

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing  : 12 March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 3 June 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                               Mr P Rogers, JP
                                Mr G F Sandal



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
Mr J. McNally of Counsel, instructed by White  Rylands  Solicitors  for  the
claimant, Mr P. Deller, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1.    The appellant  is  a  national  of  Eritrea.   He  appeals  against  a
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  A.R.  Lawrence,  dismissing  is
      appeal against the decision  refusing  to  grant  leave  to  enter  on
      asylum grounds.

2.    Despite some misgivings, the Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant
      has been a Jehovah's Witness since  1971.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
      accept, however, the appellant's claim that he left  Ethiopia  because
      the authorities were looking to deport  him.  The  grounds  of  appeal
      challenged this assessment but we do not find them persuasive. In  our
      view the Adjudicator  gave  sound  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      appellant's account was not credible.  However,  since  there  was  no
      intention to remove the appellant to Ethiopia, this dimension  of  his
      appeal is in our view, largely irrelevant, particularly given that  on
      the appellant's  own account he was not a national of Ethiopia and  so
      would not face refoulement from Eritrea to Ethiopia.

3.    The  Vice  President  who  granted  leave  specifically  rejected  the
      appellant's  claim to be stateless. He considered in the light of  the
      Court of Appeal  judgment in Tecle [2002] EWCA Civ 358 that he  was  a
      national of Eritrea. We consider this conclusion was entirely correct:
      certainly the appellant failed to show that he would be unable to meet
      the preconditions  set by  Eritrean  authorities  for  those  who  are
      entitled to Eritrean nationality  by  virtue  of  having  an  Eritrean
      father.   We follow the Tribunal guidance  set  out  in  the  case  of
      [2003] UKIAT 00016 L (Ethiopia).

4.    The Adjudicator also found that the appellant in this case  would  not
      be liable for military service because his age  made  him  ineligible.
      Once again,  there is no valid challenge to this finding.

5.    Essentially, therefore, the appellant's appeal stands  or  falls  with
      his contention that he would face real risk on  return  by  virtue  of
      being a Jehovah's Witness.

6.    Mr McNally's submissions in this  regard  were  twofold.  Firstly,  he
      argued that simply by virtue of being a Jehovah's Witness per  se  the
      appellant would face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  Secondly,  he
      submitted that even if not all  Jehovah's Witnesses in  Eritrea  would
      face a real risk of serious harm, the appellant would, in light of the
      fact that he was a committed Jehovah's Witness, face such a real risk.

7.    In relation to the latter   submission,  we  are  not  persuaded  that
      there was any error in the Adjudicator's rejection of the  appellant's
      claim  to  be  a  committed  and  practising  Jehovah's  Witness.  The
      Adjudicator stated:

             '... although I find that  he  was  baptised  as  a  Jehovah's
             Witness in 1971.  I am not satisfied that he did practise  his
             religion in Ethiopia or Eritrea and find that his  association
             with the Jehovah's Witnesses in the United Kingdom is intended
             to bolster the chances of success of his claim to asylum.'

8.    Essentially  this  assessment  of  the  Adjudicator  flowed  from  his
      adverse findings in relation to the appellant's claims about his  past
      experiences in Ethiopia and his experiences in  the  UK.  As  we  have
      already noted, these were findings supported by  entirely  sustainable
      reasons.  Mr McNally  contended that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      discount  the  significance  of  the  appellant's   involvement   with
      Jehovah's Witnesses' congregations in the UK.  He  observed  that  the
      Adjudicator had evidence from witnesses attesting to  the  extent  and
      profundity  of  his  faith.  This   evidence,   he   reiterated,   was
      unchallenged. However, the Adjudicator at paragraph  27  took  careful
      note of the evidence of these two witnesses, both  of  whom  confirmed
      they did not know the appellant before they met him in  the  UK  three
      and a half years ago. He further assessed the significance of  letters
      from Mr Gordon Murray of the London Holloway Congregation of Jehovah's
      Witnesses, the London Amharic Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses  and
      from the  Mekanissa Congregation in Ethiopia.  It  is  true  that  the
      Adjudicator failed  to  make  specific  findings  in  respect  of  the
      witnesses and these written items of evidence. But, in the context  of
      his assessment of the evidence as a whole, his  conclusion  that  they
      did not demonstrate that  the  appellant  was  a  committed  Jehovah's
      Witness was entirely sustainable.

9.    We have considered further evidence submitted  since  the  Adjudicator
      heard the appeal, including the letter from Mr Gordon  Murray  seeking
      to clarify his earlier letter and the basis for writing  it.  However,
      we do not find that its contents are sufficient to warrant a different
      view being taken by the Adjudicator of  the  appellant's  strength  of
      commitment to the Jehovah's Witness faith.

10.   Accordingly all that can be accepted in relation to this appellant  is
      that he was a baptised Jehovah's Witness.  Given that since  his  1971
      baptism he had failed to  practise his religion either  in Ethiopia or
      Eritrea, the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  he  would  not
      practise his religion upon return to Eritrea.

11.   On  the  basis  of  the  Adjudicator's  findings,  which  we  consider
      sustainable, it does not seem to  us  that  Mr  McNally's  submissions
      relating to the  situation  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses  in  Eritrea  are
      pertinent.

12.   We are prepared to accept, although we make no definitive  finding  in
      respect of it, that as a result  of  a  recent  deterioration  in  the
      conditions in which the Jehovah's Witness community  in  Eritrea  find
      themselves, members who live as part of that community or who would be
      perceived as being Jehovah's Witnesses face persecution.

13.   What we do not accept,  however,  is  that  this  appellant  would  be
      perceived as a member  of  this  community  or  that  he  would  be  a
      committed adherent who chose to live with members of  that  community.
      Given that he was someone who on his own account had not  stayed  with
      other Jehovah's Witnesses when he previously visited Eritrea, there is
      no sound basis for  considering  that  he  would  be  perceived  as  a
      Jehovah's Witness or that his being a Jehovah's Witness  would  impact
      on his living situation in Eritrea.



                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT


