

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |DS (Art3:HIV_ Helical       |
|                           |        |Treatment)South Africa      |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00018          |
|Date:  20 January 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|29 January 2004                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Chairman)                                       |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mr D R Bremmer JP                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances:

For the appellant:     Miss J Russell of Counsel.
For the respondent: Mrs R Giltrow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of South Africa, had been  granted  leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Miss R Clayton) who dismissed his appeal on asylum and  human  rights
      grounds.

2.    The learned Vice President,  Mr  G  Warr,  granted  leave  upon  human
      rights issues alone for the following reason:

      "It is said since the Adjudicator dealt with this matter, the claimant
      has been diagnosed as being HIV positive and  the  disease  is  at  an
      advanced stage. While I do not rate the chances  of  success  as  very
      high, I deem it appropriate to grant leave at least."


3.    Indeed, as clarified to us by  Miss  Russell  at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing, the appeal before the Adjudicator took place in July 2002 and
      it was not until approximately one  month  later  that  the  appellant
      learned that he was HIV positive.

4.    Miss Russell made an application  to  amend  the  grounds  of  appeal,
      which  was  strenuously  opposed  by  Mrs  Giltrow.   We  refused  the
      application bearing in mind inter alia that no  explanation  had  been
      put forward for this late application.  Indeed Miss  Russell  accepted
      she was seeking to simply raise grounds relating to the  Adjudicator's
      assessment of the appellant's credibility which  had  been  previously
      considered by the Vice President in granting  leave  on  human  rights
      grounds only.  It was apparent from the basis upon  which  he  granted
      leave he would have considered the remaining grounds to be lacking  in
      arguable merit.

5.     Miss  Russell  informed  us  that  she  sought  to  distinguish   the
      circumstances of this appellant from  that  in  the  recent  Court  of
      Appeal decision in N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369.  She further most helpfully
      made it clear that her submissions solely relied on Article 3  issues,
      that she would not be seeking to  persuade  us  that  the  appellant's
      circumstances engaged Article 8 of the ECHR.  Miss Russell sought  to
      persuade  us  that  the  Tribunal  should  find  in  the   appellant's
      circumstances that Article 3 was  engaged.   In  the  alternative  she
      asked us to consider remitting the appeal for further consideration by
      the Adjudicator in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  current  medical
      condition.

6.    We have decided to dismiss the appeal.

7.    There were a number of reports and letters before us provided by Dr  B
      McCarron, a Consultant Physician in HIV/ID General  Medicine  who  has
      been treating the appellant  since  21  August  2002.   Dr  McCarron's
      letter of 30 September 2002 explains  that  when  she  first  saw  the
      appellant she "thought he was obviously immunosuppressed at that  time
      and  subsequent  blood  tests  confirmed  his  HIV  viral   load   was
      exceptionally high at  greater  than  100,000  copies/ml  and  he  was
      severely immunocompromised with a CD4 count of 143.  In  view  of  his
      very poor health he was commenced on antiretroviral drugs quickly as I
      was worried about his health."

8.    Dr McCarron continued:

           "In view of his intelligence and motivation he  is  on  quite  a
           complicated antiretroviral regime,  however,  I  think  this  is
           necessary due to the advanced stage of his HIV disease.  He  was
           commenced on therapy on 5 September 2002.   Since  then  I  have
           seen Donald on a weekly basis in view of his poor health and  he
           has made  a  very  satisfactory  improvement.   His  weight  was
           increased to 66kgs.  His cough  is  less  marked  and  he  feels
           generally  better.    However,   Donald   remains   still   very
           significantly    immunocompromised.    Without    antiretroviral
           medication I suspect his life span to  be  at  the  maximum  two
           years.  Donald still requires quite considerable  medical  input
           into his condition which I believe he would  not  get  in  South
           Africa and on compassionate grounds I would strongly support his
           application to remain in the UK."


9.    In a subsequent letter dated 10 October 2002  Dr  McCarron  refers  to
      figures taken from  the  "World  Health  Organisation"  (he  does  not
      mention the date of such report) denoting that:

           "Approximately forty million people are living with HIV  in  the
           world and ninety four per cent  live  in  developing  countries,
           twenty eight million Africans have HIV but only thirty  thousand
           Africans receive any  antiretroviral  medication  and  very  few
           receive triple therapy which Donald is taking.  Less  than  four
           per cent of people who need  antiretroviral  medication  in  the
           developing world can access it".


10.   It is apparent from Dr McCarron's subsequent letter of 9 January  2004
      that the appellant's condition was found by her to have  significantly
      improved.  Dr McCarron points out inter alia:

           "Since attending the clinic Mr Soko has done very well indeed on
           a combination of Efavirenz Tenofovir and Lamivudine.  His immune
           system has improved and his CD4 count has climbed  to  243  with
           suppressed viral load.  He remains compliant with his therapy".


11.   Dr McCarron, who gives no  indication  of  any  expertise  as  to  the
      availability of treatment in South Africa nonetheless points out  that
      should the appellant return to South Africa he would in Dr McCarron's
      opinion find it very difficult to maintain this regime.   Dr  McCarron
      continues:

           "Although some antiretroviral therapies are available  in  South
           Africa they often do not  offer  triple  therapy  which  is  the
           standard in the UK and the Westernised World and  often  not  Mr
           Soko's   present   regime.    South   Africa   has   made   some
           antiretrovirals available but I believe a years treatment  costs
           in the range of $US 1,000 per  year.   One  of  the  medications
           available is Combivir which I believe is offered at 90 cents per
           day.  However, Combivir  is  a  combination  of  Lamivudine  and
           Zidovudine, which Mr Soko previously received but had to stop in
           view of quite disabling paraesthesia of his feet  and  therefore
           this medication would  not  be  suitable  for  Mr  Soko  in  the
           future".


12.   The most recent communication from Dr McCarron appears in a bundle  of
      documents, the late production  of  which  we  agreed  to  admit  into
      evidence and to which Mrs Giltrow raised no objection.  We have  noted
      that Dr McCarron's letter of 19 January 2004 which confirms that  the
      appellant continues to attend her clinic.  It is  noteworthy  that  Dr
      McCarron points out that "he has never had any AIDS defining  illness,
      however, he does have HIV-related illnesses with recurrent respiratory
      tract infections, oral thrush and weight loss.  His CD4 count was at a
      nadir 143 and I suspect that without medication  his  life  expectancy
      would be in the range of two years.  However, if he remains in the  UK
      with monitoring and treatment I  would  expect  him  to  have  a  good
      prognosis and a long term survival".

13.   The Tribunal were also provided with an undated report  from  Dr C  A
      Alao of the Africa Security Unit, Centre for Defence Studies at  Kings
      College London.  There is attached to the report Dr Alao's  curriculum
      vitae in which inter alia he points out that for the last ten years he
      has visited  and  conducted  research  in  more  than  twenty  African
      countries  "on   different   aspects   of   Conflict,   Security   and
      International Relations".   He  also  states  that  he  is  a  regular
      commentator on African affairs on the BBC World Service Programme  and
      other television and radio networks.  Dr Alao did not appear before us
      to give evidence and although his report is undated it is apparent  by
      his reference to providing answers to the six questions raised by  the
      appellant's solicitors in a letter of  7  January  2004  that  clearly
      therefore his report would have been dated sometime in January 2004.

14.   Miss  Russell  accepted  that  although  aspects  of  the  appellant's
      circumstances would not in isolation enable the appellant to cross the
      high threshold necessary to engage Article 3,  they  would  do  so  if
      taken cumulatively.

15.   Miss  Russell  further  submitted  that  the  appellant  in  N  was  a
      comparatively young woman whilst the appellant in the instant case was
      aged 53.  Further N's country of origin was Uganda which was described
      in the CIPU Report of April 2002  as  "at  the  forefront  of  African
      countries in the treatment and prevention of AIDS".  With  respect  to
      Miss Russell we do not find there to be such a  stark  distinction  in
      this regard.  Indeed, she overlooks the opinion of her own expert,  Dr
      Alao, who in pointing out that South Africa was "still far behind with
      the treatment of the disease when compared with the developed  Western
      European countries" further observed that:

           "South Africa is ahead of most countries in  sub-Saharan  Africa
           in the treatment of HIV victims..."


16.   Miss Russell also referred us to paragraph 52 of  the  judgment  in  N
      which she argued highlighted the cumulative factors  that  had  to  be
      considered.  However, we note that Laws LJ  at  paragraph  52  of  his
      judgment observed that the mere fact that treatment in  the  receiving
      country would significantly reduce life expectancy was not  in  itself
      enough to bring Article 3 into play.  He did, however, continue:

           "On  the  other  hand,   that   factor   combined   with   other
           considerations such as the assumption of responsibility  by  the
           member state, the advanced state of the illness and the lack  of
           any family support in the receiving country, may combine,  as  a
           matter of degree, to bring  the  Article  into  force.   As  Sir
           Christopher Staughton said in K v Secretary of State [2000]  Imm
           AR 11 (para 11) there is no absolute rule:


                 'The question is whether it would be 'inhuman or  degrading
                 treatment' to expel  the  applicant,  and  to  answer  this
                 question one has to weigh up all the circumstances  of  the
                 case, as was done in the case of D and decide whether  that
                 test is fulfilled'."


17.   In this regard Miss Russell pointed out that it  was  the  appellant's
      case that he had last been in contact with his wife on  the  telephone
      in  September  2001  and  had  since  lost  contact   due   to   local
      difficulties.  It is, however, apparent to us and is clear that at the
      time of the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom he left behind a
      wife and several children in South Africa.  We further note  from  the
      appellant's recent statement signed and dated by him 19  January  2004
      that he had recently spoken to a priest in a Roman Catholic Church  in
      the United Kingdom who was going to South Africa the  following  month
      and had provided him with a letter to forward to her.  As Mrs  Giltrow
      rightly submitted it did  not  follow  that  prior  to  following  the
      appellant's return to South  Africa  he  would  be  unable  to  resume
      contact with his wife and family.

18.   Miss Russell  reminded  us  of  Dr  McCarron's  prognosis  as  to  the
      appellant's life expectancy.  In so doing we reminded her that she had
      at all times made it clear that her calculation as to the  appellant's
      life expectancy was on the  basis  the  appellant  would  be  "without
      medication" upon return to South Africa.

19.   Miss Russell referred us to objective material within the  appellant's
      bundle which she maintained demonstrated that AIDS sufferers in  South
      Africa were stigmatised and that the South African Government  was  in
      general terms intolerant of their  plight.   Without  going  into  the
      detail of the reports to which she referred us, it was apparent, as we
      made clear to her in the course of the hearing' that the extracts that
      she cited did not report this contention.  For example,  Miss  Russell
      referred us to a report relating to the use of a water cannon on  AIDS
      sufferers conducting a peaceful demonstration.   As  we  pointed  out,
      whilst  such  a  report   did   not   make   for   pleasant   reading,
      notwithstanding the possible perception by the authorities at the need
      for crowd control, it was hardly evidence which demonstrated that AIDS
      sufferers in general in South Africa were as such, stigmatised.

20.   Miss Russell recognised what she understood to be the imposition of  a
      stricter test in relation to Article 3 issues within the  judgment  of
      N.   She  pointed  out  that  it  was  not  her  contention  that  the
      appellant's circumstances amounted to a "death bed" case but  Dr  Alao
      in his report made it clear there were a number of grave  difficulties
      the appellant would face on return.

21.   Miss Russell referred us to a particular passage  at  page  2  of  his
      report.   The  passage  is,  however,  noteworthy  for   its   opening
      observation that:

           "The Government in South Africa has decided to give  victims  of
           HIV free treatment.  It is expected this will begin  before  the
           end of the year".


22.   With respect to Dr Alao he  then  proceeds  in  the  same  passage  to
      appear to speculate that it will be unlikely the  appellant  would  be
      able to benefit from this scheme because of "a  number  of  logistical
      considerations that may delay the scheme." (Dr Alao does  not  further
      elaborate) and that "after the scheme has taken off it is still  going
      to be on a pivotal scale.  Nurses and Counsellors  would  have  to  be
      trained and the scheme will only be in a  few  hospitals.   In  short,
      before the scheme can have the extensive impact it may take  some  few
      years.  For someone like Mr Soko this may  be  too  late"  (the  typed
      emphasis is ours).

23.   Dr Alao's comments appear to be speculative and he does not  refer  to
      any additional material to support his view  that  it  may  take  some
      years before the appellant has the benefit of the  free  treatment  in
      South Africa.

24.   For the reasons above stated we  do  not  find  that  the  appellant's
      circumstances even taken cumulatively would enable  the  appellant  to
      cross the high threshold demanded in order to engage Article 3.

25.   Our conclusion in this regard is reinforced by the view  expressed  by
      Laws LJ at paragraph 40 of N as follows:

           "I am no less clear that D should be very strictly confined.   I
           do not say that its confinement is to deathbed cases; that would
           be a coarse rule and an unwise one: there may be other instances
           which press with equal  force.   That  said,  in  light  of  the
           considerations  I  have  described  I  would   hold   that   the
           application of Article 3 where the complaint in  essence  is  of
           want of resources in the applicant's own country (in contrast to
           what has been available to him in the country from which  he  is
           to be removed) is only justified where the  humanitarian  appeal
           of the case is so powerful  that  it  could  not  in  reason  be
           resisted by the authorities of a civilised State. This does not,
           I acknowledge, amount to a sharp legal test; there are no  sharp
           legal tests in this area. I intend only  to  emphasise  that  an
           Article 3 case of this kind must be based on facts which are not
           only exceptional, but extreme; extreme, that is  judged  in  the
           context of cases all or many of which  (like  this  one)  demand
           one's sympathy on pressing grounds.  On its facts, D was such  a
           case.  I consider that  any  broader  view  distorts  the  bands
           between the demands of the general interest  of  the  community,
           whose service is conspicuously the duty of  elected  government,
           and the requirements  of  the  protection  of  the  individual's
           fundamental rights.  It is a balance inherent in  the  whole  of
           the Convention."


26.   Whilst it is evident that the treatment the appellant is receiving  in
      the United Kingdom may prove to be better than in  South  Africa,  and
      despite our sympathy for the appellant, his  circumstances  cannot  be
      said to be, not only exceptional but also extreme.

27.   We find that the  facts  of  this  case  do  not  establish  that  the
      appellant's return  to  South  Africa  would  place  him  at  risk  of
      treatment contrary to his human rights.

28.   For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.




                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice President
