
 | |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|HN (Statutory Abandonment - Discretionary Leave) Lebanon [2004]    |
|UKIAT 00322                                                        |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:  13 September 2004                                |
|Date Signed:       200                                             |
|Date Determination Notified:       200                             |
|25/11/2004                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                      |
|Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)                                       |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                   |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


The appellant, prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom  in  October  1997
was a resident of Lebanon.    He  claims  that  his  nationality  is  "under
consideration" by the  Lebanese  authorities.   He  applied  for  asylum  on
arrival in the United Kingdom.   The Secretary of  State  on  11  June  2003
refused asylum and issued directions for the appellant's  removal  from  the
United Kingdom.    He appealed against that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
heard by an Adjudicator, Mr H B  Trethowan,  on  26  August  2003.     In  a
determination promulgated on 8 September 2003  Mr  Trethowan  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal under the Refugee Convention and under Article 3  of  the
Human Rights Convention and allowed his appeal under Article 8 of the  Human
Rights  Convention.    The  appellant  thereafter  sought  and  was  granted
permission to appeal to the Tribunal in respect of the asylum and Article  3
issues.   Permission  was  granted  by  the  Tribunal  in  a   determination
promulgated on 27 October 2003.

2.    In a decision dated 28 October 2003 the  Secretary  of  State  granted
the appellant discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  until  6
October 2006.   Following that  grant,  on  16  April  2004  a  Home  Office
Presenting Officer wrote to the appellant's solicitors expressing  the  view
that the appeal must be said to be statutorily abandoned in accordance  with
the provisions of Section 104(4) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002.

3.    The appeal came before the Tribunal on 19 April 2004  and  the  appeal
was adjourned at that time until 13 September 2004 on  which  date  it  came
before us.   Mr D Bazini for Oaks  Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
appellant.  Mr M Blundell appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

4.    Both representatives had  put  in  skeleton  arguments  prior  to  the
hearing as directed by  the  Tribunal  at  the  previous  hearing.   We  are
grateful to them  both  for  those  skeleton  arguments  and  for  the  oral
submissions in  which  they  both  developed  the  points  in  the  skeleton
arguments.

5.    Mr Bazini pointed to the  contrast  between  the  wording  of  Section
58(9) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 which  stated  that  a  pending
appeal under any provision of the part of the Act other than  Section  69(3)
was to be treated as abandoned if the appellant was granted leave  to  enter
or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.    He  argued  that  this   contrasted
significantly with the wording of the current  legislation  under  which  an
appeal under Section 82(1) was to be treated as abandoned  if  an  appellant
was granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or  left  the
United Kingdom.   Accordingly, Mr Bazini contended that Section  82(1)  only
concerned appeals "to an Adjudicator" whereas this  was  an  appeal  to  the
Tribunal.  Mr Bazini accepted that under Section 104, appeals under  Section
82(1) were pending during the entire  period  up  to  when  the  appeal  was
finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned or lapsed, but  argued  that  the
issue before the Tribunal was when an appeal could  be  abandoned  and  that
this was a different matter.   It  was  clear  in  the  2002  Act  that  the
relevant sections were dealing with appeals at  different  stages.   Section
82 came under the heading "Appeal to Adjudicator", whereas  appeals  to  the
Tribunal came under the heading relevant Appeal from  Adjudicator.   If  the
statute had intended to refer to abandonment of appeals before the  Tribunal
it would have done so in the previous  terms.    On  general  principles  of
statutory interpretation, when legislation was not  entirely  clear  it  was
necessary to ensure that it was neither draconian nor  absurd.    Abandoning
an appeal by statute was a  very  serious  step  and  it  was  necessary  to
construe the matter strictly and  any  doubt  should  be  construed  in  the
favour of the appellant.

6.    It was also the case that if the Secretary  of  State's  argument  was
right it led  to  a  perverse  conclusion  since  the  need  for  speed  was
emphasised.   If the appeal was not abandoned the Tribunal could decide  the
appeal but  if  it  was  abandoned  then  the  appeal  for  asylum  was  not
determined and the appellant would be able to apply again so there would  be
a potential appeal before an Adjudicator  and  further  avenues  potentially
thereafter all of which would lead to delay and expense.   It  achieved  the
opposite of what Parliament had intended.  If  the  Tribunal  were  with  Mr
Blundell it might be appropriate to make suggestions  to  the  Secretary  of
State as to future manner of dealing with matters of this sort such  as  not
granting leave when the decision in principle to do so had  been  taken  but
to give an indication to that effect and await the outcome  of  the  appeal,
which would at least achieve finality.  The current approach was absurd.

7.    Mr Blundell argued that the 2002  legislation  was  clearly  different
and  was  differently  drafted.    The  Section  82  right  of  appeal   was
predicated on the concept of an immigration decision whereas under the  1999
Act there were different sections where an appeal could be made.    All  the
rights of appeal now came  under  Section  82.    This  change  of  approach
brought about the inevitable change  in  the  wording  of  the  legislation.
Otherwise Mr Blundell relied upon his skeleton argument.

8.    By way of reply Mr Bazini  argued  that  Mr  Blundell  had  asked  the
Tribunal to read into the Act something that was not there.   Section  82(1)
concerned appeals to Adjudicators and if  Section  104(1)  was  intended  to
cover both Adjudicator and the Tribunal appeals then it would say  so.   The
nature of the appeal applied throughout the process.

9.    We adjourned to consider this  issue,  since  there  would  have  been
little point to go on and consider  the  substantive  issues  raised  in  Mr
Bazini's grounds of appeal if we  were  not  with  him  on  the  abandonment
point.   Upon consideration we  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  indeed
abandoned his appeal and there was therefore no appeal before us.   We  gave
brief reasons for this to the representatives and  undertook  to  set  these
out in greater detail in our determination which we now do.

10.   It is convenient that we set out the relevant statutory provisions  at
the outset.

11.   Section 82 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  is  to
be  found  in  part  5  of  the  Act  under  the  sub-heading   "Appeal   to
Adjudicator".  The relevant parts of that section provide as follows:

      Section 82(1)

      Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a  person  he  may
      appeal to an Adjudicator.


12.   Section 104 of the 2002 Act is headed "Pending Appeal" and  states  as
follows:

      (1)   An appeal under Section 82(1) is pending during the period -

            (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

           (b)    ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                 abandoned (or when it lapses under Section 99).

      (2)   An appeal under Section 82(1) is not finally determined for  the
           purposes of sub-section (1)(b) while  a  further  appeal  or  an
           application under Section 101(2) -

           (a)   has been instituted and, is not  yet  finally  determined,
                 withdrawn or abandoned, or

           (b)   may be brought (ignoring the possibility of an appeal  out
                 of time with permission).

      (3)   The remittal of  an  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator  under  section
           102(1)(c) is not a final determination for the purposes of  sub-
           section (2) above.

      (4)   An appeal under Section 82(1) shall be treated as  abandoned  if
           the appellant -

           (a)   is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
                 or

            (b)  leaves the United Kingdom.

      (5)   An appeal under Section 82(2)(a), (c), (d), (e) or (f) shall  be
           treated as finally determined if a  deportation  order  is  made
           against the appellant.

13.   Section 101 of the 2002 Act is headed "Appeal  to  Tribunal"  and  the
relevant parts of that state as follows:

      (1)   A party to an appeal to an Adjudicator under Section  82  or  83
           may, with permission of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, appeals
           to the Tribunal against the  Adjudicator's  determination  on  a
           point of law.

14.   The other relevant provision to mention is  that  referred  to  by  Mr
Bazini in particular, Section 58(9) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
   This states as follows:

      "(9)  A pending appeal under any provision of  this  Part  other  than
           Section 69(3) is to be treated as abandoned if the appellant  is
           granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom."

15.   As  Mr  Bazini  rightly  points  out,  the  wording  of  the  relevant
provisions is different as between the two Acts.   He argues that the  clear
implication from this is that Parliament  did  not  intend  the  abandonment
provisions to apply other than to appeals before Adjudicators  in  the  2002
Act, whereas under the 1999 Act any pending appeal under  any  provision  of
that part of the Act other than  arising  under  Section  69(3)  was  to  be
treated as abandoned if as in this case the appellant was granted  leave  to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom.

16.   On the face of it we can see the attraction of Mr  Bazini's  argument.
We consider however that that argument ignores  the  provisions  of  Section
104 of the 2002 Act, and in particular sub-sections 1 and 2.   In  our  view
it is clear from these provisions that an appeal under Section 82(1),  which
this appeal is, remains pending until the time when, as  in  this  case,  it
can be regarded as having been abandoned by virtue  of  discretionary  leave
having been granted.  We do  not  read  sub-section  1  of  Section  104  as
indicating  that  a  Section  82(1)  appeal  is  simply  an  appeal  to   an
Adjudicator against the immigration decision, but rather as  indicating  the
starting point of the appeal as it goes through the system. In our  view  it
is intended  to  cover  on  appeal  at  every  stage  until  it  is  finally
determined, withdrawn or abandoned.   That is to say, we  do  not  read  the
heading to Section 82(1) as doing any more than identifying the  gateway  to
the appeal process where the original appeal  is  made  to  an  Adjudicator.
Section 82 thereafter goes on to set out the various types  of  decision  in
respect  of  which  an  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator  can  be  made.     This
clarification and restructuring of  the  legislation  is  clearly  different
from the rather piecemeal way  in  which  appeal  rights  were  set  out  in
previous legislation, and that as much as anything in our view explains  the
different ordering of the Act in this regard.

17.   We have not of course ignored the points that Mr Bazini  has  made  to
us about the consequences of our decision and the need  for  legislation  to
be construed so as to resolve ambiguities in favour, as  in  this  case,  of
the person more likely to be disadvantaged by them and we also bear in  mind
the points that Mr Bazini made about the cost and time implications  of  the
decision to which we have come.  Those points we consider  would  have  more
force if there were ambiguity in the legislation, but we  do  not  see  such
ambiguity.  Rather  we  consider  that  on  a  proper  construction  of  the
relevant  provisions  we  can  only  conclude  that  this  appeal  has  been
abandoned.   The contrast in the headings i.e. "Appeal  to  an  Adjudicator"
comprising the sub-heading before Section 82 in contrast to the  sub-heading
"Appeal from Adjudicator" above Section 100 of the  Act  and  thereafter  to
the end of Section 103 does no more in our view  than  reflect  the  logical
ordering of the various provisions rather than carrying any implications  as
to how specific provisions of the Act are to be interpreted.

18.   For these reasons therefore we have  concluded  that  the  appellant's
appeal was abandoned at the point at  which  he  was  granted  discretionary
leave to remain on 28 October 2003.  There is  therefore  no  appeal  before
us.




                                                                   D K Allen
                                                              Vice President






















