




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

    TW (Risk on return  -  Unauthorised  Departure)  Myanmar)  [2004]  UKIAT
00285

                                            Date heard   :   7 October  2004
                                               Date notified 12 October 2004
                                   Before:-



                       DR H H  STOREY (VICE PRESIDENT)
                               MRS M McGREGOR
                                 MR A EAMES


                                                               Between








                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representatives
Mr J Rendle of  Counsel  instructed  by  Sasdev  &  Co  Solicitors  for  the
appellant; Mr G Saunders for the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.This decision is reported simply in order to highlight the  importance  in
appeals brought by nationals of  Myanmar  of  adjudicators  making  specific
findings on the question of whether such nationals  left  Myanmar  with  our
without authorisation.

2. The appellant, a national of Myanmar, has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a  determination  of  Adjudicator,  Mr  R  F  V  Sanderson,
dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  decision  by  the  respondent  giving
directions for removal following refusal to grant asylum.


3. Given the terms in which statutory review was  sought  and  granted,  the
only arguable issue before us concerns the Adjudicator's  treatment  of  the
evidence relating to whether  the  appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  of
serious harm from the authorities upon return to Burma by virtue  of  having
left without authorisation.

4. We have some doubts that  this  is  an  issue  properly  raised  in  this
appeal. It was not raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  nor  at  the  hearing
before  the  Adjudicator.  However,  we  note  that  Elias,  J  in  granting
statutory review, stated that it seemed to him right  that  the  IAT  should
consider it and hence we consider we should do just that.

5. When considering this issue, however, we meet a  major  stumbling  block.
The Adjudicator failed to make any findings on whether  the  appellant  left
Myanmar with or without authorisation. In  the  context  of  Myanmar  cases,
that seems to us a serious failing, since, on the only evidence  before  us,
that of expert Win Soe, persons who have left Mynamar without  authorisation
face punishment consisting in lengthy imprisonment on return.

6. We considered whether the fact that  the  Adjudicator  had  made  adverse
credibility findings meant that not entitled not to  attach  any  weight  to
the appellant's claims that she left Myanmar without a  valid  passport.  We
concluded we could not exclude that a person  could  be  wholly  lacking  in
credibility in respect  of  their  past  experiences,  yet  still  be  found
credible in respect of claims about leaving without authorisation.  All  the
Adjudicator did in this case was note that the  appellant  claimed  to  have
left Myanmar without a  genuine  Burmese  passport,  albeit  her  agent  had
provided her with a passport. What he needed to do, but did not do,  was  to
make a finding on whether he accepted her evidence about this. Without  that
evidence, we cannot decide properly address the returnee issue.

7. What view the Adjudicator who next hears this case takes of the  evidence
on this issue is entirely a matter for him  (or  her).  The  fact  that  the
appellant was able to enter through UK controls with a  passport  which  was
not noted anywhere to be false or in someone else's name could  be  said  to
be evidence pointing to a conclusion that she did not in fact leave  without
valid documents (either a passport or some other travel  document).  On  the
other hand, there is some suggestion in the US State Department Report  that
the authorities in Myanmar  do  make  it  difficult  for  women  to  receive
authorisation to leave the country. Even were an  Adjudicator  to  find  the
appellant  had  left  Myanmar  without  authorisation,  it  would  still  be
necessary to consider the state of  the  evidence  as  to  the  consequences
facing  persons  who  return  to  Myanmar  having   earlier   left   without
authorisation. The only specific item of evidence dealing  with  this  issue
before us was the report from Win  Soe,  which  does  not  make  clear  what
sources it relies on apart from an annexed article.

8. For the above reasons the appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  it  is
remitted to be heard by an Adjudicator other than Mr R F V Sanderson.

Approved for electronic distribution
                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
