
Heard at: Field House | | | |
|On 16 April 2004           |        |AH (Town Tunnis regarded as |
|                           |        |Bravanese) Somalia [2004]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00144                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|08 June 2004                                                      |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr A L McGeachy                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us the  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  M  A  Rana  of  Counsel,
instructed by Ratnam & Co, Solicitors and the respondent was represented  by
Mr A Hutton a Home Office Presenting Officer.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  She was born on 1 January  1975  and
so is now 28 years old.  She appeals the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr P  M
Petherbridge, who in a determination promulgated on 28 June  2003  dismissed
her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State that she  was  not
entitled to refugee status and the removing her from the United Kingdom  was
not contrary to her rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

Permission to appeal was given on a narrow basis.  The  Vice  President  who
gave permission (Mr C P Mather) said: "Permission is granted to  enable  the
Tribunal  to  consider  the  status  of  the  Tunni  sub-clan  and   whether
membership of it, without more, gives rise to a real risk on return".

The Adjudicator  found  the  appellant  to  have  been  untruthful  in  some
respects but his key findings for the purposes  of  this  appeal  appear  at
paragraph 30.  The Adjudicator said:

  "I accept the appellant as being a Somalian national....  I  accept  also
  that the appellant is of the Tunni sub-clan being one of  the  sub-groups
  of the Brava.  However, I do not consider that she  can  be  regarded  as
  Benadiri and I accept the objective evidence as set out on page 33 of the
  appellant's bundle that the Tunni belong to the Digil clan  family  which
  itself is a majority clan.  I do not therefore accept  the  appellant  as
  being of a minority clan.  I do not accept therefore that she would  have
  been persecuted because of her Tunni clan membership."

By a letter received on  8  April  2004  but  which  did  not  come  to  the
attention of this Tribunal until the morning of the hearing,  the  appellant
asked for permission to call Dr Virginia Luling as an expert  witness.   The
application was supported by a short report from Dr  Luling.   Although  the
application was rather late the case  had  been  set  down  for  hearing  to
determine the issues of safety in Somalia and Mr Hutton  should  have  been,
and was, ready to argue about country conditions.  That being  so,  although
Mr Hutton opposed the application, we saw  no  injustice  in  permitting  Dr
Luling to give evidence.

We found Dr Luling a very authoritative and impressive witness.   Dr  Luling
is qualified in social anthropology.  She has a first degree awarded by  the
University of Oxford and a Masters and  Doctorate  from  London  University.
She has made a particular study of Somalia and a town in  Southern  Somalia.
Although she did her initial field work in the 1960s she  has  kept  abreast
with affairs in the country and  most  recently  visited  it  in  1996.   Mr
Hutton did suggest that she may have been a little out of touch because  she
had not been to the country more recently.  We reject that  submission.   Dr
Luling's  reputation  depends  on  her  being  familiar  with  the   current
situation in Somalia and we are satisfied that she was  able  to,  and  did,
give honest and sound evidence about circumstances there today.

Dr Luling is very familiar with the documents that are commonly produced  in
hearings concerning Somalia.  She knows the Report  on  Minority  Groups  in
Somalia which was the result of a joint  British,  Danish  and  Dutch  Fact-
Finding Mission to  Nairobi  in  September  2000  and  the  Somalia  country
report.  We look to the report dated October 2003.  Section B  of  the  CIPU
report sets out major Somalia clan families and under number 5  it  mentions
the Digil clan family made up of  the  Dabarre,  Jiddu,  Tunni,  Geledi  and
Garre.  Dr Luling agreed that this annex does identify correctly  the  major
Somali clan families but said that it had to be understood that  "major"  in
this sense meant the major groups within the Somali clan  family  structure.
This was not the same as saying that the groups  were  politically  powerful
or important.  By and large Digil land has been  occupied  by  Hawiye  armed
groups and Digil cattle have been confiscated.   Whilst  it  is  correct  to
think of the Digil as a historically significant group it is wrong to  think
that they are powerful and able to protect themselves against others.

Dr Luling then explained to us something about the Tunni sub-clan.

The background material identifies a  group  known  as  the  "Tunni  Torre".
This appellant is not a Tunni Torre and  this  determination  is  not  about
Tunni Torres.  We mention them simply to distinguish the present  case  from
them.

Dr Luling said that the background material failed to recognise  that  there
were two distinct Tunni groups and their  circumstances  and  problems  were
not the same.  At paragraph 6.5 of the report on minority groups in  Somalia
the relationship between  Brava  and  Tunni  are  considered.   The  reports
states:

  "The elders from Brava told the delegation that they consisted of two sub-
  groups:   The Bravanese and the Tunni.  Both groups are  from  Brava  and
  they share to a large extent the same culture.  They inter-marry  between
  their groups.  However, the Bravanese consider themselves Benadiri, while
  the Tunni do not.  The Bravanese are  of  Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish
  origin.  According to the Bravanese elders the Tunni belong to the  Digil
  clan-family.  They are originally from the region of Brava.  However, the
  elders gave the delegation a copy of a letter,  written  by  the  Bravani
  elders in Nairobi to a number of organisations (including the UNHCR,  the
  US Immigration Department and Amnesty International), on their  situation
  in Kenya, in which the Tunni are mentioned in Bravanese as  part  of  the
  Baravani Community."

Dr Luling agreed with all  this  but  said  that  the  comments  had  to  be
explained further to be understood properly.  Those  Tunnis  who  live  away
from Brava have preserved, and would be seen to have  preserved,  their  own
distinct identity.  They would be recognised  as  part  of  the  Digil  clan
family and should be considered  accordingly.   However,  those  Tunnis  who
lived near to Brava have  been  practically  simulated  into  the  Bravanese
community.

Dr Luling had spoken to the appellant and understood her to have  come  from
a particular village near to Brava.  Dr Luling did  not  herself  know  that
village  but  she  knew  of  it  and  its  whereabouts.   She  was  entirely
satisfied, and the Tribunal finds, that the appellant was a  member  of  the
group of Tunnis closely associated with the Bravanese and she  accepted  the
Tribunal's slightly tongue in cheek suggestion  that  that  group  could  be
identified as "Town Tunnis".

Dr Luling explained that although the "Town Tunnis" and  the  Bravanese,  as
explained in the report on minority  groups,  inter-marry  and  to  a  large
extent share the same culture, they remain  aware  of  their  own  identity.
The Bravanese  believe  that  they  are  of  Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish
origin and the Town Tunnis, in contrast, are aware that they come  from  the
Digil clan family.  A Town Tunni who was asked to describe his clan  origins
would see himself as separate from the Bravanese and connected to the  Digil
clan family.  Similarly a Bravanese who was asked the  same  question  would
identify himself with the Benadiri and  would  see  himself  as  someone  of
Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish origin.  Dr Luling  accepted  entirely  that
the elders from Brava would have explained that the Bravanese and  the  Town
Tunnis were separate  groups.   That  is  how  the  people  saw  themselves.
However they preserved their sense of ethnic  identity  by  descent  through
the male line.  Inter-marriage was common and, in reality,  the  two  groups
were intermingled.

Dr Luling's point was that the "Town Tunnis" would be  perceived  by  others
as Bravanese.

In simple terms, a "Town Tunni" faces exactly the same  problems,  including
the risk of persecution, as does a Bravanese.  A  decision  maker  assessing
the risks faced by  a  Town  Tunni  should  assess  them  as  if  they  were
Bravanese.

In fairness to Dr  Luling,  we  should  make  it  clear  that  she  was  not
specifically  asked  if  a  "Town  Tunni"  would  have  the  same   problems
relocating in other  parts  of  Somalia  as  would  a  Bravanese.   We  have
concluded  that  a  Town  Tunni  would  experience  these  problems  because
difficulties of relocation arise not so much because a person  is  from  the
"wrong clan" but because she is not a member of the "right clan".  It  seems
to us from the background material that  a  Town  Tunni  would  find  it  as
difficult to establish herself as would a Bravanese.  However, as  explained
above, this was not expressly put to Dr Luling and if  we  are  wrong  about
that, then she should not be criticised.

It follows from this that the Adjudicator's analysis of the problems  facing
the appellant was plainly wrong although we  must  emphasise  that  we  have
only been able to reach that conclusion  because  the  evidence  before  the
Adjudicator has been explained to us by Dr Luling.  This finding should  not
in any way be seen as a criticism of the  Adjudicator  whose  findings  were
entirely sensible in the light of the evidence as it appeared before him.

We must now consider if the appellant would risk persecution  in  the  event
of her return as a Bravanese.  After some hesitation we  have  come  to  the
conclusion that she would.  We have  considered  the  UNHCR  paper  entitled
"position on the  return  of  rejected  Asylum  Seekers  to  Somalia"  dated
January 2004.  This supports the position we have taken  above  that  it  is
not reasonable to expect someone in Somalia to take up residence in an  area
or community where  persons  with  a  different  ethnic,  tribal,  religious
and/or cultural background are settled, or where  they  would  otherwise  be
considered as aliens.

It is difficult to get a clear picture about conditions in Southern  Somalia
because it is so dangerous to go there  that  humanitarian  agencies  rarely
visit.  It is well established that the Bravanese  have  been  a  vulnerable
group for a long time and we find nothing in recent changes in  the  country
that  suggest  an  improvement  in  their  circumstances.   The   US   State
Department report published in  February  2004  is  similarly  gloomy.   The
report on minority groups acknowledges that  the  Benadiri,  which  is,  for
these purposes, another word for Bravanese,  have  no  protection  from  any
clan.  Whilst each case needs to be decided on its own  merits  we  find  no
basis for concluding that this  appellant  would  be  safe.   She  would  be
regarded as a woman from the Minority Benadiri clan.  There would be no  one
to protect her.  She would be returned to  a  country  where  she  would  be
rejected unless she was amongst her  own  people  and  where  she  would  be
vulnerable to banditry and disorder made worse because of her  status  as  a
member of a minority clan.

In all the circumstances we conclude that the appellant cannot  be  returned
safely.  She is entitled to  refugee  status  and,  for  the  same  reasons,
returning her would be contrary  to  her  rights  under  article  3  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights.

We allow this appeal.




                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                               16 April 2004

