
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On:  15 July 2004          |        |DW (Article 8 - Delay -     |
|Prepared on: 19 July 2004  |        |Proportionality - October   |
|                           |        |Policy) Kenya [2004] UKIAT  |
|                           |        |00219                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|5 August 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge Huskinson (Vice President)                       |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Mr R Bremmer                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms T Hart (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:     Mr M A Rana (Counsel instructed by Ratnam &   Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals to the Tribunal, with permission, from
      the Determination of Mr M D Oakley, Adjudicator,  promulgated  on  23
      September 2003 whereby he dismissed (on asylum grounds)  but  allowed
      (on human rights grounds under Article 8 of ECHR) the appeal  by  the
      Respondent (hereafter called the Claimant) against the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to  refuse  asylum  to  the  Claimant  and  to  give
      directions for the removal of the Claimant to Kenya.

2.    The Claimant is a citizen of Kenya born on  10  February  1959.   The
      basis on which he claimed asylum is that he was an  employee  at  the
      University of Nairobi and was a member of the Ford Asili Party.  As a
      result of this membership he  was  arrested  and  detained  and  ill-
      treated by the police on three occasions during 1997 because  he  was
      seen to be against the  then  current  government,  namely  the  Kanu
      Government.  Eventually the university authorities sent the  Claimant
      home on forced paid leave for one year and during the first few  days
      of that period the Claimant came to understand that the  police  were
      again looking for him and that in particular the Police Flying  Squad
      were doing so, who the Determination said  were  infamous  for  their
      brutality.  The Claimant, therefore, decided he must leave Kenya  and
      did so in December 1998 arriving in the United Kingdom on 25 December
      1998 and being granted, initially,  24  hours  leave  to  enter.   He
      applied for asylum on 27 January 1999.

3.     The  Adjudicator  accepted  the  Claimant  as  a  credible  witness.
      However, he dismissed the asylum appeal, and the related human rights
      appeal under Article 3, on the basis that by reason of the change  of
      government in December 2002 and the election  of  a  new  parliament,
      which gave a landslide victory to Mr Kabiki's party, the Claimant was
      no longer at any real risk on return.  While  a  Respondent's  Notice
      (which is referred to further below) has been served in this case, it
      is not and has never been contended that the Adjudicator in  any  way
      erred in dismissing the asylum or Article 3 appeal.

4.    The Adjudicator did,  however,  allow  the  Claimant's  appeal  under
      Article 8.  Having set out the  various  steps  in  the  analysis  in
      paragraph 34 he continued in paragraphs 35 to  41  in  the  following
      terms:

      "35.  I find firstly that the delay by the Respondent in  determining
           the Appellant's claim is  lamentable.   The  Appellant  was  not
           interviewed for two years after  his  arrival  and  having  been
           interviewed, it took the Respondent a further eighteen months to
           issue a Notice of Refusal.


      36.   The Respondent  has  not  questioned  the  credibility  of  the
           Appellant's account and given the Appellant's  account  and  the
           objective evidence I am satisfied that it is  more  than  likely
           that the Appellant, if his case had been  decided  timeously  by
           the Respondent, would have been granted Refugee  status  at  the
           time he originally made the application.


      37.   A similar situation so far as delay is concerned was considered
           recently by the Court of Appeal in Arben Shala  Case  Number  CI
           2002/2059 in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  part  of  their
           judgement stated "...the Appellant's  case  has  an  exceptional
           feature, namely that had his asylum application been dealt  with
           reasonably efficiently,  he  would  have  been  likely  to  have
           obtained at least Exceptional Leave to Remain  as  a  cross-over
           regime, thereby giving him the ability to apply from within  the
           United Kingdom for a variation... the IAT  does  not  appear  to
           have considered that submission... in other words, but  for  the
           remarkable delay on the part of the Home Office in dealing  with
           his asylum claim the Appellant would not have  fallen  into  the
           category where the applicable policy requires an application for
           Leave to Enter...".


      38.   I have no doubt whatsoever that the Appellant's account of  why
           he left Kenya before a decision had been made  and  a  different
           government had been in power from that which is now in power  in
           Kenya that the Appellant and his family would have been  granted
           Refugee status.


      39.    The  Appellant  and  his  wife  have  themselves   been   very
           industrious; both have had employment and more importantly, have
           two children that they brought with them, namely [       ] and [
                 ].  In the case of [       ] he has spent nearly half  his
           life in the United Kingdom and in the case of [        ]  nearly
           five years.  In both cases, these two boys from all the  reports
           about them have been extremely industrious and both are  clearly
           bright boys who should do well  academically  and  in  addition,
           especially [       ], has already  excelled  himself  at  sport.
           Both boys will have had  chance  to  enrich  themselves  in  the
           United Kingdom culture and will have acquired  many  friends  at
           school.


      40.   I have been referred to the case of Benson Wachai UK IAT  06682
           in which the Tribunal made the following  statement  during  the
           course of their judgement "in our view the  Home  Office  cannot
           now be allowed to excuse  their  own  inaction  in  taking  such
           inexplicably slow steps over the years to decide the future of a
           family with young children, in terms of the  legitimate  purpose
           of maintaining an effective system of immigration control  which
           they themselves so signally failed to  secure.   Whilst  at  any
           reasonable time  the  decision  under  appeal  would  have  been
           proportional to that purpose, by the time it was taken, five and
           a half years after this family first tried to  regularise  their
           situation here by making an application for Indefinite Leave  to
           Remain (even if outside the  rules),  that  was  no  longer  the
           case".


      41.   That paragraph,  taken  from  the  IAT's  judgement,  could  be
           equally  applied  to  the  Appellant  and  his  family  in  this
           particular case and whilst  quite  clearly  there  would  be  an
           interference in  their  returning  the  family  to  Kenya,  that
           interference does have legitimate aims, namely  the  control  of
           immigration, it is clear to me that the interference is  totally
           disproportionate given the circumstances relating to  the  facts
           of this particular Appeal, notwithstanding the legitimate aim to
           be achieved.

5.    Accordingly the  Adjudicator  allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  under
      Article 8.

6.    Before coming to the respective arguments of Ms Hart and Mr Rana, two
      points can be noted at this stage.

7.    First, there is the somewhat puzzling passage in paragraph 38 of  the
      Determination.  It seems as though some words may have been  omitted.
      It is not clear what the Adjudicator is expressing there  to  be  "no
      doubt whatsoever" about.   On one reading it might be thought he  was
      saying he had no doubt whatsoever that, if the asylum claim had  been
      considered earlier, the Claimant  would  have  been  granted  refugee
      status.  However, this would be dealing with the  same  point  as  is
      dealt with in paragraph 36 and would be putting  it  in  a  different
      manner and at a  higher  level.   In  paragraph  36  the  Adjudicator
      expressed himself satisfied that "it is more than  likely"  that  the
      Claimant would have been granted refugee status if the claim had been
      decided timeously at the time he originally made his application.  Ms
      Hart drew attention to the fact that there was no blanket  policy  in
      favour of Kenyan asylum seekers in place at any relevant time and she
      argued that it was speculation on the  part  of  the  Adjudicator  to
      reach a conclusion as to the prospects of a successful outcome if the
      asylum application had been considered earlier.

8.    A further point to note is the following.  By agreement  between  the
      parties at the hearing before the Adjudicator certain facts regarding
      the history of this claim were not revealed to the Adjudicator, so as
      not to influence the  Adjudicator  by  what  had  happened  before  a
      previous Adjudicator.  It seems, however, that rather than the  delay
      being between an application for asylum on  27  January  1999  and  a
      reasons for refusal letter dated 12 May 2003, the true chronology  is
      as follows:

            . 25 December 1998: arrived in the United Kingdom.

            . 27 January 1999: Claimant makes asylum claim  with  his  wife
              and two children as dependants.

            . 8 August 2000: the Claimant's then solicitors may  (but  this
              is not entirely clear) have been  issued  with  an  SEF  form
              which should have been returned by 22 August  2000  and  they
              may also have been informed that the Claimant  should  attend
              for an interview on 5 September 2000.

            . 15 September 2000:  the Secretary  of  State  writes  to  the
              Claimant, at his previous  solicitors,  indicating  that  his
              application  for  asylum  had  been  refused  and  that   the
              Secretary of State had decided to make  a  deportation  order
              against the Claimant.

            . 28 November 2000: letter from the Claimant's new  solicitors,
              Ratnam & Co, to IND complaining  of  the  negligence  of  the
              Claimant's previous solicitors  and  that  the  Claimant  was
              never aware that documents had arrived for  him  to  complete
              and asking that the matter be reconsidered  and  that  a  new
              questionnaire be sent out for the Claimant.

            . 14 December 2000:  this was the date  originally  set  for  a
              hearing before an Adjudicator.

            . May 2001:  the Tribunal was informed that  in  May  2001  the
              Adjudicator (or possibly the Tribunal) directed that the case
              be sent back to the Secretary of  State  for  reconsideration
              bearing  in  mind  what  had  happened  with   the   previous
              solicitors.

            . October 2001:  the Claimant is interviewed.

            . 12 May 2003:  reasons for refusal letter.


9.    On behalf of the Secretary of State Ms Hart  advanced  the  following
      arguments:

      i)    She contended that the delay in this case was nothing  like  so
           great as the Adjudicator had perceived it to  be.   He  had  not
           been  informed  of  the  true  facts  regarding  what  had  been
           happening (so no criticism attaches to him in this respect)  but
           in the light of the above mentioned chronology the Secretary  of
           State could not be properly criticised for "lamentable" delay.


      ii)   Ms Hart argued that the case of Shala should  be  distinguished
           as that was a case where the question was whether the  Applicant
           should be required to leave the country so as to make an out-of-
           country application for entry clearance as a spouse  as  someone
           settled in the United Kingdom.   It was held  that,  bearing  in
           mind that if the Applicant's claim for  asylum  had  been  dealt
           with when it should have  been  he  would  at  least  have  been
           granted exceptional leave to remain if not indefinite  leave  to
           remain, this fact should  have  been  taken  into  account  when
           considering  whether  it  was  proportionate  to  apply  to  the
           Applicant the provisions which are intended to discourage  queue
           jumping, namely make him leave the country for  his  country  of
           origin  and  make  an  out  of  country  application  for  entry
           clearance.  Bearing in mind that, if his claim  had  been  dealt
           with promptly, he would have had  the  status  to  make  an  in-
           country  application  it  was  considered  that  it   would   be
           disproportionate to apply to him the same requirements as  would
           apply to someone who had no meritorious claim at the  date  they
           made such claim and who could be expected  to  make  an  out  of
           country application.  Ms Hart pointed out that  in  the  present
           case there was no question of the Claimant seeking  to  rely  on
           delay so as to excuse him from having to go  back  to  Kenya  to
           make an out of country application.  There was no available  out
           of country application for him to make.  What this Claimant  was
           seeking to do, argued Ms Hart, was to rely upon  the  delay  as
           granting him  a  self  standing  right  to  be  treated  as  not
           removable from the United  Kingdom,  rather  then  merely  being
           spared the requirement of making an out of  country  application
           for entry clearance.  In this connection Ms Hart referred to the
           case of Janjanin [2004] EWCA Civ  448  at  paragraph  61.    She
           accepted  that  delay  could  be  a  relevant  consideration  on
           proportionality but it was  not  determinative  in  the  present
           case.

      iii)  As regards the question of interference with  family  life  she
           argued there would be no such interference as the  whole  family
           would be removed to Kenya together.


      iv)   She accepted that the Claimant and his family had established a
           private life in the United Kingdom and that their removal  would
           involve an interference with this private life, such that it was
           necessary to consider  the  question  of  proportionality.   She
           argued that the  Claimant  and  his  family  would  be  able  to
           establish a private life (albeit different from the private life
           they enjoyed in the United Kingdom) in the new circumstances  in
           Kenya under the new regime.


      v)    Ms Hart referred to the starred Tribunal Determination in [2004]
           UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia) and she contended that  the  Adjudicator
           had  erred  in  concluding  that  the  interference   with   the
           Claimant's private life would be disproportionate.


      vi)   She distinguished the case of Wachai [2002] UKIAT 06682  on  the
           basis  that  there  there  were  family  members,   namely   the
           grandparents, who would be remaining in the United Kingdom.


      vii)  Ms Hart noted the point raised by Mr Rana based upon the  policy
           announced in October 2003 by the Secretary of  State  (hereafter
           "the October Policy")  in  relation  to  certain  categories  of
           Applicant who arrived in the United Kingdom and made a claim for
           asylum prior to 2 October 2000, being Applicants with children.
           She argued however that this was of no relevance to  the  matter
           before  the  Tribunal.   The  Claimant   would   be   considered
           separately and in due course under the October Policy and if  he
           qualified he would be granted the appropriate leave - if he  did
           not qualify then he would not be granted leave under the policy.

9.    In response to these points Mr Rana advanced the following arguments:

      i)    Even in the  light  of  the  fuller  chronology,  showing  what
           happened with the  Claimant's  previous  solicitors,  there  was
           still unreasonable delay on the part of the Secretary of  State.
           In particular he drew attention to the fact that  the  case  was
           sent back for reconsideration in May 2001 and  no  decision  was
           reached until May 2003.


      ii)   Mr Rana accepted the distinction made in relation to the  Shala
           case.  However, in reliance  on  Janjanin  at  paragraph  63  he
           argued  that  the  delay  in  the  present  case  was  still  of
           considerable relevance, although not determinative.

      iii)  The reason why delay was particularly relevant, he argued,  was
           that if a decision had been taken within a reasonable time then,
           having regard to paragraphs  36  and  38  of  the  Adjudicator's
           Determination, the Claimant would  have  been  recognised  as  a
           refugee and would have been granted indefinite leave to  remain.
           In particular Mr Rana argued  that  the  application  could  and
           should have been decided before  the  change  of  government  in
           Kenya in December 2002 and that, if it had  been,  the  Claimant
           would have obtained ILR.


      iv)   He argued that there would be an interference  with  Article  8
           rights, which would mostly be private life rights.  He indicated
           that there may be some interference with family life rights, but
           he did not argue  that  there  was  any  family  with  whom  the
           Claimant enjoyed family life in the United  Kingdom  beyond  the
           Claimant and his wife and his three children (one  child  having
           been born in the United Kingdom) all of whom  would  be  removed
           with the Claimant.


      v)    Mr Rana pointed  out  that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
           consider Article 8 and proportionality at all in the reasons for
           refusal  letter.   It  was  therefore  for  the  Adjudicator  to
           consider this question.


      vi)   Mr Rana  accepted  that  the  appropriate  question  which  the
           Adjudicator should have asked was whether in the  light  of  the
           facts found by him a decision to remove was outside the range of
           reasonable responses.  However, he  argued  that,  although  the
           Adjudicator did not expressly remind himself of  this  test,  he
           should be taken  as  having  applied  it  bearing  in  mind  his
           phraseology  in  paragraph  41  of  the  Determination  when  he
           concludes that it is clear  to  him  that  the  interference  is
           "totally disproportionate".


      vii)  He referred to the  case  of  Edore  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  716  at
           paragraph 20 and also to paragraph 12 of [2004] UKIAT  00088  HR
           (Serbia and Montenegro), which sets out the proper  approach  to
           the question of whether a decision by the Secretary of State  is
           or is not proportionate.


      viii) He referred to the Court of Appeal  decisions  in  Oleed  [2002
           EWCA Civ 1906 and Subesh [2004] EWCA Civ 56.  He argued that the
           Tribunal should only set aside the Adjudicator's decision if  it
           was plainly wrong or perverse.


      ix)   He referred to the Wachai Determination which he relied upon as
           a pure delay case and as showing that pure delay on the part  of
           the Secretary of State could indeed result in a conclusion  that
           a decision to remove was disproportionate under Article 8.


      x)    He referred to the Respondent's notice submitted on  behalf  of
           the Claimant which, helpfully, set  out  the  arguments  already
           mentioned above and went on to raise the question of the October
           Policy.   As regards the October Policy he reminded the Tribunal
           that the Article 8 appeal should be  decided  having  regard  to
           circumstances pertaining as at the  date  of  the  Adjudicator's
           decision (and now  the  Tribunal's  decision)  see  the  starred
           Tribunal Determination in S & K [2002] UKIAT  05613  accordingly
           the existence of the October Policy should be borne in mind when
           considering proportionality.


      xi)   He indicated that he did not argue that the decision to  remove
           the Claimant could be said to be ultra vires  having  regard  to
           the October Policy (but he reserved his right to raise  such  an
           argument supposing that the Secretary of  State  in  due  course
           failed properly  to  consider  the  Claimant's  case  under  the
           October Policy).  However, the relevance of the  October  Policy
           for  the  Tribunal's  Determination  was,  he  argued,  that  it
           indicated that lesser importance was placed by the Secretary  of
           State on the need to remove persons such as the Claimant.   Thus
           it lessened the weight to be attached to the implementation of a
           firm and fair immigration policy - if the Secretary of State was
           prepared to allow many thousands of families to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom despite the fact that they had no other claim  to
           do so, he questioned why so much weight should  be  placed  upon
           removing from the United Kingdom someone in the position of  the
           Claimant.


10.   The Tribunal asked for submissions from the representatives as to the
      significance of the recent House of Lords decision in  Razgar  [2004]
      UK HL 27, especially per Lord Bingham at paragraph 20:

           "Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of immigration
           control will be proportionate in all save a  small  minority  of
           exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis."


      Ms Hart relied upon this passage.  Mr Rana argued  that  the  present
      case was  indeed  exceptional.   He  relied  upon  the  Adjudicator's
      Determination and in particular the fact  that  the  Claimant  was  a
      credible witness, that he was a genuine asylum seeker when he arrived
      and he would have been granted ILR if  his  claim  had  been  decided
      earlier, and the Claimant was someone who had not merely worked  hard
      and prospered in the United Kingdom himself but who had a family  who
      had done likewise.  He particularly referred to the progress  by  the
      Claimant's children who were performing exceptionally well in  school
      and in  other  activities.   He  referred  to  the  material  in  the
      additional bundle showing such progress.   He argued that this was  a
      family who had good reason to  be  proud  of  its  achievements.   He
      referred to the October Policy as a further reason why the  case  was
      exceptional.  He also referred to the fact that the  Adjudicator  was
      in no doubt about the question of proportionality, expressing himself
      by saying the decision  to  remove  was  "totally  disproportionate".
      Accordingly the present was an exceptional case and  Mr  Rana  argued
      that  the  Tribunal  should  not  interfere  with  the  Adjudicator's
      decision.


11.   We have decided that we cannot  accept  Mr  Rana's  arguments.    Our
      reasons for so concluding are as follows.

12.   We accept that there has been much less delay  on  the  part  of  the
      Secretary of State than the Adjudicator thought. However, we conclude
      that Mr Rama was entitled to argue that there was  still  more  delay
      than there should have been.  We do not consider it would be helpful,
      even if this exercise could be performed, to seek to divide  up  each
      period of delay between January 1999 and May  2003  and  to  seek  to
      decide who if anyone was at fault for that delay.   We  consider  the
      significance of this delay further in paragraph 19 below


13.    We  accept  Ms  Hart's  argument  that  the   case   of   Shala   is
      distinguishable for the reasons she gave from the present  case.   In
      the present case the Claimant is seeking to rely on delay not  merely
      to excuse (as being disproportionate)  an  obligation  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom so as to make an out of country application for  entry
      clearance. Instead the delay is being relied upon as providing a self
      standing right (through the proportionality argument) to  be  allowed
      to remain indefinitely in the United Kingdom.

14.   We also consider that the case of Wachai  is  of  limited  relevance.
      First, it is distinguishable because there there were  other  members
      of the family in the United Kingdom from whom  the  family  would  be
      removed.  Secondly, we note  the  cautionary  closing  words  of  the
      Tribunal in paragraph 16 where the Tribunal stated:

           "So far as it  turns  on  the  principle  that  delay  can  make
           disproportionate what was otherwise proportionate, our  view  is
           that this would only apply in cases where, as here,  that  delay
           was obvious, gross and largely unexplained; and has been allowed
           to prejudice the interests of children, or others unable to fend
           for themselves, with close relations settled as of right in this
           country."


      We do not accept that the delay in  the  present  case  was  obvious,
      gross and largely unexplained, nor are there close relations  settled
      as of right in this country.   Quite apart from the foregoing, and of
      more importance, this decision  was  reached  prior  to  the  starred
      Tribunal decision in 00024 M (Croatia)  and  most  of  the  important
      Court of Appeal decisions referred to therein.


15.   Accordingly we conclude that the Adjudicator erred in law in that:

      i)    He  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  an  understanding  that  the
           Secretary of State's delay was substantially greater than it was
           (although no criticism attaches to the  Adjudicator  because  he
           was not made aware of the underlying facts).


      ii)    The   Adjudicator   did   not   approach   the   question   of
           proportionality by asking himself the question  of  whether  the
           decision to move was outwith the range of  reasonable  responses
           on the part of the Respondent,  as  advocated  in  M  (Croatia).
           Instead  the  Adjudicator  reached   his   own   conclusion   on
           proportionality.  We do not consider that the Adjudicator can be
           taken to have followed the M (Croatia) approach merely by reason
           of the phraseology used in paragraph 41, and in particular,  the
           expression "totally disproportionate".


      iii)  The Adjudicator in our  judgment  also  erred  by  omitting  to
           notice the distinguishing features between the present case  and
           the cases on which he relied of Shala and Wachai.


16.   In the foregoing circumstances  the  Adjudicator's  decision  on  the
      Article 8 claim is flawed and the Tribunal should itself consider the
      Article 8 claim in the light of the relevant  authorities  including,
      in particular, M (Croatia) (and the decisions  referred  to  therein)
      and Janjanin and Razgar.

17.   We have in mind all the matters identified by the Adjudicator and  by
      Mr Rana in favour of the Claimant and his family, especially the  way
      they have prospered in this country and  the  children's  success  in
      school and life outside school.  However, leaving aside for a  moment
      the two particular features next mentioned, the Tribunal is unable to
      conclude that there is anything exceptional about  the  present  case
      nor can we conclude that a decision to remove is outside the range of
      reasonable responses open  to  the  Secretary  of  State.    The  two
      particular features which we have laid on one side and which  we  now
      turn to consider are, (a) the fact that  an  earlier  decision  would
      probably have resulted in recognition of the Claimant as  a  refugee;
      and (b) the October Policy.

18.   We note paragraphs 57 and 58 of Kay LJ's judgment in  Janjanin  where
      he stated:


      "57.  ....


           It cannot be right that merely because for  a  relatively  small
           part of the time when an application might have been determined,
           there was a good prospect or even a likelihood of success,  that
           it  follows  that  any  subsequent  Determination  has   to   be
           favourable even if by then the position has  changed.   If  this
           application had been determined in its first  four  and  a  half
           months, the  evidence  does  not  suggest  that  it  would  have
           succeeded.  If it had been determined after  Bulletin  1/00  was
           issued again it seems likely to me  on  the  available  evidence
           that it would have failed.   Such a situation is in my  judgment
           far removed from the position in  Shala  and  thus  even  if  an
           argument of this kind had been advanced  before  the  IAT  I  am
           satisfied that it would have failed.


      58.   For these reasons I would dismiss  each  of  these  appeals,  I
           consider that there may well be further  merit  in  Mr  Wilken's
           argument that one is not comparing like with like in considering
           those cases involving  a  right  to  remain  when  there  is  no
           existing  basis  for  such  a  right  apart   from   Article   8
           considerations and the underlying circumstances of Shala's case.
            However, in the light of my conclusions on the factual  matters
           already set out, I find it unnecessary to determine  this  issue
           and I consider it better that it awaits to be  considered  in  a
           case where there are different facts that might  otherwise  lead
           to a different conclusion."


19.   It is relevant to note the significance of the delay in  the  present
      case.  There was some (albeit not lamentable) delay on  the  part  of
      the Secretary of State in deciding the Claimant's asylum  claim.   We
      consider the position to be as follows:

      i)    The Secretary of State  could  and  in  our  view  should  have
           decided the claim well before December 2002.   Had  he  done  so
           there is a reasonable prospect (but no more  than  that  in  our
           view) that the Secretary of  State  would  have  recognised  the
           Claimant  as  a  refugee  entitled  to  asylum.    There  is   a
           substantial element of speculation  in  what  the  Secretary  of
           State would have decided  in  these  hypothetical  circumstances
           bearing in mind that there was no stated policy of the Secretary
           of State in relation to asylum seekers from Kenya in a  position
           similar to that of the Claimant.


      ii)   If the Secretary of State had  refused  the  Claimant's  asylum
           appeal in a prompt decision, then the Claimant would have had  a
           reasonable prospect (but no  more  than  that)  of  obtaining  a
           hearing before an Adjudicator prior  to  December  2002.   There
           would have been a reasonable prospect, but no  more  than  that,
           that at such a hearing the Adjudicator would  have  allowed  the
           Claimant's asylum appeal.


      We are unable to say that  there  was  any  more  than  a  reasonable
      prospect of the Claimant succeeding on his asylum appeal because  the
      question of whether he was entitled to asylum in circumstances before
      the change of government in Kenya simply has not been  considered  by
      the Secretary of State at all and has  not  been  considered  in  any
      detail by the Adjudicator - or if  it  has  been  considered  in  any
      detail by him he has not given this detailed analysis, with  reasons,
      in his Determination.  The Tribunal itself was not  invited  (and  we
      consider both representatives were correct not to invite us) to  give
      detailed consideration to the hypothetical question  of  whether  the
      Claimant would or would not have succeeded on his asylum claim if  it
      had been considered prior to December 2002.

20.   In the light of the foregoing uncertainties, the question  arises  as
      to the extent to which the prospect of obtaining asylum (if there had
      not been  delays)  affects  the  consideration  of  the  question  of
      proportionality under Article 8.  We do  not  see  that  it  has  any
      significant relevance. In considering the question of proportionality
      it is necessary for the decision maker to have in mind the extent and
      significance of the interference  with  the  Claimant's  Article  8.1
      rights on the one hand and the considerations which are  relied  upon
      by the Secretary of State as making such  interference  proportionate
      on the other hand.  That is the relevant balance, to be approached in
      accordance with the relevant legal principles which are explained  in
      M (Croatia) and the Court of Appeal decisions referred to therein and
      in Razgar.  Taking first the Claimant's side of this balance,  we  do
      not see how the fact that he had a reasonable prospect of  succeeding
      in his asylum claim if it had been decided at some earlier stage  can
      alter the extent of the interference with his  family  life  and  the
      disruption  and  adverse  consequences  flowing   from   this.    The
      interference will be just as  great  and  the  consequences  just  as
      serious whether he would or would not  at  some  earlier  stage  have
      succeeded on an asylum claim.   Similarly, if one looks at the  other
      side of the balance we do not see how  the  fact  that  the  Claimant
      might, at some earlier stage, have succeeded on an asylum  claim  can
      affect the weight which the Secretary of State properly places upon a
      firm and fair immigration policy, which includes a policy of refusing
      leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  to  persons  who  have  been
      decided not to be entitled to such leave.   On  the  basis  therefore
      that the weight in neither side of the balance  is  affected  by  the
      fact that the Claimant might have succeeded on his asylum claim if it
      had been decided earlier, we do not see how  this  consideration  can
      affect the analysis regarding proportionality.  It  may be noted that
      if the position were otherwise, we can see great  practical  problems
      and we question how as a matter  of  practicality  the  consideration
      which Mr Rana urges upon us could, in any fair or workable manner, be
      taken into consideration on questions  of  proportionality.   In  the
      circumstances of a country of origin where  country  conditions  were
      fluctuating, one could find that it was urged by  a  Claimant,  whose
      claim had been decided otherwise than promptly, that if the claim had
      been decided promptly then it would have been decided during a window
      in country conditions when he would  have  succeeded  on  his  asylum
      claim.  Accordingly the decision maker, the Secretary of State or  an
      Adjudicator or the Tribunal, would need to consider at what date  the
      claim should reasonably have been considered and would then  have  to
      consider a hypothetical case as to whether, if considered at date  X,
      the Claimant would have succeeded.  Apart from the undesirability  of
      such hypothetical considerations having to be undertaken,  we  cannot
      see how the conclusion on this hypothetical  question  impinges  upon
      the question of whether, as at the date of the ultimate  decision  by
      the decision maker, a decision to remove is or is  not  proportionate
      within Article 8. For the avoidance of doubt we should  add  that  we
      would reach the same conclusion even if (which we do not  accept)  it
      could be said that if the  Secretary  of  State  had  considered  the
      asylum  claim  promptly  the  Claimant  would  definitely  have  been
      recognised as a refugee entitled to asylum.

21.   We now  turn  to  the  question  of  the  October  Policy.   Ms  Hart
      understandably made no concessions before the Tribunal as to  whether
      or not the Claimant would be entitled to succeed under  this  policy.
      However, no reason was suggested why the Claimant would  not  succeed
      under it.  There is thus, at least, a real prospect that the Claimant
      will be entitled to be granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
      under the October Policy.

22.   The Tribunal considers that the question of whether the  Claimant  is
      or is not entitled to stay under the October policy is not  a  matter
      of relevance to the question of whether the decision of the Secretary
      of State which is attacked by the Claimant, namely the decision  that
      he be removed to Kenya taken in May 2003,  is  a  decision  which  is
      unlawful by reason of being a disproportionate interference with  the
      Claimant's Article 8 rights.   It seems to us that  the  question  on
      this appeal is quite  separate  from  the  question  of  whether  the
      Claimant is entitled ultimately to succeed under the October  Policy.
      All that is clear at present is that the Claimant is entitled in  due
      course to be properly considered under the October Policy.

23.   If, however, the foregoing is wrong and  the  terms  of  the  October
      Policy are relevant to the Tribunal's analysis under Article 8,  then
      this does not lead the Tribunal to any conclusion different from that
      already indicated above.   We can see some  substance  in  Mr  Rana's
      argument that, if the Secretary of State considers it right to  grant
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom to thousands  of  families  who
      have no other right to be here save that they are  family  Applicants
      who claimed asylum before 2 October  2000  and  who  satisfy  certain
      other conditions, then this may indicate that the Secretary of  State
      attaches less  importance  to  removing  persons  in  the  Claimant's
      position than  might  otherwise  have  been  thought.   However,  the
      Tribunal considers that the important point is this.  If (contrary to
      the Tribunal's primary view) the October Policy is  relevant  to  the
      Article 8 appeal before the Tribunal, then  the  situation  is  this.
      The situation as at the present date is that the Secretary  of  State
      has taken a decision  the  effect  of  which,  in  relation  to  this
      Claimant, is not that he will definitely be removed from  the  United
      Kingdom if his present appeal fails.  Instead the position is that if
      the Claimant's present appeal  fails  then  he  will  potentially  be
      subject to removal from the United Kingdom, but will not  be  removed
      unless and until he has been considered under the October Policy  and
      has been found (contrary  to  the  Claimant's  expectations)  not  to
      qualify.   The foregoing being the present effect of the Secretary of
      State's decision to remove, viewing that decision as at  the  present
      date in accordance with the S & K case, the Tribunal cannot see  that
      the  decision  so  viewed  can  be  said  to  be  a  disproportionate
      interference with the Claimant's Article 8 rights.

24.   Accordingly, neither of the two  additional  features  identified  in
      paragraph 17 above,  either  separately  or  cumulatively,  lead  the
      Tribunal to alter the conclusion we would  have  reached  apart  from
      these considerations as expressed in paragraph 17 above, namely  that
      the Secretary of State's decision to refuse the Claimant  asylum  and
      to issue directions for his removal to Kenya  is  not  unlawful.  The
      decision does not constitute any disproportionate  interference  with
      the Claimant's Article 8 rights.

25.   In the result, therefore, the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.





                                                  His Honour Judge Huskinson
                                                              Vice President
