




                  AM (IWCP - Conditions in Mosul) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00263

                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                              Dates of Hearing: 13 & 14 July & 4 August 2004
                             Date Signed:   9 September 2004

                             Date Determination Notified:  22 September 2004




                                   Before:





                        Mr J Barnes (Vice-President)


                       Mr A R Mackey (Vice-President)

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)



Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
            Appellant

                                     and



      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Mr T Weisselberg.
For the Respondent:   Mr P Jorro, instructed by Messrs Elder Rahimi.

  1. The Respondent is a  citizen  of  Iraq.  The  Appellant  appeals,  with
     permission, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T  O'Flynn,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 22 August 2003 to refuse leave to enter and refuse asylum.

  2. This appeal was listed before the Tribunal  with  two  other  cases  in
     order  to  provide  the  opportunity  for  the   Tribunal   to   assess
     comprehensive evidence and submissions, and give country guidance on  a
     variety of issues relating to Iraq of  general  relevance.   The  three
     appeals were heard  together  but  separate  determinations  have  been
     prepared in respect of each. The lead case of the three is  GH  (Former
     KAZ - Country Conditions and Effect) Iraq CG [UKIAT] 0000248  in  which
     the Tribunal's general conclusions on many of the issues raised are set
     out in detail.  We adopt GH, with  which  this  determination  must  be
     read,  and  deal  here  with  the  specific  issues  relating  to  this
     Respondent and with the matters arising therefrom that  have  not  been
     addressed in GH.


The Respondent's Claim


  3. The Respondent's claim can be summarised as follows. He is a  Kurd  who
     was born in Gouwer in Northern Iraq near to Mosul. He  left  school  in
     1987.   From  1991  he  undertook  three  years  of  military  service.
     Thereafter he opened his own bakery.   His  family  had  a  history  of
     political activity against the Iraqi regime.  His brother, [    ],  was
     an activist in the banned Iraqi Workers  Communist  Party  (IWCP).  Its
     aims were to establish a socialist  state  and  it  campaigned  against
     Islamic fundamentalists and was in conflict with  the  main  groups  in
     control of the Kurdish held areas.

  4. The Respondent himself became active in IWCP in 1999.  He belonged to a
     three man cell, the other two  members  being  Yousef  and  Sabah.  The
     Respondent  distributed  leaflets  and   put   up   posters   for   the
     organisation.  On 17 December 2002 he was at his bakery when  he  heard
     that Yousef had been detained.  He sent a message to Sabah but received
     no reply.  He went into hiding at his uncle's house in  Mosul.   On  19
     December he heard that his own home had been raided by the authorities.
      He feared that his membership of the IWCP cell  had  been  identified.
     His uncle helped him to find an agent to get him out of Iraq.  He  left
     the country on a lorry on 22 December 2002 and arrived in the UK  on  7
     January 2003, making a claim for asylum on the same day.


The Adjudicator's Determination


  5.  There  has  never  been  any  challenge  to  the  credibility  of  the
     Respondent's claim.  The Adjudicator therefore concluded  in  paragraph
     6.2 of the determination
           "I find that [         ] is an Iraqi Kurd; that he was a  member
           of an IWCP cell; that his home was raided; and  that  he  feared
           persecution from the former Iraqi regime."

  6. However by the time the appeal came for hearing before the  Adjudicator
     on 11 November  2003,  the  Saddam  regime  in  Iraq  had  fallen.  The
     Adjudicator assessed the objective evidence before him in the following
     terms.
           7.2  In  August  2003  the  UNHCR  noted  that  the   prevailing
           conditions in Iraq are characterised by an absence  of  law  and
           order in many parts of the country.  UNHCR is not yet  promoting
           voluntary returns.  They advise states  to  be  mindful  of  the
           possibility of  persecution  emanating  from  non-state  agents,
           particularly given the absence of effective national  protection
           in Iraq. Similarly, atrocious forms of past  persecution  should
           favourably be taken into account in the determination process.
           7.3 Since August 2003, the security situation in  Iraq  has  not
           improved.  Commentators have suggested that,  in  spite  of  the
           appearance of the Interim Advisory Council, in reality there  is
           a political and security vacuum in Iraq. There are daily reports
           of attacks on coalition forces. ICRC has, very unusually in such
           situations, closed its Baghdad and Basra  offices  after  a  car
           bomb at their headquarters killed 12 people.  In August 2003, 22
           people were killed in a car bomb attack on the  UN  headquarters
           in Baghdad. As a result, in  September  2003,  the  UN  cut  the
           number of its international staff in Iraq, leaving fewer than 50
           foreign employees in the country.  There  is  much  evidence  to
           show that the coalition forces are not able to secure that  they
           are  effectively  protected,  let  alone  a  position  to  offer
           protection to Iraqi civilians.  The attacks are not confined  to
           the coalition forces: radical Islamist  groups  have  threatened
           people whom they perceived as presenting an  obstacle  to  their
           policies.  It is estimated that thousands of  Iraqis  have  been
           killed since the end of the war.
           7.4 The CIPU report (August 2003) suggests that  persons  within
           the former Kurdish autonomous zone (KAZ) who  have  a  localised
           problem can safely and reasonably relocate within the former KAZ
           to the Kurdish dominated areas outside  of  the  former  KAZ  or
           elsewhere.  The KDP and the PUK are in de facto control  of  the
           KAZ and are considered capable of offering protection  to  those
           who reside in their respective territories and there is a system
           in place to provide such protection. In  September  2003  a  car
           bomb exploded in the Iraqi Kurd region, killing 1  and  injuring
           47
           7.5 With regard to the IWCP, its relationship with the  official
           Kurdish parties has been strained over the  years.   It  is  not
           being allowed to operate in the Kurdish controlled area of Iraq.
            The organisation's activities have been banned by the KDP.   It
           is the only party which had no office, no radio station and  was
           not allowed to publish a newspaper  (although  the  organisation
           published papers which were distributed in secret).  The  secret
           police of the KDP keep the IWCP under constant surveillance  and
           have arrested  their  activists.   In  the  past,  the  regional
           government of Kurdistan (which represented both the KDP and  the
           PUK) have backed the Islamists against the IWCP.

  7. Given this assessment of the objective evidence, the  Adjudicator  then
     went on to state his conclusions, which can be summarised as follows.
           1. The Respondent, when he came to the UK to seek  international
           protection had a well  founded  fear  of  persecution  from  the
           Saddam regime.  The Adjudicator had to consider whether  in  the
           light of the current circumstances  and  the  overthrow  of  the
           Saddam regime that fear is still well founded
           2. IWCP represents a political philosophy that  is  outside  the
           mainstream  policies   of   the   activist   groups   in   Iraq.
           Historically, it has been disliked by the radical Islamists, who
           are presently seeking to entrench and spread their support. From
           the objective material it is clear that  anyone  who  is  openly
           flouting  radical  Islamic  principles  (such  as  the   selling
           alcohol) is being threatened by  the  Islamists.  The  IWCP  was
           equally seen by the Baath regime as presenting a real threat  to
           their power base in Iraq and the incidents of persecution  under
           the Saddam regime are well recorded.
           3. The Respondent remains an activist within IWCP and cannot  be
           expected to relinquish his ideals.  If he were to go to  Baghdad
           and continue  his  activities,  there  is  a  real  danger  that
           Islamists and other groups opposed to IWCP  would  pose  a  real
           threat to him.
           4. The coalition  forces  are  not  in  a  position  to  protect
           themselves or the international organisations, let  alone  Iraqi
           individuals who fear persecution.
           5. The Respondent could not go to the KAZ because  the  KDP  and
           the PUK have been traditionally strongly opposed  to  the  IWCP.
           They would offer some reasonable protection to their own  within
           their region but that would not include members of IWCP.

  8. The Adjudicator then, prior to allowing the appeal both in  respect  of
     asylum and Article 3, summed up his conclusions in these terms.
           8.8 Taking into account all of the above, I am  sure  that  this
           [Respondent's] fears of persecution as a member of the IWCP  may
           well be realised if he is returned.  He is a member of the  IWCP
           whose home has  been  raided.   He  is  known  therefore  as  an
           activist.  He remains an activist.  As such,  he  is  vulnerable
           wherever he goes in Iraq.  He cannot  call  upon  the  coalition
           forces for protection.  He cannot go to the  KAZ  or  any  other
           Kurdish dominated area and seek protection for  reasons  I  have
           outlined above.  For  these  reasons  I  do  not  consider  that
           "internal relocation" is a viable option for [           ].


The Grounds of Appeal


  9. The concise grounds of appeal state as follows.
           1. It is respectfully submitted that the Adjudicator  has  erred
              in his determination in failing to cite  the  source  of  the
              objective  evidence  that  a  member  of  the  Iraqi  Workers
              Communist Party would be liable to persecution at the present
              time in Baghdad (paragraph 8.4 of the  determination)  or  in
              the Kurdish Autonomous Zone (paragraph 8.6).  Since we do not
              have the sources,  we  cannot  consider  any  such  objective
              evidence
           2. It is again submitted (as was stated by the Respondent at the
              hearing, paragraph 8.3 of the determination refers) that  the
              coalition forces are taking steps to control the  actions  of
              activists in the Baghdad area, which, it is submitted,  would
              minimise any possible risk to an  IWCP  member  from  Islamic
              extremists.
           Therefore the determination cannot stand.

 10. Permission to appeal was granted so that "the parties can identify  the
     objective material referred to in the grounds of appeal and  relied  on
     by the Adjudicator.  Thereafter it can  be  reviewed  by  the  Tribunal
     together with the determination".


Submissions


 11. Mr Weisselberg accepted he had to show there was an error of law in the
     determination and specifically that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  were
     perverse. He relied upon the written submissions  made  concerning  the
     general situation in Iraq, and also referred us to a number of specific
     passages in the objective evidence relating to the IWCP. He argued that
     the Adjudicator erred in his approach to the change of circumstances in
     Iraq following the fall of the Saddam  regime.  He  had  conflated  the
     evidence about different periods of time and  different  parts  of  the
     country. He failed to identify from whom the Respondent would now be at
     risk in his home area of Gouwer and Mosul, which was outside  the  area
     now administered by the PUK/KDP. The risk from the  Saddam  regime  was
     now passed.   The  Adjudicator's  conclusions  failed  to  reflect  the
     absence of any objective evidence to show that a low  level  member  of
     IWCP  would  be  of  adverse  interest  to  anyone   in   the   current
     circumstances in Iraq. He failed to have regard to the fact  that  IWCP
     had opened offices in various cities in Iraq and their meetings were no
     longer clandestine. The only reported difficulty was a reported  attack
     on one IWCP office in  the  south  of  Iraq  in  Diwaniyah,  which  was
     described in only one report  and  nowhere  else.  IWCP  in  its  press
     releases did not  suggest  that  it  or  its  members  were  now  being
     targeted. The  Adjudicator  failed  to  identify  the  sources  in  the
     objective evidence upon which he relied for his  contrary  conclusions.
     The reality was that the Respondent could return  safely  to  his  home
     area or anywhere else in Iraq and the Adjudicator's conclusions to  the
     contrary did not reflect the evidence and were perverse.

 12. In response, Mr Jorro relied upon the submissions made by Ms  Naik  and
     Mr Adler as to the general  conditions  in  Iraq  and  referred  us  to
     passages  in  the  objective  evidence  concerning  the  risk  to   the
     Respondent. He said that the fact that the Respondent was a  Kurd  from
     Mosul and a member of the IWCP created risk factors that justified  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions. The Tribunal could not  interfere  with  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions unless there was an error  of  law  in  them,
     which effectively meant unless they were perverse - and they were  not.
     The Adjudicator's conclusions were  sound  on  the  objective  evidence
     before him at the time of the determination and were still sound in the
     light  of  the  up-to-date  objective  evidence.   There  was  no  real
     difference in the risk to him on the evidence before the Adjudicator or
     the current evidence.  The criticism of the Adjudicator that he did not
     cite his sources was a procedural matter, not  an  issue  of  law.  The
     Tribunal could remit the matter to the same Adjudicator in  order  that
     he  could  describe  his  sources  in  the   objective   evidence   or,
     alternatively and preferably, it could look at the  objective  evidence
     itself, which clearly offered a sufficient basis of fact to justify the
     Adjudicator's conclusions that the Respondent would be at real risk  as
     a member of IWCP from the pro-Western Kurdish parties in the north  and
     from increasingly Islamic fundamentalist Shiites in the  south  and  in
     Baghdad.

 13. In reaching our conclusions on these submissions we have borne in mind,
     as we were reminded by both Mr Weisselberg and Mr Jorro, that the Court
     of Appeal has in a number of recent decisions emphasised that  our  new
     jurisdiction is limited to correcting errors  of  law.   Also  we  have
     accepted that the submissions made to us in the course of  the  hearing
     have properly been wide ranging, as is appropriate given the nature  of
     the combined hearing of the three appeals, the adoption by Mr Jorro  of
     Ms Naik's submissions in GH and Mr Weisselberg's responses to them, and
     the need to provide general country guidance.


Assessment of Adjudicator's Determination


 14. As we have said, we adopt GH as it relates to relevant aspects of  this
     Respondent's appeal and this determination must be read in the light of
     what we said in GH. We have gone on to assess whether  the  Adjudicator
     made an error of law in the conclusions he reached in relation to  this
     specific appeal.

 15. In so doing, we have followed the Court of Appeal judgement in Subesh &
     Others [2004] EWCA Civ 56, which summarised the relevant  jurisprudence
     and gave guidance to the Tribunal concerning the proper approach to  be
     taken to challenges against an Adjudicator's findings. In paragraph 43,
     Laws LJ stated it as follows.
           "In every case the Appellant assumes the burden of showing  that
           the judgment appealed from is wrong. The burden  so  assumed  is
           not the burden of proof normally carried by a claimant in  first
           instance proceedings  where  there  are  factual  disputes.   An
           Appellant, if he is to succeed, must persuade the  appeal  court
           or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts  from
           that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there  are
           objective grounds upon which the court ought to conclude that  a
           different view is  the  right  one.  The  divide  between  these
           positions is not caught by the  supposed  difference  between  a
           perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case  the  appeal
           court disagrees with the court below,  and  indeed  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the court of appeal might prefer a different view (perhaps
           on marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process
           of reasoning and the application of the relevant law, require it
           to adopt a  different  view.   The  burden  which  an  Appellant
           assumes is to show  that  the  case  falls  within  this  latter
           category."

 16. In applying this test and responding to the submissions made,  we  have
     had to analyse both the Adjudicator's approach to and assessment of the
     objective evidence for ourselves.

 17. Both representatives accepted that the Adjudicator failed  properly  to
     identify the objective evidence on which he relied in his  conclusions.
     We do not consider this as a mere  matter  of  procedure  as  Mr  Jorro
     suggested, but rather a matter of some potential significance. We  need
     to be able to identify the evidence upon which the  Adjudicator  relied
     for his summary of the situation in Iraq, and  whether  the  weight  he
     attached to specific elements was reasonably open to him.

 18. However we agree with both representatives that we can cure this  error
     by adopting the approach recommended by them in inviting us to look  at
     the objective evidence as a whole for ourselves and to conclude whether
     in the light of that the Adjudicator's conclusions revealed  errors  of
     law. We note in this context that they both also agreed that  there  is
     no material difference on the issue of real risk between the up-to-date
     evidence presented to us and the post Saddam evidence presented to  the
     Adjudicator.

 19. As we have said, Mr Jorro argued that there were  three  specific  risk
     factors relating to  the  Respondent  that  in  aggregate  justify  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions. They are that he is a Kurd, from Mosul,  and
     is a member of the IWCP. These factors inter-act with  each  other.  We
     begin our assessment of them with the material relating to IWCP,  which
     was not considered specifically in GH where the facts were different.


Risk as a Member of IWCP


 20. Both Representatives referred us to passages in  the  CIPU  reports  of
     2002 and 2004.  The report of  April  2002  describes   IWCP  in  these
     terms:
           Iraqi Workers' Communist Party (IWCP/WCPI)
           The IWCP is represented  in  KDP  territory  although,  strictly
           speaking,  an  illegal  party  there,   not   being   officially
           registered and authorised to engage in political activities. The
           IWCP increasingly  includes  extreme  left-wing  Iranians.   The
           party's supposedly anti-nationalist and anti-religious  leanings
           cause friction with the KDP and have of late  also  been  giving
           rise to trouble with the PUK.
           The  IWCP  is  nevertheless  officially   represented   in   PUK
           territory,  having  its  head  office  and  radio   station   in
           Sulleymania. The  party  publishes  the  newspaper  "Bopeshawa".
           Relations between the IWCP and the PUK could until a short while
           ago be described as reasonably good. The PUK used to assist  the
           IWCP by means  of  monthly  donations.   Recently  however  some
           tension has arisen, partly as  a  result  of  an  accusation  of
           illegal fundraising levelled at the  IWCP  by  the  PUK  and  an
           investigation into IWCP involvement in the deaths of two  former
           IWCP  members.   There  are  also  rumours  abroad  of  an  IWCP
           rapprochement with Baghdad. Fierce animosity is felt between the
           IWCP and the Islamic Movement in  Kurdistan   (IMIK).  The  IWCP
           arouses irritation, not only on the part of IMIK, by its extreme
           political views, which often run  directly  counter  to  Kurdish
           traditions.   At  the  funeral  of  the  IWCP's  founder,  Farad
           Farradj, for instance, the Internationale blared forth. IMIK was
           suspected of involvement in the murder of two  IWCP  members  in
           Sulleymania in  October  1999.  IWCP  earlier  accused  "Islamic
           groups in the city of Arbil" of the murder of two  IWCP  members
           on 18 April 1998.  To the best of our  knowledge  however  there
           have been no really large-scale incidents between IMIK and IWCP.

 21. This of course reflected the period prior to overthrow  of  the  Saddam
     regime in Iraq in March April 2003. The  most  recent  CIPU  report  of
     April 2004 describes the organisation in these terms.
           Workers'  Communist  Party  of  Iraq  (WCPI  or  Iraqi  Workers'
           Communist Party (IWCP)
           The Workers Communist Party of Iran website reported on 25 April
           2003 that the WCP of Iraq had established two offices in the Bab-
           al-Sharjy and Keradeh districts in Baghdad,  in  Kirkuk  and  in
           several other Iraqi cities.  A meeting with cadres  and  members
           was held in Nasiriyah and mass meetings held in Baghdad,  Mosul,
           Tuz and Kirkuk. Several thousand copies of the weekly  newspaper
           were distributed.


           On 26 June 2003 the Independent  Media  Centre  Ireland  carries
           what appears to be a news release by IWCP itself.  It  announced
           that:
                 Following ten years of clandestine activity, the  WCPI  has
                 begun overt  activities  in  Baghdad  and  in  central  and
                 southern cities of Iraq.
                 WCPI launched a wide movement to set up mass organisations,
                 trade unions and workers councils, supporting women in Iraq
                 to establish their organisations
                 WCPI's radio and offices in Kirkuk are the only part of the
                 city's politics to which people could  turn,  in  order  to
                 stop the bloody ethnic cleansing and national conflicts.


           IWCP was formed in 1993 from four small communist  groups.   The
           IWCP accused the PUK of attacking the organisation's  office  in
           Sulleymania in 2000. The PUK also reportedly prevented the  IWCP
           from holding its second conference in December  2002,  according
           to a report by the BBC on 13 January 2003.

 22. The pattern, which therefore emerges from these brief  CIPU  summaries,
     is that towards the end of the Saddam era, IWCP  enjoyed  in  the  main
     relatively good relations with the PUK,  including  financial  support,
     though with occasional tension and trouble.  The  summaries  also  show
     that IWCP is represented in the KDP territory, although  it  is  not  a
     legal party there. It is fiercely  opposed  to  IMIK  and  vice  versa,
     although there were no large-scale confrontations between them. In  the
     post Saddam era, IWCP has ceased to be a clandestine organisation.   It
     has opened offices in a number of cities and  is  seeking  to  organise
     nationally.  It holds what it describes as  mass  meetings,  though  Mr
     Jorro suggests that, in communist jargon, a mass meeting is  a  meeting
     of representatives of the masses, and  does  not  necessarily  imply  a
     meeting of any great size.

 23. We have then looked at the remaining  objective  evidence  for  further
     insights into the current position in Iraq of IWCP.

 24. We begin by noting that IWCP  is  not  a  part  of  the  Interim  Iraqi
     Government unlike the other more moderate and rather  larger  Communist
     Party, ICP, which is.

 25. Mr Joffe cited a report of an attack on an office of the  IWCP  in  the
     south of Iraq in Diwaniyah, but this is  not  reflected  in  any  other
     reports and we conclude therefore  that  either  the  report  cited  is
     unreliable or the attack was of minor significance. Mr Joffe was unable
     under cross-examination to identify any other attacks on IWCP members.

 26. The press release from IWCP (of Iran), referred to above, describes the
     current activities of IWCP (of Iraq) but does not suggest  that  it  or
     its members are subject to any targeted attacks in any  part  of  Iraq.
     Indeed given the wide range of material placed before us and  the  fact
     that IWCP is no longer a clandestine organisation  in  Iraq,  we  would
     conclude that if there were any such  attacks,  there  would  be  clear
     evidence of them in the papers before us notwithstanding that IWCP is a
     relatively small party, as Mr Jorro observed.

 27. Mr Jorro responded to this lack of evidence of present difficulties  by
     arguing that IWCP is traditionally  disliked  by  all  the  other  main
     players in the new Iraq and that it would  be  reasonable  to  conclude
     that a member of IWCP would as a consequence be at real risk on return.



 28. He referred to other paragraphs  of  the  CIPU  reports  of  April  and
     October 2002, which show that there had during the Saddam  era  been  a
     shifting pattern of alliances and hostility between various  groups  in
     the Kurdish areas such as the KDP, PUK, ITF, PKK, IWCP  and  IMIK.  For
     example in July 2000, the PUK had ordered all opposition groups to move
     their offices out of the Sulleymania city centre following a number  of
     bombings. IWCP refused to move office and, in  an  attack  by  the  PUK
     security forces on it, six or more IWCP members were killed and  others
     arrested.

 29. Mr Jorro then referred us to an Al Jazeera report of 6 April 2004 and a
     report from the Daily Star of 27 April 2004, also  relied  upon  by  Mr
     Weisselberg in his attack on Mr Joffe's opinion that the  situation  in
     the KAZ was unstable. The headline from Al Jazeera is  that  "Kurdistan
     comes straight out of a US government press  release"  and  offers  the
     opinion that "if Kurdistan were Iraq writ large, then  you  might  just
     believe the US had won the battle for  Iraqi  hearts  and  minds".  The
     report from the Daily Star is along the same lines. Mr Jorro  submitted
     that this shows a pro-Western attitude by the Kurdish  authorities  and
     asked us to imply that this meant hostility to a Communist  Party  such
     as IWCP. In support of this submission, he referred back to  the  press
     release of IWCP (of Iran), to which we  have  already  referred,  which
     also included the statement that
           "Over the years, the WCPI has fought for the  overthrow  of  the
           Baathist regime  and  has  been  unequivocally  opposed  to  the
           economic sanctions and the war against Iraq. Following the  fall
           of the Baathist regime, the WCPI has  announced  that  the  USA-
           imposed government has no legitimacy as far  as  the  people  of
           Iraq's interests are concerned. The WCPI has strongly  condemned
           a  US  envoy,  General  Garner's  attempts  to  impose  such   a
           government as well as the efforts of Islamic groups to determine
           the future government of Iraq into a religious one".

 30. Mr Jorro also referred us to reports of a bomb  attack  on  22  January
     2004 on a newly established  Baghdad  office  of  the  Iraqi  Communist
     Party. He suggested that as this was a more  moderate  Communist  Party
     than the IWCP, one could presume that IWCP would also be at  risk  from
     the conservative Shiites who were suspected  for  the  attack  and  who
     according to the evidence were becoming more powerful in their areas of
     Iraq. However the perpetrator of the bomb attack is not known,  and  an
     obvious alternative view is that as the ICP is a member of the  Interim
     Iraqi Government, it could be  a  target  of  the  terrorists  who  are
     seeking to destabilise the democratic process in Iraqi  by  attacks  on
     emanations of the state.

 31. The problem with this approach by Mr Jorro is that if he  were  correct
     and IWCP were in reality to be so disliked by other  parties  that  its
     members at any level were at real risk in the post  Saddam  era,  there
     should be by now some  clear  evidence  of  it  that  goes  beyond  the
     jockeying for position by all the  political  parties  within  the  new
     democratic process.  There is not. There is considerable violence being
     undertaken by those opposed to the democratic  process,  which  is,  as
     shown in GH, targeted at the coalition forces,  Westerners,  emanations
     of the Iraqi state, and very recently at Christian churches.  There  is
     however no evidence of violence targeted at members of IWCP.  We are in
     reality being asked to make assumptions about what might happen in  the
     future, but that would be speculation and is not the proper function of
     the Adjudicator or of the Tribunal. Our task is to assess present risk.

 32. We therefore conclude that the Adjudicator's conclusion that "I am sure
     that this Appellant's fears of persecution as a member of the IWCP  may
     well be realised if he is returned" is speculative and  is  unsupported
     by the objective evidence as to the current situation. Consequently his
     approach reflects an error of law.

 33. The Adjudicator's error of law in his approach as  described  above  is
     further compounded by other material errors. In setting out the factual
     background relating to the Respondent  personally,  against  which  the
     Adjudicator undertook  his  assessment  of  risk,  he  began  with  the
     assertion in paragraph 8.8 that
           "He is a member of the IWCP whose home has been raided.   He  is
           known, therefore, as an activist.  He remains an  activist.   As
           such, he is vulnerable wherever he goes in Iraq.

 34.  It  is  true  that  the  Respondent  showed  commitment  to  IWCP   by
     distributing leaflets and putting up posters for them during the period
     of the Saddam regime, when the risk was great. However  his  activities
     were always clandestine and as such would not  have  attracted  general
     attention.  The raid on his home followed the capture of  a  member  of
     his cell and presumably the disclosure of the Respondent's  name  under
     torture.  Of course the consequences of this to  the  Respondent  could
     have been very serious had he been caught, given the  extreme  violence
     and brutality of the Saddam regime.  They may  not  have  distinguished
     between suspicion and proof. However the Respondent was able to  escape
     and has not therefore ever faced  actual  past  persecution  or  public
     exposure of his work for IWCP. It is entirely speculative  as  to  what
     record was kept about the Respondent by the Saddam regime, and  whether
     any such records survived the fall of the Saddam regime, when  so  much
     of the paperwork and records maintained by the secret police were  very
     publicly destroyed.  There is therefore no evidential basis to  suggest
     that the suspicion  of  local  Baathist  officials  in  his  home  area
     concerning low level activities for IWCP undertaken by  the  Respondent
     in the past, would now be available to the authorities or  anyone  else
     even in his home area, let alone Baghdad, or that, as suggested by  the
     Adjudicator, they would be a source of present risk to him anywhere  in
     Iraq. Certainly, if the Respondent openly  resumed  his  activities  on
     behalf of IWCP on return to Iraq, he may then become known in the  area
     in which he carries out those activities. However he has never  been  a
     high profile member and for the reasons described above he will not, as
     a low level member of the IWCP, be at any real risk as such.

 35. Thus,  for  the  reasons  we  have  described,  we  conclude  that  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions in respect to  the  risk  to  the  Respondent
     arising from membership and activity on behalf of  IWCP  as  such,  are
     flawed by errors of law in his approach.


Risk as a Kurd in Mosul


 36. We have then gone on to assess the picture as  a  whole  including  the
     remaining two risk factors identified by Mr Jorro, which relate to  the
     Respondent's Kurdish ethnicity and his coming from Mosul. In part  this
     was covered in general terms in  GH  but  there  were  also  some  more
     specific submissions in this appeal that we must address.

 37. It is  well-established  law  that  in  relation  to  both  asylum  and
     associated Article 3 claims, an Adjudicator must first decide whether a
     claimant is at any real risk in his home area, and, if he  is,  whether
     there is a sufficiency of protection available  to  him  there.  It  is
     however plain when reading the determination that the  Adjudicator  has
     conflated the objective evidence relating to all the different areas of
     Iraq and the various and different causes of violence in  those  areas,
     without properly assessing the real  risk  to  the  Respondent  in  the
     Gouwer/Mosul area, where he lived. This represents a further  error  of
     law in his approach.

38. Mr Jorro submitted, and this was not disputed, that the KDP and the PUK
    have become much stronger since the collapse of the Saddam  regime  and
    are seeking to spread their at power to the  south  of  their  original
    power bases in the KAZ, to areas where there is a  significant  Kurdish
    population. Mr Joffe said in his report of  6  October  2003  that  the
    local administration then was ostensibly in the hands of local  people,
    as an election was carried out in late May 2003 by the  local  American
    commander, using a hand-picked selection  of  electors  to  produce  an
    ethnically balanced town council.  On top of such tensions  that  still
    persist, Mr Joffe said that local Kurdish groups from  the  nearby  KDP
    controlled area of Kurdistan also claim the city as their own and  seek
    to reintroduce a Kurdish majority population there.

 39. Mr Jorro also referred us to paragraph 6.4 of the current  CIPU  report
     which states
           "A UK/Danish fact-finding mission report to Damascus, Amman  and
           Geneva reported in August 2003 that  in  Mosul  and  Kirkuk  the
           situation was good immediately  after  the  war  but  had  since
           deteriorated, with increasing tension between  Kurds  and  Arabs
           over de-arabisation, although these problems  had  not  been  as
           severe as anticipated.  Nonetheless, the situation remained much
           better than in Baghdad and the Sunni triangle.   However  on  27
           April 2004 the Lebanese newspaper the Daily Star  reported  that
           "in recent weeks many Kurds have been  killed  in  Mosul,  where
           Kurds from Irbil and Dohuk now avoid travelling."

40. In assessing this evidence we note  that  according  to  the  objective
    evidence Mosul has not been absorbed into the KAZ, nor is it under  the
    direct control of the PUK or the KDP. It is now under  the  control  of
    the wider Iraqi administration.  There is no  evidence  of  generalised
    violence there or of politically  directed  violence.  Until  mid  2003
    Mosul was generally quiet.  Since then there have been  some  instances
    of violence in the context of the tensions arising from  de-Arabisation
    as described in the UK Danish report. On 27  April  2004  the  Lebanese
    Daily Star in an article headed "Not all is bad in Iraq:  Look  at  the
    Kurdish areas" reported that  "in recent weeks  many  Kurds  have  been
    killed  in  Mosul,  where  Kurds  from  Irbil  and  Dohuk   now   avoid
    travelling". They do not specify how many deaths have occurred, and  to
    put this in context Mr Joffe said that some hundreds  of  thousands  of
    Kurds have returned and many sought repossession of their old property.
    Also as we described in GH there is now a  proper  legal  structure  in
    place for resolving disputes,  which  is  helping  to  calm  inevitable
    tensions and the  few  and  limited  explosions  of  violence  in  some
    localities are not reflective of wider  violence.  We  note  that  such
    violence as there has been relates essentially to  the  property  issue
    and there is no objective evidence to show that any violence  has  been
    directed at IWCP members.

41. We consider that the Adjudicator further erred in  law  in  failing  to
    identify from whom the Respondent would be at risk in  Mosul  following
    the fall of the Saddam regime. First, as we have  said,  the  objective
    evidence does not reveal targeted attacks on members of  IWCP.  Second,
    there is no evidence that the Respondent himself is seeking to  recover
    any specific property under the de-Arabisation process and, even if  he
    were, any risk to him from general violence relating to  de-Arabisation
    is in  context  limited  and  would  not  constitute  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or of a breach of Article 3. Third, even if one accepted Mr
    Jorro's submission that the KDP and the PUK dislike IWCP, the objective
    evidence does not reveal in the post Saddam era any targeting  by  them
    of IWCP members even in the KAZ. In any event, they are not in  control
    of Mosul. Fourth, Mosul is not a centre of Shiite religious  extremism,
    which Mr Jorro identified as a source of risk to IWCP  members.  It  is
    predominantly a Sunni area. Fifth, as we said in GH, IMIK  the  Kurdish
    religious extremist organisation was largely broken by  the  attack  on
    their enclave by the PUK in 2003 and even if it is seeking to  re-group
    under another guise, such as as Ansar-al-Islam, and  is  receiving  aid
    from foreign terrorists, it is under pressure everywhere and is focused
    on  attacking  the  coalition  forces.  There  is  therefore,  on  this
    analysis, no-one in Mosul from whom the Respondent  specifically  would
    be at any real risk.


Decision


 42. For all the reasons given above  we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions are flawed by errors of law and must  be  set  aside.  They
     reveal an incorrect approach to the assessment of the evidence, that is
     speculative and does not reflect the reality of the objective evidence.



 43. We can cure this error by reaching our  own  conclusions  and  have  so
     done. We conclude, on the basis  of  the  objective  evidence  and  the
     reasons we have described here and in GH, that the Respondent would  be
     at no real risk of persecution or a breach of his rights under  Article
     3 as a Kurdish member of IWCP, were he to return to his  home  area  in
     the Mosul district.

 44. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.




                                                             Spencer Batiste


                                                              Vice-President



                                        Approved for electronic transmission
