

                                 MY (Disputed Somali nationality)
                                            Somalia * [2004] UKIAT 00174 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 15th December 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                02 June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                        Mr A Jordan (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr Manjit Gill QC, instructed by Z Ali Dhanji,
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





Introduction


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr I  J
     French, promulgated on 25th September 2001.  The Appellant  claims  to
     be a citizen of Somalia, a member of the Bajuni tribe.  He arrived  in
     the United Kingdom on 3rd June 2000 and claimed asylum immediately  on
     arrival at  Heathrow.   Following  three  interviews,  his  claim  was
     refused by a letter dated 26th March 2001.   The  Secretary  of  State
     refused his claim on  the  basis  that  he  was  not  a  Somali.   The
     Secretary of State said, however, that he would be  giving  directions
     for the Appellant's removal to Somalia but solely in order  to  enable
     the Appellant to appeal, and that if his appeal was  not  upheld,  the
     Secretary of State  would  seek  to  establish  the  Appellant's  true
     identity.

  2. The Secretary of State also sent a Notice  signed  by  an  Immigration
     Officer entitled "Notice of Refusal of  Leave  to  Enter"  dated  29th
     March 2001.  After stating that leave to enter had been  refused,  the
     Notice continued under the heading of "Removal  Directions":  "I  have
     given/propose to give directions  for  your  removal  by  a  scheduled
     service at a time and  date  to  be  notified  to  (country/territory)
     SOMALIA".  It said that the Appellant was entitled to appeal  "against
     the decision to refuse you leave to enter  on  the  ground  that  your
     removal in pursuance of these directions" would  be  contrary  to  the
     Geneva Convention.  The footnote directed attention to  section  69(1)
     of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

  3. The Adjudicator concluded that:

           "... even to the lower standard the Appellant has not established
           that he is of Somalian Nationality but on the evidence before  me
           I have not been able to draw any conclusions as  to  his  correct
           nationality.


           "Bearing in mind my findings as to  the  Appellant's  credibility
           and that he is not of Somalian Nationality I did not find that he
           has established that he is a refugee within the  meaning  of  the
           Refugee Convention.  Nor do I find  that  there  are  substantial
           grounds for believing his  evidence  with  regard  to  the  human
           rights aspect of the matter.  That is not at all to  say  that  I
           believe that the Appellant should be returned to Somalia.  Such a
           course would be quite wrong as he  is  not  a  national  of  that
           country, the more so  bearing  in  mind  the  objective  evidence
           relating to the conditions there."


  4. The appeals against the asserted breaches of the two Conventions  were
     dismissed.  Nothing more was said about the removal  provisions.   The
     grounds of appeal to the Tribunal took issue with the finding that the
     Appellant was not  Somali,  and  leave  was  granted  because  of  the
     passages set out above.  The Tribunal determination of  19th  February
     2002 was brief. It pointed out that if it was said that the  Appellant
     was not a Somali, the "removal directions", as  they  were  described,
     were incorrect and outside the  provisions  of  paragraph  8(1)(c)  of
     Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971;  the  type  of  problem  which
     arose had been dealt with by the Tribunal in its  decision  in  Zecaj.
     It allowed the Appellant's appeal.

  5. The matter was remitted to the Tribunal on 15th November 2002 upon the
     Secretary of State's appeal to the Court of Appeal, following  written
     submissions only and an indication  by  the  presiding  Lord  Justice.
     Although there is no judgment, it appears to have been agreed that the
     Tribunal erred in its approach to the so-called "removal  directions",
     because the appeal was brought only under section 69(1) and not  under
     section 69(5) of the 1999 Act.  The Tribunal had also  relied  wrongly
     on its decision in Zecaj, which was distinguishable.  Indeed,  shortly
     after, that decision was overruled by  the  Court  of  Appeal  anyway,
     [2002] EWCA Civ 1919, [2003] Imm AR 298.


The Statutory Provisions


  6. Section 69 deals with the Refugee Convention.  Section 69(1)  and  (5)
     provide:

           "69(1)      A person who is refused leave  to  enter  the  United
                 Kingdom under the 1971 Act may appeal against  the  refusal
                 to an  adjudicator  on  the  ground  that  his  removal  in
                 consequence  of  the  refusal  would  be  contrary  to  the
                 Convention.
           (5)   If directions are given as mentioned in section  66(1)  for
                 the removal of a person from the  United  Kingdom,  he  may
                 appeal to an adjudicator on the ground that his removal  in
                 pursuance of  the  directions  would  be  contrary  to  the
                 convention."


  7. The other provisions of section 69 deal with limited leave or where  a
     deportation order or decision has been made.

  8. The Appellant claims also to be appealing under the  ECHR  provisions,
     which we accepted.  Section 65(1) and (5) provide:

           "65 (1)     A person who  alleges  that  an  authority  has,  in
                 taking any decision under the Immigration Acts relating  to
                 that person's entitlement to enter or remain in the  United
                 Kingdom, racially discriminated against  him  or  acted  in
                 breach of his human rights may  appeal  to  an  adjudicator
                 against that decision ... ."


                  (5)  If the adjudicator, or the  Tribunal,  decides  that
           the authority concerned
                  (a)  racially discriminated against the Appellant; or
                  (b)  acted in breach of the Appellant's human rights,
                 the appeal may be allowed on the ground in question."

  9. Section 66(1) to (3), which was relied on as  an  interpretative  aid,
     provides:

           "66(1)      This section applies if directions are given  for  a
                 person's removal from the United Kingdom-
                 (a)   on the ground that he is an illegal entrant;
                 (b)   under section 10; or
                 (c)   under the special powers conferred by Schedule  2  to
                       the 1971  Act in relation to members of the crew of a
                       ship or aircraft or  persons  coming  to  the  United
                       Kingdom to join a ship or aircraft as a member of the
                       crew.


                  (2)  That person may appeal to an adjudicator against the
                 directions on the ground that on  the  facts  of  his  case
                 there was in law no power to give them  on  the  ground  on
                 which they were given.

                  (3)  This section does not entitle  a  person  to  appeal
                 while he is in the United Kingdom unless  he  is  appealing
                 under section 65 or 69 (5)."

 10. Section 59(3) deals with the position where a person refused leave  to
     enter is appealing against that decision, and is served  with  removal
     directions or with Notice "that any directions which may be given  for
     his removal ... will be ... to a country or one of  several  countries
     specified in the Notice."

 11. Section 59(4) entitles the recipient to "object"  to  the  country  to
     which he would be removed, or to the country or countries specified in
     the Notice.  But the section contemplates that such  an  objection  to
     removal must specify the alternative country to  which  he  is  to  be
     removed, if he is to be removed at all.

 12. Section 67 deals with removal directions given  under  the  1971  Act,
     where a person has been refused leave to enter.  It  provides  for  an
     appeal to an Adjudicator against the directions on the ground that, if
     he is to be removed, it should be to a different country, but again he
     has to specify to which country.  There are other restrictions on that
     right of appeal.

 13. Paragraphs 21(1) and (2) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act are relevant to
     the scope of or restrictions on the appeals under sections 69 and  65.
     They provide:


           "21(1)      On an appeal to him under Part  IV,  an  adjudicator
                 must allow the appeal if he considers-
                 (a)   that the decision or action against which the  appeal
                       is brought was not in accordance with the law or with
                       any immigration rules applicable to the case, or
                 (b)   if the decision or action involved the exercise of  a
                       discretion by the Secretary of State or  an  officer,
                       that  the  discretion  should  have  been   exercised
                       differently,
                 but otherwise must dismiss the appeal.
           (2)   Sub-paragraph (1) is subject to paragraph 24  and  to  any
                 restriction on the grounds of appeal."


 14. Paragraph 22(6) applies the same provision to the Tribunal.

 15. Paragraph 10 of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act  provides:

           "If a person in the United Kingdom appeals under section  59  or
           69(1) on being refused leave to enter, any directions previously
           given by virtue of the refusal for his removal from  the  United
           Kingdom cease to have effect, except in  so  far  as  they  have
           already been carried out, and no  directions  may  be  so  given
           while the appeal is pending."

     There is a suspensory provision in paragraph 20 in relation to section
     65 appeals.

 16. Finally, paragraph 8(1)(c)  of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Immigration Act,
     deals with the countries for which removal directions may be set  when
     a person is refused leave to enter:

            "(i)  a country of which he is a national or citizen;  or
           (ii)  a country or territory in which he has obtained a passport
                 or other document of identity;  or
            (iii)      a country or territory in which he embarked  for  the
United Kingdom;  or
            (iv) a country or territory to which there is reason to  believe
                 that he will be admitted."

 17. By paragraph 10(2), the Secretary of State, instead of giving  removal
     directions in  which  the  carrier  is  specified,  may  give  removal
     directions to those countries "in accordance with arrangements  to  be
     made by him".


The Submissions


 18. Mr Manjit Gill QC for the Appellant  pursued  the  grounds  of  appeal
     originally  raised,  but  his  main  points  were  rather  wider.   He
     contended that in this sort of case, where the Secretary of State  did
     not accept the asserted nationality of the Appellant and issued, as he
     described them, "removal directions" to a country  of  which  he  said
     that the Appellant was not a national, those directions  were  not  in
     accordance with the law as set out in paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule  2
     to the 1971 Act and  had  not  been  issued  pursuant  to  the  proper
     exercise of his discretion.  Mr Gill contended that it was inherent in
     both  an  appeal  under  section  69(1)  in  relation  to  the  Geneva
     Convention, and under section 65(1) in relation to human rights,  that
     they had to be considered in the light of  the  "removal  directions",
     which were also to be treated as appealed against in such appeals.  It
     would be unduly narrow to read  those  sections  as  governed  by  the
     limitations in paragraph 21(2) of Schedule 4  to  the  1999  Act,  and
     would lead to multiplicity of appeals contrary to the plain intent  of
     the Act.  An Appellant would have such directions hanging over him and
     would be vulnerable to  their  sudden  activation.   If  the  "removal
     directions" were held to be unlawful, the  Secretary  of  State  would
     still be able to set such directions after reaching, as he has said he
     would, a conclusion as to the Appellant's true nationality.

 19. The refusal letter was wrong  in  saying  the  "directions"  would  be
     issued "solely" to provide a basis for appeal since,  had  the  appeal
     been by a Somali national which failed on its merits, they would  have
     been capable of being acted on. The Tribunal in Asif Khan [2002] UKIAT
     04412, was wrong to conclude that  removal  directions  could  not  be
     challenged in a pure asylum appeal and in any event there was  also  a
     human rights appeal here. The Tribunal must have been of the view that
     the Appellant could not be removed to Somalia without  breach  of  his
     human rights, and his appeal should be allowed on that ground.

 20. Mr Singh for the Respondent said that Mr  Gill's  submissions  ignored
     the differences between section 69(1)  and  69(5).   If  it  had  been
     intended to allow the validity of removal directions to be  challenged
     in a subsection (1) appeal, the Act would have so provided, as it  had
     done in subsection (5) and in section 66.  He relied upon the Tribunal
     decision in Jafar [2002] UKIAT 05184.  In these circumstances  if  the
     Appellant was not a Somali, he was not a refugee.  Paragraph 21(2)  of
     Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act did indeed operate so as  to  restrict  the
     rights of appeal and there was no appeal available in respect  of  the
     validity of any removal directions in this instance.  On the  evidence
     in this case it was impossible for the Adjudicator or the Tribunal  to
     address the question of human rights upon the Appellant being returned
     to Somalia.


Conclusions


 21. It is not uncommon for challenges to be made to immigration  decisions
     on the grounds that the country of destination  specified  in  removal
     directi0ns is not one to which the Appellant can be sent and  that  it
     falls outside the provisions of paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to the  1971
     Immigration   Act.   Sometimes   the   problem   arises   because   of
     administrative error;  sometimes as here, it arises because there is a
     dispute as to the nationality of the Appellant. The issues which arise
     are:  did the Notice actually contain or evidence removal  directions?
     Is there a specific statutory appeal available against  them  in  this
     case if they were removal directions?  If not, what is  the  relevance
     here of the stated country of removal in the human rights  and  asylum
     appeals under sections 65(1) and 69(1)?

 22. First, does the Notice issued by the Respondent dated 29th March 2001,
     either constitute or evidence removal directions at all?  It refers to
     "removal directions" in the heading;  and in his letter of 26th  March
     2001, the SSHD said that "directions"  would  be  given  for  Somalia.
     Removal directions, it is true, do not have to contain the name of the
     carrier or the date and time of removal;  paragraph 10 of  Schedule  2
     envisages that removal directions can refer only to arrangements to be
     made  in  certain  circumstances;   see  Jazayeri   16th   May   2001*
     [01/TH/0110].  The Notice there did not  itself  contain  the  removal
     directions by its own terms;  it evidenced the  decision  relating  to
     such directions sufficiently for paragraph 10 of Schedule 2.  However,
     this Notice is additionally unclear as to what the  position  actually
     is: whether such directions may have been given or may be proposed  to
     be given at some future time but have not yet been given.  The  letter
     which precedes the Notice says that they will be given,  and  yet  the
     Notice still leaves the position open.  Such dubiety cannot constitute
     or evidence removal directions.

 23. The Secretary of State may have assumed in his letter  of  26th  March
     2001 that a country of removal needed to be specified in order for  an
     appealable decision to be notified in accordance with the  Immigration
     and Asylum Appeals (Notices) Regulations 2000, SI 2246, regulations  4
     and 5, and thus appealed.  These provisions require written notice  of
     an appealable decision to contain "a statement of the country to which
     he is to  be  removed"  "if  it  relates  to  the  giving  of  removal
     directions".  He may have been of the view that his letter  or  Notice
     "related to" the giving of removal directions even if  they  were  not
     removal directions themselves.  Whether that is so or not  depends  on
     the  width  of  the  phrase  "relating  to",  and   whether   "removal
     directions" are actually ultimately envisaged.  It is not necessary to
     reach a conclusion on whether  as  a  matter  of  form  a  destination
     country needs to be stated for an appeal to be brought.

 24. The appealable decision under section 69(1) is the refusal of leave to
     enter, which does not of itself require a country  of  removal  to  be
     stated or removal directions  to  be  given.   The  ground  of  appeal
     against that decision however is that removal in consequence  of  that
     refusal would be a breach of the Geneva  Convention.   Therefore,  the
     ground of appeal requires not just a refusal of  leave  to  enter  but
     also an examination of  the  consequential  removal,  whether  or  not
     imminent or even presently envisaged.  The Appellant contends in  such
     an appeal, first, that he is a refugee and,  second,  in  consequence,
     that to remove him would breach Article 33.   No  country  of  removal
     needs to be specified in order  to  establish  whether  someone  is  a
     refugee.   As  the  country,  nationality  or  habitual  residence  is
     critical to the questions of whether  someone  is  a  refugee,  it  is
     relevant for the refusal of  leave  to  enter  to  state  whether  the
     asserted nationality is accepted.  But a country of  proposed  removal
     has to be identified in order to test whether the removal  of  someone
     who is a refugee would breach Article 33.

 25. Where the disputed nationality claim  is  resolved  in  favour  of  an
     Appellant, the  country  of  envisaged  removal  is  relevant  to  the
     assessment of whether removal would breach Article 33.   Where  it  is
     rejected, the country of envisaged removal ceases to be relevant.  The
     Notice or letter cannot here be taken the one in  isolation  from  the
     other.  Taken  together,  they  embody  a  two  stage  decision:   the
     Appellant's nationality is not X, but if it is, his removal to X  will
     not breach Article 33;  if it is not X, he is not a refugee and anyway
     will not be removed to X, so no breach of Article  33  can  arise,  on
     either limb of the ground of appeal.  It is not a decision that a non-
     national of X will be removed there.

 26. For the purpose of section 65(1), it is difficult to see how an appeal
     could be made against the refusal of leave to enter  on  human  rights
     grounds, without the threat of removal and, in almost all  cases,  the
     threat of removal to an identified country.  It  would  be  impossible
     otherwise to identify the threatened or actual breach of human rights.
      For the purposes of an appeal under section 65(1), it does not matter
     whether or not the letter or Notice  constitute  or  evidence  removal
     directions;  either way, it is plainly a decision  "relating  to"  the
     Appellant's right to enter the United Kingdom and generates a right of
     appeal in relation to human rights; see R (Kariharan,  Koneswaran  and
     Kumarakuruparan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2002]
     EWCA Civ 1102, [2003] Imm AR 163.  The letter or  Notice  generates  a
     right of appeal because section 65 encompasses an appeal  against  the
     decisions embodied in a letter or Notice such as the one sent here.

 27. The same point as is made in paragraph 25 applies in relation  to  the
     human rights appeal.

 28. The purpose of the formulation of the decision embodied in the  letter
     and Notice can be tested by examining what would happen if there  were
     to be no appeal against the decision.  It would not  be  open  to  the
     Secretary of State to say that the  Appellant  was  a  Somali  and  to
     remove him to Somalia;  the Secretary  of  State  could  only  act  in
     accordance with his own decision that the Appellant was not a  Somali,
     that his true nationality would be investigated and that he would  not
     be removed to Somalia but to some other, as yet unknown, country.  The
     Secretary of State needs to assert that the Appellant is  not  Somali,
     but not knowing what he is, is entitled to threaten his removal there,
     because the Appellant can thereby  challenge  that  rejection  of  his
     nationality and its consequences.  It is difficult to  see  that  this
     could be done effectively without any removal being proposed.

 29. The second issue  is  whether,  even  if  the  letter  or  Notice  had
     constituted removal directions an  appeal  would  have  been  possible
     against them as such?  The answer to that is "no".

 30. Section 69(5) specifically provides for a right of  appeal  in  asylum
     cases against removal directions in certain circumstances. There is no
     reason why Parliament should have enacted section 69(5) if  there  was
     an adequate right of appeal for all against  such  directions  already
     inherent in section 69(1).   We do not  accept  Mr  Gill's  submission
     that section 69(5) was simply a carry over from previous  legislation,
     and that that explains why a separate appeal provision in relation  to
     removal directions was provided for illegal entrants. It is clear from
     Zecaj that the right of appeal under subsection (5) is limited to  the
     ground specified in section 66(1), and  that  the  section  66  appeal
     itself is limited.  The effect of Zecaj  is  that  the  ground  of  an
     appeal must be that the subsection (1) ground did  not  apply  to  the
     Appellant on the facts as a matter of law.  It would be necessary  for
     the directions to have been given on the ground that the Appellant was
     an illegal entrant, or an overstayer, or had obtained leave to  remain
     by deception, was a member of a  family  of  which  one  had  received
     removal directions, or was a crew member.  None of these  were  relied
     on by the Secretary of State.  So no appeal lay under section 66.   It
     would be bizarre if the restrictions in sections 69(5) and 66 could be
     sidestepped by an appeal under section 69(1).  The language of section
     69(1) also refers to "ground" in the singular;  it does not  import  a
     further ground relating to removal directions.

 31. It  is  also  worth  noting  that  there  are  other  specific  appeal
     provisions relating to removal directions in both sections 59  and  67
     but they both require the Appellant  to  specify  another  country  to
     which he is to be sent, and so  do  not  assist  the  Appellant  here.
     Rather  they  confirm  that  the  right  of  appeal  against   removal
     directions is not to be  implied  but  is  expressly  conferred  where
     applicable.  If it requires a specific statutory provision in  section
     69(5) to provide for an appeal against removal directions as such, and
     other specific provisions exist as well, it is very difficult  to  see
     why section 65(1) in turn should be construed as containing implicitly
     such a right of appeal.  So there are no  specific  statutory  removal
     direction appeal rights available in this instance  even  were  either
     the letter or Notice to constitute or evidence such directions.   This
     case does not concern an illegal  entrant;   the  Appellant  made  his
     claim while still in the port area and as soon as possible.

 32. The Notice is inaccurate in referring to an appeal on the ground  that
     "removal in pursuance of these directions"  would  breach  the  Geneva
     Convention.  The statutory provision to which it relates refers rather
     to removal in consequence of the decision to refuse  leave  to  enter;
     it does not refer to removal directions  at  all,  and  the  provision
     which does is not referred to as the ground of appeal.  Nonetheless we
     do not consider that that can be seen as altering the  true  scope  of
     section 69(1).

 33. The appeals could not directly challenge  the  lawfulness  of  removal
     directions by reference to paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act
     language of paragraph 21(1) and (2) of Schedule 4  to  the  1999  Act,
     which refers to decisions not made "in accordance with the law".  This
     is because paragraph 21(1) is subject by 21(2) "to any restriction  on
     the grounds of appeal".  It is clear that there is  a  restriction  in
     both  section  65(1)  and  section  69(1)  appeals.   The  former,  by
     reference to subsection (5), is limited to  human  rights  and  racial
     discrimination;  it contains no other ground of appeal.  Section 69(1)
     by its terms is limited to a single ground and  contrasts  with  69(5)
     which alone, as we have said,  extends  to  the  specific  content  of
     removal directions.

 34. The third issue, and it is the important point, is as to the relevance
     to the two appeals of the country specified in the Notice.  That issue
     is not answered by merely deciding that there is  no  relevant  appeal
     against the so-called removal directions.  It  is  necessary  to  deal
     separately with the two Conventions.  We take  the  Geneva  Convention
     first.

 35. Any claim that the refusal of leave to  enter  and  the  consequential
     removal infringes that Convention relies on  the  combination  of  the
     definition  of  "refugee"  in  Article  1  and   the   non-refoulement
     obligation in Article 33, which applies to refugees.  The burden is on
     the claimant for asylum to establish that he is a refugee.  He has  to
     establish that he is outside the country of his nationality or  former
     habitual residence;  that may be clear  enough  without  that  country
     being identifiable. But he then has to establish that he is unable, or
     through fear unwilling, to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  the
     country of his nationality or of former habitual residence.  Unless he
     can establish, to whatever is the appropriate standard of proof,  what
     is his country of nationality or former  habitual  residence,  he  can
     never satisfy that requirement.  He cannot  be  someone  to  whom  the
     obligations in Article 33 then apply, for he is  not  a  refugee.   An
     individual does not become a refugee simply because he  is  threatened
     with removal from the country where he  has  sought  protection  to  a
     country where he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  however
     improbable such a threat or its achievement.  He failed to  show  that
     the refusal of leave to enter was unlawful;  the second  limb  of  the
     ground of appeal (removal) does not arise.

 36. Mr Gill suggested that the Tribunal should consider whether as a  non-
     Somali, the Appellant would be persecuted in Somalia.  We  decline  to
     consider that:  the Appellant does not come within the definition of a
     refugee.  Also, it would be impossible for the  basis  of  a  fear  of
     persecution to be established credibly.  And it would be an  abuse  of
     process for him to say that his claim should  be  dealt  with  on  any
     basis other than that which he put forward.  He cannot have  it  every
     which way.  After all, he denies that he is a non-Somali.  Finally, as
     we have said, if the Appellant is not a Somali, and he has been  found
     not to be, the Secretary of State has said that he does not propose to
     remove  him  there  but  instead  intends  to  investigate  his   true
     nationality.  So there  is  no  basis,  on  that  factual  basis,  for
     concluding that there would be a breach of Article 33.

 37. If, as an alternative, an Appellant sought to establish that he  would
     be persecuted for a Convention reason in  every  country  of  possible
     nationality (and there is no reason why he should be able  to  delimit
     the Secretary of State's possibilities  in  that  respect),  he  would
     still not come within the definition of a refugee.  The attempt  would
     also be impracticable because of the array of deceit  which  he  would
     have to put forward.  It would also be an abuse of the appeal  process
     to assert as true a sequence  of  inconsistent  stories,  having  been
     disbelieved on his first claim.

 38. It follows that the Appellant cannot make out  his  claim  to  refugee
     status at all;  the reference in the Notice to the country of proposed
     removal, even if it were actually proposed to remove him there on  the
     basis of the Adjudicator's findings (which it is not), cannot make him
     a refugee.  It is irrelevant to examine what might happen to him there
     for the purposes of the Geneva Convention.

 39. Paragraph 10 of Schedule 4 also has the  effect  that  if  the  Notice
     constituted removal directions or "directions ... given by  virtue  of
     the refusal [of leave to enter] for his removal"  it  ceases  to  have
     effect because of the asylum  appeal.   There  is  no  provision  that
     dismissal of the appeal revives any such direction.  Paragraph 10 does
     not appear to be merely a suspensory provision: rather it expunges any
     such direction.  Although the effect of a section 65 appeal is  simply
     to suspend such directions, the effect  of  an  asylum  appeal  is  to
     remove their effect permanently.  They do not have two separate lives,
     ended permanently by an asylum appeal but merely suspended by a  human
     rights  appeal,  capable  of  being  acted  upon  if  that  appeal  is
     dismissed.

 40. For the purposes of the EHCR, the issue  is  whether  the  removal  as
     proposed to Somalia involves a breach of the claimant's human  rights.
     The problem faced by the Appellant is as to the  basis  of  his  claim
     that he would be subject to treatment in  breach  of  Article  3.   He
     cannot say that he would be ill-treated as a Somalian, because  he  is
     not of Somali nationality.  He cannot be heard to say in  this  appeal
     that he would be ill-treated as a non- Somali, because that  would  be
     an abuse of process:  he cannot in the same appeal maintain two wholly
     inconsistent stances.  He cannot  give  evidence  in  support  of  his
     appeal on the basis that, if he is disbelieved as to  his  nationality
     and that basis for his claim goes, he has another story and can  claim
     to be entitled to assert a case which he has  previously  denied.   In
     reality, the lies told by the Appellant also make  it  impossible  for
     any assessment of his human rights position to be carried out. Even if
     it were possible, in theory, for someone to show that he would be ill-
     treated, whatever his country of origin, were he to be sent, say,   to
     Somalia, it would be  something  of  an  exceptional  case  and  would
     involve giving credence to someone found lacking in credibility  on  a
     fundamental issue.  It is not obvious why  such  a  person  should  be
     believed.  But the appeal  system  should  not  permit  itself  to  be
     abused, against such a theoretical case.

 41. Finally, in a human rights appeal, it is necessary for removal to be a
     reasonably imminent practical threat for a breach to arise.  Once  the
     Adjudicator has determined that the  Appellant  is  not  Somali,  such
     removal ceases to be a practical threat in the light of the  Secretary
     of State's promise in his letter not to remove him to Somalia  but  to
     investigate further his true nationality.  It follows that he does not
     in practical terms face treatment in breach of Article 3 through being
     sent to Somalia, because he will not be sent there.

 42. Even in an Article 8 claim based on family life, the country to  which
     return is proposed and the  relationship  of  the  Appellant  to  that
     country will usually be important in the assessment of  whether  there
     are difficulties in the way of his family going there.   Deceitfulness
     as to the basis of claim will be fatal there as well.

 43. This approach to false nationality claims in asylum and  human  rights
     appeals is in line with what the Tribunal has decided in other  cases.
     In  Khan  [2002]  UKIAT  04412*,  the  Tribunal   considered   removal
     directions for Afghanistan in relation  to  a  claimant  who  was  not
     believed to be from there. It held first that the Adjudicator was  not
     obliged to make a positive finding of nationality;   he  only  had  to
     decide whether the evidence established the claimed nationality.   The
     asylum claim failed;  the  Claimant  contested  the  validity  of  the
     removal directions on the basis that it had not been believed  in  the
     asylum claim that the Claimant was from Afghanistan.  He had an appeal
     under both section 69(5) and section 66 as an  illegal  entrant.   The
     section 66 appeal was rejected, depending as it did  on  the  Claimant
     asserting that he was not from  Afghanistan.   The  Tribunal  said  in
     paragraph 14:

           "We firmly take the view that an Appellant cannot  be  heard  to
           claim, for the purposes of his asylum appeal, that he comes from
           a particular country and,  in  the  same  proceedings,  for  the
           purposes of s 66, that he does not come from that country.  That
           should be sufficient to deal with any cases  in  which,  in  the
           same appeal, an Appellant claims that he is  from  a  particular
           country but, if the Adjudicator does not believe that,  then  he
           claims for the purposes of an appeal under s 66 that he  is  not
           from that country.  To do so is simply an abuse and we will  not
           tolerate it.  It follows that an appeal under s 66, based on the
           falseness of the information given for the purposes of any other
           grounds of appeal in the same appeal, will not succeed."

 44. In Hamza [2002] UKIAT 05185*, the Tribunal considered the position  of
     a Claimant who falsely claimed to be from  Somalia;   the  Adjudicator
     found on the material which he had that she was from Kenya.  All  that
     was actually necessary for the Adjudicator to decide was that she  was
     not from Somalia.  Removal  directions  were  set  for  Somalia.   The
     possibility of a challenge to removal directions under section 66  was
     raised.  The Tribunal endorsed and applied Khan.  Collins  J  said  at
     paragraphs 8 and 9:

           "Now that enables a person, in respect of whom appealable removal
           directions have been given, to say not only that he is a  refugee
           but also that there was no power to give the  directions  on  the
           facts of his case.  What he is not entitled to do is to blow  hot
           and cold and say "On the facts of my case, I  am  a  national  of
           country A and I cannot be returned to country A because it  would
           be contrary either to the Refugee Convention  (s  69(5))  or  the
           Human Rights Convention (s 65).  But, if  you,  the  Adjudicator,
           decide that I am not a national of country A,  then  the  removal
           directions cannot stand because, on the facts that you have  then
           found, there would be in law no power to give them on the  ground
           on which they were given."


           "In our view, because, like Mr Varcoe, we  do  not  believe  that
           Parliament could have intended an individual to rely on  his  own
           fraud to obtain an advantage, s 66(2) must be construed  to  mean
           that the facts of  his  case  mean  the  facts  asserted  by  the
           Appellant in support of his appeal.  That  is  to  say  that  the
           Appellant is entitled to appeal under s 66(2) if, and only if, he
           asserts facts which mean that there was in law no power  to  give
           the directions on the ground on which they  were  given.   If  he
           fails to establish those facts, he claim will fail."

 45. The same approach was  adopted  in  Jafar  [2002]  UKIAT  05184.   The
     thinking is also consistent with R (Tu) v Secretary of State  for  the
     Home Department [2002] EWHC Admin 2678, [2003] Imm AR 288.

 46. Although the Tribunal  in  Khan  and  Hamza  referred  to  Zecaj,  and
     distinguished that Tribunal's decision, before  its  reversal  by  the
     Court of Appeal, that reversal does not affect the conclusions on this
     issue to which it came.  (It distinguished Zecaj  as  relating  to  an
     administrative error.)  We see nothing in the Court of Appeal in Zecaj
     which casts  doubt  on  the  broader  point  recorded  in  the  SSHD's
     submissions to it.   We  can  see  no  reason  to  adopt  a  different
     approach, where there are either no removal  directions  or  where  no
     appeal lies against them, from that adopted  when  removal  directions
     have been issued for the country of the falsely asserted  nationality.
     The reasoning which would have applied to limit the section 66 appeal,
     had it existed, would also  apply  to  limit  the  grounds  of  appeal
     available under section 69(1) and 65(1).  If the Appellant were  right
     in his submissions as to the availability of an appeal against removal
     directions, he would lose nonetheless.

 47. The Secretary of State is, it is true, seemingly facing  two  ways  in
     asserting that someone is not a national of the country  to  which  he
     apparently proposes to return him, or in respect  of  which  he  might
     have actually issued removal directions, whilst  knowing  that  he  is
     contending that they do not satisfy paragraph 8 of Schedule 2  to  the
     1971 Act.  The reality is that the Secretary of State  is  not  facing
     two ways.  As we have explained, the letter  and  Notice  have  to  be
     taken together as a two-stage decision, with the removal  proposed  to
     Somalia  being  contingent  upon  the  Appellant  succeeding  in   his
     nationality assertion  but  failing  in  relation  to  persecution  on
     Article 3 treatment.  This is a real problem  which  arises  more  and
     more frequently over false nationality claims eg Somali, Afghan or Sri
     Lankan.

 48. The  Secretary  of  State  will  usually  not  be  in  a  position  to
     investigate fully the true nationality so long as the Claimant  has  a
     right of appeal in which the Claimant's assertion  as  to  nationality
     can be resolved.  The Secretary of State should  not  be  put  in  the
     false position of having the  burden  of  proving  nationality  in  an
     asylum or human rights appeal - that burden lies on the Claimant.  The
     Secretary of State cannot normally therefore be expected to specify  a
     removal country, whether or not in removal directions, other than  the
     one asserted by the Claimant.  This enables the appeal to  be  mounted
     and the assertion as to the disputed nationality resolved, even though
     it will often not resolve what the true nationality actually is.

 49. Any other approach would reverse the burden of proof, imposing on  the
     Secretary of State the burden of proving nationality in respect  of  a
     deceitful Claimant and would  advantage  the  deceitful  claim  as  to
     nationality.  Any given individual could assert that he was eg Somali,
     with  varying  degrees  of  improbability,  could   assert   that   if
     disbelieved, he would be ill-treated  as  a  non-Somali  and  seek  to
     prevent refusal of his asylum  claim  until  the  Secretary  of  State
     positively established his nationality.  The Conventions and  sections
     69(1) and 65(1) should not be interpreted so as to  assist  those  who
     abuse protective provisions to impose  themselves  on  the  protecting
     state.

 50. If appeals, in these circumstances, are allowed on  the  grounds  that
     the removal directions, if they are issued, do not satisfy paragraph 8
     of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act on the  Secretary  of  State's  case  as
     upheld by the  Adjudicator  or  Tribunal,  there  is  every  advantage
     accorded to deceit over  nationality.   The  asylum  or  human  rights
     appeals would have been allowed,  on  the  removal  direction  ground,
     because of the Appellant's deceit.

 51. The alternative, which is our view, is that they are dismissed in such
     circumstances.  Yet the Claimant will have had the chance to deal with
     his or the Secretary of State's disbelief as to his nationality.   Any
     problems thereafter arise from the attempted deceit.

 52. Mr Gill  submitted  that  if  these  were  removal  directions,  which
     nonetheless fell outside the scope of section 66  and  section  69(5),
     they could in theory be activated after dismissal  of  the  appeal  on
     whatever basis.  He is right that the sole purpose of such  directions
     might not be confined to enabling an appeal to be  brought.   But  his
     concern about their last  minute  activation  and  the  difficulty  of
     judicial review at short notice must be tempered in this type of  case
     by a clear understanding of the cause of the problem.  It would be the
     lies of the Claimant  and  his  failure  to  be  truthful  as  to  his
     nationality after the dismissal of his appeal.  Judicial Review  would
     still lie against their activations in the light of the  Secretary  of
     State's letter.  We see no reason why the process of  the  law  should
     permit abuse so as to guard against the possibility of  the  Secretary
     of State acting unlawfully, and in breach of what he has said  in  his
     letter.  In  any  event,  paragraph  10  of  Schedule  4  removes  the
     effectiveness of such directions in the event of an appeal being made.

 53. Likewise, if after interview,  removal  directions  are  set  for  the
     country which the Secretary of  State  concludes  is  the  country  of
     nationality, say Kenya, there may be no appeal against such directions
     under section 82 of the 2002 Act as now  would  apply.   We  say  that
     because there may be no fresh refusal of leave to enter, the Appellant
     does not come within section 10 of the 1999 Act,  and  he  is  not  an
     illegal entrant.  Had there been an  available  appeal,  it  might  or
     might not have been excluded under section 96.

 54. However, it would still  be  a  judicially  reviewable  decision.   We
     repeat the comments above about the  cause  of  the  problem  and  the
     Appellant's responsibility for it.  The difficulty of access to  last-
     minute judicial review (if indeed it all had to  be  last-minute)  can
     readily be overstated;   many  in  the  President's  experience,  have
     sought it.  We do not consider that the point  made  in  Kariharan  by
     Sedley LJ, perfectly understandable in the context of an argument that
     in effect the removal decision was not appealable, has the same  force
     or effect when the appeal has been heard and dismissed on its  merits,
     because of the Appellant's deceit.

 55. It adds nothing to Mr Gill's argument for  it  to  be  said  that  the
     Secretary of State exercised his discretion wrongly.


The Interview


 56. Mr Gill finally submitted that the Adjudicator could not lawfully have
     reached the conclusions which he did as  to  the  nationality  of  the
     Appellant.  His principal point, upon which he  hangs  all  the  other
     lesser points, was that the Adjudicator ought to have  discounted  the
     initial interview conducted by the interviewing officer at Heathrow on
     3rd and 4th  June  2000.   The  Adjudicator  relied  on  discrepancies
     between the answers given at that interview and answers given  at  his
     later asylum interview as the main basis  for  the  rejection  of  the
     claimed nationality.

 57. It was complained that the  interviewing  officer  had  acted  as  the
     interpreter himself when he should have been independent,  that  there
     was a lack of comprehension between the two, that the officer did  not
     know that there were several dialects of Swahili,  and  had  conducted
     the interview some few hours after the  Appellant  had  arrived  tired
     after a long flight, had been oppressive in his manner  and  continued
     the  interview  the  next  day  after  the  Appellant  had  spent   an
     uncomfortable night trying to sleep on chairs at the  airport.   There
     were obvious deficiencies in the interview and the answers showed that
     the Appellant was just tired and fed up and wanted  the  interview  to
     stop.

 58. The Adjudicator pointed out  that  the  Appellant  had  described  his
     Swahili as similar to that spoken in Kenya;  the  interpreter  at  the
     appeal before the Adjudicator came from Kenya;  Mr Gill said that  the
     interviewing officer was probably East African Asian.  The Adjudicator
     declined to discount the interview.  He said:

           "Whilst it does appear to me to be advisable for there to be  an
           independent interpreter present at interview I  would  need  the
           most compelling reasons to be prepared to discount an  interview
           entirely.  I note that no  formal  complaint  was  made  by  the
           Appellant or his representatives concerning the conduct of  that
           interview, the Appellant signed  the  record  and  answered  the
           usual questions indicating that he  understood  the  interviewer
           and was able to proceed.  When he stated that he was unwell  the
           first session of the interview  was  terminated.   I  appreciate
           that an interview given at the end of a long flight  in  strange
           circumstances and  particularly  when  the  interviewee  may  be
           uneducated is a gruelling and demanding experience.  I bear that
           in mind in considering the contents of  that  initial  interview
           but I do not think that  it  would  be  proper  to  discount  it
           altogether.  On the whole  the  Appellant's  answers  do  follow
           logically from the questions put.  Considering that interview  I
           do not regard it as of  any  particular  significance  that  the
           Appellant did  not  know  details  about  such  matters  as  the
           population and even capital city of Somalia.  What  I  did  find
           very surprising was  that  he  was  not  able  at  that  initial
           interview to name his own clan but only to say that he came from
           Kismayo.  It is also surprising that he was not able to give  an
           indication as to when the attack upon his home had occurred.  It
           is even more surprising that the Appellant was not aware of  the
           Somalian currency."

 59. He then contrasted those answers with  various  other  later  answers,
     before reaching his adverse conclusion on nationality.

 60. Mr Gill essentially repeated the points made to the  Adjudicator.   We
     have read the notes which are  written  in  English  even  though  the
     interview was conducted in Swahili.  There is nothing in  this  point.
     The Adjudicator was entitled to reach the  conclusions  which  he  did
     over the interview and to take it into account in  his  assessment  of
     the Appellant who gave evidence before him and whose overall  veracity
     he would have been well-placed to assess.

 61. For the reasons which we have given this appeal  is  dismissed.   This
     determination is starred for  what  it  says  about  the  approach  to
     disputed nationality claims.








                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT



