
CI (Link to Mobutu) Congo - Democratic Republic of CG [2004] UKIAT 00072
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 12th March 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               22 April 2004


                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms S Panagiotopoulou, instructed by Lawrence &
                 Co
For the Respondent:          Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs  D
      J Baker, promulgated on 23rd October 2003.  The Appellant is a female
      citizen of the DRC, who entered the United Kingdom  on  4th  December
      2002.  On 15th March 2003, the Secretary of State  refused  to  grant
      asylum and took a decision to give directions for  her  removal.   He
      also rejected her claim that removal would breach  her  rights  under
      ECHR.

   2. The Adjudicator rejected  both  her  claims.   The  Tribunal  refused
      permission  to  appeal  but  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on
      Statutory Review.  The Adjudicator concluded that very much  of  what
      the Appellant had  to  say  was  truthful.   She  accepted  that  the
      Appellant's parents were high ranking army officers  under  President
      Mobutu, one a Brigadier General and the other a  Lieutenant  Colonel.
      Her father was killed in 1998 by the Laurent Kabila  regime  and  her
      mother was arrested by the rebels.  The Appellant was  working  as  a
      low level trainee journalist and continued working  in  that  way  to
      make a living.  She was working with the Congolese National Radio and
      TV.  She married a Rwandan Tutsi who refused to join the rebels.  She
      was living in the rebel held area of Kisangani and was  arrested  and
      detained by them.

   3. The Adjudicator accepted that, taking all the  evidence  around  that
      together, the Appellant had been beaten, burned with  cigarettes  and
      raped.  The Appellant points out that the account of torture  was  in
      fact more horrific than recorded by the Adjudicator, but  we  see  no
      reason to suppose that the Adjudicator had not accepted the  evidence
      in effect that the Appellant had  been  tortured  by  the  rebels  in
      Kisangani.  The Adjudicator also accepted that she was suffering from
      PTSD.

   4. Nonetheless the Adjudicator rejected certain other matters  given  in
      evidence by the Appellant.  The Adjudicator rejected her  account  of
      her escape.  She thought it implausible that a priest,  to  whom  the
      rebels forced  the  detainees  to  confess,  would  arrange  for  her
      release.  She thought it implausible that the  nuns  would  fund  her
      journey to the United Kingdom, as the Appellant  had  supposed.   The
      Adjudicator thought that her account of the escape and journey to the
      United Kingdom was a fabrication and that the Appellant had  in  fact
      been released by the rebels after detention and that  the  rebels  in
      power in Kisangani had no continuing interest in her.  The  Appellant
      said later that she did not know where her  children  were,  although
      she said that they were in the house with their father when  she  had
      left for work but that they had gone when she returned home and found
      the soldiers waiting to arrest her.  She relied upon a  letter  which
      the Adjudicator referred to as "allegedly  from  her  maternal  Aunt"
      telling her not to return and stating that there was no news  of  her
      children; this is a letter of  15th  February  2003.   The  Appellant
      stated that shortly after receiving the  letter  she  telephoned  her
      aunt and was told not to keep calling and now does not know where her
      aunt is.  The Adjudicator said "I find that the  later  part  of  her
      account has been fabricated to embellish her claim of the  risks  she
      faces on return to DRC."

   5. The Adjudicator concluded that she was not at risk of persecution  on
      the grounds of her husband's ethnic origin if she was not  with  him,
      and that, even if she were, there would be no real risk of  treatment
      amounting to persecution.  She would not  be  at  any  real  risk  of
      treatment contrary to Article 3 in a rebel controlled area;  this  is
      because  the  Adjudicator  concluded  that  they  had  no  continuing
      interest in her.  The Adjudicator also concluded that there would  be
      nothing unduly harsh in the Appellant relocating  in  Kinshasa  where
      she was born and where she might still have an  aunt  living.   There
      were facilities for mental health treatment in DRC and  although  she
      might suffer a deterioration in her mental health  at  the  point  of
      return, she would be returning to Kinshasa where there was  treatment
      which was under government control and where she would have no reason
      to fear the rebels, and accordingly concluded that Article 8 was  not
      engaged.

   6. The Appellant submitted that  the  background  evidence  showed  that
      there would be a risk on return for those who had a military  profile
      as she said she did, as the child of soldiers  who  were  well  known
      under the Mobutu  regime  and  were  well  known  in  Kinshasa.   The
      Adjudicator had ignored the fact that there  was  evidence  that  the
      Appellant's brother had more recently  been  imprisoned  in  Kinshasa
      through his associations with his parents.  The  rebel  forces  would
      have a continuing interest in her because it had been shown that  her
      mother had been detained by the rebels.  It was said that  there  was
      objective background evidence which showed that there was no adequate
      health system in DRC for those  suffering  from  PTSD  and  that  the
      Adjudicator had not applied the test in Razgar [2003]  EWCA  Civ  840
      when considering Article 8.

   7. The Appellant also submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      consider the problem which was raised before  her  of  the  Appellant
      being returned to Kinshasa but being seen by those in power there  as
      a sympathiser with the rebels, even though she was not,  because  she
      came from Kisangani.

   8. Miss Panagiotopoulou for the Appellant submitted that the case should
      be remitted for further findings of fact to be made against which the
      assessment of risk on return could be made.  Those findings  of  fact
      in particular related to the position of the brother, the sister  and
      the aunt and the risk to those coming from Kisangani. It would not be
      appropriate, she submitted, for the Tribunal to reach a conclusion in
      relation to the position of the  brother  based  on  the  documentary
      material.  There might be more evidence  which  the  Appellant  could
      give about it, although she was not in a position  to  help  us  with
      what that might be.  She had no interpreter there to  enable  her  to
      enquire of the Appellant what that position was.

   9. Mr Gulvin for the Secretary of State said  that  there  were  certain
      omissions in the Adjudicator's findings, including a failure to  make
      a finding as to the position of  the  brother;  indeed  there  was  a
      failure to make a finding in relation to the position of  the  sister
      and aunt, although that was not in  fact  a  subject  matter  of  any
      ground of appeal.  The problems she might face on return to  Kinshasa
      as the daughter of high ranking Mobutu army officers  or  as  someone
      perceived as coming from the rebel area of  Kisangani  had  not  been
      dealt with either.

  10. We would only remit the case if relevant issues could not be resolved
      by us.  Except for the allegations in relation to  what  happened  to
      the brother and the asserted absence of findings in relation to  him,
      the sister and aunt, the rest  of  the  case  is  dependent  upon  an
      assessment of documentary evidence relating to background conditions.
       The Appellant has given her evidence about the risks she would  face
      and for what reason and as we  have  said,  there  is  no  basis  for
      supposing that she has any more to say about her brother.

  11. The position in relation to the brother,  sister  and  aunt  is  more
      straightforward than the Appellant submitted.  In paragraph 25 of the
      Adjudicator's determination it is plain that she is not accepting the
      genuineness of the letter from the aunt dated 15th February 2003,  or
      the truthfulness of its content.  The Adjudicator says:

           "In the Appellant's bundle at pages B13  and  B14  is  a  letter
           allegedly from her maternal Aunt telling her not to  return  and
           enclosing a video, photographs and other documents  and  stating
           that there was no news of her children.   The  letter  is  dated
           15th February 2003.   The  Appellant  stated  in  evidence  that
           shortly after receiving the letter she telephoned her  aunt  and
           was told not to keep calling and as a result she does  not  know
           where her aunt is now.  I find  that  the  latter  part  of  her
           account has been fabricated to embellish her claim of the  risks
           she faces on return to DRC."

  12. It is clear that the conclusion that the latter part of  the  account
      had been fabricated, was not confined to the claim to have  rung  the
      aunt, but extended to the whole content of  the  paragraph;  that  is
      clear from the word "allegedly" used to describe the letter.  Such  a
      conclusion is also soundly based in the material itself.  The  letter
      in question sent from Kinshasa says in translation that "your  mother
      is wanted", "they said your mother will be killed  without  trial  if
      she is arrested", "if you have any  news  from  your  mother  let  me
      know".

  13. The Adjudicator had found as a fact that the mother had been arrested
      by rebels in Kisangani (although the Appellant  said  initially  that
      the mother had been arrested by Kabila soldiers and only that she had
      been arrested by rebels  in  the  second  statement).   There  is  no
      suggestion that the Appellant told the aunt that  that  is  what  had
      happened in any  phonecall  to  her  or  in  any  other  way,  itself
      surprising.  The aunt was also in a position to know, before writing,
      what had happened to the Appellant's mother, her  sister,  from  what
      the Appellant's brother and sister would have told her when they went
      to the aunt in Kinshasa (bundle A7 and A13).  They were  present  (C2
      paragraph 4) when the  mother  was  arrested  and  would  have  known
      therefore that she had been arrested by rebels and would have been in
      a position to tell  the  aunt.  Accordingly,  for  good  reason,  the
      Adjudicator rejected the evidence about the brother, sister and  aunt
      in Kinshasa.  The sole source for the alleged  information  was  this
      letter allegedly from her aunt and as  we  have  said,  there  is  no
      suggestion  that  the  Appellant  could  add  more.   There   is   no
      justification for  the  matter  going  back  to  an  Adjudicator  for
      findings of fact to be made  in  relation  to  the  position  of  the
      brother; they already have been made.  There is no reliable  evidence
      that he has been detained or ill treated in any way.  The  same  goes
      for the sister and the aunt.

  14. We now examine the return of the Appellant to  Kinshasa.   She  would
      not be returned to anywhere else in  DRC,  she  would  go  as  a  DRC
      national and with travel documents.  It was contended on  her  behalf
      that she would be at risk on return to Kinshasa because she would  be
      known to be the daughter of high ranking army officers who had served
      with Mobutu and moreover, she would be at risk of being considered by
      the government in Kinshasa as a rebel  sympathiser  because  she  had
      lived in Kisangani.  This was an issue raised before the  Adjudicator
      by the Appellant and although it was not the focus of  her  case,  it
      was not an issue with which the Adjudicator dealt.   The  Adjudicator
      concentrated on  the  concerns  raised  about  the  risks  which  the
      Appellant would face were she to be returned to Kisangani.

  15. The Appellant's submissions drew heavily on a report of June 2002  of
      proceedings at a seminar held under the auspices of ACCORD/UNHCR.  It
      notes at the outset  that  the  views  and  opinions  in  it  do  not
      necessarily reflect the views of the organisers of the workshop,  and
      it does not deal with the extent to which the comments, opinions  and
      assessments have been based on UNHCR sources or have gone through the
      verification and assessment process which UNHCR  position  papers  go
      through.

  16. At page D44, under the heading "Travel Restrictions  and  Freedom  of
      Movement", the restrictions that existed in 2002  on  travel  between
      the government controlled and  rebel  controlled  parts  of  DRC  are
      identified.  The risk of those travelling from Kinshasa to the  East,
      is that one could be accused of spying for the  Kinshasa  government,
      and it notes:

           "Amnesty International knows of many people who have  fled  from
           persecution by the RCD Rwandese or other forces in the East  and
           have thought that it w0uld be safer for them to go  to  Kinshasa
           and have been subsequently arrested and detained in Kinshasa  on
           suspicion of being in alliance with the armed opposition in  the
           East.  So many people dare not go to the other side".

  17. In support of the contention that there was a risk to  the  Appellant
      because of her parent's high ranking military role under  the  Mobutu
      regime, the Appellant referred to page D56, which states:

           "It would be possible that the children of such a soldier, be it
           a high ranking officer or a private, would be  targeted  by  the
           new authorities due to the  fact  that  their  father  held  the
           respective position during the Mobutu regime.  Sometimes  people
           are abused without any justification at all.  On the other hand,
           even a  civilian,  linked  to  someone  who  is  in  a  powerful
           position, may have been responsible for abuses for which he  may
           be held reliable or be subjected to reprisals".

  18. An example was given of a general's son driving an expensive  car  or
      military Land Rover.  Family members of MPR officials were also  said
      to be at risk.  The MPR was the Mobutu political party.   The  Report
      noted that being associated or close to someone being sought  by  the
      government can create trouble sometimes amounting to persecution.

  19. The Appellant also referred to a  letter  from  UNHCR-UK  dated  11th
      March 2004.  This was  written  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors  and
      concerned the return of failed asylum seekers to  DRC.   It  repeated
      the position which the UNHCR  had  previously  set  out  and  is  not
      specific in relation to any individual asylum  seeker.   It  explains
      the basis upon which its assessment is set out:

           "... as is customary with all country positions issued by the UK
           Branch Office of UNHCR, the  latest  position  on  the  DRC  was
           drafted on the basis of information that  was  sourced  directly
           from 0ur field office in the DRC and cleared by our Headquarters
           in Geneva.  Such procedures are  followed  throughout  UNHCR  in
           order to ensure the  consistency  of  positions  issued  by  our
           offices around the world".

 20. It referred to the UNHCR's views on country of origin  information  as
     being a primary source because they were based on first  hand  reports
     from its field presence around the world.  Its intention in  providing
     information in  a  case  such  as  this  was  to  contribute  to  fair
     decisions, correctly and in a humanitarian spirit,  and  to  determine
     the protection needs and essential interests of refugees.  The  letter
     said that the  UNHCR  made  continuous  efforts  to  ensure  that  its
     position mirrored the current  situation  in  the  country  concerned.
     This is a helpful explanation of the UNHCR's position and what it says
     must be accorded considerable weight.

 21. The letter says:

           "First hand accounts and reports from local human  rights  NGOs,
           suggests that certain individuals who are  deported  (regardless
           of whether they  sought  asylum  abroad),  or  even  repatriated
           voluntarily,  may  face  serious  problems  following   possible
           interrogation conducted by security  services  upon  arrival  in
           Kinshasa.  Should the authorities in Kinshasa  discover  that  a
           deportee has a political or military profile, or  sought  asylum
           abroad owing to a  political  or  military  background,  such  a
           person may be at risk of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment".

  22. After pointing out that the UNHCR's view was that  it  was  generally
      speaking possible for unsuccessful asylum seekers to  return  to  the
      DRC provided they had been found  in  fair  procedures  not  to  have
      international protection needs, it said that that view was subject to
      two important caveats.

  23. The first caveat is irrelevant because it concerns  return  to  areas
      other than Kinshasa.  The second caveat refers to the  point  already
      made in the letter that individuals with certain profiles, (eg  those
      with real or  perceived  political  or  military  associations)  were
      likely to be at risk and therefore deserved to receive particular and
      careful consideration.  It is to be noted that it does not seek, even
      for those, to say that  they  cannot  be  returned  but  it  requires
      particularly careful consideration of their position.   It  does  not
      define the scope of those  who  are  perceived  to  have  a  military
      background or profile.

  24. The predecessor UNHCR letter which was in  the  same  terms  and  the
      position of returning failed asylum seekers to DRC was considered  at
      length in the determination of the Tribunal,  [2004]  UKIAT  00007  L
      (DRC).  That case was particularly concerned with whether there was a
      risk to those who returned merely because  they  were  failed  asylum
      seekers.  It concluded that there was not.  It recognised that  there
      were possible risk  categories,  including  those  who  had  or  were
      perceived to have a military or political profile or  background,  or
      who came from rebel  held  areas  or  who  were  a  family  of  mixed
      ethnicity or were perceived  to  be  Tutsi.   There  was  however  no
      significant risk arising from the fact that a returned failed  asylum
      seeker was a women, nor indeed from being as  in  that  case,  a  low
      level UDPS member.  At paragraph 100 it pointed out  that  the  UNHCR
      description of "military or political profile or background" did  not
      draw a distinction between high and low level individuals, nor did it
      suggest that merely being a member of an opposition party such as the
      UDPS sufficed to place on in a risk  category.   Nor  did  the  UNHCR
      letter state that persons in that category were necessarily  at  risk
      but rather that they were likely to be at risk and therefore deserved
      particular and careful consideration.

  25. The Tribunal concluded that although the  category  was  of  a  broad
      definition, it could only apply to those whose activities had brought
      themselves to the adverse notice of the authorities so they  acquired
      a certain profile in their eyes before they left.

  26. We referred Miss Panagiotopoulou to the material on these  issues  in
      the CIPU Report for DRC of October 2003. It is clear from  the  Human
      Rights Review that in 2002 there  were  widespread  abuses  of  human
      rights, both in government and rebel controlled areas, although  they
      were probably more severe because of the lack of control in the rebel
      areas in the east where Kisangani is.

  27. In 2003 all parties to the civil war and the external countries which
      had involved themselves ratified an agreement which had  been  signed
      in December 2002.  The government,  rebel  movements  and  opposition
      parties agreed  to  set  up  a  transitional  government  to  oversee
      democratic elections and these are due to take place  in  2005.   The
      transitional government would include four Vice Presidents from rebel
      groups and the civil  opposition.   It  was  agreed  that  the  rebel
      fighters should be merged  into  a  new  national  army.   Opposition
      politicians had returned to the DRC. At paragraph 4.28 CIPU  comments
      that the setting up of the transitional government effectively  ended
      the five year conflict that began in August 1998 between the  various
      rebel forces and the DRC government.  An  agreement  was  reached  in
      August 2003 on establishing a  unified  armed  forces  command.   The
      national assembly includes members of former rebel groups.

  28. Of course it is too early to say whether those structures  will  bear
      fruit and the position in  DRC  is  plainly  still  unstable.   Human
      rights abuses continue, but it provides a context in which  what  the
      Report later says about those associated with the armed forces  under
      Mobutu and his regime can be seen.  The attitude of the government to
      the former FAZ soldiers of Mobutu is relevant to the perception which
      the Kinshasa government would have of those who were Mobutu  soldiers
      and hence of those who are their children.  At 6.69 the  Report  says
      that former FAZ soldiers who are still living abroad are not at  risk
      of persecution and can therefore return to the DRC.  In 2002 all  the
      key positions in the FAC high command were occupied by FAZ  soldiers.
      Many former FAZ soldiers were serving in  the  current  army  and  an
      estimate 20,000 plus former soldiers  were  living  in  Kinshasa.   A
      committee had been formed to oversee the repatriation of the FAZ  and
      the repatriation programme would also apply  to  former  soldiers  of
      Mobutu's presidential guard.  It is difficult to see in the light  of
      that material that the position of someone known to be the child of a
      former high ranking Mobutu officers would be worse.

  29. The Report discusses those closely associated with the Mobutu  regime
      in paragraphs 6.72 and 6.73.  It points out that  many  high  ranking
      officials left the country  in  1997  to  avoid  being  arrested  and
      accused  of  robbing  the  country  of  its  wealth  for  their   own
      enrichment.  It says however that the security  situation  for  those
      closely associated with the regime improved when Joseph  Kabila  came
      to power in January 2001 and even more  so  after  the  peace  accord
      signed in April 2003:

           "A large number of persons closely associated  with  the  Mobutu
           regime have now returned to the DRC".  "Persons who were closely
           associated with the MPR during the Mobutu  regime  were  not  at
           risk of persecution by the security  forces  and  can  therefore
           return to the country if they are abroad."

  30. This information was criticised by  Miss  Panagiotopoulou  as  coming
      from a single source based  on  a  2002  fact  finding  mission  from
      Belgium.  We see no reason however not to accept it as  part  of  the
      picture.   The UNHCR Position Paper is the most cautious.   It  deals
      broadly  with  those  with  a  political  or  military   profile   or
      background.  It is not specific as to the  level  or  nature  of  the
      military or political profile which calls for particular  care.   The
      reference to profile itself suggests  that  it  has  to  be  of  some
      importance.  The Appellant has  no  profile  herself.   Although  her
      father had and her mother may still have a high profile and she would
      be known as their daughter, the background  evidence  from  the  CIPU
      Report does not suggest that their association with Mobutu would  now
      be a cause of risk to them.  Still less  does  it  suggest  that  she
      would be at risk because of her association with  them.   We  do  not
      accept that the letter purporting to come from her aunt is a reliable
      document to which any weight can be attached.  The UNHCR  Paper  does
      not contain enough detail to enable us to know whether she is  within
      one of the categories about which it expresses concern.  But it  does
      not require that such a person be  not  returned;  it  requires  that
      their position be carefully  examined.   The  CIPU  Report  does  not
      suggest that she is within such a category.  The 2002 Seminar  Report
      which is not a UNHCR Position Paper, does no more than say that it is
      "possible" that a child of any former  Mobutu  soldier  of  any  rank
      might be at risk.  But we regard that as a significantly  less  clear
      and authoritative statement of the picture than that set out at  some
      length in the CIPU Report.  It conflicts with the  CIPU  picture  and
      offers nothing more than a speculation.  We do not consider that  the
      Appellant has established a real risk to herself on that basis.

  31. The alternative basis of risk asserted  by  the  Appellant  but  with
      which the Adjudicator did not deal, is that the  Appellant  would  be
      seen as a rebel sympathiser because she had lived  in  Kisangani  and
      her father came from Equator province which  was  a  rebel  province.
      This does not seem to have been the focus of her case but it required
      to be dealt with nonetheless.  It can be allied to her marriage to  a
      Rwandan  Tutsi.   As  to  the  latter,  she  does  not  know  of  the
      whereabouts of her husband or children and is unlikely to  find  them
      in the UK.  The Adjudicator's comment that on her case she would  not
      be associated with them in  Kinshasa  is  reasonable.   Although  she
      would not be arriving in Kinshasa via a road leading from the east or
      on a plane or boat from the east, it is reasonable to suppose that it
      would become known upon arrival that  that  is  where  she  had  been
      living.  It has not been suggested that her parents were suspected of
      pro-rebel activities nor that she was  when  working  for  the  state
      radio and television station in Kisangani.  Even if there  were  such
      suspicions, the position between the government and the rebels is now
      such that it is difficult  to  see  how  such  suspicion  could  make
      persecution or a breach of Article 3 a real risk.   They  are  moving
      towards a sharing of power, in government and in  the  armed  forces,
      after a peace accord.  Again we do not see the Appellant as being  in
      a real risk category on that account.  She comes within  the  general
      category of those to whom the  carefully  considered  guidance  in  L
      (DRC) applies.  She is not one who had brought herself to the adverse
      notice of the Kinshasa authorities so as to acquire a certain profile
      in their eyes before she left.

  32. We do not consider that she faces a real risk of  persecution  or  of
      treatment which breaches her rights under Article 3 ECHR,  on  either
      basis upon which she has relied.

  33. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


