

                          DJ (Defective Notice of Decision) Iraq [2004]
                                                UKIAT 00194              | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                        Date: 11th June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                15 July 2004

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice-President)

Between:




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Stanage, instructed by Fisher Jones Greenwood
For the Respondent:Mrs Giltrow, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is an Iraqi Kurd who claimed asylum on  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom on 1st December 2001.  His claim  was  refused  on  4th
     March 2002.  His  appeal  on  human  rights  and  asylum  grounds  was
     dismissed by  the  Adjudicator,  Mr  G  Dearden,  in  a  determination
     promulgated on 8th January 2003.

  2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he was at risk from Saddam
     Hussein, and in the KAA that he would be at risk from the PUK and KDP.
      His claim was disbelieved.  The Notice of Decision to  issue  Removal
     Directions contained in the usual form a statement:

           "You are:
           A)    an illegal entrant as defined  in  section  33(1)  of  the
           Immigration Act 1971;
           B)    a person subject to administrative removal  in  accordance
                 with section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as:
                 i)    a person  who  has  failed  to  observe  a  condition
                       attached to leave to enter or remain;  or
                 ii)    a person  who  has  obtained  leave  to  remain  by
           deception;  or
                 iii)  directions have been given  to  a  person  to  whose
                       family you belong
           I have therefore issued directions for your removal to IRAQ"


     Besides the letters A and B respectively, there was a box for  ticking
     which of the options was applicable.  Neither  box  was  ticked.   The
     statement as to the Right of Appeal  included  as  the  second  bullet
     point "If you are appealing on asylum grounds, you also have  a  right
     to appeal before removal on the grounds that on the facts of your case
     there is in law no power to give [Directions] on the ground  on  which
     they are given".  The letter accompanying the Notice of Decision  said
     "you are an illegal entrant".


  3. The sole issue now in the appeal to the IAT is as to the effect in the
     circumstances of this case of the blank tick boxes in  the  Notice  of
     Decision.  This was not an issue in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
     Adjudicator, but it was raised before him and considered by him.

  4. The Appellant argued that no valid Notice of Decision had  been  given
     and no reason or grounds for  removal  had  been  given  either.   The
     argument was rejected on the basis of the Tribunal decision in Hussain
     [2002] UKIAT 03419.  This is accurately summarised in paragraph 77  of
     the determination as follows:

           "The Tribunal in Hussain held that the failure to tick boxes was
           not fatal to the Adjudicator's jurisdiction in  the  appeal  for
           three reasons:

                 (1)   The Appellant is notified broadly speaking that he is
                       a person who is removable.  There is no indication in
                       the notices regulations of the level of detail  which
                       has to be given.  There is no definition of notice in
                       the Procedure Rules and in particular notice  is  not
                       defined as a notice which  complies  in  all  aspects
                       with the notices regulations.

                 (2)   The requirement of giving a notice  of  decision  and
                       the contents of that notice contained in the  notices
                       regulations are predicated on the  existence  of  the
                       decision which is appealable.   It  seems  to  follow
                       from these considerations that the  right  of  appeal
                       exists prior to the giving of the notice and survives
                       any  defect  in  the   notice   of   decision.    The
                       requirements  of  the  notice  of  decision  are  not
                       mandatory and compliance in  all  respects  with  the
                       notices regulations is not a pre-condition to a valid
                       appeal.

                 (3)   The Appellant exercised his right of  appeal  against
                       the notice.  In those circumstances the Tribunal held
                       that  the  Appellant  had   waived   any   error   or
                       incompleteness in the notice of decision."

  5. Before us, Mr Stanage was very brief because he recognised that it was
     unlikely that  the  Tribunal  would  disagree  with  its  decision  in
     Vijayasekaram  [2002]  UKIAT  01391  to  the  effect  that  a  similar
     deficiency was remedied by the accompanying letter,  which,  as  here,
     made clear on which ground  the  Secretary  of  State  had  taken  the
     decision.  Mr Stanage wished to take that issue further.

  6. Mr Stanage submitted that the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Notices)
     Regulations 2000 SI 2246 required the reason for the  decision  to  be
     notified and that without such reason being given, no decision had  in
     effect been taken or, if so, it had no known basis.  Paragraph 1(2) of
     Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act, which provides that  a  statement  in  the
     Notice of Decision in accordance with the Regulations is conclusive as
     to the person by whom and the ground on which any decision  or  action
     was taken, meant that no valid ground for a decision  had  been  given
     here.

The relevant provisions

  7. The Notices Regulations require in Regulation 4(1) that the  decision-
     maker must give written notice to a person of any appealable  decision
     taken in respect of him.  Regulation 5 requires  that  such  a  notice
     include a statement of the  reasons  for  the  decision  to  which  it
     relates.  We note that the new Notices Regulations 2003 SI  658  would
     now cover the position for sure because Regulation 5(1) provides  that
     the notice should include or be accompanied  by  a  statement  of  the
     reasons for the decision to which it relates.  The absence of  such  a
     provision in the 2000 Notices Regulations does  not  necessarily  show
     however that the Tribunal decision in Vijayasekaram is wrong.

  8. It is clear that  the  Regulations  draw  a  distinction  between  the
     decision itself and the notice of it.  The significance of notice of a
     decision as opposed to the decision itself,  in  this  decision-making
     framework, can be seen  in  the  2000  Procedural  Rules.   Rule  6(1)
     provides:

           "Where an Appellant makes an appeal within the  United  Kingdom,
           notice of appeal shall be given not later than 10 days after the
           notice of the decision was received."

     Rule 6(3) provides:


           "'decision' means the decision against which  the  appellant  is
           appealing."


     Time thus runs from the notice of the decision rather  than  from  the
     taking of the decision itself.

  9. We note that the first reason for the decision in Hussain was that the
     absence of a tick in any box was not fatal, because the Appellant knew
     broadly that he was removable.  Whilst we recognise that the Notice of
     Decision tells him of  that  broad  position,  there  is  a  statutory
     requirement that the reason for that decision be given in  the  notice
     of the decision which  is  being  notified  (our  emphasis).   In  the
     absence of a tick in any box, that requirement on these forms  is  not
     satisfied, subject to what we say later about substantial  compliance.
     It cannot be said that the requirement is satisfied simply because the
     reason is  one  or  other  of  those  printed  on  the  form,  without
     destroying the very purpose of the statutory requirement in the  first
     place.

 10. It might be that the Secretary of State could expressly say  that  the
     reason was A, or alternatively, was B, but that is  not  in  fact  the
     position here.  Here,  he  had  a  specific  reason  in  mind  as  the
     accompanying letter showed and which the statutory provisions required
     him to indicate on the Notice of Decision by ticking box A.

 11. If a recipient wished to take advantage of the  Secretary  of  State's
     omission, he would be entitled  to  rely  on  it  as  preventing  time
     running for appealing against the underlying decision.   This  is  the
     effect of Rule 6 of the 2000 Procedure Rules.  It is clear that it  is
     Notice of the Decision, which must mean notice which complies with the
     Notices Regulations,  which  causes  time  for  the  appeal  to  start
     running.

 12. We do not accept that paragraph 1(2) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act  is
     of any relevance.  The fact  that  the  statement  in  the  Notice  is
     conclusive as to the reason for the decision, does not mean  that  the
     absence of the statement is conclusive that  there  were  no  reasons.
     It is possible, as here, for reasons to be shown in a  document  other
     than the Notice of Decision, even though the giving of reasons in that
     other document does  not  remedy  the  deficiency  in  the  Notice  of
     Decision.

 13. The suggestion that the fact that neither box was  ticked  means  that
     there were no grounds for the decision  is  quite  wrong.   There  are
     grounds for the decision  as  the  accompanying  letter  showed.   For
     purposes other than compliance with the Notices  Regulations,  nothing
     precludes the letter being relied on as showing  the  ground  for  the
     decision.  Still less does the absence of a tick mean that  there  was
     no decision.  Both the Notices Regulations  and  the  Procedure  Rules
     show that there is a clear distinction between the decision and notice
     of it.

 14. There is no reason why a defective notice should not lead to  a  valid
     appeal if in fact an appeal is lodged based on that defective  notice.
     This is not the same as requiring an appeal to be  made  on  it.   The
     insertion of the specific reason is a procedural requirement  for  the
     benefit of an Appellant, capable of  being  waived  by  sending  in  a
     notice of appeal and persisting in the appeal.  So  we  agree  largely
     with the second and third reasons when  run  together,  given  by  the
     Tribunal in Hussain, but subject to the proviso that if the defect  is
     relied on by not appealing,  the  recipient  is  entitled  to  require
     proper notice of the decision to be  given  to  him  before  time  for
     appealing runs against him.

 15. The correct approach to the  effect  of  non-compliance  with  such  a
     requirement, placed there for the Appellant's  benefit,  can  be  seen
     from R v SSHD ex parte Ravichandran and Jeyeanthan [2000] 1  WLR  354,
     Court of Appeal.  This concerned the failure by the Secretary of State
     to use the prescribed form for applying for leave  to  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal.  The only practical consequence  was  the  omission  of  the
     declaration of truth.  The Respondents argued that the appeal  to  the
     IAT and therefore the IAT's decision in  the  appeal  was  a  nullity.
     Lord Woolf MR cited extensively from the well  known  passage  in  the
     speech of Lord Hailsham in London  and  Clydeside  Estates  Limited  v
     Aberdeen District Council [1980] 1 WLR 182, pages 188-190.

 16. Lord  Hailsham  pointed  out  that  the  decisions  as  to  the  legal
     consequences of non-compliance  with  statutory  requirements  were  a
     spectrum  varying  from  fundamental  failings,  so  that   no   legal
     consequences arose from the ineffective decision, to  trivial  defects
     in procedure which the subject could not rely on at all.   "Mandatory"
     and "directory" were not the two categories into which all obligations
     had to fit, with specific and different  consequences  following  from
     the category into which each particular defect was placed.  Lord Woolf
     pointed out that although in that  case  there  had  been  total  non-
     compliance with a mandatory requirement in the decision document,  the
     document was not a nullity in the sense that it was incapable of being
     the foundation of valid proceedings.  Lord Woolf divided the issues up
     as follows:-

           "(a)  Is the statutory requirement fulfilled  if there has  been
                 substantial compliance with the requirement and, if so, has
                 there been substantial compliance in the case in issue even
                 though  there  has  not  been   strict   compliance?   (The
                 substantial compliance question).


           (b)   Is the non-compliance capable of being waived, and if  so,
                 has it,  or  can  it  and  should  it  be  waived  in  this
                 particular case?  (The discretionary  question.)   I  treat
                 the grant of an extension  of  time  for  compliance  as  a
                 waiver.


           (c )  If it is not capable of being  waived  then  what  is  the
                 consequence  of  the  non-compliance?   (The   consequences
                 question.)


           Which questions arise will depend upon the facts of the case and
           the nature of the  particular  requirement.   The  advantage  of
           focusing on these questions is that they should avoid the unjust
           and unintended consequences which  can  flow  from  an  approach
           solely dependent on dividing requirements into  mandatory  ones,
           which oust jurisdiction, or directory, which  do  not.   If  the
           result of non-compliance goes to jurisdiction it  will  be  said
           jurisdiction cannot be conferred where  it  does  not  otherwise
           exist by consent or waiver."


 17. Taking those in turn, the requirement to be complied with, so  far  as
     relevant  here,  is  not  the  general  requirement  in   the   Notice
     Regulations as to the overall content of the Notice  of  Decision  but
     the requirement that the reason be specified.  This requirement can be
     very simply met.  It is difficult in a sense with those forms  to  see
     what could be substantial compliance which did not constitute a  total
     compliance, looking at that particular requirement in  isolation.   It
     would be met by a tick in the box.  The only way in which it could  be
     said that there was partial but substantial compliance if  there  were
     no tick in the box is that the accompanying letter gave  the  relevant
     reasons.  The purpose of the requirement is that the Appellant  should
     know the reason for the decision and at the same time as  he  receives
     the decision.  On that basis the two documents, the Notice of Decision
     and the accompanying letter, can be read  together  and  it  would  be
     obvious to the recipient what the reason was. The omission would be to
     put it on one piece of paper rather than another.  As  happened  here,
     it was obvious to the Appellant what the  position  was,  because  his
     grounds of appeal to the Adjudicator did not raise that issue although
     they raised many others.

 18. So it is our view that the requirement in the Notice  Regulations  can
     be fulfilled by substantial compliance and there has been  substantial
     compliance as  Vijayasekaram  contemplated  through  the  accompanying
     letter.  We do not base our view as to substantial compliance  on  the
     fact that the other parts of the requirements in the Notice Regulation
     were met. The requirement for the giving of the reason is  a  separate
     requirement from other requirements and it is  substantial  compliance
     with that requirement which has  to  be  demonstrated.   Although  the
     accompanying letter is not the Notice of Decision, it  is  nonetheless
     close to being part of it and certainly would be  read  with  it;   it
     makes very little  difference  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  statutory
     objective if the reason is in an accompanying letter rather  than  set
     out in the Notice itself.  This  means  that  where  the  accompanying
     letter sets out the reason, time for appealing runs from  the  receipt
     of the Notice and letter.  Nonetheless, the Secretary of State  should
     comply fully with the Regulations, which means that on these forms,  a
     box should be ticked.

 19. Alternatively, the requirement is  both  waiveable  and  was  in  fact
     waived here.  It is for the Appellant's benefit  that  the  reason  is
     required to be given and it may affect a particular ground of  appeal.
     An Appellant can proceed to appeal upon such a deficient Notice rather
     than wait for a Notice correct in  all  respects  because  it  may  be
     beneficial to him to do so.  It is certainly waiveable at least  where
     the letter accompanying the Notice of Decision gives  the  reason  for
     decision and can be read  with  it.   So  the  deficiency  is  in  law
     waiveable.

 20. In the circumstances of this case it was in fact waived by the pursuit
     of the appeal by the Appellant.  The  only  other  reaction  which  he
     could have chosen (if we are wrong about substantial  compliance)  was
     to wait until he received a Notice of Decision in perfect form, but he
     chose not to do that.  It is not open to him to launch an appeal on  a
     variety of grounds and include as one of his arguments on  the  appeal
     that he ought not to be appealing when  he  has  done  so.   His  acts
     showed that there was no prejudice to him and that he wished to get on
     with the appeal.

 21. Accordingly, even though the Notice of  Decision  was  defective,  the
     existence of the accompanying letter meant that there was  substantial
     compliance with the Regulations;  even if that is wrong, the Appellant
     has plainly waived the deficiency.

 22. For those reasons this appeal is dismissed.  It is reported  for  what
     we say on that issue.










                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
