

    ZA (s 58(9) - Abandonment - Date of grant) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00241



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                               Date of Hearing: 17 June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              31 August 2004
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

For the Appellant:           Mr E Fripp, instructed by Noden & Co
For the Respondent:          Ms J Anderson, Home Office Presenting Officer

Section 58(9) of the 1999 Act requires  an  appeal  under  that  Act  to  be
treated as abandoned even if the grant of leave postdates  the  coming  into
force of the 2002 Act.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. This appeal raises an interesting and by no  means  easy  question  of
      construction of the commencement and transitional provisions  relating
      to section 58(9) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and s  104  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   2. The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Ethiopia.   She  came  to  the
      United Kingdom on 7 January 1999 and  claimed  asylum.   On  22  March
      2001, the Respondent decided to refuse her application for asylum  and
      accordingly to refuse her leave to enter.  A notice of  that  decision
      was served on her in proper form.  She appealed under s 69(1)  of  the
      1999 Act, and to her appeal added human rights grounds under s  65  of
      that Act.  Her appeal was heard by an Adjudicator, Ms C M Courtney, on
      29 September 2003.  In her determination, issued on 12 November  2003,
      the Adjudicator dismissed the Appellant's appeal insofar as it  relied
      on refugee grounds, but allowed it on human rights grounds.

   3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Tribunal against
      the dismissal of her asylum appeal.  Following correspondence relating
      to whether that application was in  time,  permission  to  appeal  was
      granted (or perhaps purportedly granted) on 16 February 2004.

   4. In the meantime, however, the  Respondent  had  looked  again  at  the
      Appellant's   case,   prompted   no   doubt   by   the   Adjudicator's
      determination.  On 16  January  2004,  he  wrote  to  the  Appellant's
      representatives in the following terms:

           "Determination of asylum claim


           Your client's claim for asylum in the United  Kingdom  has  been
           carefully considered  within  the  Immigration  and  Nationality
           Directorate of the Home Office and it has been refused  for  the
           reasons given in the reasons for refusal letter.  Your  client's
           claim has been  recorded  as  determined  on  16  January  2004.
           However, a decision has been taken that it would be  appropriate
           to grant your  client  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
           Kingdom for a specified period.  I  would  be  grateful  if  you
           would forward the enclosed letters and papers to your client  at
           the earliest opportunity.  This decision is  not  an  appealable
           decision under section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002."


  5.  The  "enclosed"  papers  are  a  two-page  letter  addressed  to  the
     Appellant.  It begins as follows:


           "Grant of humanitarian protection


           Your  client  has  been  reviewed  and  you  have  been  granted
           humanitarian protection  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  is  a
           discretionary grant of leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom not covered by the Immigration  Rules.   You  have  been
           granted leave to enter until 16/01/2007."


      The rest of the letter sets out the benefits and  conditions  of  that
      grant.


  6. The question we have to decide is what effect that grant  has  on  the
     Appellant's appeal.  Does it cause it to be treated as abandoned?   Or
     does it cause it inevitably to fail for some other reason?  Or  should
     the refugee appeal be allowed to proceed on its merits?

  7. Section 58(9) of the 1999 Act is as follows:

           "A pending appeal under any provision of this  Part  other  than
           section 69(3) is to be treated as abandoned if the appellant  is
           granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.."


  8. Section 104(4)(a) of the 2002 Act is as follows:


           "An appeal under section 82(1) shall be treated as abandoned  if
           the appellant-
              a) is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom."

  9. Section 114 of that Act is in the following terms:


           "Repeal
              1) Part IV of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  (c  33)
                 (appeals) shall cease to have effect.
              2)  Schedule  6  (which  makes   transitional   provision   in
                 connection with the repeal of Part IV of that Act  and  its
                 replacement by this Part) shall have effect.
              3) Schedule 7 (consequential amendments) shall have effect."

 10. Section 58 of the 1999 Act is within Part IV and is thus repealed by s
     114 of the 2002 Act.  There is nothing in schedules 6  and  7  of  the
     2002 Act that is relevant to present  purposes,  although  schedule  6
     includes  a  power  to  make  transitional  provisions  by   Statutory
     Instrument.   Those  provisions  were   made   by   the   Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement  No  4)  Order  2003  SI
     2003/754, made on 14 March 2003.  By Article 2 of that  Order,  s  114
     came into force on 1 April 2003.  Articles 3 and 4 are as follows:

           "Transitional provisions
           3(1)  Subject to Schedule 2, the new appeals provisions are  not
                 to have effect in  relation  to  events  which  took  place
                 before 1st April 2003 and, notwithstanding their repeal  by
                 the provisions of the 2002 Act commenced by this Order, the
                 old appeals provisions are to continue to  have  effect  in
                 relation to such events.
              2) Schedule 2, which makes  further  transitional  provisions,
                 has effect.


           Definitions for transitional provisions
           4(1)  In this Order-
                 a) "the new appeals provisions" means sections 82 to 99 and
                    sections 101 to 103 of the 2002 Act;  together with  any
                    provision (including subordinate legislation) of-
                    (i)      the 2002 Act;
                    (ii)     the 1971 Act, the 1997 Act  and  the  1999  Act
                       (all as amended by the 2002 Act);
                 which refer to those provisions
                 b) "the old appeals provisions" means-
                    (i)      sections 13 to 17 of the 1971 Act;
                    (ii)     subsections (1) to (4) of section 8 of the 1993
                    Act;
                    (iii)    the 1997 Act (without the  amendments  made  by
                    the 2002 Act);
                    (iv)     Part IV of, and Schedule 4  (except  paragraphs
                      10 to 20 and 23) to, the 1999 Act;
                    (v)      section 115 of the 2002 Act;
                    together with-
                    (vi)     any subordinate legislation  which  applies  to
                      those provisions (unless specific provision  is  made
                      to the contrary);  and
                    (vii) any provision of the old  Immigration  Acts  which
                    refers to those             provisions;
                 c) "the old Immigration Acts" means the 1971 Act, the  1988
                    Act, the 1993 Act, the 1996 Act, the 1997  Act  and  the
                    1999 Act, all without the amendments made  by  the  2002
                    Act.
           (3)   For the purposes of article 2 and Schedule 2, an event has
                 taken place under the old Immigration Acts where-
                 a) a notice was served;
                 b) a decision was made or taken;
                 c) directions were given;  and
                 d) a certificate was issued.
           (4)   For the purposes of this Order-
                 a) a notice was served;
                 b) a decision was made or taken;
                 c) directions were given;  and
                 d) a certificate was issued;
                 on the day on which it was or they were sent to the  person
                 concerned, if sent by post or by fax, or delivered to  that
                 person, if delivered by hand.
           (5)   In this article-
                 a) "this person concerned" means  the  person  who  is  the
                    subject  of  the   notice,   decision,   directions   or
                    certificate  or  the  person  who  appears  to  be   his
                    representative;  and
                 b) a reference to the issue of a certificate is a reference
                    to the issue of a certificate under section  11,  12  or
                    72(2) of the 1999 Act or section 115 of the 2002 Act."


 11. In schedule 2, the part relevant to this appeal is paragraph 6(4):

           "(4)  Subject to the provisions  of  the  Order  and  any  other
                 enactment sections 59 to 78 and schedules 2 to  4  [of  the
                 1999 Act] shall continue to  have  effect  in  relation  to
                 events which took place before 1st April 2003."

 12. Mr Fripp's argument on behalf of the Appellant is simple  and  may  be
     simply stated.  The grant of leave to the  Appellant  is  an  event  -
     either a decision or a notice - which did  not  take  place  before  1
     April 2003.  Article 3 of the Commencement Order  therefore  does  not
     preserve the old appeals provisions (including s  58(9)  of  the  1999
     Act) in relation to it.  In relation to that event, therefore,  s  114
     of the 2002 Act takes effect, repealing s 58.  Section 104 of the 2002
     Act cannot affect this appeal, because it is not an appeal under  s  2
     of that Act but an appeal under s 69(1) of the 1999 Act.   Thus  there
     is no provision which would have the effect  of  causing  a  grant  of
     leave made on or after 1 April  2003  to  require  the  appeal  to  be
     treated as abandoned.  The  appeal  is  therefore  not  abandoned  and
     should be heard.

 13. Ms Anderson says that if that is right it is an unintended  result  of
     faulty transitional provisions in  an  otherwise  coherent  scheme  of
     preserving the old appeals provisions for old appeals and  introducing
     the new appeals provisions for  new  appeals.   She  submits  that  if
     ambiguities in the legislative provisions produce the result contended
     for by Mr Fripp, we should construe the legislation in order to  avoid
     the absurdity and in  favour  of  the  coherent  rational  scheme  she
     described.

 14. We may  deal  at  once  with  that  submission.   It  would  be  quite
     impossible to make the assumption  of  rationality  and  non-absurdity
     which Ms Anderson suggests underlies the statutory scheme.  We do  not
     need to make any large comments about the  drafting  of  the  numerous
     statutory changes to the immigration, asylum and human  rights  appeal
     system that have been introduced in the last few years.  Such comments
     have been made with great frequency and are undoubtedly well  merited.
     It suffices for present purposes to consider  the  Commencement  Order
     before us.  It is admittedly so badly drafted that  it  has  been  the
     subject of three Amendment Orders (SI 2003/1040, SI 2003/1339  and  SI
     2003/2993).  We believe that the introduction of  even  one  Amendment
     Order to a Commencement Order is almost unknown:  so the present Order
     has some claim to be the worst-drafted Commencement Order ever  passed
     by Parliament.

 15. Even as amended, it contains enormous  difficulties.   Supposing,  for
     example, one were  to  ask  the  relatively  simple  question  "In  an
     ordinary case, not the subject  of  any  special  circumstances,  what
     provisions of the 1999 Act survive after 1 April 2003 in  relation  to
     an event before that date?"  The answer is apparently to be  found  in
     Articles 3 and 4.  The "old appeals  provisions"  continue  in  effect
     and, so far as the 1999 Act is concerned, they are the whole  of  Part
     IV of that Act and schedule 4 except paragraphs 10 to 20 and  23.   An
     alternative answer is found in paragraph 6(4)  of  schedule  2  which,
     according to Article 3(2) "has effect".  According to this  provision,
     the provisions of the 1999 Act which survive are only ss 59 to 78 (not
     the whole of Part IV) but, on the other hand, the whole of schedule  4
     and schedules 2 and 3 as well.  Which of these provisions is  to  take
     precedence?  There are two clues.  Paragraph 6(4) of schedule 2 is  to
     take  effect  "subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Order"  meaning,
     apparently, the present  Order  and  evidently  including  Article  3.
     Article 3, however, is made specifically "subject to schedule 2".  The
     only possible answer to the question we posed is that any provision of
     the 1999 Act mentioned in either of the two parts of the  Order  which
     we have cited continues to have effect.  Perhaps the provisions of the
     1999 Act mentioned in both parts of the Order  were  regarded  by  the
     draftsman as  particularly  important.   We  do  not  know.   What  is
     absolutely clear is that we are not dealing here with careful drafting
     or rational legislation.  We are dealing with careless,  hurried  work
     by the draftsman and by Parliament and it would be quite wrong to read
     these provisions with the eye of rationality.

 16. That does not, however, prevent us reading them at all.  When we do so
     we find that we are unable to accept Mr Fripp's principal  submissions
     on the effect of the statutory provisions taken as a whole.  We  reach
     this view for  two  reasons.   The  first  reason  forms  part  of  Ms
     Anderson's submissions.  It  is,  broadly  speaking,  that  subsequent
     events do not generally abolish earlier events.  If it be  right  that
     the grant of leave to the Appellant was an event after 1  April  2003,
     it is equally right that the refusal of leave  to  enter,  upon  which
     this appeal is founded, was an  event  (whether  decision  or  notice)
     before 1 April 2003.  In relation  to  that  event,  the  old  appeals
     provisions remain in force, including the whole of Part IV of the 1999
     Act.  Section 58 is part of Part IV.  It provides important protection
     for the Appellant, who cannot be removed whilst an appeal  is  pending
     as defined by that section.  We see no reason at all to suppose  that,
     for the whole time that an appeal against a decision  before  1  April
     2003 is pending, the provisions of s 58 do not  apply  to  it.   If  s
     58(9) did not apply, then s 58(6) would not apply;  and as soon as the
     Appellant had the Adjudicator's  decision,  whether  or  not  she  was
     hoping to appeal against it, she could be removed.  Her  appeal  would
     have been determined and there would  be  no  provision  treating  her
     appeal as pending  at  a  time  when  she  could  appeal  against  the
     Adjudicator's decision but had not yet done so. This result is no more
     desirable than that for which Mr Fripp contends:  but it is  also  not
     necessary.  The Appellant that has an appeal under s 69(1) because the
     event against which she appeals was an event before 1 April 2003.   In
     relation to that event s 58 continues  to  have  effect,  despite  its
     repeal by s 114 of the 2002 Act.  Section 58 provides,  amongst  other
     things, that the appeal is treated as abandoned if there is a grant of
     leave.

 17. If Mr Fripp is right and the grant of leave is an  "event"  which  was
     certainly after 1  April  2003  that  does  not  assist  him,  because
     although it might be that s 58  does  not  apply  to  that  event,  it
     nevertheless continues to apply "in relation to" the event of 22 March
     2001 against which she appeals.  Even if the new event does not invoke
     s 58, the old event continues to do so.

 18. We are reinforced in our views by the definition of "event" in Article
     4(3) of the Order.  Evidently, the draftsman was not prepared to allow
     "event" to have its normal meaning and the definition of it is a  very
     restrictive one.  As we read the list in Article 4(3), it  appears  to
     be a list of events which are  capable  of  generating,  modifying  or
     restricting rights of appeal.  Although the matter is  very  far  from
     being beyond doubt, we consider it in the highest degree  likely  that
     the reference to events in Article 3 and schedule 2 is intended to  be
     a reference only to such  events,  (all  of  which  do  appear  to  be
     encompassed in the definition of "event") and not to other events.  It
     does not look to us as though it was intended  that  the  new  appeals
     provisions should instantly apply to an "old" appeal if, for  example,
     directions were served by the Appellate Authority prior to a  hearing;
     or if a notice (for example of a determination)  were  served  by  the
     Appellate Authority after 1 April 2003.

 19. That view makes no substantial difference to our  decision,  which  is
     that the old appeals provisions continue  to  apply  to  this  appeal,
     because they  apply  in  relation  to  the  event  against  which  the
     Appellant is appealing.

 20. There are two other issues, both of general  application  and  one  of
     some importance in the context of this appeal.  The first  is  whether
     if Mr Fripp had  been  right  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  not
     abandoned by the grant of leave, he is also right that it  should  now
     be tried on its merits.

 21. If Mr Fripp had been right, the Appellant has a pending appeal against
     the refusal of leave to enter.  That is an appeal which, founded as it
     is  on  grounds  of  appeal  which  go  to  protection,  is,  by  well
     established principles, to be adjudicated at the time of any  hearing.
     So the Adjudicator, and subsequently the Tribunal, would be  concerned
     with assessing whether, at the time of the hearing, the removal of the
     Appellant in consequence of the refusal of leave to enter would breach
     the Refugee Convention.  The Appellant's problem would then  be  that,
     at the time of the hearing, she was not a person who had been  refused
     leave to enter and was liable to removal: she was  a  person  who  had
     been granted leave to enter and was not liable to removal.   In  those
     circumstances, we regard it as quite extraordinarily difficult to  see
     how she could succeed in an appeal on the grounds set out in s  69  of
     the 1999 Act.  Subsequent facts - whether or not they are regarded  as
     "events" for the purposes of the Order - have removed the  Appellant's
     formal cause of complaint.  As the burden of  proof  is  on  her,  she
     cannot succeed.

 22. Mr Fripp seeks to  resist  this  conclusion  by  submitting  that  the
     Appellant has in truth been granted leave to remain and that,  at  the
     time of the grant, she was not seeking leave to enter.  In  our  view,
     there is no substance in either of those submissions.  The Appellant's
     arrival and application for  asylum  constituted  an  application  for
     leave to enter.  She has never been granted leave to enter:   she  has
     had temporary admission, no doubt, and  she  has  been  here  lawfully
     while she awaited the decision and subsequently while she awaited  the
     outcome of an appeal.   But  she  has  never  withdrawn  her  original
     application and she  has  now  been  granted  leave.   That  leave  is
     described  in  the  notice  we  set  out  at  the  beginning  of  this
     determination as leave to enter in her case and that is  what  it  is.
     She now has what she has sought to obtain.  Nothing in the  1999  Act,
     so far as we are aware, enables her in these circumstances  to  object
     that she would have preferred to have been granted a different sort of
     leave.  Her appeal under s 69(1) is abandoned  or,  if  we  are  wrong
     about that, is bound to fail:  it does not  of  itself  turn  into  an
     appeal under s 69(3), and no appeal under s 69(3)  lies,  because  the
     grant of leave to enter was too late for that.

 23. That takes us on to the final issue which was not argued  specifically
     by either party, although it was implicit in comments  made  by  both,
     and we raised it briefly ourselves.  We have set out, at the beginning
     of this determination,  the  terms  of  the  grant  of  leave  to  the
     Appellant.  It will be noted that the grant is said  not  to  generate
     any right of appeal under s 82 of the 2002 Act.  Section  83  of  that
     Act is, however, in the following terms:

           "83   Appeal:  asylum claim
           (1)   This section applies where a person has  made  any  asylum
           claim and-
                 (a)   his claim has been  rejected  by  the  Secretary  of
           State, but
                 (b)   he has been granted leave to enter or remain in  the
                       United Kingdom for a period exceeding  one  year  (or
                       for periods exceeding one year in aggregate).
           (2)   The person  may  appeal  to  an  adjudicator  against  the
                 rejection of his asylum claim."

 24. It is clear  that  those  provisions  apply  to  the  Appellant.   The
     Immigration (Notices)  Regulations  SI  2003/658,  replacing  previous
     regulations in similar terms,  provide  in  Article  5  that  where  a
     decision carries a right of appeal, it must be notified to the  person
     affected and accompanied by information about  the  right  of  appeal.
     That does not appear to have been  done  in  the  present  case.   The
     precise effect of the failure was not the subject of  argument  before
     us, but bearing in mind that the grant of leave is  (at  any  rate  in
     substance, whatever its procedural effect) a benefit to the Appellant,
     we would be inclined to the view that the grant of leave to enter took
     effect on the date it was made (or perhaps  the  slightly  later  date
     when it was notified to the Appellant), but that until she receives  a
     proper notice of it in accordance with the Notices  Regulations,  time
     is not running against her for the purposes of appealing under  s  83.
     It follows that although she is treated as having abandoned her appeal
     under s 69(1), she has the possibility of raising an appeal under s 83
     on the grounds that she should have leave as a refugee, if she  wishes
     to do so.

 25. This appears to us to be in general an entirely satisfactory  outcome.
     Our general conclusion is that s  58,  like  the  other  "old  appeals
     provisions", continues in force and affects an appeal under  the  1999
     Act for the whole of the time that that appeal is said to be  pending;
     and the  question  of  whether  it  is  pending  is  therefore  to  be
     determined by reference to s 58.  We have  also  decided  that,  quite
     apart from questions of abandonment, an appeal under  s  69(1)  cannot
     succeed if, by the date of the hearing, the  Appellant  has  the  very
     thing which he sought - that is to say, leave to enter.

 26. If such leave is granted after 1 April 2003, there may be a  right  of
     appeal under s 83 if the conditions set out  in  that  section  apply:
     but, as with any appealable decision, time does not  run  against  the
     Appellant until he or  she  has  been  notified  of  the  decision  in
     accordance with the Notices Regulations.

 27. For the reasons we have given, the Appellant  has  no  pending  appeal
     before the Tribunal.  She has leave to enter and may in due course, if
     so advised, appeal against that grant under s 83.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


      -----------------------
      1


