

               MH (Accession nationals not now removed) Slovakia [2004]
UKIAT 00315
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 23 September 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                               Date Determination notified: 30 November 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Mr T B Davey
                                 Mr T Culver

Between:
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr T Greig, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr P Jorro, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors

It is Home Office Policy that citizens of  EU  countries  who  were  in  the
United Kingdom at the date of their country's accession to the EU  will  not
be removed unless they pose a threat to  public  health,  public  policy  or
public security.  Appeals by such individuals should  therefore  be  allowed
(on EU grounds only) unless they are shown to pose such threat.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   He
     appeals, with permission, against the determination of an Adjudicator,
     Mr J R Gibb, allowing on  human  rights  grounds  the  appeal  of  the
     Respondent,  a  citizen  of  Slovakia,  against  his   decision   made
     originally on 26 November 1997 and subsequently  confirmed  to  refuse
     leave to enter and give directions for removal to Slovakia.

  2. The Respondent is  [         ]  and  is  already  well  known  in  the
     jurisprudence of refugee law.  He is a person who applied  for  asylum
     from Slovakia and the refusal of asylum to  him  was  the  subject  of
     litigation, not only before the Appellate Authorities but also  before
     the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.  The  Secretary  of  State
     actively fought the Respondent's claim,  succeeding,  in  due  course,
     before the House of Lords, whose judgment was given on 6 July 2000.

  3. The Respondent was not removed at that time and, following the  coming
     into force of the Human Rights Act on 2 October 2000, the  Respondent,
     together with his wife, [         ], and his son, [       ],  made  an
     allegation that to remove them in consequence of  the  decision  which
     had been made would breach their human rights.  The Secretary of State
     declined to modify the decisions he had already made.  He refused  the
     human rights claim of the Respondent's wife and child on 2 April 2001,
     at  about  the  same  time  confirming  his  decision  to  remove  the
     Respondent.

  4.  There  have  subsequently  been  proceedings  before  the   Appellate
     Authorities, as a result of which the matter comes before us today.

  5.  In  the  meantime,  however,  Slovakia,  the  country  of  which  the
     Respondent is a national, has become a member of the  European  Union.
     As is well known, the founding documents of  the  European  Union  and
     subsequent Directives establish and enforce  a  series  of  rights  of
     freedom of movement for nationals of states within the European  Union
     exercising treaty rights within the territories of the  Union.   As  a
     result of that, the Secretary of State has,  we  have  been  informed,
     taken a view that citizens of those countries which became members  of
     the European Union on 1 May 2004 should not  be  removed  unless  they
     represent  a  threat  to  public  policy,  public  health,  or  public
     security.  That policy is contained in a letter from Maria  Leon,  the
     Assistant  Director  at  the  Immigration  and   Nationality   Appeals
     Directorate of the Home  Office,  to  the  Deputy  President  of  this
     Tribunal, dated 4 March 2004.

  6. It has the effect that appeals to the Appellate Authorities by  or  in
     respect of individuals who are  citizens  of  countries  which  became
     members of the European Union on 1 May 2004 fall to be allowed  unless
     the Secretary of State can establish that the individual  in  question
     represents  a  threat  to  public  policy,  public  health  or  public
     security.

  7. Mr Greig, who appears for the Secretary of State before  us,  confirms
     that that is the position and confirms also that  none  of  the  three
     individuals with whom we are concerned today poses such a threat.

  8. The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  therefore  dismissed.   This
     determination is being reported in order to make  as  widely-known  as
     possible the Secretary of State's policy in this type of case.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
