
Heard at Field House
On      19 May 2004
Written  21 May 2004


  AB   (Ashkaelia)   Serbia   and   Montenegro   CG   [2004]   UKIAT   00188


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             03 June 2004

                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                       Mr R Chalkley (Vice-President)
                                Mr R Hamilton



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Serbia and  Montenegro  (Kosovo),  appeals,
     with leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr C G  Kelsey
     dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 14 June
     2003 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum.

  2. Mr R Amarasinha represented the Appellant. Mr G Saunders, a Home Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows.  He  is  an  ethnic
     Ashkaelia and a Christian, whose  problems  began  in  1999  after  the
     Serbians left Kosovo.  He was ill treated  by  Albanians  in  his  home
     area, which is largely ethnic Albanian, because of his  ethnicity.   He
     was verbally abused and physically beaten whilst walking in the street.
      Further problems began when he married his  wife  in  September  2001.
     She is an ethnic Albanian and a Moslem by religion.  The  marriage  was
     not approved by  Albanians in  the  village  of  Podujevo,  where  they
     lived.  Soon after he was married he was collecting wood in the  garden
     when he heard shots and a little later was shot  in  the  leg.  At  all
     events the Appellant said he did not go to hospital because  he  feared
     being shot again.  He was scared to leave the house. He received  death
     threats if he did not leave the village. Stones would be thrown at  him
     in the street. After the shooting he contacted KFOR  who  provided  him
     with security at his house for two days.   They  then  said  there  was
     little more they could do for him.  At that time his wife was  pregnant
     and she lost the baby due to stress.  They sold belongings in order  to
     raise finance to pay for their journey to the UK.   They  arrived  here
     together on 22 October 2002 and,  after  being  found  concealed  in  a
     lorry, the Appellant claimed asylum.

  4. The Adjudicator  expressed  considerable  reservations  concerning  the
     Appellant's  credibility.  He  observed  that  although  the  Appellant
     claimed to have experienced some degree of animosity and discrimination
     after the war, he did not take any significant steps  to  report  these
     matters or seek protection from the authorities. Even  in  relation  to
     the shooting, his approach to KFOR only arose some two weeks after  the
     incident, when his wife observed KFOR troops walking past the house  in
     the street and went up to  report  the  matter  to  them.   They  acted
     properly and took full details and remained in the region for a  couple
     of days, before  leaving  when  nothing  else  untoward  happened.  The
     Adjudicator was unclear,  having  regard  to  the  earlier  shots  that
     appeared to have nothing to do with the Appellant, whether his wounding
     was a deliberate attack on him or an accidental shooting. He  concluded
     that the wound could not have been  particularly  serious  because  the
     Appellant did not go to hospital or take any immediate steps to contact
     the police or any other security organisation.  However he accepted  on
     the lower standard of proof that the Appellant had received some injury
     in a shooting incident. The Adjudicator was also concerned  that  there
     was no evidence of any particular event that caused the  Appellant  and
     his wife to leave Kosovo some 9 months after the shooting.  Plainly  if
     he was in any real fear for his life he would have left earlier.

  5. On this analysis, the Adjudicator concluded that there was no real risk
     of ill-treatment on return to his home area  sufficient  to  cross  the
     high threshold required  to  constitute  persecution  or  a  breach  of
     Article 3. In any event there was a sufficiency of protection available
     to the Appellant from the authorities in his home area within the terms
     of Horvath. Finally, if he did not wish to return home,  there  was  an
     internal relocation  option  that  would  not  be  unduly  harsh.   The
     Appellant spoke fluent Albanian and had done nothing  that  could  lead
     anyone to believe that he had collaborated with the Serbs.  Effectively
     he would be able to merge with the majority population. He had lived in
     Fush before and had not given any credible evidence that he  could  not
     return there, where there was a pocket of Ashkaelia, or elsewhere.  The
     Adjudicator therefore dismissed the asylum and associated human  rights
     appeals. He also dismissed a freestanding Article  3  claim  on  health
     grounds and an Article 8 claim in respect of private family life.

  6. Permission to appeal was granted only  to  enable  argument  concerning
     risk arising from the Appellant's ethnicity  in  the  light  of   UNHCR
     advice. In terms of the grounds of appeal this  embraced  paragraphs  3
     and 4 only,  as  the  representatives  agreed  at  the  outset  of  the
     proceedings before us.

  7. Mr Amarasinha argued that the main issue was the consideration  of  the
     risk impact of the mixed marriage, which  was  one  of  the  categories
     identified by UNHCR as requiring continuing  international  protection.
     The  issue  of  the  marriage  was  not  properly  considered  by   the
     Adjudicator. He dealt simply with ethnicity rather  than  the  problems
     posed by the mixed marriage between people of different ethnicity.   He
     did not consider what problems would arise  as  a  result  and  whether
     internal relocation was a viable option as a consequence.   He  invited
     the Tribunal to reach its own conclusions on the basis of the facts  as
     established and he submitted the appeal should be allowed outright.

  8. Mr Saunders submitted that the Adjudicator's conclusions were  properly
     sustainable.  The Appellant, though Ashkaelia, spoke  Albanian  as  his
     first language and is married to an Albanian Moslem woman. There was no
     reason why he could not merge into the majority community in  his  home
     area.  He had remained there for some nine months  after  the  shooting
     (for which it was still no corroborative medical evidence).  There  was
     no  evidence  of  material  difficulties  in  this  time  and,  as  the
     Adjudicator noted, there was no clear triggering event for his decision
     to leave Kosovo for the United Kingdom.  Alternatively, in paragraph 14
     of the determination the Adjudicator noted that the Appellant  went  to
     live for some time in Fush. Though he claimed he had had problems there
     he was unable to state what they were. Thus he had been  able  to  live
     elsewhere in Kosovo previously and could again, though he had  returned
     to his home and had lived in Ballovk  for  at  least  the  nine  months
     before coming to the UK. The objective evidence showed that attacks  on
     minorities had materially reduced and that Ashkaelia live alongside the
     majority community.  He submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.

  9. Mr Amarasinha's main submission was  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to
     consider the question of the mixed marriage alongside the  question  of
     ethnicity when considering the risk on return. That submission, insofar
     as it relates to his consideration of the specific facts, is not  borne
     out by the terms of the determination as a whole. The Appellant's  wife
     gave evidence on his behalf.  The Adjudicator plainly took on board her
     ethnicity and the Appellant's claim that the position got worse for him
     as a consequence of the marriage. He did not  however  agree  that  the
     problems faced by the couple in their home area  crossed  the  severity
     threshold required to constitute persecution or breach of Article 3  or
     that they lacked protection.  He was entitled to reach this view  given
     that the Appellant remained at his home for some nine months after  the
     shooting incident (which may well have  been  accidental  and  did  not
     result in serious injury) and was unable  to  identify  any  particular
     reason for leaving Kosovo when they did. We  noted  that  although  the
     Adjudicator expressed concern that there was  no  medical  evidence  to
     corroborate the gunshot injury, none has been produced to us either The
     Adjudicator was also entitled to take into account the  fact  that  the
     Appellant's first language is Albanian and that  this  enabled  him  to
     merge more easily into  the  majority  community.  However  whilst  the
     Adjudicator in reaching these conclusions plainly did  have  regard  to
     the specific facts and the objective evidence as a whole and identified
     a number of material passages in the CIPU report, it  is  true,  as  Mr
     Amarasinha  asserted  that  there  is  no  specific  reference  in  the
     determination to UNHCR advice either on ethnicity or  mixed  marriages.
     We have therefore assessed the objective evidence as a whole, including
     the advice of UNHCR, to see whether the Adjudicator's  conclusions  are
     sustainable.

 10. The US State Department report to which we  have  been  referred  shows
     that some minorities, including the Ashkaelia,  live  alongside  ethnic
     Albanians and their security situation has improved during 2002, though
     some incidents of violence and harassment continued to  occur.  However
     the main problems for minorities were for Serbs, who  often  feared  to
     leave their enclaves, and Roma.

 11. Mr Amarasinha referred us to the UNHCR advice of January 2003 and  said
     that it had not changed subsequently.  It states that
           "Members of minority groups  in  Kosovo  as  described  in  this
           paper, especially Kosovo Serbs and Roma, but also Ashkaelia  and
           Egyptians,  should  continue  to  benefit   from   international
           protection in countries of asylum.  UNHCR stresses  that  return
           of these minorities should take place on  a  strictly  voluntary
           basis and be based on fully informed individual decisions.   Any
           such voluntary return movements should be  properly  coordinated
           and reintegration should  be  supported  through  assistance  to
           ensure  sustainability.   Kosovo  Serbs,  Roma,  Ashkaelia   and
           Egyptian individuals or families should not be forced or induced
           to return to Kosovo.
           While general improvement in  the  overall  situation  of  Roma,
           Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities  have  continued,  with  a
           stabilised security  situation  in  many  regions,  these  three
           communities continue to face serious protection  problems.   The
           Roma to an extent comparable to the  Serbs,  the  Ashkaelia  and
           Egyptians to a lesser extent. Even where inter-ethnic  relations
           appear to have improved enabling  small-scale  returns,  amongst
           the Ashkaelia particularly, experience has demonstrated that the
           risk of attack remains. Hence their  physical  security  remains
           precarious.
           The Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptian communities  tend  to  live  in
           concentrated groups as a  means  of  enhancing  their  sense  of
           safety.  Their freedom  of  movement  is  generally  restricted,
           although it varies according to geographical location.   Freedom
           of movement also  varies  with  language  ability  (for  instant
           Albanian speaking Ashkaelia appear to the better  tolerated  and
           thus enjoyed relatively greater freedom of movement)."

 12. The CIPU report  for  April  2004,  states  when  reporting  the  ninth
     assessment of UNHCR/OCSE that
           "Ethnic identification as Roma, Ashkaelia  or  Egyptian  is  not
           necessarily  determined  by  easily  discernible   or   distinct
           characteristics or cultural traits but rather by  a  process  of
           self  identification.   It  is  not  uncommon  in   Kosovo   for
           individuals to change their ethnic self-identification depending
           on the pressures of local circumstances, especially when  it  is
           necessary in order to distance themselves from other  groups  to
           avoid negative associations.
           The  Ashkaelia  are  Albanian  speaking  and  have  historically
           associated themselves  with  Albanians,  living  close  to  that
           community.  Nevertheless, Albanians treat them as separate  from
           the Albanian community.
           The  security  position  for  Roma,   Ashkaelia   and   Egyptian
           communities varies according  to  perceptions  of  the  majority
           population,  totality  and  language  issues.   This  should  be
           qualified by underlining the fact that the trend  is  marked  by
           variations between  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities
           depending upon  the  perceptions  of  the  majority  population,
           totality, and language issues.  UNHCR and OSCE  state  that  the
           ability to speak fluent Albanian is likely to be a factor in the
           degree to which RAE are able  to  integrate  with  the  majority
           community."

 13. The main difference between the UNHCR paper and the CIPU report is  the
     UNHCR makes a recommendation against  return  whilst  the  CIPU  report
     leaves the question of safety on return to those who have to  make  the
     decisions. However it appears from  the  UNHCR  recommendation  against
     returns reflects its wider brief than ours, and that  they  have  given
     weight to economic factors related to  sustainability  and  integration
     overall, rather than  the  more  focused  exercise  which  we  have  to
     undertake to assess whether there is a real risk of  persecution  or  a
     breach of Article 3 on return, on the facts of  each  individual  case.
     Having looked at the objective evidence before  us  in  the  round,  we
     conclude, given the more positive comments by UNHCR about the  position
     facing the Ashkaelia, that one cannot properly say  that  no  Ashkaelia
     can be returned to Kosovo against  their  will.  There  are  clear  and
     differences in risk  between  different  groups,  different  areas  and
     different individual factors, which have to be assessed on  a  case  by
     case basis.

 14. In saying this, we also take note of the extensive publicity concerning
     the temporary upsurge of hostility between  the  Albanian  and  Serbian
     ethnic communities in Kosovo in March 2004.  Clearly this reflected the
     underlying  tensions  in  the  province  that  are  apparent  from  the
     objective material before us.  However that inter-ethnic  violence  was
     rapidly addressed by the security forces,  and  there  is  no  evidence
     before us to suggest that  this  episode  has  materially  changed  the
     general profile for assessing risk on return.

 15. In this appeal, the Appellant is Ashkaelia, which  appears  to  be  the
     minority community least at risk and closest to the Albanian  majority.
     He speaks Albanian as his first language and has integrated in the past
     into the general majority community and lived successfully in  an  area
     where there was an Ashkaelia concentration.  He did not leave his home,
     let alone Kosovo, after the shooting incident and was unable to explain
     to the Adjudicator what actually led him and his  wife  to  leave  some
     nine months later.

 16. We have considered whether,  as  Mr  Amarasinha  suggested,  his  mixed
     marriage would create any material extra risk for him. The UNHCR advice
     on mixed marriages produced to us is of April 2002. It states
           "While  most  Kosovo  Albanians  are  able  to  return   without
           protection difficulties there are certain categories  of  Kosovo
           Albanians who  may  face  serious  problems  including  physical
           danger were they to return home at  this  time.   These  include
           Kosovo Albanians in ethnically mixed marriages  and  persons  of
           mixed ethnicity.
           Claims from persons who fear persecution because they belong  to
           one of these categories should be carefully considered in  order
           to ascertain the need for international protection."


 17. The Appellant is not a Kosovo  Albanian  but  he  is  married  to  one.
     Plainly the main groups of mixed  marriages  that  can  cause  security
     difficulties in Kosovo  are  marriages  between  ethnic  Albanians  and
     ethnic Serbs, and the Roma who are more perceived by the  Albanians  as
     being allied to the Serbs.  This is because of the  continuing  tension
     between the two communities and the need particularly  for  the  ethnic
     Serbs and Roma to concentrate in their own communities for security and
     protection. A mixed marriage between an Albanian and a Serb could  mean
     difficulties in both communities and greater exposure to risk.

 18. The situation for Ashkaelia is  however  rather  different.  They  have
     associated themselves traditionally with the Albanian  community.   The
     Appellant has lived in the majority Albanian community for much of  his
     life. Having an ethnic Albanian wife would make it easier  for  him  to
     identify himself with the Albanian community in the  way  described  in
     the objective  evidence.   The  evidence  that  they  have  experienced
     difficulties themselves in the past  in  Kosovo  is  very  limited  and
     vague. In any event the UNHCR advice is only that claims from people in
     mixed marriages should be carefully considered. This we have done.

 19. We consider that the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  on  the
     evidence as a whole to conclude that the Appellant and his  wife  would
     not be at any real risk of persecution or a  breach  of  Article  3  on
     return to their home area and would have a  sufficiency  of  protection
     within the terms of Horvath.  Moreover, if they wish, there is a viable
     internal relocation alternative to Pristina,  to  where  they  will  be
     returned and where they will be  able  to  merge  within  the  majority
     community without people being aware of their  history.   Alternatively
     the Appellant and his wife could return  to  Fush,  where  there  is  a
     concentration of Ashkaelia and where he lived before. To expect them to
     do so would not be unduly harsh. We therefore uphold the  Adjudicator's
     determination.

 20. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
