
                                                              SR
(Credibility - Fact Finding) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00056
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date of Hearing: 8th March 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             25th March 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                                Miss K Eshun

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, instructed by Van-Arkadie & Co,
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Miss  F
     Barry, who by her determination of  8th  October  2003  dismissed  the
     Appellant's asylum and human rights appeals against  the  decision  of
     the Secretary of State, taken on 21st March 2001.

  2. The Adjudicator's determination was a fresh determination following an
     earlier decision.

  3. The Adjudicator rejected the evidence of the Appellant  and  seemingly
     of other witnesses whom  he  called  to  the  effect  that  he  was  a
     prominent member of the LTTE who had been involved in broadcasting and
     presenting  LTTE  programmes,  working  as  a   newsreader,   videoing
     conflicts and meetings of the LTTE.  She accepted  that  he  had  been
     taken into custody by the Sri Lankan authorities in January  2000  and
     that he had been seriously tortured during his time in  custody,  some
     six months.  She then assessed the  risk  of  his  being  returned  to
     Colombo on the basis that he was at best no  more  than  a  low  level
     supporter of the LTTE and that as a failed returning asylum seeker, he
     would not be at risk from the adverse attentions  of  the  authorities
     and that he would in all likelihood be waved through at  the  security
     checks.

  4. She then considered his claim under Article 8.  This was based on  his
     diagnosis of PTSD, the treatment which he was receiving for it in this
     country and the absence in Sri Lanka of equivalent medical facilities.
      It was in particular the way in which Article 8 had been  dealt  with
     by the Adjudicator and her reliance inappropriately on A(E)  and  F(E)
     [2002] UKIAT 05237 as opposed to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
     in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840, which underlay the appeal.  A number of
     other points were also raised about the way in which the  evidence  as
     to his prominence as an LTTE member had been appraised.

  5. The Tribunal refused permission to appeal to it on  the  grounds  that
     had the Article 8 claim been considered within the  Razgar  framework,
     it would inevitably have failed by reference to the  thresholds  which
     had to be met.  The claims that there had been mis-appraisals  of  the
     evidence were also rejected.   On  statutory  review,  the  Tribunal's
     refusal of permission was overturned.

  6. For the purposes of the appeal before us, Mr Haywood who appeared  for
     the Appellant commenced his submissions by  dealing  with  the  errors
     which he submitted existed in the appraisal by the Adjudicator of  the
     evidence called on the Appellant's behalf.   It  became  clear  as  we
     examined those points, that they were potentially critical errors.  If
     what the Appellant had said was true, then plainly there  was  a  much
     greater prospect of his succeeding on his Article 3 and asylum claims.
      Conversely, if the Adjudicator's appraisal was correct,  and  without
     expressing any view on the prospects  of  success  of  the  Article  8
     claim, the risk on return would have been  markedly  less.   It  might
     well fall within the scope of the series of the Tribunal decisions  in
     Jeyachandran and subsequently as for  example  in  Sathiyamoorthi  3rd
     February [2004] UKIAT 00039 S (Sri Lanka).  In that case, the Tribunal
     in paragraphs 43 and 46 considered the latest position in relation  to
     Sri Lanka and concluded that changes there did not alter the  position
     as assessed in Jeyachandran.  We set out those paragraphs:

           "43.  On a more general level, Miss Bayati recognised  that  the
                 cautious note sounded by the  UNHCR  was  the  same  as  it
                 sounded, before the Tribunal decided in Jeyachandran [2002]
                 UKIAT 01689 that it was only  the  exceptional  case  which
                 would not be able to return in safety.   The  position  was
                 reviewed in Thiagarajah [2002] UKIAT  04917.   The  current
                 problems have been considered in a number of cases and  the
                 consistent position has been that the  recent  developments
                 do not warrant a change in that  assessment.   Miss  Bayati
                 recognised that we should refer to our own  reported  cases
                 on these country conditions.  The pessimism  in  Dr  Good's
                 report of August 2003 is consistent  with  the  pessimistic
                 line which he has taken in the past, an approach which  was
                 considered by the Tribunal in May 2003, in  P  (Sri  Lanka)
                 [2003] UKIAT 00145.  The current problems had not  occurred
                 by the time of  his  August  report.   That  decision  also
                 considered  the  availability  of  medical   treatment   in
                 relation to a case where the problems of the claimant  were
                 markedly more severe than here.  He had been detained as  a
                 LTTE supporter and ill treated on a  number  of  occasions.
                 Nonetheless,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  he  could  be
                 returned.

      46.   The position after the declaration of the state of emergency was
           considered in N (Sri Lanka) [2003]  UKIAT  00150  in  which  the
           Tribunal also dealt with body scarring.  That was not seen as  a
           bar to return.  The October  CIPU  does  not  deal  the  current
           position politically, as between the  President  and  the  Prime
           Minister.  Nonetheless, the  essential  features  are  that  the
           ceasefire is still holding, the ban on the LTTE remains  lifted,
           it engages in political activities outside its area of  control,
           even if it has an unsavoury and violent  undertone  to  some  of
           what it does, as Dr Good suggests.   There  is  nothing  in  any
           evidence which we have seen to suggest that the picture  in  the
           October 2003 CIPU Report or in the determinations  to  which  we
           have referred, has significantly  changed  as  regards  the  way
           returning asylum seekers are treated on arrival or in the way in
           which searches are carried out.  There may  be  greater  tension
           and a higher incidence of searches and roadblocks; there may  be
           more arbitrary restrictions imposed  on  the  free  movement  of
           goods and people as the UNHCR letter of 8th December 2003 to Sri
           and Co says may have happened.  But that does  not  support  the
           notion that there would  be  a  real  risk  of  treatment  which
           beached Article 3.  The  assessment  made  in  Jeyachandran  and
           subsequent cases remains good.  There is nothing to suggest that
           the Appellant is wanted in a relatively serious way.  She was  a
           low level supporter briefly detained, and released, who  without
           further arrest later made her way to Colombo whence she departed
           through the series of checks at the main airport."

  7. Mr Deller for the Home Office realistically recognised that  at  least
     some of the errors identified by Mr Haywood were justified.  We  agree
     and we will deal  with  those  points  briefly.   We  would  emphasise
     however that there were a number of points made by the Adjudicator  in
     relation to credibility and the fact that some of her reasoning is not
     accepted by the Tribunal as soundly based, gives no indication one way
     or the other as to what the true position is.  That  would  be  for  a
     fresh Adjudicator considering all the evidence afresh to decide and in
     the  light  of  the  findings  of  that  Adjudicator  the  appropriate
     assessment in relation to risk on return can be made.  It may  or  may
     not affect the substance of the Article 8 claim which  relates  rather
     more  to  psychiatric  evidence,  the  availability   of   psychiatric
     treatment in Sri Lanka and a consideration of Razgar, N and Djali.

  8. Before dealing with the points where the  Adjudicator  has  erred,  we
     point out that it was  quite  wrong  for  the  Respondent  not  to  be
     represented when the matter last went back  from  this  Tribunal.   We
     have no doubt whatsoever  but  that  the  Adjudicator  faced  problems
     trying to deal with problematic credibility issues without the benefit
     of cross-examination of witnesses and submissions by the Secretary  of
     State's representatives.  It is with reluctance that we are  remitting
     this case and we express the hope that the Respondent will ensure that
     he is properly represented.  Had  he  been  properly  represented,  we
     cannot help but feel that the problem which has been faced  would  not
     have arisen.

  9. The first point made by Mr Haywood is that it was not obvious why  the
     Adjudicator thought that  an  adverse  credibility  finding  could  be
     assisted by the fact that the Appellant had "never before come to  the
     attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka  in  the  six  years  during
     which he was a member of the LTTE" carrying out his  activities  as  a
     broadcaster and as someone who claimed to be extremely well  known  to
     the Sri Lankan intelligence community on account  of  his  activities.
     It depends upon what is  meant  by  "come  to  the  attention  of  the
     authorities".  If by that no more is meant than that  the  authorities
     were aware of his existence, it takes  matters  nowhere.   If  on  the
     other hand what is meant is that it is not credible that  he  had  not
     been picked up by the authorities for his activities,  that  is,  with
     respect to the Adjudicator, not  soundly  reasoned.   There  are  many
     reasons why the Sri Lankan authorities might not  have  been  able  to
     pick up somebody in whom they were extremely interested  and  who  had
     come to their attention for a long time;  they include that  they  had
     no adequate control over areas run by the LTTE and  therefore  had  no
     means to make sure that those who come to their  attention  were  more
     closely examined.

 10. It was next submitted that the Adjudicator in reaching her  conclusion
     that the Appellant was of no real  interest  to  the  authorities  and
     lacked the prominence which he claimed, erred in relying on  the  fact
     that he had gone through the security checks and passport  control  at
     Colombo airport "apparently" on his own passport.  It  was  said,  and
     this is not disputed, that that issue had not  been  raised  with  the
     Appellant;  there was background material showing that it is  possible
     to get through Colombo Airport on a false passport and there was  some
     indication from the interview that the Appellant did not now have  his
     own passport.  It is one of the problems which arises where  the  Home
     Office  is not represented but  Adjudicators may feel concerned  about
     a particular point and yet not  raise  it,  feeling  unduly  inhibited
     perhaps by the Surendran guidelines.  They  would  not  in  fact  have
     prevented those questions being put if they concerned the Adjudicator.

 11. Mr Deller makes the point and there is some authority  to  support  it
     (Koca v SSHD Outer House, Court of Sessions 22nd November  2002)  that
     not every point which cries out for comment by an Appellant has to  be
     put in order for the absence of explanation for it to be taken against
     an Appellant, but in view of the way in which those leaving Sri  Lanka
     are able to get through the airport  and  do  so  routinely  on  false
     passports, this is not one of those issues.

 12.  The  third  point  taken  was  that   the   Adjudicator   disregarded
     corroborative evidence as to the Appellant's prominence, simply saying
     that the  witnesses  were  the  Appellant's  family  and  friends  and
     suggesting that  on  that  ground  alone  they  would  be  biased  and
     unreliable.  Again, the Adjudicator would have been helped  had  their
     evidence been tested properly through cross-examination in the  normal
     way by a representative from the  Home  Office.   She  may  have  felt
     unduly inhibited in putting points of concern to them,  but  to  treat
     the corroborative evidence  as  of  no  significance,  simply,  as  it
     appears, on the grounds that the witnesses were family and friends  is
     not adequately reasoned and is  not  a  proper  basis  by  itself  for
     eliminating the impact of their evidence.

 13. The last point raised is that the Adjudicator again in assessing  that
     the Appellant was not prominent, pointed out that during his six month
     period in custody, he had not been charged or brought before  a  Court
     and did not hold a criminal record.  He was released during the course
     of a raid on the detention camp by the LTTE.  There is nothing unusual
     about that  length  of  detention  and  the  Appellant  had  given  an
     explanation as to what he was doing by way of assisting the Sri Lankan
     authorities under duress.  But it is not possible in our judgement  to
     say that because he had not been tried or charged during that  period,
     that he was not somebody who was prominent; it may  or  may  not  have
     been the case.  The position accordingly is  that  with  regret,  this
     matter has to go back for the evidence to be properly considered.  The
     regret we express reflects not merely the fact that this is going back
     for the second time and that the problem is engendered in good measure
     by the failure of the Home  Office  to  be  represented,  it  is  also
     because  the  Adjudicator  has  plainly  endeavoured  to   produce   a
     comprehensive and reasoned determination but for the reasons  we  have
     given, we think  that  she  has  not  done  so  sufficiently  for  the
     significance which attaches to the adverse conclusions  that  she  has
     reached in relation to credibility.

 14. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the extent of it being  remitted
     for another Adjudicator to consider.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT




