
Heard at Field House
On 13 May 2004

BV (Unaccompanied Minor - Timing of Decision) Vietnam [2004] UKIAT 00148

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                         ......03rd June 2004......


                                   Before:

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                              Mrs L.H.S. Verity
                             Mrs L.R.S. Schmitt

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr G. Saunders, Home Office
                                  Presenting Officer
For the respondent/claimant:      Ms S. Naik, counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      adjudicator, Mr Timothy  Thorne,  promulgated  on  2  September  2003,
      allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
      of State to refuse the claimant's asylum and human rights appeals.

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Vietnam and was born on 13  August  1991.
      He is now still only 12 years old.  He left Vietnam  in  September  or
      October 2002, when he was just 11 years old, and flew  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  After the intervention of Social  Services,  an  application
      was made on his behalf for asylum on 23 December 2002.

   3. The circumstances in which the claimant came to the United Kingdom are
      clearly set out in the application made on 21  January  2003.   In  or
      about 2001, the claimant's parents went to work in Cambodia.  In their
      absence, the claimant stayed with his grandmother.  After his  parents
      returned from Cambodia, they were arrested.  The appellant said at A5:

      "I asked the police why they were taking my parents away but there was
      no answer.  I asked my parents why they had been  arrested,  they  did
      not answer but they said I should be a good boy and take  care  of  my
      grandmother.  There were two police officers.   I  heard  one  of  the
      officers ask my parents some questions when I was  outside.   He  said
      that he wanted to know the truth, whether they went there to  work  or
      to supply illegal goods from Vietnam to Cambodia.  They  did  not  say
      what. After the police took my parents my gran said that she  was  too
      old to take care [of me] and could not provide the money  to  continue
      with my education."

   4. An arrangement was made for the appellant to be taken to a lady,  whom
      he called "Aunty", with whom he stayed for five or ten days until they
      went together to the airport to travel  to  the  United  Kingdom.   On
      arrival, the claimant stayed with her for a few  weeks  until  he  was
      taken to the house of the gentleman but the aunt he  did  not  return.
      About a week later, the man said that he could no  longer  look  after
      the claimant and took him to see two English ladies whom  we  take  it
      must  have  been  members   of   the   social   services   department.
      Subsequently,  the  claimant  was  placed  with  foster  parents.   We
      understand the foster parents are an Eritrean family.  It was accepted
      by the Secretary of State that they are likely to have some  right  to
      remain in the United Kingdom.  At  the  hearing  of  the  appeal,  the
      claimant's foster father was called.  The adjudicator refers to him in
      paragraph 24 of the determination:


      "He said that the appellant got on well at school and was very much  a
      part of his family.  He got on well with the  other  children  in  his
      family.  He spoke good English.  The witness looked upon the appellant
      as his son.  "We would be devastated if he were returned."   It  would
      be difficult for him and his family (who were  Eritrean  refugees)  to
      visit the appellant in Vietnam."

   5. We were referred to the Home Office policy set out in  an  Information
      Note   entitled   "Unaccompanied   Asylum   Seeking   Children".    An
      unaccompanied asylum seeking child is a person who,  at  the  time  of
      making the asylum application has no adult  relative  or  guardian  to
      turn to in this country.  The Home Office does not consider a child to
      be unaccompanied if he or she is being cared for by an adult  prepared
      to take  responsibility  for  him.   IND  staff  will  involve  social
      services in  any  case  where  there  is  concern  about  the  child's
      relationship with the "responsible" adult.  Mr Saunders submitted that
      by the time the application was made on 23 December 2002, the claimant
      was being looked after by social services and was in a placement  with
      a foster parent who signed the application on 21 January 2003  as  the
      claimant's guardian.  Accordingly, the claimant did  not  fall  within
      the definition of an unaccompanied asylum seeking child.  Although  it
      is a matter for the Secretary of State to determine the ambit  of  his
      own policy, and to construe it as restrictively as he chooses,  we  do
      not consider it likely that such a restrictive  interpretation  as  Mr
      Saunders put forward is tenable.  There may be cases where  the  child
      has been so effectively placed under the care and control of  a  local
      authority or some other person as to cease to qualify under the policy
      at the time the application for asylum is made.  In the present  case,
      however, we do not regard the person referred to by  the  claimant  as
      "Auntie" as an adult relative or guardian to whom the appellant  could
      turn in this country.  Nor do we regard the gentleman who looked after
      him for a few days as such a person.  Thereafter, the local  authority
      took charge of him just because he was an unaccompanied asylum seeking
      child.  Inevitably, once the local authority took  responsibility  for
      the claimant, it required his immigration status to be regularised  by
      making an application under either or both Conventions.  By so acting,
      we consider that it would lead to a manifestly absurd  result  if  the
      claimant then lost the protection afforded by the policy  directed  to
      children who have no adult relative or guardian  to  turn  to  in  the
      United Kingdom.  Accordingly, whilst the local authority  had  assumed
      responsibility for his care, we do  not  consider  that  this  was  an
      assumption  of  responsibility  automatically  rendering  outside  the
      definition of an unaccompanied asylum seeking child.


   6. In paragraph 8.3 of the Information Note, it is said:

      "8.3  We  will  consider  for  refusal  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
      children who have no asylum or human  rights  claim.   At  this  stage
      caseworkers will consider the  safety  of  return.   The  Home  Office
      Ministers have said that no unaccompanied child will be  removed  from
      the United Kingdom unless we are satisfied that adequate reception and
      arrangements are in place in the country to  which  he/she  is  to  be
      removed.  If no satisfactory reception and arrangements  can  be  made
      then IND will grant a period of exceptional leave to remain..."


      The period of exceptional leave to  remain,  as  applied  until  April
      2003, was four years in the case the child under 14 years of age.   At
      the end of this period the child  was  then  permitted  to  apply  for
      indefinite leave to remain in the same way as those granted four years
      ELR for humanitarian reasons.


   7. In April 2003 the circumstances in which leave to  remain  was  to  be
      granted to unaccompanied asylum  seeking  children  was  left  largely
      unaltered, although the phraseology changed:


      "Discretionary Leave may be granted to an applicant who:
           Is an unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  child  for  whom  adequate
           reception arrangements in the country are not available
           Is able  to  demonstrate  particularly  compelling  reasons  why
           removal would not be appropriate."


   8. Whilst the conditions for a  grant  of  discretionary  leave  remained
      similar to those  under  the  former  policy,  the  grant  itself  was
      substantially altered.  The current regime is that an individual grant
      of discretionary leave should not be made for more  than  three  years
      (or less where specific instructions have been issued).  Unaccompanied
      asylum seeking children should normally  be  granted  three  years  or
      until their 18th birthday, whichever is earlier, although there may be
      some exceptions.  Notable by its absence is the suggestion that at the
      end of the period the child may apply for indefinite leave to remain.


   9. The Secretary of State did not grant the claimant exceptional leave to
      remain.  He was, of course, entitled to have made  a  grant,  with  or
      without his policy.  By making no decision prior to  April  2003,  the
      claimant did not have  the  benefit  of  the  applicable  regime.   In
      effect, he was not granted four years exceptional leave to remain  and
      lost the prospect of "converting"  his  limited  leave  to  indefinite
      leave.  Furthermore, the Secretary of State has not granted him  three
      years discretionary leave under the April  2003  "policy".   His  only
      status, if status it be, is the status  of  irremovability  pending  a
      decision of what to do to him.


  10. The Secretary of State's chosen course  of  action  is  to  await  the
      outcome of the asylum appeal and any associated human  rights  appeals
      before deciding what to do.  If the asylum appeal  is  successful,  an
      appellant  is  granted  leave  to  remain  and  any  enquiry   as   to
      adequate/satisfactory reception and care arrangements in the receiving
      state is rendered unnecessary.  Given the substantial period  of  time
      that may elapse before his asylum appeal is finally disposed of either
      before the adjudicator or on appeal to  the  Tribunal,  reception  and
      care arrangements that may have been both adequate  and  available  at
      the time of deciding the asylum and associated human rights claims may
      well be neither adequate nor  available  at  the  end  of  the  appeal
      process.

  11. The claimant's principal complaint is levelled  at  the  Secretary  of
      State's "wait and see" policy.  Ms Naik, who appeared on behalf of the
      appellant, asserts that the Secretary of State should make a  decision
      and that his failure to do  so  is  unlawful.   It  is  an  inevitable
      corollary of that duty to make a decision  that  the  decision  should
      have been made in her client's favour.  Given  the  Secretary  of  the
      State's stance that he has  not  established  there  are  adequate  or
      satisfactory reception and care facilities the appellant must succeed.

  12. It is argued that the Secretary of State was required to consider  the
      appellant's claim in what is in effect  the  optimum  moment  for  the
      appellant.  If the claimant had been decided when the claimant entered
      the United Kingdom, he would not have established  either  private  or
      family life in the United Kingdom for  Article  8  purposes.   If  the
      claim had been decided at the time the application for asylum was made
      on 23 December 2001, similar considerations would probably apply.   At
      most, the Article 8 claim would have the bare minimum of a private and
      family life of a few weeks since the foster parents stepped  in.   (We
      do not know the exact date when they did so.) By the  time  the  claim
      came to be decided before the adjudicator the claimant had  a  full  7
      months of private or family life with the foster parents.  By the time
      the Tribunal considered the case, this had been extended to 14 months.
       By contrast,  there  are  still  no  adequate  care  arrangements  in
      Vietnam.   It might be thought that the result is inevitable.

  13. Must the Secretary of State make a decision?  It seems as a matter  of
      first principal that he need not.  He is not  presently  contemplating
      the claimant's return so  the  claimant  will  suffer  no  present  or
      imminent violation of his human rights. See paragraphs 62 and 63 of  L
      (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT 00016  (Dr  H.  H.  Storey,  chairman).    The
      Secretary of State has a discretion when to make a decision.  Be  that
      as it may, his failing to make a decision is  not  justiciable  either
      before the adjudicator or the Tribunal under the umbrella of  a  human
      rights appeal, far less an asylum claim.  This position was considered
      in [2003] UKIAT00059  N  (Vietnam),  (Mr  J.  Barnes,  chairman),  the
      Tribunal stated:


     6. It is perhaps appropriate that we deal first with the  question  of
        that policy.  It is, in essence, that no unaccompanied  child  will
        be removed from the United Kingdom unless the Secretary of State is
        satisfied that adequate reception  and  care  arrangements  are  in
        place in the  country  to  which  he  or  she  is  to  be  removed.
        Enquiries will be made by the Secretary of State in the country  of
        intended return to establish this before removal for  the  purposes
        of identifying a potential carer, and  checking  that  there  is  a
        realistic prospect of setting  up  suitable  arrangements  for  the
        child's return.  Those enquiries  will  initially  be  with  family
        members, although alternatively the Social Services  or  equivalent
        in the child's home country may be able to provide  for  the  child
        but this will depend very much on the  quality  of  care  provision
        available.  If, following all those  enquiries,  the  Secretary  of
        State is not  satisfied  that  such  adequate  reception  and  care
        arrangements will be in place on the return  of  the  unaccompanied
        minor then the general presumption is that  he  should  be  granted
        exceptional leave to enter or remain until he attains the age of 18
        years.
     7. We accept that there is no reason to doubt that  the  Secretary  of
        State will  follow  his  own  detailed  published  policy  in  this
        respect.  He clearly cannot be expected to make these enquiries and
        put in hand such arrangements until the asylum appeal  process  has
        been  exhausted,  partly  because  this  might  breach  matters  of
        confidentiality which he has undertaken to preserve in dealing with
        the claimant's application, and partly because it  is  self-evident
        that it would not be practicable to make such arrangements until  a
        point in the asylum process had been  reached  when  it  was  known
        whether or not the claimant was likely to be returned.  That  point
        has only just been reached in the present case with the refusal  of
        leave to appeal other than on Article 8 grounds, and even then  the
        asylum  process  will  not   have   been   exhausted   until   this
        determination is formally  promulgated.   Insofar  as  Mr  Richmond
        sought to rely on any failure to have made enquiries in advance, we
        are  satisfied  that  that  cannot  provide  any  valid  basis  for
        challenging the  proportionality  of  the  intended  removal  under
        Article 8.
     9. Mr Richmond sought to contrast the  situation  that  the  appellant
        enjoys in this country, where we accept that he has made efforts to
        integrate both with his foster carers and in  the  pursuit  of  his
        further education here, with the situation which would await him on
        his return.  He said to us initially that there was an  absence  of
        family to receive him.  We cannot accept that that follows from the
        evidence because  it  is  clear  that,  for  whatever  reason,  the
        appellant has preferred that there should be  no  attempt  to  make
        contact with his family in Vietnam since  his  arrival  here.   The
        Adjudicator was in our view  perfectly  entitled  to  look  at  the
        totality of the evidence before her as to  the  way  in  which  the
        appellant had been cared for in Vietnam in the past,  and  to  make
        the assumption that there was a  reasonable  likelihood  that  such
        caring ability would continue  to  apply  after  the  comparatively
        short time since  the  appellant's  departure  from  Vietnam.   The
        medical evidence is aptly summarised  by  the  Adjudicator  in  the
        passage which we have quoted above.  It is right to  say  that  the
        report from the South London and Maudsley NHS Trust does include  a
        passage to the effect that the appellant is, in  their  opinion,  a
        vulnerable teenager whose current symptomatalogy suggests  that  if
        he removes to an environment in which he  feels  unsafe  and  under
        threat, "such as he is likely to encounter in Vietnam", he will  be
        at risk of developing a clinical  depression  which  would  require
        psychiatric treatment.


  14. It is clear that the Tribunal's reasoning in N (Vietnam)  might  apply
      in the present appeal with equal force.


  15. Ms Niak, however, whilst not expressly asking this Tribunal to  differ
      from N (Vietnam), contends that the Tribunal was not  there  asked  to
      consider whether the Secretary of State had failed to  apply  his  own
      policy.  She contended that he had not done so and that  his  decision
      was, therefore, flawed, permitting the  adjudicator  to  consider  the
      matter afresh.

  16. We do not consider that this is correct.  If the  Secretary  of  State
      had made inquiries and  had  satisfied  himself  that  there  were  no
      adequate reception facilities for  the  claimant  on  return  but  had
      nevertheless decided to return him, such a decision would have been  a
      clear breach of his own policy.  Indeed, quite separate from that,  it
      would be a violation of the claimant's human rights to return  him  to
      Vietnam in such circumstances.  The Secretary of State  has  not  done
      that.  Instead, he has made a decision to refuse the  claimant  asylum
      claim and to issue directions for his removal to Vietnam.  That  gives
      rise to a right of appeal which the claimant is required  to  exercise
      if he wishes to challenge the asylum decision.  In addition, the  one-
      stop procedure requires the claimant to raise a human rights claim  if
      he chooses to do so.  In  our  judgment,  there  is  nothing  in  this
      procedure that  requires  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the
      adequacy of reception facilities at this stage.
  17. Ms Naik submitted that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  considered
      discretionary leave prior  to  April  2003,  it  is  likely  that  the
      claimant would have received the benefit of four  years  discretionary
      leave.  She, therefore, submits that this was a clear failing to apply
      his policy.  In our judgment, it is impossible to establish  what  the
      Secretary of State would have done.  If he had found that  there  were
      adequate reception facilities in Vietnam, by applying his  policy,  he
      would have been quite entitled to issue  removal  directions  in  line
      with that policy.  It does not, therefore, follow  that  consideration
      of the policy would inevitably have lead to  the  grant  of  leave  to
      remain.


  18. Ms Naik also submitted that the Secretary of State made no  Article  8
      decision and, therefore, the adjudicator  was  entitled  to  make  the
      decision himself.  The  adjudicator,  it  was  argued,  was  therefore
      entitled to apply the Secretary of State's own policy.  On  the  state
      of evidence before the adjudicator, the adjudicator was both entitled,
      and indeed bound, to  find  that  there  were  no  adequate  reception
      facilities and, therefore, that the claimant's  return  would  violate
      his human rights.  In our judgment, the adjudicator  was  not  in  the
      position of the Secretary of State.  It was not part of  his  function
      to stand in the shoes of the Secretary of State and  make  a  decision
      that the Secretary of State had himself declined to make at this stage
      in the process.

  19. In support of her contention, it was argued on the  claimant's  behalf
      that where the Secretary of State fails to apply his own  policy,  the
      Tribunal is required to intervene.  In [2004] UKIAT 00027 H  (Somalia)
      (Ouseley J., President) the Tribunal considered in an entry  clearance
      case the family reunion policy, (the statement  of  policy  permitting
      leave to enter to family members where the sponsor has refugee status,
      irrespective of his ability to meet the maintenance and  accommodation
      requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.)   In  paragraph  19  of  the
      determination, the Tribunal accepted  that  although  the  policy  was
      potentially applicable to the appellants, it had not  been  considered
      by the Secretary of State  or,  if  it  had,  that  it  had  not  been
      considered on the correct factual basis.  The President stated:

      "Accordingly, on that basis, this appeal falls to be allowed,  but  we
      would not direct that entry clearance  be  granted.   It  is  for  the
      Secretary of State to consider whether the appellants fall within  the
      scope of his refugee family reunion policy on the basis which we  have
      set out.  He is entitled to  reach  a  decision  either  way  on  that
      matter."


      In paragraph 46 of the determination, the Tribunal concluded:


      "The consequences of a conclusion is that these  four  appellants  are
      entitled to have their Article 8 rights considered by the Secretary of
      State and are not confined  to  arguing  what  for  them  would  be  a
      hopeless case on the Rules, and a deliberately  restricted  one  under
      the extra-statutory discretion.  But it does not follow  at  all  that
      that leads to much greater scope for them to enter.  It would normally
      be the  position  that  the  combination  of  the  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Rules and the extra-statutory policy and discretion  would
      provide a proportionate basis for any interference  with  or  lack  of
      respect for family life in the light of the well-established right  of
      the state to control entry, whether or not that is to be regarded as a
      free-standing restriction on the scope of  Article  8  or  as  falling
      within  the  qualification  in  Article  8  (2)...  It  would  be  the
      exceptional case where circumstances fell outside the Rules  and  that
      the  compassionate  discretionary  policy,  and  yet  were  such  that
      exclusion was an unreasonable response by the Secretary of State."


  20. Accordingly, the appeal was allowed with the effect that the Secretary
      of State was required to consider his own policy.  It did  not  result
      in the grant of  entry  clearance.   This  procedure  should,  in  our
      judgment, be strictly confined.  In an asylum appeal, the  adjudicator
      or the  Tribunal  is  concerned  to  consider  whether  there  is  the
      reasonable likelihood of persecution or a violation of the  claimant's
      human rights.  The appeal  process  is  not  normally  concerned  with
      procedural irregularities or a consideration of whether the  Secretary
      of State has applied his  own  extra-statutory  policies.   It  is  of
      course well-established in the case of Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148  that  a
      decision of an Entry Clearance Officer  may  be  treated  as  "not  in
      accordance with the law" where a policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      outside the Rules has not been considered or has been considered on an
      erroneous factual basis.


  21. In this appeal, the adjudicator  concluded  in  paragraph  51  of  the
      determination that the claimant was an  unaccompanied  minor  who  had
      been abandoned by his parents and grandmother in his own country.  The
      adjudicator concluded:

      "He has no one and nowhere to be returned  to  in  Vietnam.   In  such
      circumstances I conclude that there is a real risk  that  the  act  of
      returning  him  at  his  age  constitutes  inhuman  and  or  degrading
      treatment in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article
      3 ECHR."


  22. We do not consider that the evidence establishes that the claimant has
      been abandoned.  The entirety of the evidence in so far as it  relates
      to the circumstances in which the claimant came to the United  Kingdom
      has been set out above in  paragraph  3  of  this  determination.   It
      establishes that  the  claimant's  parents  were  arrested.   It  also
      establishes that elaborate (and costly) arrangements were made by  the
      claimant's grandmother for the claimant to come to the United Kingdom.
       We do not consider this amounts to  abandonment.   More  importantly,
      perhaps, it does not  mean  that,  were  the  claimant  to  return  to
      Vietnam, his parents or his grandmother would refuse to care for him.


  23. Furthermore, by deciding that the claimant's family had abandoned him,
      the adjudicator was pre-empting the consideration that  the  Secretary
      of State was himself intending to give when he came to  make  his  own
      enquiries in Vietnam.  As appears from the Tribunal's  decision  in  N
      (Vietnam), the Secretary of State will first  consider  whether  there
      are family members in Vietnam who are likely to assume  responsibility
      for the child.  In  our  judgment,  until  those  enquiries  had  been
      concluded, it was not  for  the  adjudicator  to  decide  whether  the
      claimant had been abandoned.

  24. The adjudicator then went on to deal with the  Article  8  claim.   In
      paragraph 73 of the determination, the adjudicator  decided  that  the
      Secretary of State had not considered proportionality at all and  that
      it was, therefore, open to him to carry  out  the  balancing  exercise
      himself, albeit paying deference to the Secretary of State's  duty  to
      maintain effective immigration control. For the reasons that  we  have
      set out above,  once  the  adjudicator  had  embarked  upon  a  simple
      comparison of conditions in the United Kingdom and the absence of  any
      information as to conditions in Vietnam,  the  contest  was  bound  to
      result in the claim succeeding.  For the reasons we have  given,  that
      is not the correct approach.

  25. Finally, in paragraph 77 of the determination, the  adjudicator  found
      that the Secretary of State had failed to  follow  his  own  published
      policy.  In our judgment, the adjudicator was confusing the fact  that
      the Secretary of State had not embarked upon  an  examination  of  the
      adequacy of reception and care arrangements in Vietnam with a  failure
      to comply with the policy.

  26. Although Ms Naik sought to argue the appeal on  the  basis  that  this
      appeal raises the issues that were not considered by the Tribunal in N
      (Vietnam), we do not consider that any fresh principles are  involved.
      We consider that N (Vietnam) was correctly decided  and  applies  with
      equal force to the  circumstances  in  the  instant  appeal.   In  our
      judgment, the adjudicator reached the wrong conclusion in allowing the
      claimant's appeal.

Decision:  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
13 May 2004

