
H-DN-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |Ms (Activity in war -       |
|                           |        |Persecution -               |
|                           |        |Discrimination) Croatia     |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00165          |
|On 30 March 2004           |        |                            |
|Dictated 21 April 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|15 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr N W Renton                                                     |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Malik of Sutovic and Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mss J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen  of  Croatia,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
    Tribunal against the Determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs A K  Simpson)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  made  on
    30th November 2000 to refuse him leave to enter and asylum.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 28th January 1999  and
    claimed asylum on arrival.  His wife, born on  14th  March  1952  is  a
    dependant on his application.  His son born on 3rd December 1981 had  a
    separate appeal, which was heard on 11th November 2002 with his appeal.



3.    Grounds of Appeal against the Adjudicator's Determination were lodged
    on 15th January 2003.  Leave  was  sought  primarily  in  view  of  the
    Tribunal's recent decision in S and K [2002] UKIAT 056113  in  relation
    to ethnic Serbs from Croatia being currently appealed  with  permission
    being sought from the Tribunal to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Leave
    was being sought pending the decision of the Court of Appeal in  S  and
    K.  It was also argued in the Grounds of Appeal  that  the  Adjudicator
    erred in law in concluding that economic discrimination  cannot  amount
    to persecution under the Refugee  Convention.   Leave  was  granted  to
    appeal to the Tribunal on 4th February 2003.  Since then S  and  K  has
    been decided and is now known as SK.  We note that  this  decision  was
    not relied on by either party.

4.    The Appellant is an ethnic Serb, born in Branimirovac.   In  1962  he
    moved to Osijek in eastern Slovenia.  His wife was born in the  village
    of Tenja, about 5 kilometres from Osijek.  They married on 3rd  October
    1970.  He is an Orthodox  Christian.   He  completed  military  service
    between  February  1969  and  July  1970.   Subsequently  he   obtained
    employment  making  agricultural  machinery.   His  wife  worked  in  a
    confectionary  factory.   As  a  result  of  political  instability  in
    Croatia, the Appellant was dismissed in  May  1991  and  his  wife  was
    dismissed in July 1991.

5.    In September 1991  the  battle  for  the  village  ended.   When  the
    Yugoslav army commanders discovered that the Appellant had served in  a
    tank regiment during his military  service,  he  was  conscripted  into
    their forces.  He served as a private in a tank regiment,  although  he
    had command of the four-man tank.  When the Serbian  army  withdrew  on
    20th May 1993, the Appellant was promoted to lieutenant and was left in
    command of 50 men and ten tanks.  He remained in that position until he
    was demobilised under the Dayton Agreement in May 1995.

6.    The Appellant feared for his family's safety, from Croatians who were
    returning to his village.  On 26th January 1998 he took the  family  to
    Norway where he  claimed  asylum.   During  their  stay  in  Norway  he
    discovered that his paternal cousin, Cerdo Sterbac, a  colonel  in  the
    Yugoslav army who had been in command of a brigade, had been  tried  in
    absentia for war crimes and sentenced  to  twenty  years  imprisonment.
    Following refusal of his asylum claim, the  Appellant  and  his  family
    returned to Croatia on 11th October 1998.  Although the  Appellant  had
    owned a flat in Osijek, this had been taken over by a  Croatian  family
    in 1991.  Attempts to reclaim the flat were unsuccessful.  He  and  his
    family had to live with his widowed sister-in-law, Branka, in Tenja.

7.    He was unable to find work in Osijek.    He considered moving to  the
    Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia,  particularly  since  his  daughter,
    married to a Serbian citizen, lived in Belgrade but  although  Croatian
    Serbs were allowed to travel in and out of the country, they  were  not
    allowed to settle there.  He decided that there was no future  for  his
    family Croatia.  In January 1999 he and his family travelled by car  to
    Zagreb airport and from there came to the United Kingdom.

8.    He last spoke to his sister in-law, Branka,  in  January  2002.   She
    told him that his cousin was now in prison in Croatia.  Although he had
    not been involved in any war crimes, he believed  that  his  would  not
    stop the Croatian authorities  from  blaming  him  for  the  deaths  of
    Croatian citizens.  He feared that if he returned to Croatia  he  would
    be arrested and probably imprisoned,  although  not  for  such  a  long
    period as his cousin.

9.    The Adjudicator found the Appellant to be a credible  and  compelling
    witness and accepted his account.  She found that there was nothing  in
    the  evidence  before  her  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  had  any
    individual  responsibility  for  war  crimes.   In  the  light  of  the
    objective evidence before her she found that the Appellant was  not  at
    real risk of prosecution for war crimes.  She noted that the UNHCR  was
    actively promoting the return of Serbs to Croatia and she  was  certain
    that the UNHCR would not encourage  return  if  persuaded  that  ethnic
    Serbs faced persecution such as would engage  the  Refugee  Convention.
    She was therefore not persuaded that the Appellant's  military  service
    and his  relationship  with  his  cousin,  a  convicted  war  criminal,
    sufficed to create a real  risk  of  persecution  by  the  local  Croat
    population.   The Adjudicator had relied on S and K in  which  the  IAT
    took the view that in general, unless the situation deteriorates  to  a
    significant  extent  or  special  circumstances  can  be  shown  in  an
    individual case, no ethnic Serb should be able  to  establish  a  claim
    under either the Refugee or European Convention.

10.   She looked at the third limb of the Appellant's claim, which  related
    to the fact that he would, if returned to Croatia,  be  homeless.   She
    noted that the Croatian government has undertaken to  assist  returnees
    in their reintegration  by  providing  basic  assistance  depending  on
    monthly income for a six month period, including cash  grants,  medical
    coverage  and  other  legal  and   social   benefits.    Although   she
    acknowledged that there was  discrimination,  particularly  as  regards
    housing and employment, she took the view that  economic  hardship  did
    not, of itself, entitle a person to be regarded as a refugee.

11.   At the hearing Mr Malik made an application to vary  the  grounds  of
    appeal on the basis that there was a delay by the Secretary of State in
    deciding the Appellant's asylum application  and  the  consequences  of
    this delay should prevent the Secretary of State removing the Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  On looking through  the  file,  we  saw  that
    permission to vary the  grounds  had  been  granted  by  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal in August 2003.  Counsel made a new application to
    adjourn the hearing in view of the imminent decision by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the case of Janjanin in which the issue  under  consideration
    was whether delay in Croatian cases ought to  apply  in  an  Article  8
    claim.  We refused Counsel's application to adjourn the hearing.

12.   Miss Sigley submitted three decided cases, 24 M (Croatia) starred, 16
    J and K.

13.   Mr Malik sought to rely on unreported cases that  were  contained  in
    the Appellant's bundle of documents.  Miss Sigley objected on the basis
    that Mr Malik had not complied with the President's Practice  Direction
    issued on 19th May 2003.  Item 5 of the Practice Direction says that an
    application for permission to rely on an unreported determination  must
    (i) include a full transcript of the determination, (ii)  identify  the
    proposition for which the Determination is  to  be  cited,  (iii)  must
    identify  that  that  proposition  is  not  found   in   any   reported
    determination of the  Tribunal,  and  has  not  been  superseded  by  a
    decision of a higher authority, and  (iv)  must  be  accompanied  by  a
    summary analysis of all  other  decisions  of  the  Tribunal,  and  all
    available decisions of a higher authority, relating to the same  issue,
    promulgated in the period beginning six months before the date  of  the
    decision proposed to be cited and ending two weeks before the  date  of
    the hearing.  Following consideration of the matter the Tribunal  ruled
    that Mr Malik had not complied with Item 5 of the  Practice  Direction,
    and refused him permission to rely on the unreported decisions.

14.   Mr Malik said that there were two grounds on  which  the  Appellant's
    fear  of  persecution  is  based.   Firstly,  his  Serb  ethnicity  and
    secondly, as somebody who was a captain in the Serb army.  He said that
    the Secretary of State did not give consideration to the second ground.
     The reasons for refusal letter, which  is  dated  3rd  November  1999,
    dealt mainly with the general situation of Serbs and paragraphs 12  and
    13 asserted that the Appellant's motivation for coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom was economic.

15.   Mr Malik said that the Appellant was interviewed on  his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom.  At A4 of that interview the  Appellant  was  asked
    "what has prompted you to leave now and not in  1991?"   The  Appellant
    replied "I thought that Yugoslavia would remain intact and not split up
    completely.  I was in the war until the end.  From 28th June 1991 until
    the Dayton Accord in 1995 I was in the war".  At A10 when he was  asked
    if there was anything he wished to add to or change what  he  had  said
    the Appellant's reply was "Because of my involvement in the army and my
    cousin was a high ranking officer in the army, it means that we  cannot
    feel safe in Croatia".  Mr Malik said that  these  two  answers  should
    have raised concerns with the Secretary of State.   He  said  that  the
    Appellant then sent a witness statement  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
    which is at Annex C2 of the Home Office bundle.  Although  the  witness
    statement was dated 13th January 2000, for reasons not  known,  it  was
    not forwarded to the Secretary of State until 4th August 2000.   At  C5
    of that witness statement the Appellant said  that  he  was  a  private
    although he had command of four men in the tank that they  used.   When
    the Serb army withdrew as of 20th May 1993 he was left in command of 50
    men and 10 tanks.  He was promoted to lieutenant.  He  was  comfortable
    with the responsibility as the men who would serve him were the men  he
    had been fighting with for many months.  He  stayed  in  that  position
    until he was demobilised under the Dayton Agreement in  May  1995.   Mr
    Malik said that although the statement was sent  to  the  Secretary  of
    State before the Secretary of State made his decision on 30th  November
    2000, there was  no  reference  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  this
    particular aspect of the Appellant's claim.  Furthermore, although  the
    Secretary of State's decision was dated 30th  November  2000,  the  PF1
    giving notice of the Secretary of State's decision was not sent to  the
    Appellant's solicitors until 19th November 2001.

16.   Mr Malik reminded us that the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 28th January 1999.  At the time of his  arrival  there  was  a  Home
    Office Bulletin,  2/99  in  place.   Paragraph  10.6  of  the  Bulletin
    contained advice to caseworkers and set out  two  bullet  points.   The
    first bullet point said "There is no  'group  policy'  towards  Serbian
    asylum seekers from Croatia and each case  is  determined  on  its  own
    merit".  The second said "The general presumption  is  that  Serbs  (or
    those with a mixed Serbian background through parents or marriage) from
    the war affected area of eastern Slovenia, Baranja  and  Sirmrurn,  the
    Krajina and western Slovenia, will be able to substantiate a  claim  to
    asylum on the grounds of their ethnicity.  Mr Malik also referred us to
    the same Bulletin, paragraph 9.1 of which said, that "during the war in
    Croatia in 1991, the Croatian and Serbian sides had various militias in
    the field as well as other irregular groups.  It is likely that  almost
    all these groups were responsible for atrocities".  Mr  Malik  referred
    us to yet another Bulletin 4/99,  which  stated  that  caseworkers  and
    Presenting Officers would need to be aware of the recent allowed appeal
    in the case of Kekus (K1002445).  It said that "at the appeal  hearing,
    representatives  acting  for  Kekus,  an  ethnic  Serb   presented   an
    impressive "expert opinion" paper on the position of  ethnic  Serbs  in
    Croatia as well as an OSCE Report dated May 1999.   These  showed  that
    ethnic Serbs are very likely to suffer persecution  and  discrimination
    based on ethnicity."  The Bulletin  referred  to  an  "expert  opinion"
    which, Mr Malik said was the expert opinion of Karphammar,  the  former
    head of the legal unit to  the  OSCE  Mission  to  Croatia,  which  was
    referred to by an Adjudicator in the case of Milan Cicic heard on  14th
    August 2000.  In Cicic the Adjudicator noted that the validity  of  the
    Karphammar  Report  had  been  accepted  by  the  Home  Office  Country
    Information and Policy Unit and had been referred to  and  accepted  as
    giving an accurate and factual account of the situation in the  region.



17.   Mr Malik said that the upshot of all this evidence  is  that  if  the
    Secretary of State had considered the Appellant's  claim  properly  and
    fully, taking into account his  rank  in  the  Serb  army,  the  asylum
    interview record of his fears and the basis  of  his  return,  and  the
    presumption in the Home Office Bulletins, the Appellant would have  had
    a good prospect of being granted exceptional leave to  remain  or  full
    refugee status.  He said that those who served with the Appellant in  a
    lower position in the army were recognised as refugees.  In his opinion
    the Appellant's claim was not given the proper  consideration  that  it
    deserved.  In support of his argument Mr Malik relied on  paragraph  31
    of the  Tribunal's  decision  in  24  M  (Croatia)  starred.   In  that
    paragraph the Tribunal said that there was a good prospect that at  the
    time of entry if a decision had been made then, the Claimant would have
    been granted some form of leave to remain.  The Tribunal were  prepared
    to assume that a government committed to speedy  decision-making  could
    reasonably have made a decision within a year.  Mr Malik said that  the
    Claimant in 24 M entered the UK in October  1999,  eight  months  after
    this Appellant.  Had this Appellant's claim been considered within  the
    reasonable period of a year, he would have had a good prospect  at  the
    time of being granted some form of leave, that is, exceptional leave to
    remain for four years, not just  on  his  ethnicity  but  also  on  his
    activity in the army and his rank as a  captain.   This  case  he  said
    comes into the Shala exception.  He also relied on the case of  Mahmood
    for his argument that those who have a legitimate claim to  enter  such
    as this Appellant ought to be considered differently.

18.   Mr Malik then went on to address us as to how the delay has  affected
    the Appellant's private life.  Mr Malik referred us to paragraph 18  of
    the Tribunal's decision in 16 J wherein the Tribunal said that  as  has
    been emphasised in Nhundu and Chiwera (01/TH/0613), the right protected
    under Article 8 is a composite one and elements of private  and  family
    life required to be considered cumulatively.  Mr Malik  said  that  the
    delay denied the Appellant the strong  presumption  that  he  would  be
    granted exceptional leave to remain and thereafter would have been able
    to apply to be granted indefinite leave to remain.  He said that  there
    was an additional delay in the service of the notice by a year and  the
    delay in the Appellate system.

19.   Mr Malik said that the Appellant lost property in Croatia and has  no
    chance of regaining it.  On return to Croatia he will be at  the  mercy
    of charitable organisations.  He referred us to  objective  information
    on conditions in Croatia.  The US  State  Department  Report  on  Human
    Rights Practices in 2003 states that arrests of ethnic  Serbs  for  war
    crimes continued but decreased throughout the year.  In some  cases  of
    arrest on war crimes charges, the subject was released a few days after
    charges were dropped.  However, in other cases  persons  were  detained
    for long  periods.   Over  the  last  few  years,  several  ethic  Serb
    defendants convicted in absentia or at non-transparent trials continued
    to be held in  detention  for  extended  periods  while  their  appeals
    progressed slowly through the over-burdened judicial system.  The  OSCE
    reports that the outcomes of war crimes  prosecutions  appeared  to  be
    largely determined by the ethnic identity of both the defendant and the
    victim.  According to  the  Human  Rights  Watch,  Croatia  Report  the
    Croatian government must reform its laws and policies  to  ensure  that
    returnees have an  opportunity  to  repossess  their  homes  or  obtain
    compensation for lost property, and  equal  access  to  employment  and
    pension benefits.  The Report said that until the government  does  so,
    hundreds of thousands of Croatian Serbs  would  be  unable  to  realise
    their right to return home.

20.   The US State Department Report also  highlights  an  OSCE  Report  on
    several ethnically related incidents where  perpetrators  were  charged
    with  misdemeanour  offences.   In  a  majority  of  cases  police  and
    prosecutors  were  reluctant  to   identify   the   cases   as   ethnic
    discrimination.  Mr Malik said that the picture painted by the  reports
    makes the Appellant more vulnerable.  The discrimination at local level
    continues.  The OSCE Report shows that war crime trial is not dead  and
    buried.  Therefore the Appellant would be in a more vulnerable position
    were he to be returned to Croatia.

21.   In reply Miss Sigley said that the Tribunal is not in a  position  to
    grant the appellant asylum.  The Tribunal has to decide whether or  not
    the Appellant qualifies for asylum or whether return would  breach  the
    UK's obligation under the Human Rights Convention.  She  accepted  that
    the Appellant has established a private life since his arrival  in  the
    UK.

22.   Miss Sigley said that the determinations of Adjudicators allowing the
    appeals of three people the Appellant knew in the army do not support a
    blanket proposition that the Secretary  of  State  granted  exceptional
    leave to remain to all Serbs from Croatia.  The Tribunal in 24  M  said
    that removal of  that  Claimant  would  not  be  disproportionate.   At
    paragraph 38 of 16 J the Tribunal held that in conducting the balancing
    exercise under Article 8, the existence of any unreasonable  period  of
    delay is ordinarily a relevant factor that it will rarely be a decisive
    factor  unless  accompanied  by  other  special  circumstances,   which
    disclose particular prejudice to a Claimant.  The Tribunal then  listed
    three pre-conditions which should underpin the Shala  point  and  these
    are (a) the fact that the Appellant had a legitimate claim to enter  at
    the time when, on any reasonable basis,  his  claim  should  have  been
    determined; (b) the fact that, had his asylum  application  been  dealt
    with reasonably efficiently, he would have been likely to have obtained
    at least exceptional leave to remain; (c) the fact that his private  or
    family life had only become significantly established as  a  result  of
    the time spent by him  in  the  UK  where  he  formed  a  relationship.
    Accordingly possession of ELR, if it had been granted  when  it  should
    have been, would thereby have given  him  the  ability  to  apply  from
    within the  UK  for  a  variation  of  leave  on  the  grounds  of  his
    relationship.  Miss Sigley argued that point  (c)  is  absent  in  this
    case.  Whether the Appellant has established a private life in  the  UK
    from 1999 to now, the Tribunal will still have to consider  whether  it
    would be disproportionate to remove him.  The Tribunal  in  24  M  paid
    deference to the Secretary of State at paragraph 28.  It said that  the
    Tribunal and Adjudicators should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali  as
    providing clear exemplification of the limits of  what  is  lawful  and
    proportionate.  They should normally hold that a decision to remove  is
    unlawful only when the disproportion is so  great  that  no  reasonable
    Secretary of State could remove in those circumstances.

  23. As to the Appellant's fear of prosecution for  war  crimes,  and  his
    inability to regain possession of his home, Miss  Sigley  referred  the
    Tribunal to the decision in DK.  We have previously  been  referred  to
    paragraph 89 of that  decision  by  Mr  Malik  wherein  the  Claimant's
    Counsel had referred to a letter which stated that those who return  as
    failed asylum seekers do not receive the benefit  of  UNHCR  assistance
    prior to return, or temporary accommodation from the ODPR,  and  it  is
    highly unlikely that any exceptional humanitarian assistance  would  be
    available to DK from UNHCR.  Miss Sigley referred us to  paragraphs  92
    and 93 of the same decision where the Tribunal found that DK  would  be
    entitled to the welfare rights of a Croatian citizen and that there was
    no  evidence  that  Serbs  suffered  discrimination  in  that  respect.
    Although  there  would  be  a  level  of  hardship,  it  was   not   so
    significantly different from  that  rejected  in  S  and  K  as  to  be
    sufficient to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  The Tribunal went on
    to say that there was no evidence that accommodation,  notably  private
    rented  accommodation,  including  accommodation  with  Serb  or  other
    families, would be unavailable even if there  were  no  ODPR  temporary
    accommodation.  Miss Sigley asked us to come to the same conclusion  in
    this case.

24.   As regards the Appellant's activities in the war,  Miss  Sigley  said
    that the Tribunal should not interfere with the Adjudicator's  findings
    in this respect.  At paragraph 81 of DK the  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    position over war crimes prosecutions has not markedly  changed;  there
    are still trials in absentia, but that does not prevent a  fresh  trial
    upon arrest.  Although Serbs faced discrimination in the  frequency  of
    arrest and prosecution, the Tribunal noted that the increase in arrests
    in 2003 still only affected a very small number of people.  There is  a
    trial process, which is not said to be unfair and there  is  an  appeal
    system, which has led  to  some  convictions  being  overturned.   Miss
    Sigley therefore argued that it is not the case that the Appellant will
    be at risk of persecution on account of his activities in the war.

25.   The Appellant's appeal was prosecuted on three grounds:

        (1) Delay in the processing of his asylum application denied him  a
            presumption of  the  grant  of  some  form  of  leave,  namely,
            exceptional leave to remain for four years following  which  he
            could have had the opportunity of applying for indefinite leave
            to remain.


        (2) His fear of prosecution for activities in the war and;


        (3) The Appellant's inability to regain possession of his  property
            and the discrimination he might face on return to Croatia as an
            ethnic Serb.


26.   The first ground of delay was predicated on  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision  in  Shala.   The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  there   were
    circumstances in which the delay on the part of the Secretary of  State
    in dealing with the asylum claim was an exceptional feature which  took
    the case outside the significant area  of  judgment  which  the  Courts
    would allow him in balancing the conflicting interests  of  the  proper
    maintenance of immigration control  and  interference  with  Article  8
    rights.  The exceptional feature in Shala was that the Appellant had  a
    legitimate claim to enter because at the time he would have been likely
    to benefit from the Secretary of State's policy of granting  asylum  to
    ethnic Albanians from Kosovo.  Had the  decision  been  made  within  a
    reasonable time, he would have been likely to have  been  granted  some
    form of leave to remain and this would have enabled him to make an  in-
    country application for a variation in his leave to stay  as  a  spouse
    and the Secretary of State's policy  of  requiring  those  who  had  no
    leave, to apply for entry clearance out  of  country,  would  not  have
    applied, and the interference with family life would not have occurred.
     In our opinion the Tribunal in 16 J at paragraph 38  (iii)  reiterated
    the three special features in Shala.

27.   Taking the first exceptional feature in Shala, the question we ask is
    whether the Appellant had a legitimate claim to enter  because  at  the
    time he would have been the likely  beneficiary  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy of granting asylum to an ethnic Serb from  Croatia,  had
    his claim been determined within a reasonable time.  The case of  24  M
    Croatia starred decides that a reasonable time is within a year  of  an
    Appellant's entry to the UK.  This  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in January 1999.  The Secretary of State could reasonably  have
    been expected to make a decision on his asylum application  by  January
    2000.  Although the Secretary of State's reasons for refusal letter  is
    dated 3rd November 1999, the relevant decision refusing  to  grant  the
    Appellant leave to enter and asylum was made  on  30th  November  2000.
    This means that the delay was  outside  the  reasonable  period  within
    which the Secretary of State could have made his decision.

28.   In Shala the Secretary of State had a policy of  granting  asylum  to
    ethnic  Serbs  from  Kosovo.   However,  we  find  that  there  was  no
    equivalent policy in force for ethnic Serbs from Croatia at the time of
    the Appellant's entry.  What we have  are  Bulletins  in  the  form  of
    advice to caseworkers in their consideration of applications by  ethnic
    Serbs from Croatia.  Bulletin 2/99 advised that  there  was  no  "group
    policy" towards Serbian asylum seekers from Croatia and that each  case
    has to be determined on its own merits.  There was however the  general
    presumption that Serbs from the war affected  areas  including  eastern
    Slovenia,  from  where  the  Appellant  originates  will  be  able   to
    substantiate a claim to asylum  on  the  grounds  of  their  ethnicity.
    Bulletin 4/99 advised caseworkers and Presenting Officers the  need  to
    be aware of the recent allowed  appeal  of  Kekus  and  also  objective
    evidence, which showed that ethnic Serbs were  very  likely  to  suffer
    persecution and discrimination based on ethnicity.  In this appellant's
    case, his claim in his interview was wholly based on economic  reasons,
    namely, the loss of his job  and  property.   This  was  what  led  the
    Secretary of State to conclude  that  the  appellant's  motivation  for
    coming to the UK was economic.   In the circumstances we are not  in  a
    position to assume that this particular Appellant would have received a
    favourable decision and thereby been granted  some  form  of  leave  to
    remain, had his application been considered within a  reasonable  time,
    namely, within 12 months of his arrival.

29.   The other special feature in Shala was that had he been granted  some
    form of leave to remain, this would have enabled him  to  make  an  in-
    country application for a variation of his leave to remain as a  spouse
    and the Secretary of State's policy of requiring those who had no leave
    to apply for entry clearance out of country, would  not  have  applied,
    and the interference with family life would not  have  occurred.     In
    this Appellant's case, it  was  argued  that  had  the  Appellant  been
    granted some form of leave to remain, e.g. exceptional leave to  remain
    for four years, he would then have been able to apply for the grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain.  The facts of  this  Appellant's  case  are
    somewhat different from Shala.  Shala had married someone  who  had  no
    connection with Kosovo and who already had two  children  and  who  had
    already been granted refugee status in this country.  Therefore an  out
    of country application as a spouse would have caused  an  interference,
    however temporary, to his family life.  In this  particular  case,  the
    Appellant arrived in the UK with his wife and son.   Therefore  refusal
    to grant him  some  sort  of  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  poses  no
    interference with his family life, as he and his wife would be  removed
    together. We accept that he has established a private life as a  result
    of time spent in the UK but we are of the view that  his  private  life
    cannot be looked at in isolation to his family life. We do not know the
    outcome of his son's asylum appeal.  Nevertheless any interference with
    their  family  and  private  lives  would  not,  in  our  opinion,   be
    disproportionate to the effective maintenance of  immigration  control.
    Furthermore, as it is speculative to assume that  he  would  have  been
    granted some sort of leave to remain, it is also  speculative  that  he
    would have been in a position to apply for indefinite leave to remain.

30.   We now turn to consider Counsel's  argument  that  the  Secretary  of
    State did not consider the Appellant's claim that he fought in the war.
     The reasons for refusal letter was written on 3rd November 1999.   The
    information the Secretary of State had before him at the time  was  the
    Appellant's interview on arrival.  At A4 of the interview the Appellant
    was asked what particular event caused him to leave  his  own  country.
    His answer was that he felt like a  third  rate  citizen,  particularly
    since 1991 from the beginning of the war he  no  longer  lived  in  his
    flat.  Everything he accrued over 20 years of work had been  lost.   He
    was then asked what prompted him to leave then and not in 1991, and his
    reply was he thought that Yugoslavia would remain intact and not  split
    up completely.  He was in a war until the end.   From  28th  June  1991
    until the Dayton Accord in 1995.  When the  question  was  repeated  he
    said that he had a young child, he could not go back to  his  flat  and
    since June 1991 he had not had a job.  He survived by  doing  odd  jobs
    and legally he could not get a job because of  the  Croatian  soldiers.
    His emphasis throughout his interview was on the fact that at  the  end
    of 20 years of work he had nothing to show for it, no flat, no job  and
    no country.  It was at the end of the interview when he was asked if he
    had anything to add that he said that because of his involvement in the
    army and his cousin being a high ranking officer in the army he did not
    feel safe in Croatia.  We accept that the Secretary of  State  did  not
    consider the limited evidence before him in relation to the Appellant's
    activity in the war or his fear as a consequence thereof when he  wrote
    his reasons for refusal letter.   The  Appellant's  statement  of  13th
    January 2000, which was sent to the Secretary of State  on  4th  August
    2000, appears not to have been considered by the  Secretary  of  State.
    It is obvious that the statement was sent after the reasons for refusal
    letter but was before the Secretary of State when he made his  decision
    on 30th November 2000.  Counsel argued that had the Secretary of  State
    taken into account the Appellant's fear on account of his  activity  in
    the war and his cousin's high rank and status in  the  army,  he  would
    have granted the Appellant some  form  of  leave.   We  disagree.   The
    Bulletins in force at the time make no mention of the likelihood of  an
    ethnic Serb succeeding because of his activities in the war.

31.   The Adjudicator did however consider the  Appellant's  evidence  with
    regard to his activities in the war.  She accepted his evidence that he
    served with the Serbian  militia  from  1991  to  1995  and  later  the
    Yugoslav army.  She also accepted that his cousin has been convicted of
    war crimes.  The Adjudicator considered the Appellant's fear  that  his
    past military service may lead to a risk of persecution for alleged war
    crimes.  We find that the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the  Appellant
    is not at real risk of persecution for war crimes, nor his relationship
    with his cousin, a convicted war criminal to be  perfectly  sustainable
    in the light of the evidence that  was  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
    Tribunal  in  DK  acknowledged  that  the  position  over  war   crimes
    prosecution has not changed.  However, the increase in arrests in  2003
    still only affected a very small number of people.  There  is  a  trial
    process which cannot be said to be unfair and there is an appeal system
    which has led to some convictions being overturned.  In the light of DK
    we support the Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant is not at  real
    risk of prosecution for war crimes.

32.   We now turn  to  the  Appellant's  fear  of  discrimination  and  his
    inability to regain possession of his property.  We rely on DK and find
    that there is no evidence that accommodation,  notably  private  rented
    accommodation, including accommodation with Serb or other families will
    be unavailable even if there is no ODPR  temporary  accommodation.   If
    the Appellant is unable to regain his own property, he should  be  able
    to obtain  other  accommodation.   His  inability  to  regain  his  own
    property is insufficient to create a real risk of persecution.  In  the
    light of the objective evidence, we accept that there is discrimination
    against Serbs in Croatia.   However we find that the discrimination  is
    insufficient to create a real risk of persecution.

33.   Accordingly, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.







                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice-President




