




HD (Long _ Unlawful _ Residence _ Proportionality) Croatia [2004]
UKIAT00051






                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 9th December 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             23rd March 2004
                                   Before:


                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                               Mr P R Moulden
                                 Mr P R Lane


  Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


  For the Appellant:         Mr P Nathan, instructed by Sutovic and Hartigan
  For the Respondent:  Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1.   This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  W
         Hanbury, promulgated on 5th February 2003, whereby he dismissed the
         Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
         in a letter dated 22nd November 2001 to refuse  her  permission  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  that  her  return  to
         Croatia would be a breach of her Article 8 rights under  the  ECHR.
         The appeal to the Adjudicator was brought under section 65  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


  2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Croatia born on 27th November 1970. She
         arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th February 1992 as an  au  pair
         and was granted leave to remain until 14th February 1994.  On  29th
         July 1993, she sought asylum but this was refused in a letter dated
         20th January 1994 and a subsequent appeal  was  dismissed  in  July
         1994. No appeal was brought to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  On
         30th November 1994, IND wrote to her solicitors saying that because
         there was no further appeal:

                    "Your client therefore has no basis of stay in this
                     country and must now leave the
                    United Kingdom immediately.










                    If your client fails to embark, they will be liable to
                     prosecution for an offence under
                    the Immigration Act 1971 ... your client will also be
                     liable to deportation ... ."

  3.   In December 1994, the Appellant met the man who is now  her  husband,
         "Mr D". According to the statement  of  11th  January  2003  placed
         before the Adjudicator, she  had  met  him  in  December  1994  and
         "subsequently" moved in together and lived as common-law  partners.
         She did not at that stage want to get married because she wanted to
         be sure that her  potential  husband  would  be  committed  to  the
         marriage for life.  In his statement, her husband  said  that  they
         moved in together almost straight away in December 1994. Unlike his
         wife, he is a Serb from Croatia who obtained exceptional  leave  to
         remain in about 1997 and because a British citizen in 2001.


  4.   In  March  1996,  IND  again  wrote  to  the  Appellant  through  her
         solicitors in the same terms in which  they  had  written  on  30th
         November  1994.  In  October  1996,  the  Appellant  wrote  to  the
         Respondent seeking to rely upon her relationship with  Mr  D  as  a
         basis for deferring removal  action  while  his  asylum  claim  was
         considered. It was treated as an application for  leave  to  enter.
         This matter was not dealt with by  the  Secretary  of  State  until
         after he had received  further  communication  from  the  Appellant
         stating, as indeed was the case, that on 1st  March  1999  she  had
         married Mr D. This had led to a further application to stay.  In  a
         letter of 16th  August  2001,  the  application  was  refused.  The
         Secretary of State said that she had  remained  unlawfully  in  the
         United Kingdom and had been served with the relevant  notice  to  a
         person subject to administrative removal, which made her liable  to
         detention and summary removal. It was said she had  overstayed  her
         permitted leave for seven years and five months.  She did not  fall
         within the Immigration Rules.


  5.   The Secretary of State referred to guidelines which he had laid  down
         for dealing with marriage applications from overstayers in  DP3/96.
         These guidelines say that grants of leave to remain  exceptionally,
         on the basis of a marriage, can be  made  where  the  Secretary  of
         State is satisfied that the marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting,
         that it pre-dated the service of an enforcement notice by at  least
         two years and that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  settled
         spouse to accompany his or her spouse on  removal.  This  case  was
         said not to meet the necessary criteria, although it  was  accepted
         that the marriage was genuine and subsisting. For the  purposes  of
         his policy, he said that the service of a notice warning  a  person
         of their liability to removal was deemed to be  the  initiation  of
         enforcement action.  Accordingly, the marriage in  March  1999  did
         not pre-date by two years the service of the notice of liability to
         removal.


  6.   The Secretary of State's decision then considered whether there  were
         compassionate circumstances such as to allow a  concession  on  the
         grounds of marriage. He said that it would be  reasonable  to  have
         expected both husband and wife to  have  know  of  the  Appellant's
         unlawful status and that the existence of the marriage  within  the
         United Kingdom would be precarious. He concluded that  any  claimed
         interference with Article 8 would be  entirely  justified  "in  the
         pursuance of the legitimate aim of maintaining a  firm  immigration
         control". He accepted that he could not expect the
       husband to accompany her to Croatia as he was a refugee, although  he
         could go to public expense should he wish. Alternatively, he  could
         remain in the United Kingdom and support any application for her to
         return as the spouse of a person settled here. He accepted that she
         would have established a degree of what could  qualify  as  private
         life in the United Kingdom, but did  not  consider  that  that  was
         sufficient to be an exceptional factor justifying allowing  her  to
         remain further. Balancing all matters, he concluded that the action
         of removing the Appellant would  be  proportionate  to  the  social
         need.


  7.   On 7th and 21st September 2001, the Appellant's  present  solicitors,
         Sutovic and Hartigan, made further representations on the basis  of
         policy DP3/96, her husband's citizenship  and  submitting  that  it
         would be a breach of Article 8 ECHR for the Appellant to be  forced
         to leave the United Kingdom.  Somewhat curiously, they say  in  the
         letter of 7th September 2001 in the IND that they  had  taken  over
         the case from previous solicitors on 14th November  1995  but  that
         the Appellant had told them that her previous solicitors had sought
         Judicial Review in February  1995  following  the  refusal  by  the
         Secretary of State in November 1994 to exercise his  discretion  in
         her favour as she had  asked.  The  action  was  withdrawn  on  2nd
         November 1995. In January 2002, the  present  appeal  was  launched
         against the refusal of 22nd November 2001.


  8.   Although it was said in the appeal that the Appellant was a  refugee,
         the case essentially turned on breach of Article 8. No material was
         supplied to suggest that she was a  refugee  as  a  result  of  any
         change in circumstances following the refusal of her  asylum  claim
         in 1994. The Adjudicator was aware that she had a young child  born
         on 24th July 2002, a factor which had not been before the Secretary
         of State when he made his decision.  The child was six  months  old
         at the date of the appeal before the Adjudicator.  She had told him
         that she could not return to Croatia to apply for  entry  clearance
         because of her child whom she had to look after, because  both  she
         and her husband had jobs, but that they had also been aware of  her
         precarious immigration status when they married.  She  had  parents
         and a sister in Croatia with whom she could stay.


  9.   It was submitted to the Adjudicator on behalf of the  Appellant  that
         nothing had been done about removing her until 2001 and that should
         benefit the Appellant. Enforcement action had not  commenced  until
         16th August 2001 and so the Appellant fell within the  guidance  in
         DP3/96 because she had married her husband in March 1999.  Removing
         her would be disproportionate and would place an  excessive  burden
         on her family life.


  10.  The Adjudicator said that the burden of proof upon the Appellant  was
         to satisfy him to the standard of serious possibility or reasonable
         likelihood that her rights under the ECHR would be infringed by her
         return to Croatia.  He said that it was not part  of  his  duty  to
         stand in the shoes of the Secretary of State and that the Secretary
         of State was entitled to take into account  the  need  properly  to
         enforce immigration control when dealing with an interference  with
         an ECHR right.  The Adjudicator concluded that there had  been  two
         attempts at enforcement of the Appellant's  removal:   first  by  a


       letter dated 30th November 1994 and secondly by the  letter  of  12th
         March 1996. Those proceeded the recent decision  to  issue  removal
         directions. He rejected the claim that the  Appellant  fell  within
         any of the guidance issued by the Secretary of State.  Rather  than
         blame the situation on the  Secretary  of  State,  the  Adjudicator
         concluded that the fact that the Appellant had ignored requests for
         her to leave the United Kingdom if anything reflected badly on her.
          Resources might have inhibited her removal. She  had  married  and
         had a child with  full  knowledge  of  the  precariousness  of  her
         immigration  status.  He  concluded   that   it   was   a   proper,
         proportionate and reasonable step for her to be required  to  leave
         the United Kingdom to make an application for entry clearance  from
         Croatia.


  11.  In conclusion, the Adjudicator said:


              "The Appellant has established a private and family  life  in
              the United Kingdom which  will  be  interfered  with  by  her
              removal.  However, her removal is likely to  be  short  lived
              and she can be accommodated  with  relatives  living  in  the
              country of nationality.  I conclude that the decision of  the
              Secretary of State was necessary  and  proportionate  to  the
              requirement for proper enforcement of immigration policy  and
              therefore within the terms of Article 8(2) of the ECHR."


  12.  Before the Tribunal the Appellant relied  on  a  statement  from  her
         husband, which had not  been  before  the  Adjudicator.  In  it  he
         described how she worked as the manager of a hotel earning a salary
         which he and she needed in order  to  pay  the  mortgage  on  their
         house, which they had bought in 2002 (this  was  the  second  house
         which they had bought to live in). The two of them worked in such a
         way that one could look after the child, while  the  other  was  at
         work. He referred to the impact which her being forced to leave the
         country would have on their ability to pay the mortgage and to look
         after the child. He said that they would not be  able  to  pay  the
         mortgage without her contribution and that he would have to give up
         his job in order to care for the child because he could not  afford
         to  pay  for  professional  childcare.   He  also  said  that   the
         Appellant's brother had been granted asylum in 2002 and was  living
         in the house with them.  He had a  job  and  could  not  return  to
         Croatia as an ethnic Serb.  The Appellant's case was  supported  by
         references from her and her husband's employers who commended their
         qualities in a number of respects.


  13.  Mr Nathan, for the Appellant, made it clear that he  was  not  taking
         issue with the decision of the Tribunal in SK [2002]  UKIAT  056132
         or indeed with the Tribunal's later decision on the return of Serbs
         to Croatia in DK [2003] UKIAT 00153K Croatia. Nonetheless, he  said
         that the problems which it was recognised  that  Serbs  would  face
         upon return formed a background to the consideration of this  case.
         That was because the husband was a  Serb,  although  the  Appellant
         herself was not. He relied in particular upon  Article  8,  and  in
         reality  it  was  the  question  of  the  proportionality  of   the
         interference with the Appellant's family and private life which was
         at issue. He referred to Boultif v Switzerland [2001] 33  EHRR  50,
         in which in paragraph 48 the ECtHR referred to a number of  matters
         which were relevant, particularly in the context of the removal  of
         criminals. He also referred to the decision in Razgar  [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 840.


  14.  He replied, in his submissions on proportionality, upon the length of
         the Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom, the Respondent's delays
         in determining her  marriage  application,  the  obstacles  to  her
         husband's return with her  to  Croatia,  their  work  records,  the
         potential loss of the family home and the Respondent's own  policy.
         He contended that the Respondent had been aware of the relationship
         and ought to have applied to it the policy DP2/93 which  considered
         the position of those who were in a common-law partnership akin  to
         a marriage. The Secretary of State had considered the position only
         in relation to his policy on marriage. DP3/96 did not deal with all
         the relevant circumstances as covered by DP2/93 and  could  not  be
         regarded as wholly superseded.


  15.  Mr Nathan referred to an extract from  Butterworths  Immigration  Law
         Service page D63, paragraph 501, footnote, which  referred  to  the
         case of Wilby 8th April 1999 in which the Tribunal  had  held  that
         DP2/93 had not been totally revoked by DP3/96 to  the  extent  that
         DP2/93 dealt with relationships outside marriage. The footnote also
         referred to statements of Government  Ministers  of  22nd  February
         1996 and October 1997 and 11th March 1998. The latter was  said  to
         have stated that common-law relationships brought to his  attention
         prior to the coming into force of DP2/96 should be dealt with under
         DP2/93  notwithstanding  the  silence  upon  this  point   of   the
         transitional  provisions  in  paragraph  10  of  the  DP3/96.   The
         footnote suggested that Wilby was inconsistent with other  Tribunal
         jurisprudence and ought to have concluded  that  the  Secretary  of
         State did not err in  failing  to  consider  an  application  under
         DP2/93.


  16.  Mr Nathan also put reliance on decisions such as Shala v SSHD  [2003]
         EWCA Civ 233, in relation to delay and failure of the Secretary  of
         State to take steps to give effect to the enforcement action  which
         had apparently decided upon. Essentially, Mr Nathan submitted  that
         because the strength of the case for the grant of  entry  clearance
         to the Appellant was so strong, there was no benefit in  compelling
         the Appellant to leave the country for what would be a fairly short
         space of time, but one which would  be  potentially  sufficient  to
         cause the loss of her job and home and to disrupt  the  life  of  a
         young child, who was now of the order of sixteen months old.


  17.  Mr Phillips, for the Respondent, said that  it  was  clear  that  the
         Secretary of State was  entitled  to  apply  DP3/96  and  that  the
         Appellant did not fall within it. He  had  not  supposed  that  the
         husband would or could go to Croatia. He said that it was  for  the
         Tribunal to determine proportionality for ourselves because of  the
         change of circumstances.


  Conclusion


  18.  It is clear that the Appellant does not  come  within  the  terms  of
         policy DP3/96 because the  couple  had  not  been  living  together
         continuously since their marriage for at least two years before the
         commencement of enforcement action.  Enforcement action includes  a
         specific instruction to  leave  with  a  warning  of  liability  to
         deportation if the subject fails to do so. Both the letters of 30th
         November 1994 and  12th  March  1996  constitute  such  enforcement
         action.
  19.  Secondly, even if the common-law relationship was to  be  equiparated
         with marriage for these purposes, which it was not, the  common-law
         relationship had not subsisted for two years before the enforcement
         action. It started after the first enforcement action  of  November
         1994 and would have only run for fifteen months by the time of  the
         second enforcement action in March 1996.  Even if DP2/93  had  been
         in force at the time of their  application,  they  would  not  have
         fallen within it.


  20.  We have examined  the  Ministerial  statements  referred  to  in  the
         Butterworth's footnote at D63.  The statement of 22nd February 1996
         is uncompromising in its  terms.   Foreign  nationals  applying  to
         remain on the basis of common-law relationship could  expect,  with
         immediate effect, that their applications would  be  refused.  ILPA
         was told that they would all be refused.  DP  2/93  was  completely
         superseded and Wilby is wrong, as has been said in  other  Tribunal
         decisions, in treating it as having lived a  half-life;  common-law
         relationships were deliberately excluded  from  the  scope  of  the
         relationships, by  a  concession  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
         However, none of  the  terms  of  that  concession  apply  or  were
         suggested to apply to this Appellant.  The provisions  of  DP  2/93
         clearly do not survive the various provisions  in  the  concession,
         and its subsequent variations.


  21.  Accordingly, neither the Immigration Rules  nor  any  extra-statutory
         concessions assist this Appellant.


  22.  However, although the position under the Rules and  the  Government's
         policy is  very  important,  the  question  of  Article  8  and  of
         proportionality needs to be  considered.   It  is  clear  that  the
         Appellant has over time established her family and private life  in
         the United Kingdom with her husband and now her child.  Her removal
         to Croatia would be a very significant interference with  it,  even
         on the assumption that she would take the child to  look  after  it
         rather than leave the husband to do so. The removal would  probably
         be temporary, although not made easier by  the  possible  financial
         implications. How long it would take to obtain entry clearance  was
         unknown but it is unlikely to be less than several months.


  23.  It  is  necessary  then  to  consider  whether  the  interference  is
         proportionate to the public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  the
         system of immigration control, bearing in mind  the  importance  of
         that system. In such  an  analysis,  the  existence  of  Rules  and
         concessions which deal with  relationships  of  the  type  involved
         here, even though this case does not fall  within  their  scope  is
         relevant to the proportionality of the decision. They can  properly
         be regarded at the view of the legislature and the executive as  to
         what is proportionate, though they do not cover every  eventuality.
         They indicate what factors  are  important  including  enforcement.
         Accordingly, it would require a strong case for a decision to  fall
         outside the Rules and concessions and yet for removal  to  be  held
         disproportionate.


  24.  The approach to proportionality has been considered by the  Court  of
         Appeal in Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 716 INLR 361, Razgar v  SSHD
         [2003] EWCA Civ 840, [2003] INLR 543, Shala [2003]  EWCA  Civ  233.
         The issue
         normally is whether the Secretary of State's decision is within the
         limits of the decisions reasonably available to him. Where  he  had
         made no decision on proportionality or the  facts  relied  on  have
         been  appraised  differently  or  have  changed,  it  is  for   the
         Adjudicator and  Tribunal  to  consider  the  issue.  The  Tribunal
         considers, for  the  reasons  set  out  in  [2004]  UKIAT  00024  M
         (Croatia) Starred, paragraph 28. This says:


              "The starting point should be that if the  circumstances  the
              removal  could  reasonably  be  regarded  as   proportionate,
              whether or not the Secretary of State has actually said so or
              applied his mind to the issue, it is lawful. The Tribunal and
              Adjudicators  should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and   Djali   as
              providing clear exemplification of  the  limits  of  what  is
              lawful and proportionate. They should normally  hold  that  a
              decision to remove is unlawful only when the disproportion is
              so great that no reasonable Secretary of State  could  remove
              in those  circumstances.  However,  where  the  Secretary  of
              State, eg through a  consistent  decision-making  pattern  or
              through decisions in relation to members of the same  family,
              had clearly  shown  where  within  the  range  of  reasonable
              response  his  own  assessment  would  lie,   it   would   be
              inappropriate to assess proportionality  by  reference  to  a
              wider range of possible responses than he in  fact  uses.  It
              would  otherwise  have  to  be  a  truly  exceptional   case,
              identified and reasoned, which would justify  the  conclusion
              that the removal decision was unlawful  by  reference  to  an
              assessment that removal was within the  range  of  reasonable
              assessment of proportionality. We cannot think of one at  the
              present; it is simply that we cannot rule it out."


  25.  The Secretary of State reached a view on proportionality, but at  the
         time when he did so he did not know that the Appellant would become
         the mother of a child. Nor did he know the impact which her removal
         might have on the home life of the Appellant and her husband in the
         way now set out for the Tribunal.


  26.  The Adjudicator made his decision knowing of the birth of the  child,
         but perhaps not having all the financial information which we have,
         though  it  is  fairly  nebulous  and  the  implications   of   the
         Appellant's removal do not appear to have  been  investigated  with
         the mortgage lender. Indeed, it is almost inevitable given the time
         which cases take on appeal from the Home Office to the  Adjudicator
         and from the Adjudicator to the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  that
         there will be changes in circumstances which the Secretary of State
         does not directly consider. His position is reflected, if  properly
         reflected  at   all,   in   the   continued   resistance   of   his
         representatives to the allowing of the appeal.


  27.  The husband might now be able to return to Croatia to live  with  the
         Appellant but no such case has been put forward by the  Respondent.
         He has instead accepted that his refugee  status  and  now  British
         citizenship means that the husband cannot be expected to return  to
         Croatia with his wife. Whilst the situation for a Serb returning to
         Croatia is not in general such that they should be returned, it  is
         nonetheless sufficiently tough for it to  be  unsurprising  that  a
         Serb would not  return,  if  he  had  refugee  status  and  British
         citizenship. Accordingly, there would be  an  interference  in  the
         family life of the Appellant and a separation one way or the  other
         of the child from one or other parent. The Appellant does have some
         family in Croatia, although will not have  had  much  contact  with
         them for some time.


  28.  The expectation of the Respondent is that upon  such  return  by  the
         Appellant she will  be  able  to  make  an  application  for  entry
         clearance and that it would be granted.  The  Respondent  does  not
         deny the genuineness of the marriage and he has raised no objection
         by way of suggesting that the couple would be  unable  to  maintain
         themselves if they were to stay, although  the  impact  of  removal
         might make it more difficult for them to maintain themselves.  They
         would be potentially  disadvantaged  by  the  fact  of  removal  in
         pursuing the application  for  entry  clearance.  Her  husband,  as
         sponsor, might find himself less well-placed to support her  entry.
         The possible loss of their home, which clearance  is  an  important
         factor, as is the potential loss of job and of contact between  the
         child and one or other of its parents. It is now a  child  of  some
         sixteen to eighteen months.


  29.  We do not give a great deal of weight to the length of time which the
         Appellant has been in this country, since 1992, even though for her
         it is almost all her adult life and one third of her life  so  far.
         This is because both in November 1994 and in  March  1996  she  was
         clearly required to leave the country, but remained  unlawfully  in
         circumstances  where  she  was   liable   to   prosecution.   These
         circumstances are very different from  those  in  Shala  where  the
         delay  in  Home  Office  decision-making  and  the  development  of
         relationships in the meantime combined to deprive the Appellant  of
         the right to an in-country application for variation of leave.


  30.  Greater weight has  to  be  given  however  to  the  genuineness  and
         duration of her relationship with a man who is now her husband.  He
         is settled in this country, first  as  a  refugee  and  then  as  a
         British citizen from 2001. The  relationship  which  in  its  early
         years might have been thought uncertain because, as  the  Appellant
         put it,, she did not want to get married until she  was  sure  that
         the relationship would endure,  has  now  blossomed  into  marriage
         without there having been, by March 1999, any  further  enforcement
         action taken by the Secretary of State. It is true that  the  child
         was conceived after the refusal letter of 16th August 2001, for  he
         was born on 24th July 2002. But timing which in other  cases  might
         give rise to  suspicions  has  to  be  seen  here  as  the  natural
         consequence of a relationship which had, by that time,  lasted  six
         or so years and by which time the Appellant was over thirty.


  31.  Nonetheless, through all its development  from  living  together,  to
         marriage, parenthood, mortgages and financial interdependency,  the
         Appellant's position has been known to her and her  husband  to  be
         precarious. Indeed, it has been more precarious than most,  because
         her position was not so much  uncertain  as  positively  determined
         against her and she was liable to removal at any time.


  32.  The troubling feature in this  case  has  been  the  failure  of  the
         Appellant to accept the law in relation to immigration control  and
         the way in which she has stayed in defiance of it. The  Adjudicator
         right gave significant weight to that  factor.  It  is  the  factor
         which has caused  us  the  greatest  anxiety  in  considering  this
         matter. The duration of the Appellant's stay in the United  Kingdom
         in defiance of immigration control does her no credit, although she



         never absconded and her details, so far as we can tell, have always
         been available to the Home Office, and the Home Office has taken no
         active steps to  bring  about  her  removal.   There  are  resource
         implications  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  and   in   examining
         proportionality, the lack of action for so many years  is  relevant
         in judging whether the full rigour of the maintenance of the system
         of immigration control should be visited upon this family  in  this
         instance. We do not consider that, in general, Appellants should be
         able to advance their cause by relying on their  unlawful  presence
         in this country and their unwillingness to comply with its laws.


  33.  Edore shows that even flagrant and deliberate breaches of immigration
         control do not themselves always override the provisions of Article
         8(1). But the decision of Mahmood v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2001] Imm AR 299, paragraphs 23 and 26 per Laws LJ, and
         paragraphs 55, 65 and 66 per the Master of  the  Rolls,  underlines
         the significance of adherence to the system of entry clearance,  of
         the precariousness of the position of one party to  a  relationship
         and that a requirement which would cause a break  in  contact  with
         husband or young child is not for that reason a basis for holding a
         decision as disproportionate.  Nor  is  the  fact  that  the  later
         application might be successful.


  34.  This  is  another  case  in  which  two  views  can  be  taken  about
         proportionality, depending on the weight given to the interests  of
         the family and the disruption for this family inherent  in  even  a
         relatively short separation, or the weight given to the enforcement
         action which in effect the Appellant defied, and the precariousness
         of the her position as the relationship developed  in  that  light.
         She has never come within the scope of any Rule or  concession.  It
         has never been thought appropriate  that  they  should  cover  her,
         because she has refused to comply with enforcement action.


  35.  We have concluded that the Respondent cannot be expected to  have  to
         undertake physical removal in order  to  avoid  the  argument  that
         family life has  become  established  and  would  be  disrupted  if
         removal now were physically enforced. That would  be  to  give  too
         great an advantage to flouting a law where inadequate resources  to
         enforce it physically in each case were available. It would have to
         be a very much stronger case for someone to be able to rely on  his
         or her defiance of the law as the basis of a claim to  stay.  Edore
         was one such case. Here, closer to Mahmood, the  Appellant  is  not
         likely permanently to lose contact  with  her  husband,  or  to  be
         unable to take the child with her. She had family in Croatia and is
         a Croat, not a Serb.  It is to be hoped that  any  application  for
         entry clearance will be processed rapidly.


  36.  However, notwithstanding the significant  disruption  to  her  family
         life, we do not consider that the decision to remove is outside the
         range of proportionate actions open  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
         whatever view we might have come to. It is not  unlawful  therefore
         for her to be removed. We also give  considerable  weight  in  that
         context to the  Adjudicator's  assessment  on  not  very  different
         material.
         37.      This appeal is dismissed.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
