
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |SB (Art 8 _ Mental Health _ |
|                           |        |Razgara Djali) Sri Lanka    |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00033          |
|On 5 September 2003        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 February 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Chairman)                              |
|Mr D R Bremmer                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr C Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms J Laughton, Counsel



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from the determination  of
      Mrs Jones, Adjudicator, sitting on 17 March 2003.  Before dealing with
      the grounds of appeal it would be convenient to deal with the facts of
      the case as found by the Adjudicator.

2.    The claimant is a Tamil citizen of  Sri  Lanka  who  was  born  on  26
      February 1960 and so is now 43-years  old.   She  entered  the  United
      Kingdom on 2 May 2002 and applied for asylum, apparently on arrival.

3.    We should point out at the outset that the claimant's account of  what
      had happened to her and what led to her fleeing Sri Lanka was found by
      the Adjudicator to be entirely credible.  There is no challenge to the
      Adjudicator's findings of fact.

4.    The claimant lived in Kilinochchi from the date  of  her  marriage  in
      1979.  She and her husband have one child, a daughter Imayalina.   Her
      husband was a wealthy farmer.

5.    From 1991 the LTTE came regularly to her house and she  would  prepare
      food for them.  From 1994 her husband combined the regular trips  that
      he made to Vavuniya to sell produce with picking up information useful
      to the LTTE and bringing  back  medicine  for  them.   Their  daughter
      joined the student organisation of the  Liberation  Tigers  and  began
      helping them full-time from about the age of 15.

6.    In 1996 the army captured Kilinochchi and they were  displaced.   They
      left  everything  behind  and  went  to  live  Mankulan   in   reduced
      circumstances.

7.    On 10 October 1998  the  claimant's  husband  tried  to  get  back  to
      Kilinochchi to check on the family's property but  he  never  returned
      and nobody knows what has happened to him. It is thought that  he  may
      have been picked up by the army, was probably arrested and is probably
      now dead.

8.    Somewhat after this occurred, prerhaps within a  month  or  so  of  it
      occurring, the claimant and her daughter got  a  pass  from  the  LTTE
      which allowed them to travel to Vavuniya to make enquiries  about  her
      husband.  They were told  there  that  certain  people  who  had  been
      arrested in the area had been transferred to Colombo.  They managed to
      get a further pass and they travelled  to  Colombo  in  January  1999.
      They were registered with the police on arrival.

9.    It is plain that neither the claimant nor her  daughter  were  of  any
      particular adverse interest to the authorities at this  stage  because
      on 18 June 2000 they flew together to Singapore  where  Imayalina  was
      married to someone who is a refugee  from  Sri  Lanka  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Imayalina obtained a visa to join him as  a  spouse  in  the
      United Kingdom and, having in the meantime returned to Sri Lanka, flew
      to London on 24 July 2000.  She has stayed  here  ever  since  and  is
      settled in the United Kingdom.

10.   Two days after her daughter's departure the claimant was  arrested  by
      police who had surrounded the lodge where she was living.   They  took
      her to Pettah police station where she was kept for a  week.   It  was
      put to her that her daughter was an LTTE member and  the  police  said
      that they knew about her husband and that he  had  been  arrested  for
      helping the LTTE.  They accused her of coming to Colombo as a spy  and
      of being a member of the LTTE.  At about the beginning of  August  she
      was  transferred  to  Kalutra  prison  where  she  was  treated  as  a
      terrorist.

11.   In prison she was  appallingly  ill-treated.   Her  ill-treatment  was
      exacerbated by the asthma attacks from which she  suffered.   She  was
      repeatedly kicked, beaten and abused by female guards who accused  her
      of being an LTTE spy.  They would grab her by the hair, bang her  head
      against the wall, kick her in the face and whip  her  with  her  belt.
      She was made to eat food mixed with sand and tiny stones so  that  she
      would vomit and would then be beaten.  She was also made to engage  in
      arduous work which aggravated her asthma.

12.   Worse than this she was raped on about six occasions.   The  means  by
      which she was subjected to her ordeal were that she was made to take a
      drink which evidently contained drugs and was then, whilst  drowsy  or
      unconscious, stripped naked and raped.  This was done by different men
      whom she knew nothing of apart from the fact that that they were under
      the influence of alcohol at the time.

13.   In due course she was given a check-up  by  a  Tamil  doctor  who  was
      sympathetic to her plight and who said he would tell the  guards  that
      she was infected with some disease.  This stopped the rapes occurring.



14.   It is not known when these assaults occurred but  she  was  in  prison
      for a considerable period of time.  In about December 2001 a man  from
      her village, a Mr Selvarajah came to visit another  prisoner  and  saw
      her.  She persuaded him to  help  her  by  going  to  Kilinochchi  and
      selling her family land and  belongings.   A  Singhalese  officer  was
      bribed and she was taken under escort from detention to an  office  to
      get a passport in about January 2002.

15.   On 29 April 2002 a female guard took her from her cell to  the  prison
      office where Selvarajah and an agent were waiting.  She managed to get
      through Colombo airport on a false passport leaving Sri  Lanka  on  29
      April 2002 eventually arriving in the United Kingdom.
16.   Those were the facts that the Adjudicator accepted.   The  Adjudicator
      also accepted the medical report of Dr Kanagaratnam which stated  that
      she was suicidal, was suffering from PTSD,  and  was  in  a  state  of
      detachment and listlessness.  The Adjudicator was in no doubt that the
      claimant had been "horrifically traumatised" to use her words by  what
      had happened to her.  The Adjudicator then  went  on  to  analyse  the
      background information, in particular the treatment  of  returnees  at
      Colombo airport, and concluded as follows:

           "51.  In summary there is reason to believe  the  present  peace
           process at the present time to be distinctly  uneasy.   I  infer
           from this that the authorities will be  loath  to  admit  Tamils
           into the country who have a history of LTTE involvement  and  of
           detention.


           52.   In  the  appellant's  case  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
           reasonably likely  in  view  of  her  history  and  the  present
           instability of  the  peace  process  that  she  is  at  risk  of
           detention at the airport itself on return,  that  her  detention
           will be lengthy and that she will be  at  grave  risk  of  being
           tortured, on account of her political opinion."

17.   The Adjudicator then went on further to say that in light of the  past
      that the claimant had had it would be a breach of Article 3 to  return
      her to Sri Lanka and further a breach of Article 8  because  her  only
      close immediate family are living in the United Kingdom and  that  she
      has established a family life over here with which her  removal  would
      prove  a  disproportionate  interference.   Further  the   Adjudicator
      concluded that the disparity in medical treatment  between  Sri  Lanka
      and the United Kingdom was such that Article 8 would  be  breached  on
      that ground also.

18.   The grounds of appeal state that the  Adjudicator  made  a  number  of
      errors of law and the first of these can briefly  be  described  as  a
      failure properly to appreciate the background evidence as to the state
      of affairs in Sri Lanka.  The  Secretary  of  State's  contention  was
      below and before us that the claimant would not be  at  real  risk  of
      persecution for her political beliefs if she were to be returned.   It
      was submitted by the Secretary of State that the  claimant  had  never
      been charged with any offence, has  never  signed  any  confession  or
      other of paper and appears to have  left  detention  in  circumstances
      that make it overwhelmingly probable that her release  would  only  be
      recorded as a legitimate release if it is recorded at all.

19.   A number of cases before the Tribunal that  have  been  decided  since
      the ceasefire began in February 2002 illustrate in general terms  what
      problems returning failed Tamil asylum seekers are likely to  face  if
      they go back to Sri Lanka.

20.   The first thing to note, as was set out in the  case  of  Jeyachandran
      is that unless somebody is wanted by  the  authorities  for  a  reason
      which the authorities regard as important, they are unlikely to  incur
      any trouble on return.  The number of people  who  are  likely  to  be
      wanted was not thought by the Tribunal in Jeyachandran  to  be  large,
      indeed it was concluded that such persons would be likely to be in  an
      exceptional category of returnee.  The background evidence shows  that
      people who are wanted may be people who  the  authorities  suspect  of
      being involved in particular specific or high profile  crimes,  people
      who are the subject of criminal charge or, perhaps, people with a high
      political profile who have intelligence which the authorities would be
      very anxious to obtain.

21.   It was found by the Adjudicator in this case  at  paragraph  44,  that
      the authorities probably covered their tracks when  releasing  her  by
      listing her disappearance as an escape from custody.  We do  not  know
      why the Adjudicator came to  that  conclusion,  for  findings  of  the
      Tribunal have shown that is not what one would expect the  authorities
      to do when covering their tracks at all.  In  Tharmakumaseelan  [2002]
      UKIAT 0344 the Tribunal found, relying also on earlier authority, that
      bribery related releases, particularly from army custody would not  in
      the absence of some special  and  credible  reason  be  likely  to  be
      treated as escapees.

22.   It seems to us that would be particularly so in this case where  every
      attempt appears to have been made to regularise the claimant's release
      from custody and her departure from the country.

23.   We confess that we cannot see how the Adjudicator could have  come  to
      the conclusion she did about the  likelihood  of  the  claimant  being
      listed as a wanted  person  in  light  of  previous  findings  of  the
      Tribunal, which of course are based n the background evidence of  what
      actually goes on in Sri Lanka.  It could be said that the claimant did
      not escape from army custody but from a prison,  but  we  can  see  no
      reason why different  principles  should  apply  nor  indeed  did  the
      Tribunal in Thamarkumaseelan which found that even if escapes are  not
      from army custody, they are not likely to be recorded as  escapes  for
      the reasons set out in that case.  We thus do not consider that it  is
      at all likely that this claimant would be listed as a wanted person on
      return to Sri Lanka and that despite the fact that  she  was  detained
      for a long while.  She  has  never  been  charged  with  any  criminal
      offence and there is no sign that the authorities  have  retained  any
      interest in her since her departure.

24.   In those circumstances we cannot see how it would be likely  that  she
      would be a person who was either wanted by  the  authorities  or  fell
      into an exceptional category of returnee for  any  other  reason.   In
      those circumstances we consider that the Adjudicator was wrong to find
      in favour of the claimant on her asylum claim and we allow the  appeal
      of the Secretary of State on that point.

25.   We now turn to the other matters on which  the  Adjudicator  found  in
      her favour.  The first of these was in respect of  Article  3  of  the
      Human Rights Convention.  It was stated that her  past  treatment  was
      such and her medical condition was such that on return  to  Sri  Lanka
      she would suffer inhuman or degrading treatment.

26.   Following the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in N [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 1369  we cannot see, as far as Article 3 is  concerned,  that  the
      Adjudicator's finding can possibly be upheld.   This  is  not  a  case
      where the claimant is in the latter stages of a terminal  illness  nor
      is it one, as it seems to us, where the  humanitarian  appeal  of  the
      case is so powerful that it could not be reasonably  resisted  by  the
      authorities of a civilised state.  The claimant is ill and has  mental
      problems, ones which are perfectly  understandable  in  light  of  the
      treatment that she has undergone  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities.  It would be distressing for her to  return,  even  to  a
      country where she is no longer being sought by the authorities and  is
      no longer at real risk of persecution or other inhuman treatment,  but
      her condition comes nowhere near the sort of level of  extremity  that
      has to be satisfied before Article 3 could  successfully  be  invoked.
      On this ground also we allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

27.   We turn now to Article 8 which is pursued  in  two  distinct  ways  in
      this case.  It is convenient to deal first with that aspect of Article
      8 which is concerned with her health rather than with her family.

28.   Here reliance is placed upon the recent  authority  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840.   In  that  case  the  Court  of
      Appeal concluded at paragraph 22:

           "22.   We suggest that in order to determine whether an  Article
           8 claim is  capable  of  being  engaged  in  the  light  of  the
           territoriality principle the claim should be considered  in  the
           following way.  First, the claimant's case in  relation  to  his
           private life in the deporting state should be  examined.   In  a
           case where the essence of  the  claim  is  that  expulsion  will
           interfere with his private life by  harming  his  mental  health
           this will include consideration of what he says about his mental
           health in the deporting country, the treatment he receives there
           and any relevant support that he  says  that  he  enjoys  there.
           Secondly it will be necessary to look at what he says is  likely
           to happen to his mental health in the  receiving  country,  what
           treatment he can expect to receive there and what support he can
           expect to enjoy.  The third step is to determine whether on  the
           claimant's case serious harm to his mental health will be caused
           or materially contributed  to  by  the  difference  between  the
           treatment and support that  he  is  enjoying  in  the  deporting
           country and that which will be available to him in the receiving
           country.  If  so,  then  the  territoriality  principle  is  not
           infringed and the claim is capable of being engaged.


           23.  The degree of harm must be sufficiently serious  to  engage
           Article 8.  There must be a sufficiently adverse affect  on  the
           physical and mental integrity and not merely on health.  ...


           25.  Even if a  removal  case  engages  Article  8(1)  there  is
           Article 8(2) to consider.  ...


           41.  When it comes to deciding how much weight to  give  to  the
           policy  of  maintaining   effective   immigration   policy   the
           Adjudicator should pay very careful deference to the view of the
           Secretary of State as to the importance of  maintaining  such  a
           policy. ..."

29.   It will be noted that what was stated  in  Razgar  quite  clearly  was
      that before Article 8 is engaged at all there must be  a  sufficiently
      adverse affect on what is described as physical and mental  integrity,
      not merely an affect on health.

30.   It seems from comments in N and also  from  what  was  said  by  Simon
      Brown LJ in Djali, that Article 8 claims appear to have  been  decided
      on a different and less stringent approach to the responsibilities  of
      the United Kingdom towards persons making claims than those  who  were
      suffering from purely physical illnesses rather than mental disorders.
       Simon Brown LJ went so far as to say that it would seem  to  be  very
      odd if a markedly more generous  approach  were  brought  to  bear  in
      respect of those suffering mentally rather than  physically.   Perhaps
      an example of an approach which would not have succeeded in respect of
      a physical ailment can be seen in the case of Januzi [2003]  EWCA  Civ
      1187 which of course was decided after Razgar but before N or Djali.

31.   The apparent discrepancy is or may be explained by what  was  said  by
      Lord Justice Simon Brown at paragraph 29 of Djali, in a judgment  with
      which both other members of the Court of Appeal agreed.   Simon  Brown
      LJ held as follows:

           "True it is that in Bensaid v UK [2001] 33EHRR 205 the ECtHR  in
           paragraph 46 of its judgment  referred  to  the  possibility  of
           there being an Article 8 breach "where  there  are  sufficiently
           adverse effects on physical and moral integrity".  Paragraph  47
           however indicates what the Court there had in mind:


           47.  Private life is a broad term not susceptible to  exhaustive
           definition. The Court has already held  that  elements  such  as
           gender identification, name and sexual  orientation  and  sexual
           life are important elements in the personal sphere protected  by
           Article 8.  Mental health must also be  regarded  as  a  crucial
           part of  private  life  associated  with  the  aspect  of  moral
           integrity.   Article  8  protects  the  right  to  identity  and
           personal development and the  right  to  establish  and  develop
           relationships with other human beings in the outside world.  The
           preservation  of  mental  stability  is  in  that   context   an
           indispensable pre-condition to effect employment of the right to
           respect of the private life".

      Interference with sexual orientation  or  sexual  life  may  adversely
      affect physical integrity;  not, however,  in  this  context  physical
      health."  [emphasis added]

      It seems to us that what the Court of Appeal are saying there is  that
      it is with the context of a right to  identity,  personal  development
      and the establishment of development of relationships that the Article
      is concerned rather than with issues that  go  to  health,  which  are
      properly the subject of Article 3.

32.   If that be  the  case  then  Razgar  is  of  very  much  more  limited
      application than might have been thought but we cannot see how else to
      interpret what the Court of Appeal are here saying.  We are  fortified
      in our view that that is what the Court of Appeal are saying and  that
      that does represent the law in this country by consideration  of  what
      was said by Laws LJ in N at paragraph 38:

           "38.  I am bound to declare with great respect, that as a matter
           of principle I have much difficulty with the  case  of  D.   The
           contrast between the relative well-being accorded in a signatory
           state to a very sick person who for a while, even a long  while,
           is accommodated there, and the  scarcities  of  grave  hardships
           which, without any violation of international law, he would face
           if he were returned home, is to my mind - even if  the  contrast
           is very great - an extremely fragile basis upon which to erect a
           legal duty upon the state to confirm  or  extend  the  right  to
           remain in its territory, a duty unsupported by any  decision  or
           policy adopted by the democratic arm, executive  or  legislature
           of the state's government.  The elaboration of  the  immigration
           policy, with all that implies for the  constituency  of  persons
           for who within its territory a civilised  state  will  undertake
           many social obligations is a paradigm of the  responsibility  of
           elected  government.   One  readily  understands  that  such   a
           responsibility  may  be  qualified  by   a   supervening   legal
           obligation arising under ECHR where a person in question  claims
           to be protected from torture or other mistreatment in  his  home
           country in violation of the Article 3 standards,  especially  if
           it would be meted out to him at the hands of the state.   But  a
           claim to be protected from  the  harsh  effects  of  a  want  of
           resources, albeit made harsher by its contrast  with  facilities
           available in the host country, is  to  my  mind  something  else
           altogether.  The idea of the "living instrument" which is a well-
           accepted  characterisation  of  the   ECHR   (and   some   other
           international texts dealing with  rights)  no  doubt  gives  the
           Convention a necessary elastic quality, so that its  application
           is never too distant from the  spirit  of  the  times.   I  have
           difficulty in seeing that it should stretch so far as to  impose
           on the signatory states forms of obligation  only  different  in
           kind  from  anything  contemplated  in  the   scope   of   their
           agreement."

      Laws LJ then went on to point out that since D had  been  decided  the
      Court had avoided any extension of the exceptional  category  of  case
      which it represented.

33.   If D represents an extension beyond  which  the  Court  has  shown  no
      willingness to go in imposing an obligation on  a  host  country  then
      logically  Article  8  cannot  be  interpreted  as  imposing  such  an
      obligation because  it  is  much  wider  in  scope,  as  it  has  been
      interpreted in Razgar if Razgar truly does refer to mental or physical
      health rather than the very limited kind of circumstance that it would
      apply to if the interpretation of Simon Brown LJ in Djali is  correct.
      We find ourselves in some difficulty  in  interpreting  Article  8  in
      light of recent authorities but we have concluded  that  we  must  now
      hold that it bears a restricted meaning of  being  referable  only  to
      cases where physical or moral integrity  as defined by Simon Brown  LJ
      are harmed and that it does not have an implication where physical  or
      mental  health  are   concerned;    Article   3   deals   with   those
      circumstances.

34.   Thus we would allow the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
      Article 8 health ground.

35.   That leaves the Article 8 family ground.

36.   If the claimant were to go to Sri Lanka she  would  be  in  a  country
      where she says, and there is  no  reason  to  doubt  it,  she  has  no
      immediate family members left, her husband being presumed to be  dead.
      It could also be said that her son-in-law could not  visit  Sri  Lanka
      because he is a refugee in this  country.   We  know  nothing  of  his
      history and nothing of the problems that he would face  on  return  to
      Sri Lanka now because it appears that he was classified as  a  refugee
      before the ceasefire, but we must assume on  the  material  before  us
      that it would be expecting too much to expect him to go to Sri  Lanka.
      We are not aware that her daughter would face an  insuperable  problem
      in making a visit to Sri Lanka but yet again we will assume that there
      would be difficulties in that taking place because of her relationship
      to her husband.  We do  not  go  so  far  as  to  say  they  would  be
      insurmountable but they would exist.  In  those  circumstances  it  is
      unlikely that the claimant would be  visited  by  her  family  in  Sri
      Lanka.  That does not stop her making an application to  come  to  the
      United Kingdom to visit her family here r.  The only impediment in her
      way of doing that would be financial, and that is an impediment  faced
      by many  families  that  are  split  because  of  migration.   If  her
      circumstances are such that when in Sri Lanka she is  only  subsisting
      because of support from this country and they can be said to  be  ones
      that as a matter of  compassion  require  that  the  family  are  back
      together then she may make an application under Rule  3171(e)  of  the
      Immigration Rules to settle in the United Kingdom and her  application
      will be dealt with in the ordinary way.

37.   We cannot see in the circumstances of  this  case  that  it  would  be
      disproportionate to apply the ordinary immigration rules to this case,
      for if it is a case deserving of the most compassionate  consideration
      she will be permitted to come to the United Kingdom;   if  it  is  not
      then she would be in the position of many other parents who are  under
      65 but who have families in the United Kingdom;  she will be permitted
      to visit but not to settle.

38.   On this ground also therefore we allow the appeal of the Secretary  of
      State.

39.   In conclusion the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  allowed  in  its
      entirety from the determination of the Adjudicator.






                                                   His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                                              Vice President






