
ar
   BE (Military service - Punishment - Landmines) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00183


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing  : 26 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 8 July 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                               Mr M W Rapinet
                        His Honour Judge N Huskinson




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
Miss S. Naik  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Newcastle  Law  Centre  for  the
appellant;   Mr S. Halliday for the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This case is reported for the analysis it contains of the question  of
      whether and in what circumstances punishment of a soldier for refusing
      to plant anti-personnel  landmines  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution.

   2.  The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Iran.  He  appeals   against   a
      determination of an Adjudicator, David A.W.H.  Chandler,  refusing  to
      grant leave to enter on asylum grounds.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
      account.  In 1998 the appellant did his military  service.  After  two
      years he joined the regular army, becoming a  sergeant.  His  training
      was in the laying and removing of land mines. In September 1998 he was
      sent to Iranian Kurdistan based in Paveh and Baneh where he spent  two
      weeks. He was ordered to plant landmines but he refused because he did
      not want to kill innocent people in Kurdistan. He escaped.  After  six
      months he was arrested and tried  by  a  military  tribunal.   He  was
      sentenced to three months imprisonment and demoted. In  June  1999  he
      was sent back to Kurdistan as a driver. In September 1999 a  colleague
      was killed by the army for refusing to plant landmines.  A week  later
      he was ordered to plant  landmines  again.  After  discussion  with  a
      friend he saw his choice as being either to plant landmines as ordered
      or to desert. Since he believed that to plant landmines would endanger
      civilians, he deserted. First he went into hiding and then came to the
      UK via Turkey.

4.       The Adjudicator did not consider that  the  appellant's  punishment
      of imprisonment for three months following the sentence of a  military
      tribunal was persecutory. He pointed out  that  the  appellant  was  a
      serving soldier and must have been aware of the possible  consequences
      of his action.  In relation to the appellant's desertion in June 1998,
      however, he did accept that he  "understandably was very frightened of
      the  consequences". He then wrote:

             "I  accept  he  still  has  a  well-founded   fear   of   such
             consequences should he be returned to Iran.  But that  is  not
             the end of the matter.  The fear has to be persecution  for  a
             Convention reason."

5.        He then went on to find, by  reference  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in Sepet and Bulbul that  the  appellant  could  not  show  a
      Refugee Convention reason, whether of political opinion or any  other.
      He concluded:

             "Having decided this I  do  not  regard  it  as  necessary  to
             consider whether or not his fear is of  persecution.   A  very
             similar issue arises in his human rights  appeal  and  I  will
             deal with it there."

6.    When he turned to consider the human grounds of  appeal,  he  accepted
      that as a deserter the appellant might well face  a  stiffer  sentence
      than for his first offence when he went absent without leave.  He  did
      not accept, however, that either the length of  the  sentence  or  the
      conditions  he  would  face  in  prison  would  cross  the  Article  3
      threshold.

7.    The Adjudicator also considered, in  the  light  of  Article  6,  that
      whilst the trial the appellant could face before a  military  tribunal
      might be wanting in some respects,  in  particular  he  might  not  be
      afforded legal representation, it would not  amount  to  a   "flagrant
      denial" of a fair trial. He also rejected submissions based on Article
      9.

8.    Miss Naik conceded that in the light of the Court of  Appeal  judgment
      in Ullah [2003] Imm AR 304 any issues arising under  Articles 6 and  9
      only retained force insofar as they  had  a  bearing  on  whether  the
      appellant was at risk on return of treatment contrary to Article 3.

9.    With this proviso, Miss Naik contended that the Adjudicator had  erred
      in his assessment under both the Refugee and Human Rights  Convention.
       She did not contend that upon return the appellant would  once  again
      be ordered to plant landmines in the same area of Iran or in the  same
      circumstances. Given that the last incident occurred over  five  years
      ago, we think she was right not to maintain such an unduly speculative
      contention. She did, however, maintain  that  the  Adjudicator  should
      have accepted that the sentencing and punishment the  appellant  would
      face would be disproportionate, by virtue of the fact that his offence
      was one of refusal to obey orders which were illegal as  a  matter  of
      international law.  The  illegality  of  the  order  would  also,  she
      submitted  give  rise  to  a  Refugee  Convention  reason  of  imputed
      political opinion.

  10.  Miss  Naik  also  submitted   that  since  on  the  occasion  of  the
      appellant's previous detention in a military prison, he had been  kept
      for  a  period  of  three  months  in  solitary  confinement,  it  was
      reasonably likely he would again face oppressive prison conditions. In
      assessing the length of his detention one had also to factor in likely
      sentence for his illegal exit from Iran. Also relevant  was  the  fact
      that he had previously been held in Evin prison, which  was  notorious
      for ill-treatment of its inmates.


  11.  Mr  Halliday  urged  the  Tribunal  to   uphold   the   Adjudicator's
      determination. The appellant was a deserter. He had joined the regular
      army and must have known that his training as a  landmines  specialist
      would lead to him being asked to lay them in areas Iran wished to keep
      safe from illegal intrusions  into  its  own  territory.  He  had  not
      explored or taken the option open to him earlier to buy  himself  out.
      He had made no real complaint  against  his  detention  on  the  first
      occasion and there was no reason to expect  he  would  face  any  more
      arduous custodial treatment in the future.  The  Adjudicator  did  not
      find that the  appellant's  friend  had  been  killed,  only  that  he
      subjectively believed he had been killed.


Our Conclusions

  12. We do not consider the Adjudicator  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
      likely conditions the appellant would face in detention. Whilst prison
      conditions in Iran are poor, the Tribunal has not considered that they
      cross the threshold of serious harm:  see Fazilat [2002] UKIAT  00973.
      Following the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Harari  [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 807 and  Batayav [2003] EWCA Civ 1489, it is clear that  in  order
      to show prison conditions would give rise to a real  risk  of  serious
      harm, it is necessary to show a consistent pattern of gross,  flagrant
      or mass violations of the human rights of prisoners.  In our view  the
      objective country materials relating to Iran  did  not  (and  do  not)
      establish such a pattern.

  13. Furthermore, even assuming the appellant would be reasonably likely to
      once again face  some  period  of  solitary  confinement,  we  do  not
      understand solitary confinement per  se  to  be  contrary  to  Art  3,
      although depending on its extent and the  conditions  under  which  it
      occurs it may be: see the European Court of Human Rights  judgment  in
      GB v Bulgaria Appcln. No. 00042346/98, judgment 11 March  2004,  paras
      84-87.  Also  relevant  in  our  view  is  that   despite   previously
      experiencing solitary confinement and doing so  in  Evin  prison,  the
      appellant on his own account had been fed and he did not state that he
      found the conditions inhuman or degrading. Certainly Evin prison has a
      record where  torture  and  ill-treatment  of  inmates  happens  to  a
      significant  extent;  but   as   the   appellant's   own   experiences
      demonstrate, such treatment is not necessarily routine in  respect  of
      all prisoners, and his offence was one  of  desertion,  not  of  being
      active in political organisations bent on subversion.

  14.  In relation to the likely period of imprisonment, Miss Naik  was  not
      able to identity any evidence to suggest that the length  of  sentence
      would in itself be disproportionate as a penalty for desertion.

15.   Did the Adjudicator err nevertheless in his treatment of the  military
      tribunal process of punishment which  would  precede  the  appellant's
      incarceration?  He stated (when dealing with  the  Article  9  issue),
      that: "So far I  have  avoided  having  to  make  a  decision  on  the
      correctness of the appellant's behaviour and will continue to do  so."
      He decided, that is to say, not to evaluate the rights and  wrongs  of
      the conduct which was likely to lead to punishment under Iranian law.

16.   In our view  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  think  he  could  avoid
      evaluation of the appellant's military misconduct entirely. The  issue
      he had to decide was not, as he thought, solely one of "morality". Nor
      was it simply one of national law. It was also  one  of  international
      law. The Adjudicator did not have the benefit of the  House  of  Lords
      judgment in Sepet and Bulbul [2003] 1 WLR 856;  but he  did  have  the
      earlier judgment of the Court of Appeal in this case [2000] ImmAR 445,
      which  had made clear that although conscientious  objection,  partial
      or absolute, could not ground a claim to persecution,  there  remained
      three exceptions which could. These related to abusive  conditions  of
      military service, disproportionate  punishment  and  participation  in
      military actions contrary to the basic laws of  human  conduct.  These
      exceptions - particularly the  last-mentioned  -  have  been  analysed
      further in the Tribunal case of B (Russia) [2003] UKIAT  00020 and  in
      the Court of Appeal judgment  in  Krotov  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  69  which
      approved B.  In Krotov the Court of Appeal stated:

             'If a court or tribunal was satisfied:


             (a)  that the level  and  nature  of  the  conflict,  and  the
                 attitude of the relevant governmental authority towards it,
                 had reached a position  where combatants were or  might  be
                 required on a  sufficiently  widespread  basis  to  act  in
                 breach of  the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct  generally
                 recognised by the international community'


             (b)  that they would be punished for refusing to do so and


             (c)  that  disapproval  of  such  methods  and  fear  of  such
                 punishment was the genuine reason motivating the refusal of
                 an asylum seeker to serve in the relevant conflict,


             then  it  should  find  that  a  Convention  ground  had  been
             established.'

17.    How  do  the  principles  clarified  in  these  cases  apply  to  the
      appellant's case?

18.   Before we can answer  this  question  it  is  necessary  to  establish
      whether the orders whose refusal in the form of desertion  would  lead
      to the appellant's  actual  or  likely  punishment  were  contrary  to
      international law.

  19. The Adjudicator found that the  appellant  had  been  ordered  on  two
      separate occasions to plant landmines in an  area  which  he  believed
      would put civilians in peril. Mr Halliday sought at one point to argue
      that the Adjudicator`s finding that  the  appellant  believed  he  was
      being required to plant landmines in an area where civilians lived did
      not equate to an acceptance that this was objectively the  case.   His
      argument is lent some support by the fact that  at  paragraph  22  the
      Adjudicator sought to limit his finding in respect to the  appellant's
      claim that his colleague had been shot for refusing to plant landmines
      to the fact that this was only what the appellant believed. It is also
      lent some support by the lack of any specific  objective  evidence  to
      show that at this particular time the Iranian authorities had  planted
      anti-personnel land mines in this region with the deliberate intent of
      harming civilians or being reckless of harming them.  Indeed  we  note
      that the Iran Landmine Monitor Report 2003 produced under the auspices
      of the UN Development Programme pursuant to an agreement with Iran  in
      July 2002 to help develop a mine action strategy and provide  training
      in various aspects of mine action, makes reference to  a  Ministry  of
      Foreign Affairs official writing that the territories where  landmines
      were used were "uninhabited territories ...clearly known to  the  non-
      military populace, and  those  who  take  the  risk  of  entering  the
      minefields are none but the military personnel".


  20. However, the Adjudicator did not seek to qualify his findings  in  the
      way Mr Halliday has suggested. At para 23 he  made  reference  to  the
      appellant  having  a  "well-founded  fear"  of  the  consequences   of
      disobeying the order given to him. It is also  relevant  in  our  view
      that the Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was  trained  to  lay
      and remove landmines: it was not a case, therefore, of a  soldier  who
      refused to plant landmines per se. We also note that at  paragraph  18
      the Adjudicator said the appellant was "in a better position  than  I"
      to determine this matter.

  21. Accordingly we consider that we can treat the Adjudicator`s finding of
      fact as being that the appellant had been ordered to  plant  landmines
      and had refused because he genuinely believed it  might  lead  to  the
      death of innocent civilians

  22. Whether the Adjudicator intended further to find  that  the  appellant
      had valid reasons for his genuine belief that he was being ordered  to
      endanger civilian life is more difficult to say. Given  the  statement
      cited earlier from the Iranian Ministry of Foreign  Affairs  official,
      it is clear that the Iranian authorities at least  would  very  likely
      dispute that there was any intention to harm civilians  or  even  that
      civilians were harmed.  However,  we  note  that  the  same  Landmines
      Monitor report does record a small but significant number of civilians
      killed by mines, stating at one point that "according to several media
      reports, every year dozens of shepherds and local residents are killed
      or injured by mines in the border regions". Furthermore, it  is  clear
      that both as a result of the Iran-Iraq war and of ongoing  efforts  to
      combat  organised  international  drug  smuggling  rings   and   anti-
      government terrorist groups along Iran's borders, there are plainly  a
      very high number of landmines still uncleared in  Iran  and  over  1.8
      million hectares of Iran are still infested with landmines.

  23.  We may summarise the objective  evidence  yielded  by  the  Landmines
      Monitor report as follows. During the relevant period: (i) the Iranian
      government, whilst condemning landmines as inhumane weapons, confirmed
      that it has used and would go on using them to protect its borders and
      to combat drug smugglers and terrorists;   (ii)  areas  it  had  mined
      included the province of  Kurdistan  (the  area  referred  to  by  the
      appellant);   and  (iii)  there  have  been  civilian  casualties   in
      Kurdistan.

  24. Given the Adjudicator's acceptance of the appellant's credibility  and
      in the light of these background facts,  we  are  prepared  to  accept
      that, whatever the position generally, the appellant was asked on  the
      particular occasion in question to obey an order whose carrying out he
      had valid reasons for considering would result in endangering civilian
      life.


  25. However, it remains to consider the implications for the appellant  of
      the punishment he would receive for refusing to obey  such  an  order.
      The argument relied upon in the grounds is that the consequence  would
      be the exposure of the appellant to  serious  harm/persecution,  since
      such an order was contrary to international law.

  26. Miss Naik, by reference to the Court of Appeal judgment in Krotov  and
      the threefold requirements set out earlier, sought to argue  first  of
      all that it  was  self-evident  the  appellant  met  the  requirements
      identified as (b) and  (c).  We  agree.  The  appellant  stood  to  be
      punished for refusing to obey the order and his refusal was  motivated
      by genuine reasons.

  27. The only remaining issue, therefore,  is  whether  she  was  right  to
      submit that the appellant also met the requirement set out in  (a)  to
      show that the conduct the appellant would have to undertake  would  be
      contrary to international law. To be more specific the test set out in
      Krotov is:

                    'that the level and nature of  the  conflict,  and  the
                 attitude of the relevant governmental authority towards it,
                 had reached a position where combatants were  or  might  be
                 required on a  sufficiently  widespread  basis  to  act  in
                 breach of  the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct  generally
                 recognised by the international community'


  28. After careful consideration we are unable to agree with Miss Naik that
      the order which the  appellant  refused  to  obey  was  one  that  was
      contrary to international law.


  29. In examining this issue we have to  bear  in  mind,  of  course,  that
      international law comprises not  just  international  treaty  law  but
      customary international law: see Roberts and Guelff, Documents on  the
      Laws of War, 3RD Ed, 2000 p. 7ff.  Also  salient  in  identifying  the
      global scale of the problem posed by landmines is what is said in this
      text at p.655:

             "In a report  based  on  US  and  UN  sources,  Anti-personnel
             Landmines: Friend or Foe - A Study of the Military Use of Anti-
             personnel Mines, published by the ICRC in March 1996,  it  was
             estimated  that  there  were  about  100  million   land-mines
             scattered  throughout  sixty-four  countries,  killing   about
             thirty people a day and injuring over thirty-five, many of the
             casualties being civilians".


  30. As regards the  relevant  international  treaty  law,  there  are  two
      specific international instruments of recent  origin  which  proscribe
      the planting  of  landmines  so  as  to  endanger  civilian  life,  in
      particular: Protocol 2 (on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the use  of
      Mines, Booby or Other Devices, in force since December  1998)  of  the
      1980 UN Convention on Prohibitions  or  Restrictions  on  the  Use  of
      Certain Conventional Weapons Which May be  Deemed  to  be  Excessively
      Injurious or to Have  Indiscriminate  Effects;  and  the  1997  Ottawa
      Convention on the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer  of  Anti-
      Personnel Mines and on their  Destruction  (in  force  since  1  March
      1999): this is known as the Mine Ban Treaty. Unlike the principles set
      out in Protocol 2 of the 1980 Convention, which are not applicable  in
      non-international armed conflicts, the 1997 Ottawa Convention or  Mine
      Ban Treaty prohibitions apply in peacetime as well as in situations of
      armed conflict. Art 1 of the 1997 Convention prohibits the use  "under
      any circumstances" of anti-personnel mines.

  31. There is also Common Article 3 under the four 1949 Geneva Conventions.
       The most relevant of these  is  Geneva  Convention  Relative  to  the
      Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, 1949 (IV). It states at
      Article 3:

             'In the  case  of  armed  conflict  not  of  an  international
             character occurring in the  territory  of  one  of  the   High
             Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict shall be bound
             to apply as a minimum, the following provisions:


             (1)  Persons  taking  no  active  part  in  the   hostilities,
                 including members of armed forces who have laid down  their
                 arms and those placed hors de combat by  sickness,  wounds,
                 detention, or any other cause, shall in  all  circumstances
                 be  treated  humanely,  without  any  adverse   distinction
                 founded on race, colour, religion or faith, sex,  birth  or
                 wealth, or any other similar criteria.


                 To this end,  the  following  acts  are  and  shall  remain
                 prohibited at any time and in  any  place  whatsoever  with
                 respect to the abovementioned persons:


                 (a) violence to life and person, in particular       murder
                    of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
                 (b)  taking of hostages;
                 (c)   outrages  upon  personal   dignity,   in   particular
                    humiliation and degrading treatment;
                 (d) the passing  of  sentences  and  the  carrying  out  of
                    executions without previous  judgment  pronounced  by  a
                    regularly constituted court affording all  the  judicial
                    guarantees which  are  recognised  as  indispensable  by
                    civilised peoples.


             (2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.


             An impartial humanitarian  body,  such  as  the  International
             Committee of the Red Cross, may  offer  its  services  to  the
             Parties in the conflict.


             The Parties to the conflict should further endeavour to  bring
             into force, by means of special agreements, all or part of the
             other provisions of the present Convention.


             The application of the preceding provisions shall  not  affect
             the legal status of the Parties to the conflict.'

32.   As regards common Article 3, it is possible to say that  this  is  now
      accepted to be a peremptory  norm under customary  international  law:
      see the judgment of the International Criminal Tribunal in the  Former
      Yugoslavia (ICTY): Prosecutor v Tadic, Appeal on Jurisdiction, No. IT-
      94-1-AR-72 (Oct 2 1995); Prosecutor v Tadic, Sentencing  Judgment  No.
      IT-94-1-T (Nov 11, 1999) 39 ILM 119 (2000).

33.   However, insofar as the treaties, which specifically address  the  use
      of land mines, are concerned, the evidence before us is that Iran  has
      not signed or ratified either of the treaties concerned.  Indeed,  the
      Landmines Monitor Report 2003 states that since Iran regards landmines
      as a "necessary evil", it  has  refused  to  accept  a  total  ban  on
      landmines and it has also abstained from voting on every pro-mine  ban
      UN  General  Assembly   resolution   since   1996.   Plainly   through
      participation in the UN Development Programme it  is  now  playing  an
      active role in mine clearance and mine  education  in  some  areas  of
      Iran, but its use of landmines, particularly  in  border  regions,  is
      ongoing.

  34. As regards Common Art 3, however, Iran has ratified  the  1949  Geneva
      Conventions (albeit not the  two  Additional  Protocols  to  the  1949
      Geneva Conventions) and, in any event, as already noted Common  Art  3
      is now to be regarded as part of customary international law and so of
      binding effect even in the absence of state ratification.

  35. But the difficulty remains for this appellant that Common Art  3  does
      not apply to every situation in which landmines are used.   It depends
      crucially on whether there is (or was) in existence an internal  armed
      conflict.

36.    At  this  point  we  need  to  clarify  the   current   international
      humanitarian law (IHL) classification of armed conflicts.  It  is  not
      straightforward.   That   partly   reflects   a   concern   that   the
      characterisations given to armed conflicts takes sufficient cognisance
      of variations in the way such conflicts are fought on the ground:  see
      e.g. Avril Macdonald, "Introduction to International Humanitarian  Law
      and the Qualification of Armed Conflicts" in P  J  Van  Krieken  (ed),
      Refugee Law in  Context:  The  Exclusion  Clause  (The  Hague,  1999).
      Nevertheless it can be seen that conflicts fall into five categories:


        i) traditional international armed conflicts.
           These are defined in Common Art 2 as "all cases of declared  war
           or any other armed conflict between two or more High Contracting
           Parties, even if the state of war is not recognised  by  one  of
           them".  This provision also applies "to all cases of partial  or
           total occupation of the territory of a High  Contracting  Party,
           even if the said occupation meets  with  no  armed  resistance".
           The Fourth Geneva Convention deals in detail with occupation and
           the treatment of the inhabitants.

       ii) armed conflicts in the context of racist  and  colonial  regimes
           and alien occupation.
           Art 1(4) of the Additional  Protocol  I  of  1977  expanded  the
           concept of international armed conflict described in common  Art
           2 of the 1949 Conventions to include "armed conflicts  in  which
           people  are  fighting  against  colonial  domination  and  alien
           occupation and against racist regimes in the exercise  of  their
           right to self-determination, as enshrined in the Charter of  the
           United  Nations   and   the   Declaration   on   Principles   of
           International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
           among States in  accordance  with  the  Charter  of  the  United
           Nations".

      iii) armed conflicts between a State and organised armed groups under
           responsible command.
           Additional Protocol II applies a limited range of  international
           standards to situations of internal confrontation that  reach  a
           certain level of intensity. However, its obvious application  to
           civil wars is limited by the requirement  that  it  only  covers
           conflicts where the organised armed groups meet the criteria  of
           responsible command, control  over  territory  and  capacity  to
           implement the Protocol.

       iv) Common Article 3  conflicts  under  the  1949  Conventions  (see
           paragraph 31  below).

        v) internal disturbances and tensions, such as riots, isolated  and
           sporadic acts of violence or other acts of a similar nature.

      This final category marks as it were the threshold below which  Common
      Art 3 does not apply,  because  the  level  of  internal  violence  is
      insufficiently high.


37.   Albeit this five-fold classification is not  simple,  it  is  possible
      for refugee law purposes to simplify its applicable provisions in  the
      following way. Whenever internal armed conflict is above the  internal
      strife threshold, it is subject to the peremptory  norms  set  out  in
      Common Art 3. More extensive norms may apply in the case of  conflicts
      falling within the first three  categories.  But  where  the  internal
      armed conflict  falls  below  the  common  Article  3  threshold,  its
      peremptory norms do not apply.

38. We draw from this background that the appellant in this  case  can  only
   succeed if he can show that when the order was given to him in  September
   1999 there was in existence in  that  part  of  Iran  an  internal  armed
   conflict at least meeting the (relatively low) threshold requirements  of
   Common Article 3.

39. However, in this regard none of the background evidence  has  identified
   the existence of any such level of conflict in Iran at the relevant time.
   Nor was there any evidence that the ICRC had qualified the  circumstances
   at issue as a non-international armed conflict covered by Common  Art  3.
   In our view these  lacunae are fatal to the  appellant's  case.  We  find
   that during the relevant period, the order given  to  this  appellant  to
   plant landmines was not one which was illegal either  under  the  law  of
   Iran or under any applicable international law. Even  though  we  earlier
   criticised the Adjudicator for his attempt to avoid any evaluation of the
   rights and wrongs of the order given to the appellant and his response to
   it, we must ultimately agree with him  that,  whilst  it  was  one  which
   offended basic morality, it was not one whose refusal to obey  can  bring
   the appellant within the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the
   Human  Rights  Convention  by  virtue  of  being  or  order  contrary  to
   international law.

40.   Since the order was not contrary to national or international law,  it
      cannot be said either that punishment imposed in view of a refusal  to
      obey it by way of desertion would be illegitimate or disproportionate.



41.   Thus the punishment concerned would  not  involve  the  infliction  of
      serious harm either under the Refugee Convention or Art 3.  Nor  would
      it involve flagrant denial of any other protected human right.

42.   One matter which exercised us during our consideration  of  this  case
      was  its  apparent  similarity  with  an  important   Canadian   case,
      Zolfarkharghani [1993] 3 FC 540 in which it was held that an   Iranian
      paramedic who had deserted from the army because he did not want to be
      part of using chemical weapons against the Kurds contrary to the Hague
      Convention of 1879 and 1907 and customary international law. MacGuigin
      J held that  use  of  chemical  weapons  "is  clearly  judged  by  the
      international community  to  be  contrary  to  basic  rules  of  human
      conduct, and consequently the ordinary  Iranian  conscription  law  of
      general application as applied to a conflict in which Iran intended to
      use chemical weapons, amounts to persecution for  political  opinion."
      However, we decided that irrespective of  whether  this  judgment  was
      entirely consonant with leading  UK  cases,  there  was  a  clear  and
      important point of distinction. The situation  in  the  Canadian  case
      concerned adverse consequences resulting from a refusal to  engage  in
      conduct at a time when  there  was  an  international  armed  conflict
      taking place between two separate states: Iran and Iraq. Thus it was a
      situation in which there was a level of armed  conflict  (well)  above
      the minimum Common Art 3 threshold. That was not  the  situation  with
      which we were faced in this case.

43.    We should perhaps clarify further  that  had  we  accepted  that  the
      order given to the  appellant  to  plant  landmines  was  contrary  to
      international law, we may also have had to consider the  position  the
      appellant would have been faced with had he chosen to obey the  order:
      he would not necessarily have been relieved of international  criminal
      responsibility by the fact that he had been  ordered  to  plant  these
      landmines. At international  law  the  fact  that  a  crime  has  been
      committed by a person pursuant to an order of a superior  can  relieve
      that person of criminal responsibility, but that  exemption  does  not
      apply when the person knows that the order was unlawful. The appellant
      in this case was adamant  that  he  knew  the  order  would  have  the
      consequences of killing  and  harming  civilians  and  that  this  was
      unlawful. The appellant would then have been  in  a  wholly  invidious
      position. However, since we have found that the order was not illegal,
      this dimension to the case did not come into play.

44.   For the sake of completeness, we should also clarify that we have  not
      considered we should  attach  any  importance  in  this  case  to  the
      possible fact that in the course of the military tribunal process  the
      appellant would face, there would be a flagrant denial of his right to
      a fair trial. On his own account he had deserted  as  a  result  of  a
      refusal to carry out an order and he did not at any stage suggest that
      he had not done what he would be charged with.

45.   We should also  clarify  that  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of
      punishment we have taken into account that the  appellant  might  well
      face a fine and/or a short period of  imprisonment  for  violation  of
      Iranian exit regulations. However, in our view this further  dimension
      to likely punishment he  would  face  would  not  render  his  overall
      punishment disproportionate.

46.   One final matter concerns what we noted at paragraph  8 in respect  of
      Art 9 of the ECHR. Since the  hearing  the  House  of  Lords  has  now
      delivered judgment in Ullah, R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator and Do  v
      SSHD [2004]  UKHL 26.   We are sure, had Miss Naik known  the  outcome
      of Ullah, she would not have conceded Art 9 without further  ado.   We
      are equally sure, however, that even under the "flagrant denial"  test
      approved  by  their  lordships  (with   reference   to   the   starred
      determination in Devaseelan [2003]  ImmAR  1),  the  appellant's  case
      under Art 9 fails for very similar reasons  as  it  has  failed  under
      Article 3.
47.   For the above reasons we consider that although criticism can be  made
      of some aspects of  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  his  principal
      conclusions were sustainable.

Summary of Conclusions
48.   In considering whether punishment a person would face for refusing  to
      obey  a  military  order   whilst   a   serving   soldier   would   be
      disproportionate, Adjudicators must follow the principles set  out  by
      the Court of Appeal in Krotov with  some  care.  It  is  important  to
      ascertain whether the order was or was not contrary  to  international
      law. However, it is equally important to bear in mind that the  answer
      to this question must depend on whether or not relevant  international
      law provisions are  applicable  to  the  armed  conflict  or  military
      situation in question. In Iran during the relevant period,  there  was
      no armed conflict reaching  the  Common  Article  3  threshold.   Thus
      international  law  prohibitions  on  the  use  of  landmines  and  on
      avoidance of harm to civilians were not applicable.

48.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.



                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT








