
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        | IB and TK (Sikhs - Risk on |
|On: 16 March 2004          |        |return - Objective evidence)|
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00150                       |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|20 May 2004                                                       |
|Decision reserved                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|FIRST APPELLANT                                                   |
|and                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        | SECOND APPELLANT           |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For  the  First  and  Second  appellants:      Miss  A  Jones  of  Counsel
                                   instructed   by Bhogal Lal, solicitors.
For the respondent:    Miss C Hanrahan, Home Office Presenting  Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant, whom we shall hereafter refer  to  as  B,  is  a
      citizen of Afghanistan and a Sikh born on 25 December 1965 whose home
      in Afghanistan was in Jalalabad.  The second appellant, whom we shall
      hereafter refer to as K, is also a citizen of Afghanistan and a  Sikh
      born on 1 January 1964 whose former home was in Kabul.

2.    B arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 December  2000  accompanied  by
      his wife and three children who are his dependants.  He  applied  for
      asylum and following submission of a statement of evidence  form  and
      an interview that application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
      for the reasons set out in a letter dated 24 September 2002.   On  24
      September 2002 the Secretary  of  State  issued  directions  for  his
      removal to Afghanistan as an illegal entrant  after  refusal  of  his
      asylum application.

3.    K arrived in the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  24  April  2001
      accompanied by his wife  and  two  children  and  claimed  asylum  on
      arrival with them also as his dependants.  He also submitted  a  self
      evidence form and was interviewed by the Secretary of State who  then
      refused his application for the reasons set out in a letter dated  27
      September 2002.  On 11 October 2002 the  Secretary  of  State  issued
      directions for his removal to Afghanistan following refusal of  leave
      to enter after refusal of his asylum application.

   4. Both appellants appealed against those decisions on asylum and  human
      rights grounds.


   5. B's appeal was heard  on  14  March  2003  by  Mr  D  C  Clapham,  an
      Adjudicator, who found him credible in his factual history.  This  is
      sufficiently set out in the refusal letter at paragraphs 2 and  3  as
      follows:

      "2.   You state that you have been persecuted both by the Taliban and
           the  Mujahideen  in  Afghanistan.   You  state  that  you   were
           physically and verbally abused by the Taleban because you are  a
           Sikh,  and  prevented  on  many  occasions  from  attending  the
           Gurudwara.  You state that you were also put under  pressure  to
           convert to Islam.  You state that your father was killed by  the
           Taleban in September 2000 when he was trying to protect you from
           being beaten by then.  You also state that in October  2000  you
           were kidnapped by the Taleban and held for 4-5 days and that you
           were released after a friend of yours paid them.  You also state
           that you were beaten by them whilst they detained you.


      3.    You also state that prior to the arrival of  the  Taleban,  you
           were persecuted by the Mujahideen.   You  state  that  you  were
           taken to the police station and asked  by  them  to  convert  to
           Islam in 1994.  You state however that  you  escaped  during  an
           explosion at  the  police  station.  You  also  state  that  the
           Mujahideen used to come to your house and beat  you  and  demand
           money from you and [you] also  state  that  you  were  asked  to
           convert to Islam on a number of occasions."


6.    The Adjudicator accepted on the facts that he had been persecuted  in
      the past by reason of his religion and race but  concluded  that  the
      situation in Afghanistan had now changed to  the  extent  that  there
      would be no reasonable likelihood that B would be  either  persecuted
      or treated in breach of his protected human rights under Article 3 of
      the European Convention if now returned to his own country.

7.    K's appeal was heard on 4 April 2003 before Mr  H  Macleman,  another
      Adjudicator. His claims are recorded by the Adjudicator at  paragraph
      3 of the determination as follows:

      "3.   In a statement lodged with the Home Office on 29 April 2001 the
           appellant said that he ran a shop in  Kabul.   Problems  started
           when the Mujahideen took control, but  more  particularly  after
           the Taliban came to  power.   They  took  away  the  appellant's
           brother in July 2000.  They demanded $4,000 for his release, but
           when the appellant  made  further  enquiries,  his  brother  had
           disappeared.  On  23  January  2001  the  Taliban  detained  and
           tortured the appellant over a period  of  twenty  days  until  a
           friend paid a bribe for  his  release.   On  14  March  2001  an
           unknown person offered to arrange the family's travel abroad for
           US$22,000.   He  took  this  opportunity.   At   interview   the
           appellant added a few details.  Under the  Taliban  he  was  not
           allowed to pray, was ordered to shave his beard and was insulted
           and abused in public."


8.    Although the second Adjudicator dismissed  the  appeal  also  on  the
      basis of it being safe for Sikhs now to  return  to  Afghanistan,  he
      added that he had not found  K  a  credible  witness  in  significant
      respects which he details as follows:

           "There was no adequate explanation for giving a quite  different
           account of detention at interview as compared with the statement
           or for failing to state he was released on payment of  a  bribe.
           The obvious  conclusion  is  that  he  could  not  remember  the
           statement invented by him or on his behalf.   The  appellant  in
           cross-examination made it clear that it was because of his  lack
           of resources and the general situation in  Afghanistan  that  he
           did not wish to return, not because of any  particular  risk  to
           him."


9.    Both Adjudicators relied on the Tribunal decision  in  Gulati  [2002]
      UKIAT 02130 as authority  for  the  proposition  that  there  was  no
      background evidence on which either  appellant  could  on  the  basis
      simply of being a Sikh establish a well-founded fear  of  persecution
      or risk of ill-treatment contrary to his human rights if returned  to
      Afghanistan.

10.   The main thrust of the grounds of appeal in each case  was  that  the
      Adjudicator had erred in placing undue weight on  the  views  of  the
      Tribunal as expressed in Gulati because he had failed  to  take  into
      account and make any findings on objective material before him  which
      post-dated that decision and which,  it  was  said,  pointed  to  the
      existence of a risk to Sikhs in Afghanistan.  Reliance was placed  on
      an expert report made by Dr  Martin  Lau  to  which  we  shall  refer
      further in due course.  It is sufficient to note at this point we are
      satisfied from what Miss Jones said to us that Dr Lau had  authorised
      the use of that report for the purposes of these appeals.

11.   In the substantial background material which was placed before us for
      the appellants, there were also statements by a Tara Singh Wadwa  and
      Mr Gajinder Singh Safri, both whom had attended  before  us  for  the
      purpose of giving evidence if so  required.   For  the  Secretary  of
      State Miss Hanrahan informed us that she did not  wish  to  challenge
      anything contained in their respective  statements.   We  also  noted
      that in paragraph 8 of the skeleton argument for B it was said:

           "The appellant is from Jalalabad.   He  could  not  be  returned
           there; it is common ground that  Kabul  is  the  only  place  in
           Afghanistan where the rule of law operates.  The appellant would
           be returned to a city where he has no roots or connections."


      We asked Miss Hanrahan if what was asserted there was, indeed, common
      ground between the parties and she conceded that it was and  B  would
      be at real risk of persecution in Jalalabad.


12.   It follows, therefore, that this determination must be  read  on  the
      basis that clear concessions were made on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State in relation to these matters.

13.   Finally, we note at this point that our attention was drawn  also  to
      the Tribunal determination [2003] UKIAT 00057 K  (Afghanistan)  heard
      on 25 July 2003 in which on an appeal by the Secretary of  State  the
      Tribunal  had  considered  at  considerable  length  the   background
      material produced before it in relation to the position of  Sikhs  in
      Kabul  and  had  concluded  that  there  was,  in  general  terms,  a
      sufficiency of protection for Sikhs in Kabul.

13.   Miss Jones made it clear at the outset of her submissions that it was
      not her case that Sikh ethnicity of itself meant that there would  be
      a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Kabul  but  that  in  the
      circumstances of these appellants that would be  the  case  and  they
      would not have a sufficiency of protection there.  In the case of  B,
      the Secretary of State had accepted that  he  would  be  at  risk  in
      Jalalabad, his home area, so that if Kabul was considered to be  safe
      for him for the purposes of relocation, there would be the additional
      issue of whether or not it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to
      return and live there.  These were issues  which  in  her  submission
      could be determined by the Tribunal.  So  far  as  K  was  concerned,
      however, it was her submission that the adverse credibility  findings
      made by Mr Macleman were unsafe and unsustainable and that the proper
      course in his case was for the evidence  to  be  reheard  by  another
      Adjudicator following remittal.

15.   In the course of  submissions  we  were  referred  to  the  following
      specific sources of background evidence:  the report of  Dr  Lau  and
      the statements of Mr Wadwa and Mr Safri; the UNHCR letter of 18  July
      2003 concerning protection concerns for individuals of Sikh faith  in
      Afghanistan; a report of 22  May  2003  by  the  Afghan  Professional
      Alliance for Minority Rights (APAMR) on the Hindu/Sikh  community  in
      Afghanistan; Amnesty International Report of 23  June  2003  "Out  of
      Sight, Out of Mind: the Fate  of  the  Afghan  Returnees";  the  CIPU
      Afghanistan Country Report of October 2003 (contrasted with what  was
      said in the October 2002 Assessment); a letter  of  3  December  2003
      from Mr Ravinder Singh, a member of the  Emergency  Loya  Jirga;  the
      Human Rights Watch Report of  2004  entitled  "Losing  the  Peace  in
      Afghanistan"; and current  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  travel
      advice.

16.   We have made a full record of the helpful submissions  made  by  both
      advocates to us and will refer as appropriate in  this  determination
      to the substance of those submissions.

17.   Miss Jones' primary submission was that Gulati and K  were  based  on
      out-of-date material and that the views expressed there  required  to
      be revisited in the light of the current country material.

18.   In Gulati the Tribunal considered what was said by the  UNHCR  office
      in London in a letter of 21 May 2002. The Tribunal  considered  that,
      from its wording, this letter was intended to refer to those who were
      not refugees under the Convention but was  rather  dealing  with  the
      situation of unsuccessful asylum applicants  and  expressing  a  view
      that in  the  light  of  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  situation  in
      Afghanistan at that time UNHCR was  of  the  view  that  no  enforced
      returns should then be made.  As the Tribunal  noted,  that  did  not
      assist with the issue before them of whether Mr Gulati  had  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  in  Afghanistan
      then.  The Tribunal then considered certain reports in newspapers  in
      December 2001 and February 2002 all of which suggested at  that  time
      the return of Sikhs  to  Afghanistan  would  be  facilitated  by  the
      Afghanistan authorities.

19.      In K the Tribunal considered whether a Sikh woman from Kabul  with
      two infant relatives and a widowed mother-in-law would be at risk  of
      persecution if returned there. The  Tribunal  considered  substantive
      background material as to the general position in Kabul, the majority
      of which dated from 2002, and concluded that  in  general  terms  the
      security situation in Kabul was good. The  Tribunal  then  considered
      the situation of Sikhs in Kabul and said this at paragraphs 14.5  and
      14.6 of its determination:

           "14.5. We were referred to pages A62 and A 63 of the  Claimant's
           bundle. However, in the  main,  this  document  relates  to  the
           problems of Sikhs in a place called Khost in Afghanistan.  There
           is reference, on page A63, to the Sikh community leader in Kabul
           (Autur Singh) saying that "in terms of freedom" their lives were
           much better now and  that  they  had  good  relations  with  the
           officials in Kabul. Although it is true that  he  is  quoted  as
           lamenting the lack of financial support for the Sikh  community,
           as  compared  to  other  communities,  there  is  nothing  which
           suggests that Sikhs are a  persecuted  ethnic  group  in  Kabul.
           Indeed,  we  note  that,  according  to  the  last  sentence  of
           paragraph 6.42 of the CIPU report, four Hindu and Sikh delegates
           who attended the Loya Jirga in June 2002 reported that they were
           no longer repressed and felt free to practise  their  religions.
           Further, in September 2002,  the  UNHCR-Kabul  and  Co-operation
           Centre for Afghanistan confirmed that the situation  for  Hindus
           and Sikhs was generally good; there is  religious  tolerance  of
           these  groups  and  they  have  the  right  to  practise   their
           religions.  The  source  for  this  information  (according   to
           footnote 8c to paragraph 6.43) is the Danish fact-finding report
           from September to October 2002. The Amnesty International Report
           dated 23rd June 2003 in the Claimant's bundle (which  starts  at
           page E17) refers (on page E25) to three Sikh asylum seekers  who
           were forcibly returned by the United Kingdom and who were forced
           to seek shelter in a Sikh temple in Kabul as  they  had  nowhere
           else to go. They reported that they were "singled out for abuse"
           in a market place in Kabul three days after their return. Whilst
           we have  noted  this,  this  does  not  amount  to  evidence  of
           treatment  which  is  sufficiently  severe  as  to   amount   to
           persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3.


           14.6  Although we agree with Mr Patel that paragraphs  6.38  and
           6.39 of the CIPU report are, n general terms, based  on  out-of-
           date sources, we have come to the conclusion, by considering the
           objective evidence relating to the current  situation  which  is
           before us, that Sikhs are  not  a  persecuted  ethnic  group  in
           Kabul. We have concluded, on the evidence before us, that  there
           is no real risk that the Claimant would face treatment amounting
           to persecution or breach of her  Article  3  rights,  simply  on
           account of being a Sikh.

20.   It is clear that the position of the UNHCR United Kingdom office  has
      changed since Gulati and the letter  from  which  we  quote  was  not
      apparently before the Tribunal in K which was heard on 25 July  2003.
      Their letter of 18 July 2003 relates to the question of a  reasonable
      likelihood of persecution and states unequivocally:

           "We  propose  ...  to  highlight  the  protection  and  security
           situation facing Sikhs within the broader context of the current
           situation in Afghanistan.  We also articulate UNHCR's considered
           opinion that as non-Muslim religious minorities in  Afghanistan,
           Sikhs and Hindus are particularly susceptible to persecution  in
           the sense of the 1951 Convention.


           ... In some instances, UNHCR's view of the current situation may
           furnish the elements for establishing  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution under Article 1A(2)  of  the  1951  Convention.   In
           other  instances  involving  the   indiscriminate   effects   of
           widespread violence and disorder, UNHCR's views could contribute
           to a decision to recognise protection needs under  Human  Rights
           instruments, even if protection under  the  1951  Convention  is
           deemed not proven.  The UNHCR's comments are set out in  general
           terms.  It is for the applicant's legal representatives to  draw
           on UNHCR and other sources in order to establish how the  merits
           of the individual case correspond with the  relevant  protection
           criteria."

21.    Dealing  with  the  security  protection  situation  in  Afghanistan
      generally, the letter says this:

           "The general human rights situation remains a  source  of  great
           concern.   The  lack  of  adequate  national  security  and  law
           enforcement capacity and the  weakness  of  the  justice  system
           exacerbate human rights violations.  Abuses are reported in  all
           parts of the country, most often by forces under the control  of
           regional factions or local commanders.  The main features of the
           prevailing security situation are the ongoing military  activity
           against Taliban forces, the continuing 'war on terrorism' by the
           coalition  forces,  and  the  continued  factional  clashes  and
           warfare by local warlords.  There is concern  about  re-grouping
           of Taliban forces in the south east and targeted killings of aid
           workers.  Factional and tribal clashes have led to the  internal
           displacement of civilians and the forcible recruitment of  young
           men from villages in direct contravention of decrees  issued  by
           central  government.   The  military  or  militia  control  [in]
           certain areas is also linked to extortion of money, looting, the
           abduction  of  women,  kidnapping  and  ransoms   and   unlawful
           occupation of land and unlawful control of water.


           All of this makes  for  a  precarious  security  and  protection
           environment in which a number of individuals and groups  are  at
           risk of human rights abuses and persecution.  The rule of law is
           a long way from enjoying full  respect  and  implementation  and
           this has a bearing on  the  question  as  to  whether  effective
           national  protection  is  available  in  Afghanistan.   In  this
           regard, Afghanistan's legal institutions suffer from a  lack  of
           resources while the record of  laws  and  regulations  has  been
           destroyed and much has disappeared during the years of conflict,
           leaving  practitioners  unclear  as  to  the  substance  of  the
           country's law.  Although court systems exist  from  district  to
           national  levels,  the  influence  of  commanders  and  powerful
           figures often renders it impossible for fair and just  decisions
           to be reached over land disputes."


22.   The letter then considers  the  position  of  Sikhs  specifically  as
      follows:

           "The UNHCR's information is that there are some 3,500  Sikh  and
           Hindu families in Afghanistan, mainly living in  Kabul,  Ghazni,
           Kandahar, Helman and Nangahar provinces.  Until 1992,  they  had
           not  suffered  from  discrimination  and  could  exercise  their
           religion freely in the urban centres  where  they  predominantly
           lived.  During the civil war and Taliban  rule,  many  of  their
           temples were destroyed or used as military bases.  The community
           still suffers from the consequences of a more rigorous and  less
           tolerant application of Islamic values  by  the  state  and  the
           various factions in power during the last fourteen years.  As  a
           result, the community still faces various forms of  intimidation
           in public places  and  children  cannot  attend  their  existing
           Sikh/Hindu schools.


           Against this backdrop, and after giving careful consideration to
           the current circumstances, UNHCR's opinion  is  that  Sikhs  and
           Hindus from present day Afghanistan are among those who  qualify
           for protection under the 1951 Convention."


23.   It is right to add that a further passage  in  the  letter  makes  it
      clear that the views there expressed are a primary source as they are
      based on first hand reports from  UNHCR's  extensive  field  presence
      throughout Afghanistan.  They are articulated  primarily  in  UNHCR's
      "Update of the  Situation  in  Afghanistan  and  Internal  Protection
      Considerations" (July 2002 and July 2003) and they also rely on their
      own  internal  reports  and   confidential   briefing   provided   to
      governments at their request.

24.   Following the defeat of the Taliban by  international  and  coalition
      forces  in  December  2001  and  the  subsequent  military  technical
      agreement signed by the Afghan Interim Administration  on  4 January
      2002 on the deployment of an International Security Assistance  Force
      (ISAF) it had been considered that the position of Sikhs  and  Hindus
      had improved substantially to the point where  four  Hindu  and  Sikh
      delegates to the Loya Jirga in June 2002 reported that they  were  no
      longer repressed and felt  free  to  practice  their  religions  (see
      extract from K above).  Nevertheless it remained the case that of the
      total Hindu and Sikh population, which at its highest  amounted  only
      to some 50,000, the vast  majority  had  either  emigrated  or  taken
      refuge abroad from 1992 onwards.  The position appeared to have eased
      somewhat for the small Sikh minority remaining after the Taliban took
      control in 1996 although later  in  their  period  of  dominance  the
      position became more difficult and in some cases clearly  persecutory
      for  those  remaining.   By  June  2002  the  numbers  remaining   in
      Afghanistan were variously estimated at as few as 1,000, of whom half
      were concentrated in Jalalabad, although it seems to us  that,  given
      its network within Afghanistan, the UNHCR's estimate  of  some  3,500
      remaining Sikh and Hindu families is probably to  be  preferred.   On
      any view, however, Afghani Sikhs now represent a  small  minority  in
      the country who were, as in the case  of  these  appellants,  largely
      drawn from the merchant class and who are, of course, distinctive  by
      their dress.

25.      We must deal next with the expert opinion of Dr Lau  whose  report
      is dated 6 June 1993.   He  is  a  Barrister  and  Head  of  the  Law
      Department of the School of  Oriental  and  African  Studies  at  the
      University of London and has other relevant academic  qualifications.
      He says that his work involves intensive research  on  modern  Afghan
      and Pakistani law and that  he  visited  Afghanistan  twice  in  2002
      carrying out fieldwork on behalf of the International  Commission  of
      Jurists, Geneva, and again for a week  in  May  2003  to  advise  the
      interim government on the rebuilding of  the  legal  system  and  the
      training of  lawyers  and  judges.   He  accepts  that  the  security
      situation in Kabul has improved and that the presence of ISAF  troops
      and Afghan security forces has restored relative calm  in  the  city,
      taking into account the coalition forces stationed at Bagram Airbase,
      40 km away.  He says, however, that he would not describe Kabul as  a
      perfectly safe place.  He  considers  that  Sikhs  would  find  their
      position more difficult because Islamic Welfare funds  and  community
      support would not be readily available to them, and there is  in  his
      view a very real likelihood  that  they  could  face  harassment  and
      intimidation from the authorities since many of its holders of office
      must be regarded as being rather conservative Muslims.   A  Hindu  or
      Sikh without any close family in  Kabul  belonging  to  a  non-Muslim
      minority  religion  which  itself  has  all  but   disappeared   from
      Afghanistan would in his view face a  very  real  danger  that  their
      human rights would be violated by some members of the authorities, or
      at the very least that the authorities would be unable  to  guarantee
      their human rights.  He made the point that there  is  in  general  a
      lack  of  information  on  Afghanistan's  human  rights  situation  -
      although having regard to the material to which we have been referred
      we do not accept this as at the present time - and he mentions that a
      "seemingly reliable source of information on  the  human  rights  and
      political/legal situation" is the periodic report submitted by the EU
      Special Representative to Afghanistan to the European Union.  He says
      that he understands those  reports  are  made  available  to  the  UK
      Government but that the Special Representative was not at liberty  to
      share them with Dr Lau although they were consistently "most critical
      of  human  rights  developments  in  Afghanistan".   Beyond  this  he
      referred to the uncertainty currently as to the final form of the new
      constitution  and  what  provision  it  would  make  in  relation  to
      religious minorities.  So far as the question of  the  EU  report  is
      concerned, Miss Hanrahan  informed  us  that  she  had  enquired  the
      position with the Central Information and Policy Unit who stated that
      any relevant material from them would be included  in  their  reports
      and that there was none in the current report.  Whilst we  note  what
      Dr Lau says, his views are, of course, broadly put  and  relevant  to
      the country as a whole.  The reports were not prepared in relation to
      either of the appellants before us although  they  do  represent  the
      impression of an independent foreign observer as at  June  1993.   In
      broad terms they are not  out  of  line  with  the  other  background
      evidence before us and, if anything,  perhaps  reflect  some  of  the
      optimism of earlier reports. In view of the fact that Dr Lau's report
      was made as long ago as June 1993, we find  it  surprising  that  the
      respondent has not thought it appropriate to disclose any of  the  EU
      reports referred to, particularly since these appeals were previously
      adjourned to enable him to do so, but the other  material  before  us
      makes it hardly surprising that they are reported to be  critical  of
      the current human rights situation.

26.   The current October 2003 CIPU report confirms at paragraph  6.6  that
      the UNHCR regards non-Muslim religious minorities, amongst others, as
      potentially being at  particular  risk  of  violence,  harassment  or
      discrimination and deals jointly with Sikhs and Hindus in more detail
      at paragraphs 6.45 to 6.54  of  the  report.   Much  of  the  earlier
      material in these paragraphs is simply repeated (it  was  before  the
      Tribunal in K) and what has been adverted to  above  from  the  UNHCR
      letter is largely repeated at the new paragraph 6.54.  The  preceding
      paragraph 6.53, which is also new, sheds some light on  the  position
      of those returning to Afghanistan.  It reads as follows:

           "A report by [APAMR] on 22 May 2003 stated that, in  2002,  some
           fifty Hindu and Sikh families returned to Afghanistan,  some  of
           whom found their houses, temples, lands and shops being occupied
           by commanders, tribal leaders and armed groups.   Some  are  too
           afraid to repossess their properties for fear of reprisals  from
           the present occupants.  Problems of this nature were reported in
           Kandahar,  Nangahar, Helman and Khost provinces.  The Hindus and
           Sikhs who have returned to Afghanistan are reported to be mostly
           living in temples (Daramsals) in Kabul and other  provinces,  as
           they  do  not  have  a  house  or  job  to  support  themselves.
           Representatives of the Hindu and  Sikh  communities  told  APAMR
           that they had not been consulted about the selection of a member
           for the Constitution Commission to represent their community and
           they have not been consulted them [sic] about  the  difficulties
           and problems their community faced.  It is estimated  that  1200
           Hindu and Sikh families are now living in Afghanistan  including
           350 families in Kabul."

      Further, at paragraph 6.54, drawing once more on APAMR,  it  is  said
      that Sikhs and Hindus are unwilling to send their children to  Afghan
      schools (as opposed to  the  limited  provision  still  remaining  in
      Sikh/Hindu schools) "for fear of mistreatment".   What  is  clear  is
      that the CIPU Report does not seek to make any critical evaluation of
      the current position of the Sikh and Hindu minorities. It is really a
      sequential history from various sources which  as  it  has  now  been
      expanded makes  it  clear  that  the  relatively  optimistic  picture
      painted following the overthrow of the Taliban needs to be revised in
      light of what are  clearly  pessimistic  reports  which  justify  the
      comparison made with the separation of the two communities  in  India
      with the fact  that  in  Afghanistan  they  "have  become  united  in
      adversity" (paragraph 6.51).


27.   It seems to us from the passages to which we have referred above  and
      from our general consideration of the background material to which we
      have been  referred,  that  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  in
      considering the present situation  of  Sikhs  that  it  can  only  be
      understood against the historical background.  In the period  of  the
      war and subsequent Mujahideen control from 1992  to  1996,  there  is
      evidence of past persecution of some and general  insecurity  of  the
      majority of Sikhs which led to a substantial exodus from Afghanistan.
       Both Mr Wadwa and Mr Safri, to whose evidence we shall make  further
      reference below, fall  into  this  category.  During  the  period  of
      Taliban predominance, it would appear that most of those who remained
      were generally treated with tolerance so far as their  expression  of
      their religion was  concerned  but  that  their  circumstances  as  a
      comparatively wealthy merchant class were much reduced. In the  later
      period of Taliban dominance, the discrimination which that  attracted
      became more serious resulting in some cases in the sort of  treatment
      suffered by B and his family.  After the  overthrow  of  the  Taliban
      these pressures certainly eased initially but  the  position  of  the
      Sikhs remained  potentially  one  of  difficulty  insofar  as  former
      leaders of the Mujahideen regained control in  substantial  areas  of
      Afghanistan, including Kabul on the evidence before us.  That  is  no
      doubt why the respondent has formally conceded that  B  would  be  at
      risk in his home area of Jalalabad.

28.   It was common to the statements of Mr Wadwa and  Mr  Safri,  both  of
      whom formerly held prominent positions in Afghanistan society  -  the
      former as a doctor and one time  representative  in  the  Loya  Jirga
      before the Russian occupation, and the latter as a merchant  involved
      also in social work for the Sikh and  Hindu  community  in  Kabul,  a
      former Member of Parliament from 1988 to 1992 and a  Sikh  and  Hindu
      representative for the Loya Jirga from 1987 - that it was fear of the
      Mujahideen which had led to their flight from  Afghanistan.   It  was
      the view of both of them that those in power in the Northern Alliance
      were  former  Mujahideen  and  in  some  cases  even  former  Taliban
      supporters.   Both  referred  to  the  fact  that  Rabbani  had  been
      President during the  Mujahideen  period  and  that  Generals  Fahim,
      Dostum and Ismail Khan, all of whom had targeted the Sikh  and  Hindu
      communities during the Mujahideen period, were  now  back  in  power.
      Although they had not been personally in Afghanistan  from  the  mid-
      1990s, both expressed serious concern for the safety  of  members  of
      the Sikh community on the basis of their accepted past experiences.

29.   Their views are largely supported in the letter of  3  December  2003
      from Mr Ravinder Singh who describes  himself  as  a  member  of  the
      emergency Loya Jirga in 2002 and a representative of  the  Hindu  and
      Sikh communities based in Kabul, who had attended Afghani  Government
      meetings in order to advise them as to the situation faced  by  these
      religious minorities.  He says that he has given interviews  to  many
      organisations including the APAMR.   He  claims  that  Kabul  remains
      unsafe and that his community is not being supported by international
      committees or organisations there and has not been given any  aid  to
      sustain the  community.   The  Hindu  and  Sikh  families  living  in
      Afghanistan have decreased to around three hundred families in Kabul,
      since most fled during the time of the Mujahideen. He  also  observes
      that the  same  Mujahideen  leaders  are  prominent  in  the  interim
      administration.  He states that he advises those who wish  to  return
      from India not to return to Kabul because the houses and  temples  of
      the local community have been  totally  destroyed  and  many  of  the
      surviving shops, houses and land are being occupied by some  powerful
      commanders and armed groups. The  interim  administration  offers  no
      assistance to the  remaining  Sikh  community  either  in  rebuilding
      destroyed buildings or in recovery of land and property.  Many of the
      police and those controlling  them  are  former  Mujahideen  who  are
      extorting money  from  the  minority  community  and  there  are  now
      unfounded allegations  by  some  Afghans  that  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
      communities were supporters of the Taliban.  He sums up the situation
      in these words:

           "We cannot walk on the streets without suffering harassment.  We
           are easily identifiable because of the way that we dress and, as
           a result of this, are singled out by the Muslim people for abuse
           and persecution. We cannot approach the  police  for  protection
           because they are not interested in our safety, dignity or  well-
           being; they are interested  only  in  asking  for  bribes.   The
           police claim that we supported  the  Taliban  and  use  this  to
           justify ignoring us as a community.  We are told that we are not
           welcome in Afghanistan and that we should go to India."


30.   He adds that the current Hindu and Sikh representatives  to  the  new
      administration do  not  consult  with  their  community  about  these
      grievances and have lost the trust of the communities.  He says  that
      he has witnessed beatings of people in his  own  community  and  also
      himself been subject to  demands  by  way  of  bribery.   It  is  his
      position that these communities have been  persecuted  by  the  local
      population.

31.   We have also considered the APAMR Report of  22  May  2003.   We  are
      informed that this organisation  is  an  Afghan  NGO  established  in
      Pakistan in 2001 by Afghan professionals living in different parts of
      the world, is registered with the transitional administration and  is
      a member of  the  Coalition  for  the  International  Criminal  Court
      (CICC), an Asian network for International Criminal  Court  (ICC)  as
      well as having very close relationships with the United  Nations  and
      many other international and national human rights agencies.  That it
      is afforded some recognition as an NGO is clear from the fact that it
      is quoted as a  source  in  the  current  CIPU  Report.   It  is  not
      concerned  solely  with  the  situation  of  Sikhs  and   Hindus   in
      Afghanistan but is concerned with the rights of  all  minorities  and
      has provided reports based on direct interviews and observations  and
      first hand evidence.

32.   Whilst it is clear that Mr Ravinder Singh  has  provided  substantial
      information to APAMR it is also clear  from  the  report  that  their
      information is not confined to him as a single source but is far more
      generalised.  It is concerned  particularly  with  the  situation  of
      those returning and confirms by reference to a variety of  individual
      interviews their inability to recover their  property  which  was  in
      most cases initially occupied by the Taliban and has now  been  taken
      over  by  those  active  in  the  present  transitional   government,
      including Mr Rabbani, the former  President,  and  Northern  Alliance
      commanders. These examples relate to  land  and  property  in  Kabul.
      Attempts to seek the assistance of the Kabul security forces are said
      to be ineffective. Many of the Sikh temples were looted and destroyed
      in Kabul and other parts of the country by different armed groups and
      only  three  have   been   reconstructed   since   the   transitional
      administration commenced.  They say that the Hindu and Sikh community
      in Afghanistan, including the returnees,  are  suffering  badly.   By
      example they refer to Panchowk, an area in the west  of  Kabul  where
      some one hundred Hindu and Sikh  families  used  to  live,  as  being
      entirely razed during the 1990s and that many  of  the  temples  were
      looted and have never been restored to use. They repeat  the  extreme
      difficulties in  the  provision  of  education  for  Hindu  and  Sikh
      children.  The only school now functioning has only  four  classrooms
      which are insufficient for the present one hundred students  and  the
      four present teachers are young girls aged between ten and  thirteen.
      The Headmaster says that the situation in the provinces is much  more
      difficult and appeals for help to the President and other members  of
      the interim administration had resulted in no  practical  assistance.
      Most returnees have neither shelter nor  the  capability  of  renting
      property and are living in temples, unable to obtain a job to support
      their families. They are provided with  no  support  by  the  interim
      administration or any other organisation in Afghanistan.

33.   We have taken into account that the testimony of members of the  Sikh
      community here and the statement  of  Mr  Ravinder  Singh  cannot  be
      regarded as  disinterested  sources  of  evidence  but  the  detailed
      evidence  which  they,  like  APAMR,   provide   is   not   generally
      inconsistent with the thrust of the international  reports  which  we
      have considered. It is in our view  appropriate  to  consider  it  as
      fleshing out the more generalised information in the latter  reports.
      There can be little doubt that in terms of the hardship faced by  the
      remaining members of this minority community, and in particular those
      now  returning  from  abroad,  that  there  are  real  and  practical
      difficulties  of  subsistence  and  deprivation  of  primary   civic,
      economic and educational rights as set out in the  report  of  APAMR.
      Serious humanitarian considerations are raised.

34.     In reaching that conclusion we  have  borne  in  mind  the  Amnesty
      International Report in relation to Afghan returnees generally.  Much
      of that lengthy report is concerned with issues relating to the  poor
      living conditions which exist but, on the evidence before  us,  those
      are not matters which in our judgment would give rise to  destitution
      to such an extent as to engage  Article  3  or,  more  obviously,  to
      amount to  persecution  for  Refugee  Convention  purposes.   We  do,
      however, note the passage at paragraph 7.2.4 of  the  Report  dealing
      with the situation of ISAF where it is pointed out that it is  not  a
      peacekeeping force and has no mandate to  intervene  in  relation  to
      human rights violations without a request from the government.  Faced
      with evidence of lack of action in relevant situations by the  Afghan
      authorities themselves, we are satisfied that ISAF cannot be regarded
      as of itself being able to  provide  a  sufficiency  of  security  to
      individuals in the Sikh community notwithstanding that  its  presence
      may have a generally calming effect in Kabul (but see also  paragraph
      36 below as to the current security situation in Kabul generally).

35.      The latest report before us is the Human Rights Watch  Report  for
      2004 entitled "Losing the Peace in Afghanistan".  This emphasises the
      importance of international support for  rebuilding  Afghanistan  and
      underlines that international assistance is running at a fraction  of
      that previously applied in Rwanda, East Timor, Kosovo and Bosnia.  It
      quotes the Henry L Stimson Center, a Washington DC based think  tank,
      as pointing out that the international community  spent  twenty  five
      times more in Kosovo on a per capita basis then  it  has  pledged  in
      Afghanistan  and  that   where   Iraq   received   US$26,000,000   in
      reconstruction  aid  in  2003,   Afghanistan   received   less   than
      US$1,000,000.  It makes a powerful  plea  for  additional  assistance
      from the international community  if  the  progress  made  is  to  be
      consolidated and go forward, citing problems such as the reappearance
      of elements of the  Taliban  in  southern  Afghanistan,  increasingly
      powerful regional warlords, growth  of  the  poppy  trade  and  other
      criminal activity, and  a  continuing  threat  of  meddling  regional
      powers as representing four different but interlinked  challenges  to
      the goal  of  creating  a  stable  civilian  government  there.   The
      relevance of the report is, to our mind, that it points to  important
      disruptive challenges which do exist and which may  arguably  in  the
      case of the Sikh minority exacerbate the difficulties which they  are
      currently recorded as facing not only in  the  areas  in  Afghanistan
      where they have formerly  lived  but  also  in  Kabul,  their  likely
      destination if now returned if they did not formerly live there.


36.      Finally, as to the present position in Kabul we were  referred  to
      the current Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice against  all  non-
      essential travel to Kabul and against all travel to  other  parts  of
      Afghanistan.  Whilst this is intended  for  British  nationals,  this
      advice, current at 28 January 2004, says  this  of  the  position  in
      Kabul:

           "There are regular rocket and bomb attacks in Kabul,  and  there
           have been a number of attacks  against  westerners  and  suicide
           bomb attacks against  civilians,  including  one  in  a  crowded
           shopping street.  On 28 December 2003,  six  people  died  in  a
           probable suicide car bomb near Kabul Airport.   On  25  December
           2003, a bomb destroyed a wall  on  the  UN  compound  in  Kabul.
           Several rockets were  fired  into  residential  areas  of  Kabul
           whilst the Constitutional Loya Jirga (CLJ) was meeting  from  14
           December 2003 to 4 January 2004, although none are believed  to
           have been aimed at the CLJ itself.  On 22 November 2003, a small
           bomb exploded near the Intercontinental Hotel, although  no  one
           was injured.  The Intercontinental Hotel, and other hotels where
           foreigners might stay, will continue to be possible targets  for
           such attacks.  On 5 November 2003,  a  bomb  exploded  near  the
           Kabul offices of Oxfam and Save the Children but there  were  no
           casualties and on 7 November 2003, an Indian national,  working
           for an Indian construction company, was  shot  dead  by  unknown
           attackers.  There have been a number of  attacks  against  Kabul
           International Airport and further attacks cannot be  ruled  out.
           On 7 June 2003, a suicide bomb was  detonated  alongside  a  bus
           carrying  German  troops   from   the   International   Security
           Assistance Force, killing several and injuring many others."

37.   It was submitted by Miss Jones that this evidence made plain that the
      combination  of  corruption,  prejudice  against   Sikhs,   breakdown
      following tyranny and then war, and inadequate funding means that the
      authorities either will not or cannot provide a sufficiency of  state
      protection to the appellants.  If true, that  of  course  presupposes
      that there will be a real  risk  of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
      Convention by reason of their race or religion or of breach of  their
      protected human rights under Article 3  of  the  European  Convention
      against which such protection is necessary.

38.   Before we consider the situation of each appellant, it is appropriate
      to give our views in respect of the situation of the  Sikh  community
      in Afghanistan generally. The evidence which we have considered above
      certainly points to a situation of  general  societal  discrimination
      and of interference with economic and educational rights  in  respect
      of which the state does not appear to offer  adequate  protection  or
      provision. Because of the concession made by the  respondent  in  the
      case of B, we have not had to consider the  evidence  other  than  in
      relation to Kabul but there is no reason to believe from the evidence
      that the situation of Sikhs elsewhere in Afghanistan, in the  limited
      areas in which they reside, is any better than in Kabul.  It  may  be
      worse. In Kabul, SIAF might have the ability to provide a sufficiency
      of protection as KFOR does in Kosovo but it will not intervene unless
      asked to do so by the interim administration and there is nothing  we
      can  find  in  the  evidence  before  us  to  demonstrate  that   the
      administration does make such requests in relation to the  protection
      of members of the Sikh community.  Indeed such evidence  as  we  have
      been referred to would seem to be to the  contrary.  Nonetheless,  we
      accept that the mere presence of SIAF is likely to have  a  practical
      restraining effect on overt  public  excess.   Considering  the  high
      threshold to be reached before the Conventions are engaged,  it  does
      not seem to us that these matters,  however  hard  and  difficult  it
      might make the lives of the Sikh community, will be sufficient to say
      that there is a general risk of persecution or breach  of  Article  3
      rights simply by being an Afghan Sikh.  To that extent, we agree with
      Miss Jones' submission that it is  the  individual  circumstances  of
      each  appellant  which  require  consideration  and  that,  as  UNHCR
      accepts, it is not the case  that  Sikhs  as  such  are  entitled  to
      recognition as refugees but rather that they form  a  class  of  whom
      individual members may, on the basis of their  particular  situation,
      properly qualify for international protection.

39.   To that extent, the material before us does supersede that before the
      Tribunal in Gulati and suggests that K also may be unsafe insofar  as
      it  considers  on  the  evidence  there  reviewed  that  there  is  a
      sufficiency of protection in Kabul for those whose  previous  history
      points to past persecution or adverse interest by members or factions
      of the Mujahideen who retain a position of influence in  Kabul.  They
      may now have directly conflicting interests with those  of  returnees
      seeking to recover their property. Evidence of a past personal animus
      against a  specific  asylum  applicant  will  also  be  of  potential
      relevance.

40.   We do not suggest that this picture of the  current  situation  means
      there is  a  real  possibility  of  or  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
      persecution in Kabul for all Sikhs but it is part of  the  background
      picture to be taken into account in considering the position of those
      to be returned to Kabul.

41.    We turn now to consider the position of B.  It was conceded that  he
      had a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area of  Jalalabad
      but for the reasons which we have set out above, we do  not  find  on
      the totality of the evidence that such a fear would extend  to  Kabul
      to which he is intended to be returned.  Nevertheless  if  he  cannot
      reasonably be expected to relocate there, he will be entitled  to  be
      recognised  as  someone  enjoying  the  protection  of  the   Refugee
      Convention. The issue for our consideration is therefore  whether  it
      would be unreasonable - that is to say unduly harsh - to  expect  him
      to relocate in Kabul with his wife and children.


  42. The leading case on the issue  of  reasonableness  of  relocation  is
      still R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1997] INLR 182.  Lord  Woolf,  then
      Master of the Rolls, said this at p.189:

           "It follows that if the home State can afford what has variously
           been  described  as  'a  safe  haven'.  'relocation',  'internal
           protection', or  'an  internal  flight  alternative'  where  the
           claimant would not have a well-founded fear of persecution for a
           Convention reason, then internal protection  is  not  necessary.
           But it must be reasonable for him to go and stay  in  that  safe
           haven. As  the  majority  of  the  Federal  Court  of  Australia
           observed in Randhawa (above) ... :


                 'If it is not reasonable in the circumstances to expect  a
           person who has a well-founded fear of persecution in relation to
           the part of a country from where he or she has fled to  relocate
           to another part of the country of nationality, it  may  be  said
           that, in the relevant sense, the person's fear of persecution in
           relation to the country as a whole is well-founded.'


           In determining whether it would not be reasonable to expect  the
           claimant to relocate internally, a decision-maker will  have  to
           consider  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  against   the
           backcloth that the issue is whether the claimant is entitled  to
           the status of a refugee. Various tests have been suggested.  For
           example, (a) if as a practical matter  (whether  for  financial,
           logistical or other good reason) the 'safe' part of the  country
           is not reasonably accessible; (b) if the claimant is required to
           encounter great physical danger in travelling there  or  staying
           there; (c) if he or she is required to undergo undue hardship in
           travelling there or staying there; (d) if  the  quality  of  the
           internal protection fails to meet  the  basic  norms  of  civil,
           political and socio-economic human rights. So far as the last of
           these  considerations  is  concerned,  the   preamble   to   the
           Convention shows that the contracting parties were concerned  to
           uphold the principle that human beings should enjoy  fundamental
           rights and freedoms without discrimination. In Thiranuvukkarasu,
           Linden JA, giving the judgment of the Federal  Court  of  Canada
           said at 687:


                 'Stated another way for clarity, would it be unduly  harsh
           to expect this person, who is being persecuted in  one  part  of
           his country, to move to another less hostile part of the country
           before seeking refugee status abroad?'"

  43. In considering whether B could reasonably relocate to Kabul, we  must
      consider the facts that are personal to him. First, our consideration
      must be on the basis that he will have to live there  with  his  wife
      and three infant children so that it is  the  reasonableness  of  the
      relocation of the family unit with which we  are  concerned  and  not
      simply the Appellant considered in isolation. The evidence identifies
      the further factors relevant to B and  his  family:  (a)  he  has  no
      connection in Kabul from the  past;  (b)  no  government  assistance,
      either financial or practical, will be available to him; (c) there is
      no reasonable prospect that  he  could  find  gainful  employment  in
      Kabul; (d) in consequence of the two preceding factors, he  would  be
      wholly dependent for survival upon the support of the small remaining
      Sikh community in Kabul; (e) as even some of those  originating  from
      Kabul are forced to live in temples, that is reasonably likely to  be
      his position indefinitely; (f) there is  no  reasonable  prospect  of
      educational facilities being available for his  children  because  of
      the level of discrimination in Afghani schools and the inadequacy  of
      facilities within the Sikh community; (g) additionally,  and  in  our
      view crucially, as a member of a religious and  ethnic  minority,  he
      and his family would be  reasonably  likely  to  be  the  subject  of
      general discrimination on the part of the  Muslim  majority  with  no
      real  prospect  of  being  provided  with  protection  against   such
      discrimination by the authorities or any other body.

44.   We would stress that the above  factors  are  all  specific  to  this
      appellant and are not to  be  considered  as  a  'shopping  list'  of
      relevant factors. Such factors will in each Sikh Afghan case  require
      individual consideration on the basis of  the  specific  history  and
      circumstances of each appellant where internal relocation falls to be
      considered.

45.   On the basis of the factors identified as relevant to B, it does  not
      seem to us that the State will provide him with  a  'safe  haven'  or
      'internal protection' in Kabul. We are satisfied that the quality  of
      the internal protection fails to meet  'the  basic  norms  of  civil,
      political and socio-economic rights'. In reaching this view  we  have
      carefully considered the judgments in AE and FE v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 1032. At paragraph 64, Lord Philips, MR, said:

           "So far as refugee status is concerned,  a  comparison  must  be
           made between the asylum-seeker's conditions and circumstances in
           the place where he has reason to fear persecution and those that
           he would be faced  with  in  the  suggested  place  of  internal
           location.  If  that  comparison  suggests  that  it   would   be
           unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to relocate in  order
           to escape  the  risk  of  persecution,  his  refugee  status  is
           established."


      We have therefore considered this issue on the basis of a  comparison
      between the situation of the Appellant in his  former  home  area  of
      Jalalabad and in Kabul. For the  reasons  which  we  have  enumerated
      above in paragraph 43, with the consideration  under  (g)  playing  a
      decisive role in our finding by reason of its discriminatory  nature,
      we find that the cumulative effect of these factors is that it  would
      be unreasonable or unduly harsh to require this particular  Appellant
      to relocate with his family to  Kabul  and  that  he  is  accordingly
      entitled to the protection of the Refugee  Convention.  We  have  not
      considered whether there are other areas of Afghanistan  to  which  B
      might  reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate  because  it   is   our
      understanding of the concession made Ms Hanrahan that the only  place
      of relocation in Afghanistan considered appropriate by the Respondent
      for consideration in B's case was  Kabul.  As  each  appeal  must  be
      decided on its own specific facts, this  does  not  mean  that  other
      areas for relocation may not be appropriate in other cases.

46.   So far as K is concerned, he is a native of Kabul and it is to  there
      that the Secretary of  State  proposes  to  remove  him.  The  issues
      relevant to B as a non-native of Kabul  do  not  therefore  have  any
      application in K's case. The issue is simply whether K  has  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason  or  of
      breach of his protected human rights under Article 3 of the  European
      Convention in Kabul.  Miss Jones urged upon us that the Adjudicator's
      adverse credibility findings, which formed  the  secondary  basis  of
      dismissal of his appeal, are insufficiently reasoned and unsafe.   We
      do not agree.  There was a contradiction as to whether the  appellant
      was arrested once or twice but even if the appellant was credible  in
      respect of both occasions, these were actions  on  the  part  of  the
      Taliban  and  not  the  Mujahideen.   The  appellant  said   of   his
      experiences during the Mujahideen period that "they started harassing
      and intimidating us on several occasions and demanded money  from  us
      but they gave us freedom of religion, freedom of speech,  freedom  to
      do our business the way we want and freedom to travel  all  over  the
      country".  He contrasted the situation then  with  that  which  arose
      when the Taliban came to power in 1996.  Although  even  then  it  is
      clear that he retained his house and his shop throughout  the  period
      until he left Afghanistan.  Whilst we remain of  the  view  that  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to reject credibility in the  way  which  he
      did, it makes no difference to the  outcome  of  K's  appeal  in  any
      event.  The only problems which could on his own  account  reach  the
      high threshold where they could be regarded as persecutory in  nature
      arose under the Taliban regime which no longer exists in  Kabul.   We
      therefore find that, taking his account at its highest, there  is  no
      arguable basis for saying that K is currently able to make out a well-
      founded fear of persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason  or  of
      treatment in breach of his protected human rights  under  Article  3.
      The situation which he will face will  no  doubt  be  unpleasant  and
      difficult but he is from Kabul and it is to there  that  he  will  be
      returned. There is in  any event no evidence that  his  family  house
      and shop in Kabul do not remain available to him there.  He  says  in
      his statement that he funded the cost of leaving Afghanistan from the
      proceeds of sale of a shop in another part of Afghanistan.  But  even
      if they were not available this would in our view go in his  case  to
      general humanitarian issues only and would be for  the  consideration
      of the Secretary of State outside  the  provisions  of  the  European
      Convention (see the distinction  drawn  in  AE  and  FE  referred  to
      above). It follows that he cannot succeed before us and his appeal is
      accordingly dismissed.

47.   In summary, so far as the refugee claims are  concerned,  B's  appeal
      succeeds. He has shown a well founded fear of persecution in his home
      area and has shown he cannot reasonably be expected to live elsewhere
      in Afghanistan. K's appeal fails. He has shown no well  founded  fear
      at home, and of course  in  those  circumstances  cannot  succeed  by
      showing that he might have had a claim had his  home  been  elsewhere
      (see Dyli  [00/TH/02186*].  So  far  as  the  Article  3  claims  are
      concerned, both fail. Neither appellant is at real risk of  receiving
      treatment contrary to Article 3 in the part of the country  where  he
      will in reality be. We were not concerned with any claim that  return
      would be in breach of Article 8 rights, no doubt because there is  no
      arguable basis on which such a claim could be made following Ullah  &
      Do v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ. 1856.







                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President


