
,H-MH/11-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 27 April 2004           |        |LS (Zambia - Article 3 /HIV/|
|Prepared 29 April 2004     |        |"N" followed) Zambia [2004] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00181                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|22 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. A.R. Mackey - Chairman                                        |
|Mrs. L.R. Schmitt                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms. L. Longhurst-Woods, of Counsel
                       Representing Greenland Solicitors, London.
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of  Zambia  who  appeals  with  permission
    against  the  Determination  of  an  Adjudicator,   Ms.   M.E.   Lewis,
    promulgated 26 June 2003 wherein she dismissed an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent who had refused exceptional leave to  remain
    and a human rights application.

2.    The Appellant was born in 1964.   She  arrived  from  Zambia  in  the
    United Kingdom in June 1999 with an  entry  clearance  for  a  shopping
    visit.  In December 1999 she submitted an application for an  extension
    to remain on  medical  grounds  stating  that  she  had  been  recently
    diagnosed as HIV positive.

The Adjudicator's Determination

3.    This matter was heard in June 2003 prior to the leading Determination
    of the Court of  Appeal  in  N  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 which was published on 16 October 2003.
     Detailed reference and guidance  from  that  Determination,  which  is
    followed by us, is set out later in this decision.

4.    The Respondent, produced to the Adjudicator  a  medical  bulletin  on
    HIV/AIDS treatment in Zambia dated October 2002 and also relied on  the
    Determination in K v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2001]
    Imm AR 11.  Medical evidence was provided by the  Appellant,  the  full
    details of these  are  set  out  in  paragraphs  5.2  and  5.3  on  the
    Adjudicator's Determination.

5.    The Appellant gave evidence that she arrived on a six month  visa  in
    June 1999 and two weeks after arrival she was concerned  about  serious
    diarrhoea.  She visited a general practitioner  and  this  led  to  the
    diagnosis of HIV.  Her son had not travelled  with  her.   However  she
    stated that her son's father had "dumped him on my doorstep on 19  July
    2002".  The Appellant also stated that she had nobody  in  Zambia;  her
    most recent partner had died two years earlier.   Her  father  died  in
    1990 and her mother in May 2003.  She stated that  the  father  of  the
    child was married to someone else and had other children.  She also had
    no way of contacting him and if she returned to Zambia could  not  rely
    on him to look after their 11 year old son.  In  Zambia  she  has  been
    employed as a nurse/midwife but did not consider that she could  resume
    that work given her HIV status.

6.    Ms.  Longhurst-Woods,  who  also  appeared  before  the  Adjudicator,
    submitted that the Appellant required a  complex  combination  of  drug
    treatment as confirmed by the report of Dr.  Cath  Rodgers,  Consultant
    Physician, Guy's & St. Thomas' Hospital Trust.  The  Appellant  had  no
    family in Zambia and could not work on return.  Also she could  not  be
    supported by her son's father and would have to continue  her  parental
    responsibilities for him.  She  argued  that  the  United  Kingdom  had
    assumed responsibility for the Appellant's treatment  some  four  years
    ago and therefore was obligated to continue that treatment.
7.    The Adjudicator did not accept that the United  Kingdom  had  assumed
    responsibility for the Appellant's treatment.  She considered that like
    anybody else the Appellant was  able  to  enter  an  NHS  hospital  and
    obtained treatment but that did not equate to an informed  decision  on
    the part of the Secretary of State or some other government  department
    to assume responsibility for care.   The  Adjudicator  also  noted  the
    report of Dr. Rodgers that stated the  anti-retroviral  therapy  should
    give the Appellant normal life expectancy.  However if it  was  stopped
    her physical well-being and  immune  deficiency  would  return  to  her
    baseline levels of June 1999.  Dr. Rodgers had  not  commented  on  the
    availability of anti-retroviral therapy in Zambia nor  the  effects  on
    the Appellant of having access only to Combivir or some combination  of
    drugs that are now available in  Zambia.   The  Adjudicator  noted  the
    Respondent's evidence, set out in the bulletin as to  the  availability
    of drug treatments, and did not conclude that return to  Zambia,  where
    the medication available may be less, would have a severe effect on her
    health.  She stated: "I do not  conclude  on  this  evidence  that  the
    Appellant is close to death or that to return her to her  home  country
    would result in such a severe relapse as to amount to cruel or  inhuman
    treatment".

8.    The Adjudicator then noted the problem of cost of treatment in Zambia
    but found that the European Court of Human Rights, the Court of  Appeal
    and IAT in the UK, had all consistently taken the line that, despite an
    Appellant not being able to afford all the treatment required, this did
    not amount to inhuman or degrading  treatment.   The  Adjudicator  also
    took into account the psychological evidence  that  was  presented  and
    accepted the Appellant had been very distressed by her illness and  her
    concerns for her son.  She noted that the  Appellant's  father  clearly
    had an involvement in the boy's life as  he  was  named  in  the  birth
    certificate and had cared for the son for two years before  he  brought
    him to the United Kingdom.   Also  she  noted  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had stated that she had  lived  with  the  son's  father  for
    various periods in the past, although at other times he had lived  with
    his wife.  She noted therefore that there  was  some  form  of  support
    available, even if it was not very consistent.  In those  circumstances
    she found that the appeal must fail.

The Appellant's Submissions

9.    A detailed skeleton argument was put forward by  Ms.  Longhurst-Woods
    which we have taken into account.  In support of  the  submissions  she
    refers to all of the  medical  and  psychiatric  reports  including  an
    additional report from Dr. Cath  Rodgers  dated  4  July  2003  and  an
    updated psychological assessment dated 1  July  2003  from  Dr.  Erasmo
    Tacconelli, Chartered Clinical Psychologist, Haringey NHS.

10.   The  second report of Dr. Rodgers, dated 4 July 2003, was made  after
    considering the Determination of the Adjudicator.  It states:

      "I reply to item 8, point 3, under conclusions  and  reasons  in  the
         above case.

      I did not decline  to  comment  on  availability  of  anti-retroviral
         therapy in the country of origin but emphasised that I was not  in
         a position to do so.  The latter is a legal point rather than  the
         purpose of a factual medical report.  However, now that I am privy
         to the contents of item 7.1 in the document informing  me  of  the
         anti-retroviral  drugs  that  have  been  negotiated  for  cheaper
         purchase  in  Zambia,  I  can  confirm  that  Ms.  Sitima's  anti-
         retroviral treatment is not available in her  country  of  origin.
         Any combination containing just two drugs would be sub-optimal and
         lead to treatment failure.  As only  three  anti-viral  drugs  are
         available, should this combination fail,  Ms.  Sitima  would  have
         access to no second line therapy in  Zambia.   All  these  points,
         taken into account, Ms. Sitima's life expectancy would be  reduced
         considerably if she were returned to Zambia.

      I would like to emphasise, for future hearings, that it  is  not  the
         purpose of a medical report to ascertain the availability of anti-
         retroviral drugs in countries in Africa.
      I hope the significance of my  above  comments  will  be  taken  into
         account at Ms. Sitima's second appeal".


11.   The updated report of Dr. Tacconelli sets out that  he  had  met  the
    Appellant  on  seven  appointments  and  continued   to   address   her
    psychological needs.  These  were  addressed  to  cognitive-behavioural
    therapy for depression, and HIV adjustment.  It is stated that progress
    was limited due to the overriding concerns about her asylum appeal.

12.   This report concludes:

      "Ms. Sitima attends sessions well and appears to be benefiting so far
         from our contact.  However, it is clear that she is stuck  in  her
         asylum situation and is unable to move  on  psychologically  until
         her immigration status is addressed.  It is clear that to move  on
         psychologically,  she  needs  security  in  this   country.    The
         standardised measures of her mood on two occasions  (11/11/02  and
         15/05/03) illustrate that only until this aspect is resolved  will
         her mood and quality of  life  improve.   Based  on  Ms.  Sitima's
         psychological distress, her  asylum  appeal  needs  to  take  into
         account her physical  and  mental  health.   She  needs  stability
         regarding her status to feel  settled  and  able  to  address  her
         psychological issues.

      I strongly recommend that Ms. Sitima's psychological presentation  be
         considered with her asylum appeal as if  she  were  to  return  to
         Zambia, she would not be able to afford the medical treatment  for
         HIV, her mental health would greatly  deteriorate  immediately  as
         the prognosis would with no medical intervention  lead  to  death.
         Ms. Sitima is aware of this and very scared about the  possibility
         of this happening to herself and the effect on her young son.

      Ms. Sitima is a well meaning, sincere woman and  devoted  mother  who
         would contribute a great amount  to  UK  society.   She  has  used
         scarce NHS services with respect  and  gratitude  and  is  clearly
         intelligent, wishing to give something back to the country".

13.   Also, in a further statement presented by the Appellant dated 7  July
    2003, she states that the Adjudicator's finding in  respect  of  living
    with the son's father was incorrect and that she had never  lived  with
    him before or after the birth of the  baby,  and  had  stated  this  in
    Court.

14.   Ms. Longhurst-Woods went on to submit further arguments of a  similar
    nature to those  put  to  the  Adjudicator.   She  submitted  that  the
    treatment required by the Appellant was simply not available in Zambia.
     In addition as her HIV status had been diagnosed in 1999 and  she  had
    needed a lot of therapy this country had assumed responsibility for her
    treatment since 1999.  In addition the situation  of  the  relationship
    with the son had to be considered as he would have no one to  care  for
    him  when  the  Appellant  returned  to  Zambia   and   her   condition
    deteriorated.  She submitted that the Adjudicator had not engaged  with
    the medical evidence sufficiently and coupled this  with  the  lack  of
    support available to the Appellant and the plight  of  the  Appellant's
    son on return.

15.   In addition she submitted that  the  Respondent  had  not  considered
    correctly the IND instructions in relation to the HIV/AIDS  policy  and
    that the policy had not been appropriately applied by them, despite two
    applications made in February and March 2000, which were  supported  by
    medical evidence.  She asked us to note that it was  not  until  9  May
    2001 that a refusal letter was received,  by  which  time  her  medical
    condition had improved upon the treatment available at  the  NHS.   She
    submitted that that refusal also did  not  engage  correctly  with  the
    Secretary of State's policy.  She acknowledged that the decision was of
    course one for the Secretary of State and not an issue  upon  which  we
    could reach a decision.

16.   The second refusal letter was dated 14 April  2003  and  stated  that
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR would not be breached if the  Appellant
    were to be returned.  She submitted that the Respondent had  not  taken
    into account a situation where no treatment was available and  that  in
    such situations it would normally be appropriate for extended leave  to
    be granted.  She submitted that had the Respondent taken  into  account
    the contents of Dr. Rodgers'  reports  a  conclusion  would  have  been
    reached that the treatment that was available in Zambia was of  no  use
    to this Appellant.  In addition she asked us to  note  that  while  the
    case law, indicated that arguments based on the cost of treatment would
    not be successful, we should take into account, in the totality of this
    Appellant's evidence, that she had no financial  support  available  to
    her.

17.   At this point we asked if she had further instructions in relation to
    the statement made by the Appellant (at A12 of her statement) that  she
    was receiving support of �450 per month.  We asked where this came from
    and if it continued.  We recognised that this statement had  been  made
    in December 1999.  Ms. Longhurst-Woods  advised  us  that  she  had  no
    instructions on this point or indeed how  the  Appellant  and  her  son
    survived and maintained themselves at this time.  She stated  that  she
    could obtain the additional information if it was required.

18.   The submissions made  by  Ms.  Longhurst-Woods,  in  respect  of  the
    decision in N, were that currently leave was being requested to  appeal
    to the House of Lords and if necessary to go to Strasbourg.  She  asked
    us to note that  the  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  from  that
    Determination included :

         (i)      the advanced stage of the illness,  including  resistance
             and symptoms and the proximity  of  death  if  treatment  were
             withdrawn,


         (ii)     the existence of dependent children  (in  this  case  the
             Appellant has her young son with  her  in  the  UK  since  his
             estranged father brought him here and  abandoned  him  to  his
             mother),


         (iii)    the lack of accommodation, livelihood, social  or  family
             support in the destination country (the  evidence  shows  that
             the Appellant satisfies these criteria),


         (iv)     the lack of  any  realistic  or  effective  programme  to
             combat AIDS in the destination country (again the evidence  is
             highly supportive of this).


19.   She also referred to the case of Adei where Lord Justice  Sedley  had
    granted leave on the basis that "removal  would  be  akin  to  a  death
    sentence for this woman  and  something  not  very  different  for  her
    child".

20.   In totality she submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon her and that  she  should  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain.

The Respondent's Submissions

21.   Mr. McGirr submitted that the Respondent had complied  with  the  IND
    policy and that while the letter of May 2001 did not specifically refer
    to the policy it covered the points that were required.  He asked us to
    note that that policy had been introduced on  the  basis  of  the  well
    known European Court of Human Rights' Determination in D v UK and that,
    in this case, the Respondent had addressed the three  requirements,  as
    set out in the policy.

22.   He also submitted that the Adjudicator had been correct in  assessing
    the Appellant's case with reference to the  medical  bulletin  and  had
    taken into account the  expanding  range  of  drugs  now  available  in
    Zambia.

23.   He submitted that the Appellant's course of therapy had  not  changed
    for some time, but the medical evidence did not appear to  address  the
    ability to use other anti-retroviral drugs, that may  be  available  in
    Zambia.  In response to questions from us, particularly relating to Dr.
    Rodgers' report of 4 July 2003, he submitted that  the  medical  report
    had not answered the question as to whether there were  an  alternative
    combination of drugs available which would possibly be  successful  for
    this Appellant and be available in Zambia.

24.   He submitted that, on the evidence that was before  the  Adjudicator,
    the  decision  was  a  sustainable  one.   In  addition  to  this   the
    psychiatric report did not add substantially to the evidence  that  was
    before the Adjudicator.

25.   He therefore submitted that we  should  dismiss  the  appeal  or  if,
    noting that it was a difficult task that was before the Tribunal,  rule
    that the matter should be adjourned to obtain further evidence both  on
    the resources and  support  available  to  the  Appellant  and  whether
    alternative combinations of treatment, based on drugs in Zambia,  could
    be used by the Appellant.

26.   In reply  Ms.  Longhurst-Woods  submitted  that  the  full  range  of
    evidence had been available to the Adjudicator and, even though reports
    went back to 1996 and 1998, these  were  appropriate,  given  that  the
    Appellant had been diagnosed in 1999.   Beyond  this  the  most  recent
    reports from Dr. Rodgers from  May  and  July  2003  covered  her  drug
    treatment and her CD4 count situation.  In addition  the  psychological
    evidence was provided and the report from the HIV/AIDS  Association  of
    Zambia (dated 9 May 2003)  explained  the  situation  in  Zambia.   The
    report from "Blackliners" of March 2000 also had been provided.

27.   Thus, she submitted, there had been sufficient  evidence  before  the
    Adjudicator, from the time of diagnosis, to the date of  hearing,  upon
    which a sustainable Determination could have been reached.

28.   She submitted that Dr. Rodgers' reports had shown that  only  two  of
    the three drugs required by the Appellant were available in Zambia  and
    that, without the full cocktail of three drugs, which was  working  for
    this Appellant, her treatment was clearly sub-optimal and the prognosis
    for her, on return to Zambia, would be that her  life  would  be  "very
    much shortened, in terms of months to a few years".

29.   We referred Ms. Longhurst-Woods to the 4  July  2003  report  of  Dr.
    Rodgers, where she stated that the Appellant's anti-retroviral  therapy
    was not available in her country of origin  and  that  any  combination
    containing just two drugs would be sub-optimal and  lead  to  treatment
    failure.  We noted she had gone on to state that as  only  three  anti-
    viral drugs were available, should this combination fail, the Appellant
    would not have access to second  line  therapy  in  Zambia.   We  noted
    however that the medical bulletin on Zambia appeared to  indicate  more
    than three drugs being available and that the report of Dr. Rodger  did
    not appear to indicate whether or not  another  combination  of  drugs,
    from those available in Zambia, could possibly work for the  Appellant.
    We asked for her comments on  this  information.   Ms.  Longhurst-Woods
    submitted that, from the evidence that was before us, particularly  the
    report of Dr. Rodgers, a change  in  the  drug  regime  could  lead  to
    treatment failure  and  this  was  the  risk  that  was  faced  by  the
    Appellant.  She noted that in the United Kingdom there were nine  anti-
    retroviral drugs available and so back up or second  line  therapy  was
    more likely to be achieved.  This had to be compared with the situation
    in a Third World, country such as Zambia, where a restricted range only
    was available.  She concluded  therefore  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed,  particularly  taking  into  account  not  only  the   serious
    prognosis for the Appellant but also her psychiatric situation and  the
    responsibilities for her son.

30.   We reserved out Determination.

The Issues

31.   We found the issue before us solely whether there would be  a  breach
    of Article 3 of the ECHR to return this Appellant  to  Zambia  at  this
    time.  In so doing, we have noted that the credibility of the Appellant
    is largely accepted by the parties and accordingly the Appellant's case
    can  be  assessed  against  her  evidence  at  its  highest   and   our
    interpretation and assessment of the  range  of  objective  and  expert
    evidence before us.

Decision

32.   We consider that the starting point for our assessment  must  be  the
    jurisprudence we are bound by and the application of the facts of  this
    Appellant's  case  to  that  jurisprudence.   As  stated  the   leading
    Determination in England, which binds us in this case,  is  N  v  SSHD.
    This was a decision of Lord Justice Laws, Lord Justice Dyson  and  Lord
    Justice Carnwath (dissenting).  The determinations of  Laws  and  Dyson
    LJJ  set  out  a  very   detailed   consideration   of   the   relevant
    jurisprudence, both in this country and in particular from  Strasbourg.
    Particular reference was made to the Strasbourg Determination in D v UK
    where it was considered, that there would be a breach of the ECHR if D,
    who was suffering from AIDS, were to be returned, at that time, to  St.
    Kitts.  At paragraph 41 of the decision in N Laws LJ stated:

      "But I am no less clear that D should be very strictly  confined.   I
         do not say that its confinement is to deathbed cases;  that  would
         be a coarse rule and an unwise one: there may be  other  instances
         which press with equal force.  That said,  in  the  light  of  the
         considerations I have described I would hold that the  application
         of Article 3, where  the  complaint  in  essence  is  of  want  of
         resources in the applicant's home country, (in  contrast  to  what
         has been available to him in the country from which he  is  to  be
         removed) is only justified where the humanitarian  appeal  of  the
         case is so powerful that it could not in reason be resisted by the
         authorities of a civilised state.  This does not,  I  acknowledge,
         amount to a sharp legal test; there are no sharp  legal  tests  in
         this area.  I intend only to emphasise that an Article 3  case  of
         this kind must be based on facts which are not  only  exceptional,
         but extreme; extreme, that is, judged in the context of cases  all
         of many of which (like this one) demand one's sympathy on pressing
         grounds.  On its facts, D was such a case.  I  consider  that  any
         broader view distorts the  balance  between  the  demands  of  the
         general interest of the community, whose service is  conspicuously
         the duty of  elected  government,  and  the  requirements  of  the
         protection of the individual's fundamental rights".

33.   He went on at paragraph 43 to find that:

      "In my view, the evidence for the Appellant, taken  at  its  highest,
         would not bring her within the extreme class of case to  which  in
         my judgment, she must belong if her Article 3 case is good".

      He also found there was no viable Article 8 claim.

34.   In the Determination of Lord Justice Dyson he also  agreed  that  the
    appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Laws LJ.  He  gives
    consideration to the actual Determination in D and the opinion of Judge
    Pettiti  therein.  He states at paragraph 47:

      "Sadly, there are many examples of persons who enter the UK and other
         states  from  developing  world  countries  and  who  suffer  from
         HIV/AIDS.  They  receive  sophisticated  treatment  here,  and  if
         returned to their countries of origin they will receive much  less
         effective treatment, and, in some cases, no treatment at all.  The
         anti-retroviral drugs which they receive in this country may  give
         them a life expectancy of many years.  If  they  are  returned  to
         their countries of origin, their  life  expectancy  may,  in  many
         cases almost  certainly  will,  be  substantially  reduced.   But,
         tragic though all such cases are, it seems to me that it is  clear
         from D that the ECtHR would  not,  without  more,  recognise  such
         cases as raising humanitarian consideration so  compelling  as  to
         engage Article 3.  The Court would not regard  such  circumstances
         as exceptional, still less very exceptional.  The  fact  that  the
         applicant's life expectancy will be  reduced,  even  substantially
         reduced, because the facilities of the receiving  country  do  not
         match those in the expelling country is not sufficient  to  engage
         Article 3.  Something more is required.  I have  already  referred
         to the special circumstances which enabled the Court in D to  find
         that Article 3 was engaged.  I do not say that Article 3 will only
         ever be engaged where the applicant  is  in  the  last  stages  of
         terminal  illness.   But  I  consider  that  the  class  of   case
         recognised in D as  engaging  Article  3  should  be  confined  to
         situations   where,    broadly    speaking,    the    humanitarian
         considerations are as compelling as they were in that case".

35.   He then turned, in paragraph 48, to the evidence of the  Appellant  N
    and noted that as long as  she  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    continued  to  receive  treatment  here  she  had  a  reasonable   life
    expectancy.  He  noted  that  if  she  returned  to  Uganda,  her  life
    expectancy would be reduced to about two years.  He also noted that  if
    she returned to Uganda, the  prospect  was  extremely  distressing  and
    moreover death itself was likely to be painful and distressing.  In his
    judgment he did not consider that the Appellant would  satisfy  a  test
    that the facts disclosed a situation so exceptional and  so  compelling
    that there would be a breach of Article 3.  He stated:

      "They enjoy sophisticated medical treatment  in  this  country  which
         keeps the disease at bay, and which ensures they  have  reasonable
         life expectancy.  If they  are  returned  to  their  countries  of
         origin, they will be unlikely to receive  medical  treatment  that
         they currently enjoy and, as a  result,  their  life  expectancies
         will be substantially reduced.  It seems to me that if the Article
         3 door is opened in such cases, it will be opened far  wider  than
         is intended by the signatories of the European Convention on Human
         Rights, and far wider than  the  Court  envisaged  in  D.   Tragic
         though such cases undoubtedly are, unless they have  some  special
         feature, which gives rise to particularly compelling  humanitarian
         considerations, they do not meet the  stringent  requirement  that
         they be truly exceptional  in  order  to  satisfy  the  Article  3
         criteria.  For the reasons that I have given, I  do  not  consider
         that it is reasonably arguable that  there  is  any  such  special
         feature in the Appellant's case".


36.   It is now relevant to consider the comparative situation of N, and D,
    with this Appellant.

37.   N was a woman who had entered the United Kingdom from Uganda in  1998
    and had been diagnosed within one or two days as HIV positive.  She had
    no idea that she had this condition before  she  left  Uganda.   By  23
    November 1998 she had developed full blown AIDS and was suffering  from
    disseminated mycobacterium TB and  also  a  form  of  cancer  known  as
    Kaposi's sarcoma.  These were AIDS-defining illnesses.  She was treated
    with  chemotherapy  for  both  conditions.   She  was  also  clinically
    depressed.  The medical report on her stated that from an HIV point  of
    view she was extremely advanced.  Her CD4  count  at  presentation  was
    just 20  cells/mm3  reflecting  considerable  immuno-suppression.   Her
    viral load was around 50,000 copies/ml  at  baseline.   Anti-retroviral
    therapy had been problematic with recurrent episodes of abnormal  liver
    function, associated with fever,  but  she  had  recently  tolerated  a
    combination of Stavudin, Nevirapine and Lamivudine.  The medical report
    for N stated that without active treatment the prognosis was  appalling
    and that it was anticipated her life expectancy would be  under  twelve
    months if she was forced  to  return  to  Uganda  where  there  was  no
    prospect of her getting adequate therapy.

38.   Paragraph 4 of the Determination in N sets out a  convenient  account
    of HIV/AIDS so that an understanding of the issues can be gathered.  We
    have been assisted by that summary.

39.   The facts of D are  also  set  out  in  the  Determination  in  N  at
    paragraph 18.  D came from St. Kitts  and  after  being  imprisoned  on
    drugs offences in the United States was deported in 1993 to St.  Kitts.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom however two weeks later.  He was found
    to be in possession of a quantity of cocaine.  He was refused leave and
    given notice of removal to  St.  Kitts.   Before  the  directions  were
    executed however he was prosecuted for importing a  Class  A  drug  and
    imprisoned to six years' imprisonment.  While he was serving  the  term
    of imprisonment he was diagnosed with HIV and suffered from  AIDS.   By
    December 1996 his HIV infection was  in  an  advanced  stage.   He  was
    severely immuno-suppressed.  He was receiving anti-retroviral  therapy,
    his prognosis was very poor.  He was transferred to an AIDS hospice  in
    January 1997 and there was sudden deterioration  in  his  condition  in
    February 1997 such that he had to be transferred to hospital.   At  the
    time of his hearing before  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
    February 1997 it was said that his life was drawing to a close.  He had
    been receiving counselling and was psychologically prepared  for  death
    in the UK environment in which he had been looked  after.   If  he  was
    returned to St. Kitts, where the population was beset with  health  and
    sanitation problems, there would be  nothing  to  show  that  he  would
    receive any  moral  or  social  support  nor  even  that  he  would  be
    guaranteed a bed in either of the hospitals on the island which the  UK
    had started to care for AIDS patients.

40.   As  stated  above  Laws  and  Dyson  LJJ  both  considered  that  the
    conclusion in D v UK  should  be  very  much  confined  in  the  manner
    described above.  We have gone on to the sad and  regrettable  task  of
    making some comparison between  the  predicaments  of  N,  D  and  this
    Appellant.  It  is  clear  that,  at  the  time  of  diagnosis  of  the
    Appellant's HIV infection, she had a severe immuno-suppression  with  a
    CD4 count of 4 cells/mm3 and a viral load  of  29,755  copies/ml.   The
    therapy adopted immediately for her and continued during  her  time  in
    this country has demonstrated "excellent compliance".  Her past medical
    problems have included

         (i)      Recurrent herpes.
         (ii)     Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia Grade 3.
         (iii)    LOOP excision of the transformation zone of the cervix.
         (iv)     Drug induced peripheral neuropathy.
         (v)      Osteoarthritis of both knees.
         (vi)     Generalised xerosis.


41.   She is stated to be currently stable in her physical health  although
    very fearful of her long-term prognosis.

42.   She states that she does not have a support system available  to  her
    in Zambia on return and that  she  would  have  the  responsibility  of
    caring for her 11 year old son.   She  also  claims  that  due  to  her
    illness she would not be well enough to work.

43.   The comparative availability of anti-retroviral drugs in  the  United
    Kingdom  and  Zambia  is  provided  to  us,  possibly  not  the  latest
    information available,  but it is  the only evidence  before  us.   The
    October 2002 medical report on Zambia, from the  Respondent,  shows  in
    paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4 the range of drugs available particularly  those
    at reduced prices.  It appears from the reports of Dr. Rodgers and  the
    Home Office medical  bulletin  that  two  of  the  drugs  used  by  the
    Appellant are available in Zambia (Combivir, and Nevirapine).   However
    Dr. Rodgers states that any combination containing just two drugs would
    be sub-optimal  and  lead  to  treatment  failure.   She  then  states,
    possibly incorrectly by reference to the Home  Office  medical  report,
    that "as only three anti-retroviral drugs are  available,  should  this
    combination fail, Ms. Sitima  would  have  access  to  no  second  line
    therapy in Zambia".

44.   As we expressed during the hearing we are concerned that we are  left
    with a lacuna in the evidence.  The medical evidence  does  not  inform
    us, and indeed it may be  impossible  to  do  so  with  any  degree  of
    confidence, as to whether another combination of anti-retroviral drugs,
    taken from those that are available in Zambia at this time, while  even
    possibly "sub-optimal", could lead to a satisfactory form of treatment.
     Our conclusion in this  regard  is  that  while  the  medical  reports
    indicate that a change in the anti-retroviral  therapy  taken  by  this
    Appellant at this time (apparently successfully)  in  this  country  is
    undesirable and "sub-optimal", we are not able to say with  any  degree
    of certainty that some other combination of drugs, from those available
    in Zambia, would not be successful  for  this  Appellant.   Clearly  as
    there are thousands of  HIV/AIDS sufferers in Zambia and many of  these
    are now being successfully treated from the drug regime  available,  it
    would be wrong to conclude that  an  alternative  "cocktail  of  drugs"
    would not give satisfactory treatment for this Appellant.
45.   We have therefore found that this Appellant's situation is not vastly
    different from that of N.  Indeed this appellant  does  not  appear  to
    have had the AIDS-defining illnesses that N has suffered  from  in  the
    past.  Her prognosis of a shortened life in terms of months  to  a  few
    years is possibly slightly better than that of N who was stated to have
    a life expectancy of under twelve months.

46.   The other factors we must take into account are  the  Appellant's  11
    year old son  and  the  possibility  of  support  in  Zambia  for  this
    Appellant and her son on return.   The  Appellant  claims  she  has  no
    support available and that she has not lived with the father of the son
    at any time in the past.  However, as noted by the Adjudicator,  it  is
    clear that  the  father  acknowledges  his  situation  from  the  birth
    certificate and that he cared for the son for a  period  of  two  years
    from the time this Appellant came to this country  until  the  son  was
    allegedly "dumped" on the Appellant.  The father clearly had the  funds
    to bring himself and his son to this country in  2002.   Some  support,
    even if difficult to obtain,  is  at  least  a  possibility  from  that
    source.

47.   We have taken into account the totality of this Appellant's difficult
    situation and consider that her predicament is not  of  the  nature  of
    that set out in D.  Her  predicament  on  return,  whilst  it  has  the
    possibility  of  being  difficult  and  limited,  with  the  additional
    problems of care and support for herself and her son, do not constitute
    a  very  exceptional  case  where  there  are  compelling  humanitarian
    circumstances of the extreme  nature  noted  by  Laws  and  Dyson  LJJ.
    Accordingly we dismiss the appeal.





                                                                 A.R. MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
















