
KK ( Failed Asylum Seeker) Libya CG [2004] UKIAT 00151

Heard at Field House
On      20 May 2004
Written  20 May 2004

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             27 May 2004

                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice-President)
                               Mr G H Getlevog



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen  of  Libya.  The  Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  D  R  Garratt,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 13 August 2003 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum

  2.  Ms  R  Brown,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  represented  the
     Appellant. Mr R Arkhurst represented the Respondent.

  3. The Respondent arrived in the UK on  15  April  2002  and  applied  for
     asylum on the same day. The Adjudicator, who heard  the  appeal  on  27
     November 2003 and  prepared  his  determination  on  8  December  2003,
     reached  properly  reasoned  and  comprehensive   adverse   credibility
     findings concerning the factual basis of that claim. However he went on
     to conclude that, as a returned asylum seeker who left Libya illegally,
     the Respondent would be at real  risk  of  ill-treatment  amounting  to
     persecution.  In  reaching  that  conclusion  he  had  before  him  and
     considered a  report  on  Libya  dated  25  March  2003  by  the  Dutch
     Immigration Authorities.

  4. Although the Adjudicator was unaware of this, a full legal panel of the
     Tribunal chaired by the President was considering  this  precise  point
     with a view to providing country guidance, in much the same way  as  it
     had previously done, with the approval of the Court of  Appeal,  in  SK
     (Return - Ethnic  Serb)  Croatia*  [2002]  UKIAT  05613  and  in  other
     subsequent cases. The Tribunal hearing took place on  29  October  2003
     and the determination was promulgated on 17  December  2003.   In  that
     case the Tribunal took into account not  only  the  material  that  was
     before the Adjudicator in this appeal but also had  the  benefit  of  a
     wider range of evidence.   It  conducted  a  careful  analysis  of  the
     country evidence as  a  whole,  including  the  advice  of  UNHCR.  The
     Tribunal's key conclusions were
           "It  is  plain  that  people  who  are  suspected   of   serious
           involvement with anti-Libyan political groups are at risk in the
           event of their return. Then it is argued that there is  evidence
           before us that this risk extends to everyone because the act  of
           seeking asylum abroad is seen as an act against  the  government
           of Libya.  It is plain that this cannot  be  right.   The  Dutch
           report shows people who have  been  returned  as  failed  asylum
           seekers now going about their business in Libya.  They  had  not
           being persecuted on their return and are not persecuted now.  If
           it were the case that every failed asylum seeker was risk  there
           would be no examples  of  people  being  returned  safely.   The
           examples of people being seriously ill  treated  all  appear  to
           relate to those who have been involved, or  at  least  seriously
           suspected of being involved, in serious  political  activity  or
           are radical Islamic supporters.
           It must be the case that the bald assertion  that  any  returned
           asylum seeker will be persecuted because they will be  perceived
           as someone taking a stance against the government is wrong."

  5. Ms Brown argued that the only reason given by the Adjudicator  in  this
     appeal was that he would be at risk as a  failed  asylum  seeker.   The
     Adjudicator had rejected his claim of  involvement  in  any  activities
     that could arouse the adverse attention of the Libyan authorities.  His
     assessment of the significance of the  Dutch  report  was  wrong.  This
     appeal should be allowed in line with E Libya. Indeed there was further
     evidence since E Libya was decided confirming its conclusions. A report
     by Amnesty International dated 27 April  2004  reported  on  the  first
     visit in  many  years  by  representatives  of  that  organisation.  It
     recorded a speech by Colonel Gaddafi to the Supreme Council of Judicial
     Bodies on 18 April 2004 in which he called for a number  of  legal  and
     institutional  reforms,  in  response  to  issues  raised  by   Amnesty
     International. The report also noted  that  during  2003  international
     travel restrictions on thousands of Libyan nationals  had  been  lifted
     and that the  Libyan  authorities  were  embarking  upon  a  policy  of
     actively encouraging Libyan nationals  residing  abroad  to  return  to
     Libya with guarantees that they will not face persecution after return.
     Against this, they reported one case where a Libyan national,  Mustapha
     Krer, who returned in May 2002 after assurances from  Libyan  officials
     abroad that he could returned safely, was arrested at the  airport  and
     had been charged with affiliation to the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group.
     Ms Brown submitted that these developments reflected the view taken  by
     the Tribunal in E Libya on the risk on return.

  6. We invited Mr Ackhurst to  explain  to  us  why  E  Libya  was  wrongly
     decided, or whether there had been a change of circumstances  in  Libya
     requiring a review of it, or whether there were any other  reasons  why
     we should not follow E Libya on facts of this appeal.

  7. He argued first that the Adjudicator was entitled to make his  decision
     at the time he did on the basis of the evidence before him, even though
     the situation may  have  changed  subsequently.  However  there  is  no
     validity in this submission.  The Adjudicator had before him the  Dutch
     report and the conclusions he  reached  from  it  were  plainly  wrong,
     having regard to the analysis and reasoning of the Tribunal in E Libya.
     In any event, the Court of Appeal in Subesh & Others [2004] EWCA Civ 56
     has recently given guidance  to  the  Tribunal  concerning  the  proper
     approach to be taken by  it  to  challenges  against  an  Adjudicator's
     findings. In paragraph 43, Laws LJ stated it as follows.
           "In every case the Appellant assumes the burden of showing  that
           the judgment appealed from is wrong. The burden  so  assumed  is
           not the burden of proof normally carried by a claimant in  first
           instance proceedings  where  there  are  factual  disputes.   An
           Appellant, if he is to succeed, must persuade the  appeal  court
           or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts  from
           that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there  are
           objective grounds upon which the court ought to conclude that  a
           different view is  the  right  one.  The  divide  between  these
           positions is not caught by the  supposed  difference  between  a
           perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case  the  appeal
           court disagrees with the court below,  and  indeed  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the court of appeal might prefer different  view  (perhaps
           on marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process
           of reasoning and the application of the relevant law, require it
           to adopt a  different  view.   The  burden  which  an  Appellant
           assumes is to show  that  the  case  falls  within  this  latter
           category."

  8. We find that the Appellant has shown us that this is a case  where  the
     process of reasoning and the application of the relevant law,  requires
     us to adopt a different view from that taken the Adjudicator. We  adopt
     E Libya and its reasoning and conclusions.

  9. Mr Arkhurst then submitted that the Amnesty report  showed  that  there
     was still some risk to returnees such as Mr Krer, who had been arrested
     and charged despite having assurances  that  he  could  return  safely.
     However the situation of Mr Krer is very  different,  in  that  he  was
     suspected by the authorities of having links  to  an  Islamic  militant
     organisation.  The Tribunal in E Libya fully recognised that people who
     were suspected of activities against the Libyan regime would  still  be
     at risk and should  not  be  returned.   In  this  appeal  however  the
     Adjudicator has reached a  comprehensive  adverse  credibility  finding
     concerning any such activities by the Respondent, which  has  not  been
     challenged on his hehalf. We conclude therefore that there is  no  real
     risk  that  the  Respondent  would  face  ill-treatment  amounting   to
     persecution or a breach of Article 3 on return, bearing in mind that he
     will be returned as a failed asylum seeker who has been  out  of  Libya
     now for some two years and has  not  established  that  he  is  of  any
     adverse interest to the Libyan authorities  as  a  consequence  of  any
     activities in or outside that country.

 10. Accordingly and for the reasons given  above  this  appeal  is  allowed
     outright, the Adjudicator's decision to allow the asylum and Article  3
     appeal is set aside, and the Appellant's original decision is upheld.



                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
