
H-DMG-V3

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 6 July 2004             |        |NK (FGM - Cameroon) Cameroon|
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00247          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10 September 2004                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Vice President)                                    |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Mrs B M Southwell                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms N  Mallick  of  Counsel  instructed  by
      Mirza & Co                   Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Hutton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant aged 30 is a national of Cameroon. She appeals  against
      a determination of Adjudicator Mr T P  Thorne  dismissing  her  appeal
      against the decision giving directions for removal  following  refusal
      to grant asylum.

2.    The basis of the Appellant's claim was that when  she  turned  18  in
      1992 her stepfather began to pressurise her to become  a  Muslim.   In
      1997 her stepfather took steps to  arrange  a  marriage  for  her  and
      demanded that she undergo Female Genital Mutilation (FGM).   She  went
      to the police, but they refused to  pursue  the  matter  and,  indeed,
      following a complaint to them from her stepfather, arrested,  detained
      and molested her.  During the time she spent in three separate prisons
      she was raped.  Eventually in November 1998 she was  finally  released
      when her mother bribed the guards.  With her mother's  help  she  then
      fled the country.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted the core features of the  Appellant's  claim
      as credible.  However, he dismissed her appeal for two  main  reasons.
      He considered her release on payment of a bribe demonstrated that  the
      authorities no longer had an adverse interest  in  her.   He  reasoned
      that her stepfather, in view of the fact that she was now older (29 at
      the date of hearing), would no longer have the desire to harm her: "It
      would not be in accordance with custom to force her to undergo FGM  at
      her age".  He went on to find that, even if he were wrong  about  risk
      to the Appellant in her home area, she would have a viable  option  of
      internal relocation.

4.    The grounds of appeal, as amplified by Ms Mallick, contended that the
      Adjudicator was wrong to conclude that the Appellant  would  not  face
      serious harm on return to her home area  and  wrong  to  conclude  she
      would in any event have a viable internal relocation alternative.

5.    We agree with Ms Mallick that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  concluding
      that the Appellant would not face further acts of serious harm in  her
      home area.  Irrespective of whether FGM was or was  not  practised  on
      older women, her stepfather had proved capable  of  influencing  local
      police and security forces to imprison and  maltreat  her  for  nearly
      eleven months.   His anger at her had not been solely because  of  her
      refusal to undergo FGM.  It  was  also  because  she  had  refused  to
      convert to Islam and refused to go through with the  marriage  he  had
      arranged.  Therefore it was reasonably likely, in our view,  that  her
      act of fleeing after  release  from  prison  would  have  angered  him
      further, in  particular  for  having  frustrated  his  plans  for  her
      marriage.

6.    Nevertheless we do not consider that the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      dismiss the appeal.  That is because he went on in the alternative  to
      consider whether, (even if he was wrong about risk in her home  area),
      she would be able to achieve safety by means of  internal  relocation.
      The grounds have challenged his conclusion that  she  could  relocate,
      but  we  do  not  find  the  arguments  they  advance  on  this  issue
      persuasive.

7.    Whilst the Adjudicator was  wrong  in  our  view  to  find  that  the
      Appellant's stepfather would no longer have any animus against her, he
      was entitled to find that this man would not  have  the  resources  to
      pursue the Appellant or locate her in other  parts  of  Cameroon.   Ms
      Mallick has submitted that he was a man of some power and influence in
      his home area, as demonstrated by  the  readiness  of  the  police  to
      ignore the Appellant's complaint against him and to incarcerate her in
      response to his complaint.  However, even  assuming  this  to  be  the
      case, she has not been able to point to  any  evidence  to  show  that
      individuals with influence locally are able  to  get  the  police  and
      security  forces  elsewhere  in  the  country  to  pursue  or   target
      individuals on their behalf, at least not when  the  matter  concerned
      only family and domestic matters.  The Adjudicator was quite  entitled
      to find that his occupation as a lorry driver would not enable him  to
      conduct any significant search operation.  Furthermore, as  Mr  Hutton
      pointed out, Cameroon has a territory of 183,000 square  miles  and  a
      population of 15.7 million.  And,  if  the  suggestion  was  that  her
      stepfather would be able to  exploit  contacts  in  the  wider  Muslim
      community,  the  Appellant  plainly  identified  her   own   religious
      persuasion as Catholic.  As such, if she feared that having to live in
      a Muslim area of the country might expose  her  to  a  risk  of  being
      located by her stepfather or perhaps subjected again to pressure  from
      local Muslims to convert or marry  or  undergo  FGM,  Cameroon  was  a
      country in which there were several areas  where  the  population  was
      predominantly  Christian.   The  Adjudicator  was  quite  entitled  to
      conclude she could resettle safely in a Christian area.

8.    Ms Mallick set much store by the evidence (which included IRB, Canada
      materials and the CIPU Report of a Fact-finding Mission to Cameroon 17-
      25 January 2004). She submitted that it indicated:

      (i)   FGM was a widespread and routine practice in Cameroon; and


      (ii)  it was not only practised on young girls but was also  practised
           on women prior to marriage, regardless of her age.

9.    We are bound  to  say  we  do  not  consider  the  objective  country
      materials bear out that FGM is routinely practised on women and  girls
      in Cameroon.  It certainly continues to be practised on a  significant
      percentage of the female population, but, even on the highest  figures
      cited by Ms Mallick, it is only inflicted on one in five  (i.e.  20%).
      Furthermore, on her own figures, the main victims were women and girls
      residing in predominantly Muslim areas of the  country.   The  January
      2004 Fact-finding mission report  states  at  paragraph  9.11  that  a
      diplomatic source had stated that FGM  occurs  in  three  out  of  ten
      provinces in the east, south-west and far north.

10.   It is true that even in the  predominantly  Christian  areas  of  the
      country, FGM is still practised.  We are also prepared to accept  that
      the government has not passed laws to make FGM illegal or to repudiate
      the custom.  However, whilst we accept that it  can  be  practised  on
      women of any age prior to marriage, it is equally  clear  that  it  is
      normally practised on young girls aged 6-8  years.   That  is  plainly
      stated in the CIPU Report at paragraph 6.70.

11.   Ms Mallick urged us to find that the Adjudicator was wrong (and  that
      we would be wrong) to rely on  this  passage  from  the  CIPU  Report.
      However, even on the alternative sources she urged us to  prefer,  the
      Amnesty International report in particular,  there  is  no  suggestion
      that the practice of FGM is inflicted as often on  post-adolescent  as
      on pre-adolescent females.

12.   Ms Mallick submitted that, even if we found that the Appellant  would
      not be at risk of being  pursued  or  located  by  her  stepfather  or
      members of his family, we should find that it would be unduly harsh to
      expect a young woman on her own to relocate within Cameroon.  In  this
      regard she drew our attention to passages in the background  materials
      highlighting discrimination against women in a number of  areas.   She
      also pointed out the poor record of the authorities  in  Cameroon:  at
      para 5.28 there was reference to "arbitrary  arrests  and  detentions"
      and at para 6.1 mention of numerous serious abuses  of  human  rights.
      However, the background evidence fell well  short  of  establishing  a
      consistent pattern of gross, mass or flagrant violations of the  human
      rights of women.  The legal system in Cameroon  permitted  freedom  of
      movement  (CIPU,  6.51).   Also  relevant  was  that  this  particular
      appellant had shown herself able to turn to  Catholic  church  members
      for help and support.

13.   Whilst, therefore, the Appellant might face hardship in  other  parts
      of Cameroon outside her home or other Muslim areas, we do not consider
      that the evidence justified a conclusion  that  this  Appellant  would
      face a real risk of serious harm.





                                                                  H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT


