
ar           ZK (Country Expert - Partisan) Iraq [2004] UKIAT 00068


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing  : 11 March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                 .......8th April 2004......

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                             Mrs M Padfield, JP
                        Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr A.  Taylor,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Harehills  and
  Chapeltown  Law  Centre  for  the  appellant;   Mrs  R.  Giltrow  for  the
respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Iraq. He  appeals  with  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against a determination  of an Adjudicator,  Mr  C.B.  Kealy,
      dismissing his appeal against the decision refusing to grant leave  to
      enter on asylum grounds.

2.    The grounds  of  appeal  stretched  to  twenty  points.  As  the  Vice
      President  who  granted  leave  rightly  observed,  a  number   lacked
      substance.  But  essentially  they  consisted  in  two  main   points.
      Firstly,  they  contended  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in  his
      assessment  that the appellant  had  not  given  a  credible  account.
      Secondly, it was argued that the Adjudicator  had erred in  concluding
      in the alternative that even if the appellant's account  was  accepted
      as credible, he would be able to obtain effective  protection  in  his
      home area or, failing that, in other parts of Iraq.

3.    We do not propose to set out in detail the submissions that were  made
      to us, relating to the  Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings.
      That is because we are satisfied there were significant errors in  his
      assessment. In particular, he failed  in  our  view,  to  take  proper
      cognisance of what had been said by Mr Justice Collins when  remitting
      this  appeal  to  him.  The  then  President  described    "his   then
      solicitor's  apparent  total  failure  to  behave  as  any   competent
      solicitors should". That description should have made the  Adjudicator
      far less ready to overlook the various complaints  the  appellant  had
      made about the serious inaccuracy of his SEF statement.

4.    Mrs Giltrow sought to argue that, even if no reliance  was  placed  on
      the   SEF statement, the Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings
      were  still  sustainable,  since  they  also  identified   significant
      inconsistencies between the appellant's interview  record and his more
      recent statement. However, having examined both of these  accounts  we
      fail to see any serious discrepancies.

5.    Whilst we would  accept  it  remains  arguable  that  the  appellant's
      account lacked credence, we are prepared, in view of the  shortcomings
      identified above,  to  approach  this  case  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant's account should be regarded as credible. We notice that the
      Adjudicator did go on in the alternative, to consider his  account  on
      this basis, so we have a basis against which  to  assess  whether  his
      resultant conclusions were sound.

6.    Given that on the appellant's own account the family  of  the  wronged
      girl, the Ahmads, were powerful in the KDP (and possibly had influence
      within the fundamentalist United Islamic Party as well), we  are  also
      prepared to accept that the Adjudicator was wrong to conclude that  he
      would be able to obtain effective protection  in  his   home  area  or
      indeed anywhere within the  KAZ.   The  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
      observe that the  KDP and the PUK  are now both firmly opposed to  the
      tradition of honour killings and can in general afford  protection  to
      those  affected.  However,  he  failed  to   consider   whether   this
      appellant's circumstances fell outside the general run  of  cases.  He
      should have recognised that if the Ahmad family were powerful  in  the
      KDP they would be  in  a  position   to  influence  significantly  the
      willingness and ability of the authorities to protect this  particular
      appellant.

7.    Given further the closer cooperation now  practised  between  the  KDP
      and PUK we are also prepared to accept that internal relocation within
      the  KAZ would not obviate the real risk the appellant would face from
      the  Ahmads of serious harm against which neither the KDP or PUK would
      be minded to protect.

8.    It remains, however, to consider whether the appellant  has  a  viable
      internal relocation alternative outside the KAZ.  The Adjudicator  did
      not go on to consider this because of  his  view  that  the  appellant
      could achieve safety within the  KAZ.  But it remains an issue. We had
      the benefit of hearing submissions from both parties on it.

9.    Mr Taylor submitted that the appellant would not be safe  anywhere  in
      Iraq. If he went to any area where Kurds lived, he would  be  in  real
      danger of identification by other Kurds who would know of  the   Ahmad
      family's adverse interest in him.  If he went to a non-Kurdish area he
      would face discrimination and hostility making it unduly harsh for him
      to relocate there. Finally Mr Taylor pointed out the general  backdrop
      to all of this was that Iraq post-Saddam continues to experience  high
      levels of violence and instability.

10.   We found ourselves unable to accept Mr  Taylor's  submissions.  Taking
      first the appellant's position  in  a  non-Kurdish  area,  we  do  not
      consider that the objective country materials bear out that  Kurds  in
      such areas face a real risk  of  serious  harm.  Certainly  there  are
      significant levels of violence directed against  Kurds.  However,  the
      extent and frequency of such incidents fall well short of establishing
      in non-Kurdish  areas  a  consistent  pattern  of  gross  or  flagrant
      violations of the basic human rights of Kurds.

11.   Mr Taylor said there was a special reason  why  this  appellant  would
      "stick out" in non-Kurdish areas, namely that he only  spoke  Bardini.
      However, this appellant had not said when he served in  the Iraq  army
      that language had been a particular difficulty. And in any event,  the
      objective  country  materials   do   not   identify   any   particular
      difficulties for Bardini speakers.

12.   Even within Kurdish areas outside of the KAZ, e.g. Kirkuk  and  Mosul,
      we do not consider it reasonably likely the appellant  would  face  in
      such areas a real risk of identification and attack by members of  the
      Ahmad family or others acting on their behalf.

13.   Here it is important to focus on the actual position of  this  family.
      Even assuming they are powerful within the  KDP  and  possibly  within
      fundamentalist Islamic  groups  as  well,  there  is  no  satisfactory
      evidence to show that  the  KDP,  PUK  or  indeed  any  fundamentalist
      Islamic organisations seek out, on behalf  of  powerful  families  who
      enjoy close links with them, persons wanted  by  reason  of  a  family
      feud or honour killing. Furthermore, on the very evidence  adduced  by
      the appellant's representatives, the  Ahmads were part of the  100,000-
      strong Doski tribe.  This tribe was based primarily in   Dihok  (which
      was in PUK territory) and on and over the  Turkish border.  There  was
      no evidence that it had any particular influence or  presence  outside
      the far north.

14.   In seeking to  persuade  us  otherwise  Mr  Taylor  placed  particular
      reliance on the expert evidence of Dr Fateh. The Adjudicator had  been
      wrong, he said, to reject that evidence on the  basis that Dr Fateh is
      a "pro-Kurdish  polemicist".   Mr  Taylor  asked  us  to  regard  this
      judgment on Dr Fateh as  prejudicial  since  his  qualifications  made
      clear that  he had very specialised knowledge of Iraqi affairs.

15.   We do not consider that it  is  an  error  for  an  Adjudicator,  when
      evaluating expert evidence, to take into account by  reference  to  an
      expert's curriculum vitae, indications that the person concerned holds
      partisan views in relation to the issues on which he  gives  evidence.
      However, we do not think that Dr Fateh's statement of  his  background
      demonstrated that he was a "pro-Kurdish polemicist".  We note that  he
      had  said  he  had  "no  political  involvement  with  any   political
      organisations".  If an Adjudicator sees fit to classify an  expert  as
      partisan, it should be on the  basis  of  evidence,  either  that  put
      before him or that established through his own examination of it.

16.   In the absence of any further examination of Dr  Fateh's  bona  fides,
      we are prepared (at least for the purposes of this case) to accept him
      as an expert witness and attach due weight to his  evidence.  However,
      the question remains, does his evidence establish that  the  appellant
      would face a real risk of  serious  harm  in  Kurdish  areas  of  Iraq
      outside the KAZ?  In considering this question we have  also  to  take
      account of other objective materials including the CIPU Report.

17.   We do not think that the objective evidence  does demonstrate  a  real
      risk of serious harm in such areas. Certainly (as  Dr  Fateh's  report
      illustrates) such  evidence  does  indicate  that  Iraq  continues  to
      experience high levels of violence and to remain  unstable.  Certainly
      too, (as Dr  Fateh's  report  illustrates)  there  are  a  significant
      number of incidents in which Kurds have been targeted  by   Arabs:  Dr
      Fateh notes, for example, a May 2003 Baath loyalist  tribe  attack  on
      Kurds in Kirkuk.  However, his report certainly does  not  demonstrate
      in Kurdish or non-Kurdish areas  outside  of  the   KAZ  a  consistent
      pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of the human  rights  of
      Kurds.
18.   Accordingly, we are not  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator   erred  in
      concluding that the appellant upon return to Iraq  would  not  face  a
      real risk of  serious  harm:  he  had  a  viable  internal  relocation
      alternative.

19.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
