

|Heard at Field House       |        |CO and NO (No protected     |
|On 14 April 2004           |        |family life) Nigeria [2004] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00232                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 August 2004                                                    |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C M G Ockelton                                                 |
|(Deputy President)                                                |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr L V Waumsley                                                   |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS                                   |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Respondents                 |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us the appellant, hereinafter  "the  Entry  Clearance  Officer",  was
represented by Mr P Deller, a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  and
the respondents, hereinafter "the  claimants",  were  represented  by  Mr  S
Chelvan of counsel instructed by Dillon & Co.

The claimants are citizens of Nigeria.  They are brother  and  sister.   The
first respondent was born on 11 February 1979 and so is  now  25  years  old
and the second respondent was born on 24 March 1981 and so is now  23  years
old.  In a determination promulgated on 16 September  2002  an  Adjudicator,
Mr G F Denson,  allowed  their  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry
Clearance Officer that refusing them admission to  the  United  Kingdom  was
not contrary to their rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
Human Rights.  It is against that decision that the Entry Clearance  Officer
now appeals.

On 7 July 2000 the claimants, with other members of  their  family,  applied
for permission to settle in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  sponsor  and
mother.  Their father and younger brother made similar applications  at  the
same time.  The applications  of  their  father  and  younger  brother  were
allowed by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The application of these  claimants
was refused.  At the time of making that application they had each  achieved
their majority and were unable to show that they were living  alone  outside
the United Kingdom in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.
The Adjudicator dismissed their appeal against that decision and it  is  not
suggested that that decision can be  criticised.   However  the  Adjudicator
decided that excluding the claimants was not  proportionate  to  the  proper
purpose  of  enforcing  immigration  control.   At  paragraph  42   of   the
determination the Adjudicator said

  "I  note  that  the  respondent  has  granted  entry  clearance  to   the
  appellant's father and younger brother who had subsequently travelled  to
  this country and obtained indefinite leave to remain together with  their
  mother and elder sister.  I also note that the appellant's  mother  is  a
  nurse and that strenuous efforts are made to recruit  nurses  within  the
  Health Service in the United Kingdom.  I do not consider for  one  moment
  that it is proportionate to preclude entry to the United Kingdom  of  the
  appellants and thus in effect split up the close family unit.   I  accept
  that the sponsor could return to Nigeria with other members of her family
  who have been granted indefinite leave to remain but I  do  not  consider
  for one moment that it is proportionate in relation  to  the  aim  to  be
  achieved."

It is against that decision that the Entry Clearance Officer now appeals.

It is fair to say that the determination was  promulgated  as  long  ago  as
September 2002.  The jurisprudence concerning the application for Article  8
in the United Kingdom  has  developed  considerably  since  then.   We  have
reached  the  conclusion,  in  the  light  of  that  development,  that  the
Adjudicator erred in his approach.

Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights says  "Everyone  has
the right to respect for his private and  family  life,  his  home  and  his
correspondence."   This  does  not  mean  that  everything  that  might   be
described  reasonably  in  ordinary  conversation  as  part  of  a  person's
"private and family life" is within the meaning of the  words  "private  and
family life" in Article  8(1)  of  the  European  Convention.   It  was  the
claimants' case that they were maintained by their  sponsor  in  the  United
Kingdom.  The Adjudicator appears to have accepted  that  their  sponsor  in
the United Kingdom was paying  for  them  to  continue  their  education  in
Nigeria.  We have no hesitation in accepting that their  relationships  with
their father and younger brother and with their mother were all part of  the
appellants' private and family life in the  colloquial  sense.   However  we
also note that any financial dependency was one of choice, as was  the  fact
that their mother and sister on  earlier  occasions  and  their  father  and
brother on this occasion applied to settle in the United Kingdom.   In  this
case the claimants have two  older  brothers  who  have  formed  independent
lives in Nigeria and were not said to be part of the family unit.

We do not accept that the right "to respect for  private  and  family  life"
extends necessarily to a right (even a qualified right) to join  with  other
relatives who  are  entitled  to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
Immigration Rules.  Mr Chelvan was not able to show us any decision  of  the
European Courts which recognised the right of adult children  to  choose  to
live with their parents in a country where the European Convention on  Human
Rights applies.  We accept that there may well be  cases  where  removing  a
person interferes with his private  and  family  life  established  in,  for
example, the United Kingdom.  That is quite different  from  saying  that  a
person has the right to join with a relative who has chosen to live  in  the
United Kingdom.  Similar points were made by Mr J  Barnes  (Vice  President)
in the case known as S(Uganda) [2004] UKIAT 00064 at paragraph 8

  "It is accepted that in circumstances where family life is put forward as
  existing between an adult child and his parents or an adult  sibling  and
  his other siblings there needs  to  be  further  evidence  of  dependency
  involving more than normal emotional ties.  This was  reaffirmed  by  the
  Tribunal in the recent case of Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698  relying  on  the
  earlier case of Advik v United Kingdom,  a  Strasbourg  case  decided  in
  September 1995.  The relevant quotation from Advik is also  contained  at
  paragraph 13 of the decision in Salad.  Each case is fact dependent.   In
  Salad adult brothers had been living apart for a long period of time  and
  were not dependent on each other.  Equally  where  relationships  between
  parents and an adult child are concerned  the  protection  of  Article  8
  would not necessarily be engaged without evidence of further elements  of
  dependency.  In the present appeal no evidence of such further dependency
  has been adduced although the appellant was offered  the  opportunity  to
  bring oral evidence before us had he wished to do so."

In this case the only dependency was a  dependency  of  choice  because  the
claimants wanted an education.  There is no suggestion that  there  was  any
exceptional emotional dependency.  This is not a case, for example, of  ill-
health creating any special circumstances.

It is quite clear to us that on the evidence before him it was not  open  to
the Adjudicator  to  conclude  that  the  appellants'  dealings  with  their
relatives, either those settled in the United  Kingdom  or  those  who  were
permitted to enter the United Kingdom when these claimants applied  for  and
were refused permission, were within the scope of the  "private  and  family
life" protected by Article  8(1)  of  the  European  Convention.   In  those
circumstances there is no question of it being contrary  to  the  claimants'
rights to refuse them admission to the United Kingdom.  It follows that  the
Adjudicator was wrong and we must allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

Furthermore the adjudicator was plainly wrong to find that the  interference
with the claimants' private and family life caused by  their  being  refused
entry clearance was disproportionate to the proper  purpose  of  immigration
control.  A state is  entitled  to  regulate  admission  to  its  territory.
Unless the immigration rules are  themselves  unlawful  (and  this  was  not
suggested here) it will only be in the most exceptional  circumstances  that
an Adjudicator can say properly that a  person  who  does  not  qualify  for
admission under  the  rules  must  still  be  admitted  because  refusal  is
disproportionate to the proper purpose of enforcing control.

As indicated above, we allow the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.




                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                               14 April 2004


