
ar
      AB (Jamaica - Art 3 - Art 8 - HIV/AIDS) Jamaica [2004] UKIAT 00096


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 22 March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               30 April 2004

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                             Mr D R Bremmer, JP
                                Mr P Bompass




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representatives:  Mr  R.  Beloff,  Counsel,  instructed  by   Sultan   Lloyd
Solicitors for the appellant, Mr J. Jones for the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica.  He  appeals  against  a
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R.D. Lewis, dismissing his  appeal
      against a decision giving directions for removal.

2.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was a homosexual and  that
      in Jamaica conditions for homosexuals  are  'uncomfortable'.  He  also
      accepted that he was  HIV  positive  with  a  skin  disorder  (prurigo
      nodularis) as a result of his co-infection of HIV and hepatitis B  "e"
      antigen positive.  Despite doubts, he  accepted  too  the  appellant's
      accounts of his father throwing him out when he was seventeen. He also
      (seemingly) accepted that the appellant, his aunt, with  whom  he  had
      gone to live, asked him to leave the house when she  found  out  about
      his relationship with a gay man. What he did not accept, however,  was
      that the appellant had any valid reason for failing  to  claim  asylum
      until he had been in the UK staying with his  grandfather  some  three
      years nine months.

3.    In dismissing the appellant's  asylum  appeal  the  Adjudicator  noted
      that the appellant had never come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
      police and, although suffering the indignity of being shouted  at  and
      having stones thrown at him, had not been  beaten  up.   At  most,  he
      concluded, the appellant  had  faced  difficulties  falling  short  of
      serious harm or persecution. There was no reason, he stated, to  think
      that the appellant would face serious harm or persecution  on  return.
      He accepted the appellant's condition might make it difficult but  not
      impossible for him to find a job.

4.    In relation to  the  appellant's  health  he  further  concluded  that
      return would not expose him to a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3. The appellant would, he agreed,  clearly   need  medicines.
      However, in his view the drugs the appellant needed would be available
      in Jamaica: their cost was 'not truly unobtainable because of price'.

5.     Turning  to  Article  8,  the  Adjudicator  considered  whether   the
      appellant's relationship with his grandfather qualified as family life
      within the meaning of Article 8.  Despite accepting that the appellant
      had looked after his grandfather, an elderly man in  ill  health,  for
      some four years, he did not think the  grandfather  would   be  denied
      assistance from the social services were the appellant to be  returned
      to Jamaica.  He did not find that there  was  a  'further  element  of
      dependency' such as to make the  relationship   with  his  grandfather
      qualify under Article 8.  'In any event', he added,  'I  am  satisfied
      that the removal would be a proportionate response.'

6.    The grounds of appeal challenged the  decision  on  asylum  and  human
      rights  grounds.   As  regards  Article  3  they  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator  underestimated  the  degree  of  societal  prejudice  and
      homophobic violence homosexuals face in Jamaica. The  police,  so  far
      from protecting homosexuals, often ill-treated them. Issue  was  taken
      with the Adjudicator's finding that the appellant  would  be  able  to
      obtain employment, particularly given he had a skin condition and that
      HIV sufferers faced  discrimination  in  any  event.  The  Adjudicator
      failed to take proper account of the impact on the  appellant  of  the
      cessation or withdrawal of medical and social facilities.

7.    As to Article 8, the grounds submitted the Adjudicator  had  erred  in
      not taking into account the adverse impact  of  the  decision  on  the
      grandfather's human rights.

8.    We have not set out in detail the challenge raised in the  grounds  to
      the Adjudicator's dismissal of the asylum appeal. That is  because  we
      considered this challenge decidedly ill-founded. Essentially the  only
      objection raised was to the Adjudicator's  decision  to  take  adverse
      account of the appellant's failure to apply for asylum for some  three
      years.  However, the Adjudicator was quite entitled in our view not to
      accept that the appellant, who was an  intelligent  young  man,  would
      have failed to understand the need to apply for asylum. Whether or not
      he felt able to divulge his  past  difficulties  as  a  homosexual  in
      Jamaica to his grandfather, there was no satisfactory evidence to show
      he had been deprived of opportunities during his three years in the UK
      to seek advice or assistance about his asylum concerns.

9.    We shall next address the Article 8 grounds of appeal. In relation  to
      this issue too we consider the grounds lacked merit. It is right  that
      an Adjudicator when considering  Article  8  grounds  of  appeal  must
      consider not just the human rights of  the  appellant,  but  also  the
      human rights of other family members insofar as they adversely  impact
      on the appellant. But that is precisely what the Adjudicator  did.  At
      paragraph 44 he reminded himself that 'it is the human rights  of  the
      appellant with which I am concerned, following  the  guidance  of  the
      Tribunal  in  Kehinde  (01/TH/02669)  those  of  his  grandfather  are
      relevant only so far as  they  impinge  upon  his'  (emphasis  added).
      Furthermore, he went on to consider whether there was a  family   life
      relationship between the appellant and his grandfather.

10.   We see some force in the criticism that the Adjudicator was  wrong  to
      find that the appellant's relationship with the  grandfather  did  not
      constitute family life. Earlier in his determination he accepted  that
      the appellant's grandfather was 'an elderly man in ill health who  has
      been  looked  after  by  the  appellant  since  1999.'    Given   this
      acceptance, it is not clear to us that he was justified in  concluding
      that  there  was  no  element  of  dependency  such  as  to  bring   a
      relationship  between  the  appellant,  an  adult  grandson,  and  his
      grandfather within the meaning of family life  for  Article  purposes.
      However, it remains that the Adjudicator was justified in  considering
      that  this relationship  was not integrally a dependant one, since, if
      the appellant returned to Jamaica, it was  reasonable  to  assume  the
      grandfather  would be eligible for social services support: that  went
      to the issue of the strength and depth of  these  family   life  ties.
      However in any event, the Adjudicator did go on  in the alternative to
      find that even if there was  a  family   life  between   him  and  his
      grandfather,  the  decision  did  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
      interference with that  family  life.  In this regard, the  fact  that
      the appellant  was a young adult who had known from the outset that he
      had  no entitlement to remain in the UK beyond his limited leave was a
      weighty factor.

11.   Although not raised clearly in the grounds we  have  also  considered,
      under the aegis of Article 8,  whether  the  decision  amounted  to  a
      disproportionate interference with  the appellant's right to  physical
      and moral integrity as an aspect of his right to respect  for  private
      life.  However, we see no proper basis in this case  for  keeping  the
      issue separate  from  that  of  whether  the  decision  constituted  a
      violation of Article 3.  It is to this issue that we now turn.

12.   Mr Beloff sought to argue that in comparison with  the  situation   of
      the appellant in the Court of Appeal case of N [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1369
      the appellant in this case was in an extreme and exceptional situation
      since he not only had HIV, he also had  a skin  disorder  complication
      together with the prospect of a hostile  homophobic  environment.   He
      reiterated the arguments raised about the  appellant's  job  prospects
      and associated ability to pay for anti-retroviral drugs that he  would
      need.  He  also  drew  attention  to  the  recent   medical   evidence
      highlighting the lack of  availability  in  Jamaica  of  the  specific
      cocktail of drugs he would need to avoid a collapse of his health.

13.   We do not consider the situation the appellant would  face  on  return
      to Jamaica would expose him to a real risk of serious  harm.  Although
      the objective evidence did show  that  homosexuals  in  Jamaica  faced
      societal  discrimination  and  prejudice,  it  fell  well   short   of
      establishing that homosexuals per se faced  a  real  risk  of  serious
      harm.   The  appellant   had  not  previously  come  to  the   adverse
      attention of the authorities and the Adjudicator did not  accept  that
      difficulties  he  had  met  in  the  past  crossed  the  threshold  of
      persecution, or that future difficulties would  cross  this  threshold
      either.

14.   As regards the appellant's state of health,  as  Mr  Beloff  conceded,
      his condition was not as  serious  as  that  of  N.   He  was  in  the
      relatively early stages of  HIV.  The medical report  of  Dr  Jeanette
      Medway dated 19 March 2004 described the appellant's CD4 count  (prior
      to treatment) as 210 and an  initial  viral  load  of  500,000.    She
      states that "[w]ithout appropriate treatment Mr  Brown  is  likely  to
      survive less than  two  years."   Even  taking  account  of  his  skin
      condition and past history of hepatitis, he was still able to function
      as an independent adult (and had engaged in  education  whilst  here).
      His skin condition, as described by Dr Tan in his report  of  9  March
      2004, is described as having been controlled  by  various  creams  and
      ointments.  The appellant himself had only seen fit  to   afford  four
      sessions of ultraviolet light treatment.

15.   As regards  the  availability  of  appropriate  medical  treatment  in
      Jamaica, we are prepared to  accept,  on  the  basis  of  the  medical
      reports, that he may not be able to obtain the  ideal  combination  of
      drugs  and  treatment  in  Jamaica  for  HIV  sufferers,  which  would
      certainly prevent any dramatic deterioration in his condition.
16.   Mr Beloff contended that, even if  there  was  an  adequate  level  of
      treatment potentially available to  this  appellant,  in  practice  he
      would not be able to access it for reasons of cost.  However,  in  the
      first place we see  nothing  unsustainable  about   the  Adjudicator's
      finding that the appellant  would be  able  to  obtain  employment  in
      Jamaica. There is evidence that HIV-sufferers face  discrimination  in
      the job market, but given the appellant was found to be an intelligent
      young man, it was  open  to  the  Adjudicator  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant could overcome these difficulties.

17.   In any event, it is clear from the Court of Appeal judgment in N  that
      affordability cannot be determinative of the issue of whether a person
      needing medical treatment upon return to his country of origin faces a
      real risk of serious harm.  We would  observe  that  even  though  the
      medical experts noted shortcomings in the available medical facilities
      in Jamaica, it is certainly not a country in respect of which there is
      no framework of public medical provision for HIV sufferers:  see  CIPU
      Report  for  October  2003  at  paragraphs  5.73  to  5.79.   On   the
      Adjudicator's findings, this appellant would  also  have  the  ability
      through employment to pay for treatment, thus  avoiding  cheap  agency
      AVRs, at least to some extent.

18.   With reference to N and  in  particular  the  dissenting  judgment  of
      Carnworth LJ, Mr Beloff pointed out that unlike N the appellant  would
      not have any  available  structure  of  family  support,  having  been
      rejected by his father and aunt. That would appear  to  be  the  case.
      Nevertheless,  the  Adjudicator  for  sound  reasons  found  that  the
      appellant would be able to obtain employment.  In  addition  to  being
      able to establish a working life, we do not think there is any  reason
      why he would find it impossible to develop private life  relationships
      with others, including,  as  before,  with  a  homosexual  partner  or
      partners. We accept that his health difficulties would cause him  some
      difficulties,  but  we  do  not  consider  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      concluding that they would not cross the threshold of serious harm. In
      reaching our conclusions we  have  taken  particular  account  of  the
      report of Dr Jeanette Medway which details stigma  and  discrimination
      attached to those with  HIV/AIDS  in  Jamaica.   However,  we  do  not
      consider her report demonstrates that there is a consistent pattern of
      gross, flagrant or mass violations of  the human rights of those  with
      HIV/AIDS in Jamaica.  Following  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgement  in
      Harari [2003] EWCA Civ 807, the appellant failed to show   that  there
      was a real risk of serious harm.

19.   It is, as Mr Beloff has emphasised, necessary in  considering  Article
      3 to assess the appellant's situation cumulatively.  However,  we  are
      satisfied that this is what the Adjudicator did  in  this  case.    He
      took account of the difficult societal situation the  appellant  would
      face as a homosexual, his medical condition, including the  fact  that
      the appellant had a serious skin condition and the likely availability
      of medical treatment given "that the cost of the drugs  is  not  truly
      unobtainable because  of  price".   In  short,  the  Adjudicator  gave
      sustainable reasons for finding that  the  appellant's  case  was  not
      extreme or exceptional and that the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated
      that the decision would cause serious harm to his physical  and  moral
      integrity.

20.   For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT



-----------------------
      1


