
 JN (Deportation _ Conviction _ Public Transport _ Proportionality) Kenya
                         [2004] UKIAT 00009                              | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                   Date of Hearing: 15th & 16th January 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                ......03/02/2004............

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr A Jordan
                                  Mr G Warr

Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State.  He appeals, with permission,
     against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J R Gibb, allowing the
     appeal of the Claimant against his decision on 16th September 2002  to
     make  a  deportation  order  against  him  on  the  ground  that   his
     deportation was conducive to the  public  good  and  that  he  is  not
     protected from  deportation  by  any  international  Convention.   The
     Secretary of State has been represented  before  the  Tribunal  by  Mr
     Underwood QC and Ms Giovannetti, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.
      The  Respondent,  a  citizen  of  Kenya,  whom  we  shall  call  'the
     Claimant', is represented by Ms  Webber,  instructed  by  the  Refugee
     Legal Centre.

History

  2. The Claimant was born on 3rd July 1974.   He  arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom in May 1994 and sought entry as a visitor.  That  was  refused
     and he thereupon claimed asylum.  He was interviewed in connected with
     that claim in August 1994 and was refused asylum on 9th July 1996.  He
     appealed against that refusal, that is to say he appealed against  the
     associated immigration decision refusing him leave to enter the United
     Kingdom.  There were two hearings before the same Adjudicator, Mr Fox,
     and there were two Tribunal hearings.  The reason for the complication
     was first that there was some doubt about whether the Claimant at  his
     first hearing had had a proper opportunity to  put  his  case  in  the
     absence of professional representation,  and  secondly  because  there
     were questions about internal relocation and about the application  of
     Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  In August 1999, the Tribunal
     decided that the Claimant was in principle entitled to refugee  status
     subject to consideration of the applicability of Article 33(2)  if  it
     were proposed at any time to return him to Kenya.

  3. Article 33(2) arises in this appeal because late on Christmas Eve  and
     early on Christmas Day 1995 the Claimant committed a series of serious
     offences. Following a trial before Her Honour  Judge  Pearlman  and  a
     jury, he was convicted of abduction, making a threat  to  kill,  three
     counts of rape and one count of false  imprisonment.   The  Claimant's
     defence to rape had apparently been consent.  The victim  underwent  a
     change of personality as a result  of  her  experiences.   In  passing
     sentence, the judge specifically rejected the suggestion that anything
     in the Claimant's history, including his claimed experiences in Kenya,
     could excuse or explain what she described as  his  wicked  behaviour.
     She expressly passed  longer  than  commensurate  sentences  totalling
     fourteen years imprisonment and made an order under section 44 of  the
     Criminal Justice Act 1991.  There was an appeal  against  sentence  to
     the Court of Appeal Criminal Division.  We have  not  been  shown  any
     details relating to that appeal and there is nothing before  us  which
     suggests that the fervour of the remarks made by the learned judge  in
     passing sentence was doubted in the appeal to the Court of Appeal.  It
     is, however, clear that the total term of imprisonment was reduced  by
     that Court from fourteen years to eleven years.   In  any  event,  the
     Claimant was thus in prison at the time of his asylum appeal hearings.
      He was not released on parole, but he  ceased  to  serve  a  term  of
     imprisonment  on  the  non-parole  release  date  of  13th  May  2003,
     remaining under licence, as he does now, until 25th December 2006.

  4. Following the  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order,  there  were
     hearings before the Adjudicator on 2nd April 2003, 2nd June 2003,  4th
     June 2003 and 18th July 2003, following which we are told  that  there
     were written submissions made by both sides.  After 13th May 2003, the
     Claimant remained  in  immigration  detention  pending  his  projected
     deportation.  On 18th July 2003, the Adjudicator granted bail  subject
     to conditions as to residence with the Claimant's wife  and  children,
     weekly reporting and compliance with the terms of  the  licence  which
     applied to him on his release from his imprisonment.   Following  that
     period of bail, bail was discharged by an Adjudicator on 3rd  November
     2003 but the Claimant was subsequently made subject to restrictions as
     an alternative to his detention under schedule 3, paragraph 2  of  the
     1971 Act.  At the end of the first part of this hearing yesterday, the
     Claimant was again taken into custody.  An application  for  bail  was
     unsuccessful.

  5. We should say something about the Claimant's family life.  He met B in
     about 1994 and subsequently went through a ceremony of  marriage  with
     her in prison.  There is no doubt that that marriage was bigamous.   B
     has or had a previous husband living.  We are not aware of any attempt
     to regularise the position.   B  was  cautioned  for  the  offence  of
     bigamy.  At the time they met, B was pregnant.  She gave birth to K in
     April 1995.  B became pregnant by the Claimant and gave birth to S  in
     June 1996, by which time of course the Claimant was in  prison.   Much
     of the time that B  and  the  Claimant  knew  each  other  before  the
     Claimant's offence, they were not able to live together because B  was
     in a mother and baby unit, owing to concerns about her parenting of  K
     and subsequently S.   K  himself  was  twice  in  foster  care:   once
     immediately after his birth, and subsequently again apparently after a
     trial period of living with his mother B.  The family unit  consisting
     of the Claimant, B and the children had  in  fact  never  been  tested
     until the  Adjudicator  released  the  Claimant  on  bail.   Following
     concerns about the Adjudicator's determination, the Claimant was moved
     to different accommodation where he now lives, as  it  happens,  apart
     from B, K and S.  It is said, and again this is a matter which was not
     strictly in evidence in this  appeal  but  we  take  it  into  account
     because it would be wrong to ignore it, that there is another child on
     the way, apparently conceived shortly after the Claimant's release  on
     bail.  There is copious evidence before us, as there  was  before  the
     Adjudicator, expressing  concern  about  B's  ability  to  cope  as  a
     housewife and mother.  There is no evidence before us relating to  the
     situation in which  the  family  have  had  the  opportunity  to  live
     together since the Claimant's release.

  6. Lastly, in this part of our judgment, status.  The Claimant has  never
     had leave to enter or remain here, which is of some importance in  the
     context of this appeal.  That is because mere success in what  we  may
     call the pure deportation element of the appeal would  not  of  course
     give him leave to enter or remain.  If  he  succeeds  on  that  ground
     only, he would appear to be an  overstayer  liable  to  administrative
     removal.

The Adjudicator's Determination

  7. The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from the Claimant, from B and from
     various experts.  He considered a large  range  of  documents.   After
     some argument, he took the view that  he  had  before  him  an  appeal
     against the decision to make a deportation  order  on  three  separate
     grounds.  Firstly, on the ground that the discretion should have  been
     exercised  differently.   That  is  the   pure   deportation   appeal.
     Secondly, on the ground that the Claimant's removal to Kenya would  be
     a breach of the Claimant's human rights, and thirdly,  on  the  ground
     that the Claimant's removal to Kenya would be a breach of the  Refugee
     Convention.  The Adjudicator allowed the appeal on all three of  those
     grounds and the Secretary of State appeals to us on all three bases.

  8. We  have  concluded  for  reasons  that  we  shall  explain  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in law in his evaluation of the question whether the
     discretion to deport should have been exercised differently,  that  he
     erred in law in his approach to the question before  him  relating  to
     breach of the Claimant's human rights, and that he erred in law in his
     approach to, and his decision  of,  issues  relating  to  the  Refugee
     Convention.  To that  extent,  therefore,  the  Secretary  of  State's
     appeal must be allowed.

  9. But that is not the end of the matter.  Mr Underwood  referred  us  in
     the course of his argument to the recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Bunavic [2003] EWCA  Civ  1843.   At  paragraph  19  of  the
     judgment of Latham LJ in that case, there is some guidance on the role
     of the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  cases  of  this  sort.   We
     appreciate that the question before the Court of Appeal in Bunavic was
     not identical to the questions relating to this Claimant  today.   But
     the principle, we apprehend, is a similar  one.   In  particular,  the
     Court of Appeal in Bunavic provides what, in our respectful  view,  is
     valuable guidance on the role of public policy and in the role of  the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  considering  the  judgment  of   an
     Adjudicator in a matter which affects public policy.  Latham  LJ  said
     this:

           "The appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal is not restricted
           to matters of law.   An  Adjudicator  does  not  have  the  same
           primary responsibility as the  Respondent  for  determining  the
           policy considerations inherent in a  decision  relating  to  the
           enforcement of immigration control.  He has what might be called
           a supervising responsibility and has no greater  expertise  than
           the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Indeed the contrary  might  be
           said to be the case bearing in mind that one of the functions of
           the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  is  to  review  decisions  of
           different Adjudicators in  order  to  secure  a  consistency  of
           approach.  In carrying out that function, although the  Tribunal
           would necessarily hesitate before interfering with the  decision
           of an Adjudicator, it is bound to do so if it considers that the
           decision is wrong.  That does not mean that every decision by an
           Adjudicator in a doubtful case must be the subject matter of  an
           appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Leave to appeal will
           only be granted in a case where it was shown to be arguable that
           there was an error in  the  way  the  Adjudicator  assessed  the
           issue."


      As we have indicated, our view is that there were errors  in  the  way
      that the Adjudicator assessed all the issues before  him.   We  should
      add as a footnote to the judgment in Bunavic that that was as this  is
      a matter which arose under the provisions of the 1999 Act, and it  may
      well be that bearing in mind the restriction of right of appeal to the
      Tribunal by the 2002 Act  and  the  Rules  made  under  it  that  that
      judgment may have to be read with some caution for future cases.

The Refugee Claim

 10. It is convenient to look first at issues relating  to  the  Claimant's
     claim to be at risk on return to Kenya.  As we have indicated, he  won
     his asylum appeal and he has been  regarded  as  a  refugee  for  that
     reason.  Before the Adjudicator, there were two arguments on behalf of
     the Secretary of State.  The first was that  Article  1(C)(5)  applies
     and that he is no longer in truth  a  refugee.   The  second  is  that
     Article 33(2) applies and that even if he is  a  refugee,  he  is  not
     entitled to protection from  expulsion  to  Kenya  under  the  Refugee
     Convention.   The  Adjudicator  said,  in  effect,  that  he  did  not
     understand the relationship between the two sub-Articles.  He declined
     to decide whether there was currently a risk to the Claimant,  and  he
     declined to decide whether  Article  1(C)(5)  applied.   That  was  an
     inappropriate way to deal with the Claimant's claim or  the  Secretary
     of State's response to it.

 11. In her submission before us, Ms Webber made  a  number  of  points  on
     Articles 1(C)(5)  and  33(2),  which  we  found,  to  say  the  least,
     surprising;  and it is right to say that we  had  some  difficulty  in
     following them.  She submitted first of all that all the  benefits  of
     the  Refugee  Convention  apply  to  anybody  who  has  been  formally
     recognised as a refugee until that refugee status  has  been  formally
     revoked.  Therefore, even a person who has  no  well-founded  fear  of
     persecution would be entitled not only to the  protection  of  Article
     33, but to all the other benefits of the Refugee Convention including,
     she indicated, the use of a refugee travel document, if the status had
     not been formally revoked.  We reject that submission.   There  is  no
     foundation for it in the Convention itself, which clearly provides for
     the existence and non-existence of refugee status (if that is what  it
     is to be called) regardless of any  formal  act  of  recognition,  for
     example one could look at Articles 31 or indeed 1(c)(1).   Neither  of
     those Articles indicates that the lack of formal  recognition  of  the
     commencement or cesser of refugee status is  to  effect  the  position
     under the Convention.  Nor is there any  foundation  for  Ms  Webber's
     submission in any  authority,  nor  (as  she  sought  to  support  her
     submissions in the absence of  authority)  do  general  principles  of
     certainty and finality support what she had to say. The purpose of the
     Refugee Convention is to recognise those who are currently at risk, as
     its Article 1(A)(2) makes clear.

 12. Ms Webber's second submission on this point was that  the  application
     of Article 1(C)(5) to the Claimant was illegal and unfair.  She  based
     that submission on three documents.  The first was  a  letter  from  a
     Refugee Legal Centre worker with a great  deal  of  asylum  experience
     saying that she had never seen Article  1(C)(5)  relied  upon  by  the
     United Kingdom Government.  That  was  said  to  show  that  there  is
     invariable practice of not relying  on  that  sub-Article.   With  the
     greatest respect, it is clear that the Article is being relied upon in
     this case.  That is a counter-example.  It may be an unusual case  but
     the Refugee Legal Centre worker's knowledge or lack  of  knowledge  of
     any other cases does not establish any  practice.   For  that  reason,
     that particular piece of evidence is worthless in this context.

 13. The second document was the 2002 Act, section 76, allowing  revocation
     of indefinite leave to remain in cases where Article 1(C)  applies  by
     an act of the refugee himself - for example,  where  the  refugee  has
     voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection  of  his  country  of
     nationality  or  has  acquired  a  new  nationality  and  enjoys   the
     protection of the country of his new nationality.  With that statutory
     provision Ms Webber showed us  an  extract  from  the  Report  of  the
     associated debate on the provision of the Bill in the House of  Lords.
     The problem with Ms Webber's submissions on that point  of  course  is
     that this Claimant has never had indefinite leave to remain:  and  the
     construction that Ms Webber sought to  put  on  the  sentence  of  the
     Ministerial speech upon which she particularly relied is, in our view,
     a construction  that it cannot bear.  It is clear to us  that  at  all
     relevant times the Minister was speaking of the then proposed power to
     revoke indefinite leave to remain and his statements about the way  in
     which the power would be used are statements about that power and  not
     about another power.

 14. The third document upon which Ms Webber relied was  (and  in  applying
     this description we do not intend to demean the document  in  any  way
     but simply to provide an accurate description of  it)  an  out-of-date
     statement of Government policy.  The part  of  that  policy  which  is
     accepted as being still in force in  the  current  policy  relates  to
     refugees who have  committed  a  serious  criminal  offence.   In  the
     context of the usual rules about the  grant  of  leave  to  remain  to
     refugees - rules which have, we understand, been modified  since  this
     particular document was issued - we find this:

           "We may also refuse to grant indefinite leave  to  remain  to  a
           refugee who has committed a serious criminal offence  and  about
           whom we wish  to  have  more  time  to  consider  whether  their
           continued presence in the United Kingdom  is  conducive  to  the
           public good."


      That document explains why indefinite leave to remain was not  granted
      to this Claimant and, indeed, why he was not granted any leave at  the
      time of his final recognition as a refugee by this Tribunal.  It shows
      that in such a case, rather than granting indefinite leave to  remain,
      the Secretary of State will reserve his position in order to  be  able
      to consider deportation of a refugee or  a  former  refugee  when  (no
      doubt with full regard to Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights) he finds that he can lawfully do so.


 15. There is no unfairness here either.  The Claimant is not a person  who
     has leave and certainly by now he has had ample  opportunity  to  deal
     with this particular point.  The Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to
     consider that the Refugee Convention does not  apply  to  him  if  the
     provisions of Article 1(C)(5) are met.

 16. Article 1(C)(5) reads as follows:

           "This Convention shall cease to  apply  to  any  person  falling
           under the terms of section A, that is to say a refugee, if:
           (5)   He can no longer, because the circumstances in  connection
                 with which he has been recognised as a refugee have  ceased
                 to exist, continue  to  refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
                 protection of the country of his nationality."


      We do not need to read out the rest of that Article.


 17. That Article, by its own terms, shows the difference  between  Article
     1(C)(5) and Article 33(2) with which the Adjudicator appears  to  have
     had such difficulty.  If Article 1(C)(5)  applies,  the  rest  of  the
     provisions of the Refugee Convention do not apply.  If Article 1(C)(5)
     applies, therefore Article 33 does not.  The question for us is,  does
     it apply?  Although there is no specific reference to  this  point  in
     the Article itself, it is we think generally understood that it is not
     every casual change in the circumstances in a Claimant's home  country
     which brings Article 1(C)(5) into operation.  The  change  is,  it  is
     sometimes said, one which must be fundamental and lasting.  Those  are
     two separate conditions.  Nevertheless, we are clear on the  facts  of
     this case that Article 1(C)(5) applies to this Claimant.

 18. The change in circumstances in Kenya both as a whole and as they apply
     to the Claimant, has been both fundamental and lasting.  The  Claimant
     left Kenya at a time of severe, well-attested human rights  violations
     and abuses under an oppressive  regime.   General  difficulties  arose
     from a history of corruption and the suppression of human rights.   As
     Mr Underwood pointed out, there is nothing in the material upon  which
     Ms Webber relied (which included, incidentally, in large part a  Human
     Rights Watch Report looking  forward  to  the  elections  rather  than
     looking back to the result of them) that indicates that  the  Claimant
     is somebody who is now at risk.  His difficulties  arose  from  ethnic
     conflicts in the Rift Valley in and around the elections of  1992  and
     his association with FORD-A.  In our view, the position is,  as  shown
     by those particular reports, that the Claimant is  not  now  at  risk.
     That view is reinforced by a letter,  curiously  anonymised,  deriving
     apparently from the British High Commission on  an  unspecified  date,
     perhaps in 2001.  For what it is worth, that letter indicates  that  a
     person with a history such as the Claimant has is a person who  is  no
     longer at risk in Kenya.

 19. Whatever may have been the position in the past, the Claimant is not a
     refugee today.  He is not a person who  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
     persecution in Kenya.  Article  1(C)(5)  applies  to  him  and,  as  a
     result, none of the rest of the Convention does.  It follows that  his
     deportation would not be prevented by the Refugee Convention.

 20. In view of what we have said  about  Article  1(C)(5)  and  about  its
     effect, there is no real need for us to  consider  Article  33,  which
     reads as follows:

           "(1)  No Contracting State shall expel or return ("refouler")  a
                 refugee in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the  frontiers  of
                 territories where his life or freedom would  be  threatened
                 on account of his race, religion,  nationality,  membership
                 of a particular social group or political opinion.
           (2)   The benefit of the present provision may not, however,  be
                 claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds  for
                 regarding as a danger to the security  of  the  country  in
                 which he is, or who,  having  been  convicted  by  a  final
                 judgment of a particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a
                 danger to the community of that country."


 20. In any event, we should approach matters  relating  to  Article  33(2)
     with caution in the context of this appeal for two reasons.  First, if
     Article 33(2) applies, ex hypothesei the Claimant is being treated  as
     a refugee:  in accordance with the reasoning which we have applied  so
     far on this issue, he is a person who has at the present time a  well-
     founded fear of  persecution.   It  follows  that  even  if  the  1951
     Convention might not expressly and of itself prohibit  his  return  to
     his own country, if Article 33(2) applies,  it  is  very  likely  that
     Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  would  inhibit
     return.  We have concluded that this Claimant is not at  any  risk  at
     all, but we envisage a provision that in any case where Article  33(2)
     is genuinely in issue, there would need to be consideration of whether
     the Claimant's return would breach Article 3.

 21. Secondly, there are issues relating to section 72 of the 2002 Act.  In
     our judgment, it is absolutely clear that that new  provision  applies
     to the Claimant's case insofar as the response to it is  framed  under
     Article 33(2).  There are difficulties in the interpretation  of  that
     provision and indeed in precisely deciding how the presumption  is  to
     be discharged by evidence from the Claimant.  In view of the fact that
     we have concluded that Article 33(2) is not in issue as it  turns  out
     in this appeal, this is not the time to provide any real assessment of
     the effect of section 72.

 22. Our conclusion on this part of the  appeal  is  that  the  Adjudicator
     should not have allowed the Claimant's appeal on the basis that he  is
     a refugee.

The 'Pure' Deportation Appeal

 23. We pass now to questions of deportation.  The argument here on  behalf
     of the Claimant is that the Secretary of State's discretion to make  a
     deportation  order  should  have  been  exercised  differently.    All
     deportation decisions are discretionary in the sense that, within  the
     Immigration Rules, the decision imports a discretion.  All Immigration
     Acts have provided that in such a case,  the  task  of  the  Appellate
     Authorities is to allow an appeal if the Authority (the Adjudicator or
     the Tribunal) considers that the discretion should have been exercised
     differently.

 24. In order to reach such a  decision,  an  Adjudicator,  or  indeed  the
     Tribunal, does not have to conclude that the Secretary of State  erred
     in law in the decision that he, the Secretary of State, made.  But, as
     the Tribunal hearing an appeal from an Adjudicator, we would  be  very
     slow  to  substitute  our  discretionary  judgment  for  that  of  the
     Adjudicator unless we were satisfied that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
     law.  There is a difference, in other words, between the task  of  the
     Appellate Authorities as a whole and the  task  of  the  Secretary  of
     State.  The task of the Secretary of State in making his  decision  is
     to exercise his discretion and the Appellate Authorities  as  a  whole
     can review and substitute their own discretion.  But between  the  two
     levels of the Appellate Authorities, once the Adjudicator has  made  a
     lawful assessment of the discretion, we, as the second Appellate tier,
     should be slow to interfere.

 25. It was originally claimed on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that
     this ground was not open to the Claimant at all and that it was barred
     by the One-Stop provisions of sections 74 and  76  of  the  1999  Act.
     That ground was not pursued before us.  We think that the decision not
     to pursue it was right.  It is clear that at all relevant  stages  the
     Secretary of State envisaged this appeal as an appeal under section 63
     of the 1999 Act, ie on pure deportation grounds,  independent  of  any
     claims which might be made under sections 65 or 69, as  indeed  claims
     subsequently were.

 26. We should perhaps begin by reading paragraph 364 of  HC395,  which  is
     the relevant immigration Rule:

           "Subject to paragraph 380, in considering whether deportation is
           the right course on the merits,  the  public  interest  will  be
           balanced against any compassionate circumstances  of  the  case.
           While  each  case  will  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
           particular circumstances, the aim is an exercise of the power of
           deportation which is consistent and fair as between  one  person
           and another, although one case will  rarely  be  identical  with
           another in all material respects.   ...  Before  a  decision  to
           deport is reached the Secretary of State will take into  account
           all relevant factors known to him including:


           (i)   age;
           (ii)  length of residence in the United Kingdom;
           (iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
           (iv)   personal  history,  including  character,   conduct   and
           employment record;
           (v)   domestic circumstances;
           (vi)  previous criminal record and the nature of any offence  of
                 which the person has been convicted;
           (vii) compassionate circumstances;
           (viii)       any  representations  received  on   the   person's
           behalf."


     The phrase "all relevant circumstances" is important, as is the  list,
     which is clearly not intended to  be  exclusive,  though  it  must  be
     regarded as of some weight.
 26. The Adjudicator  dealt  at  length  with  the  risk  of  re-offending,
     following his assessment that the evidence he  heard  was  in  general
     terms both credible and trustworthy:  that is  to  say,  the  evidence
     from the Claimant, from B and the experts.  He made that conclusion at
     paragraphs 96-101 of his determination and the conclusion was that the
     risk of re-offending was very low.  He then went on to look at  family
     life.  We had better set out his findings on family life at paragraphs
     102-104 of the determination:
           "102. Looking at all of the evidence, I do not think that it has
                 been established that the appellant ever lived with B and K
                 as a family unit.  It is clear that B and the appellant did
                 have a relationship, and that B spent time at his flat.  It
                 is  also  clear  that  she  kept  some  possessions  there,
                 including toys and equipment for  K,  but  she  always  had
                 another place to live and it does not appear that B and the
                 appellant ever had  a  shared  home.   I  accept  that  the
                 appellant did contribute financially to K and that  he  did
                 visit the hospital.  He was  clearly  involved  with  B  in
                 decisions about K and plans  for  the  future  when  B  was
                 pregnant with S, but he failed to attend meetings  and  was
                 drinking heavily at that time.
           103.  I am confident, given all of  the  evidence  that  I  have
                 heard, that the appellant has maintained a connection  with
                 B and the children  throughout  his  time  in  prison.   He
                 regards K as his son, and K regards the  appellant  as  his
                 father, and the social services documents suggest that this
                 was the case when the appellant was first in prison.   Both
                 K and S have maintained regular contact with  their  father
                 through visits to him in prison and through telephone calls
                 and letters.  In many ways, this is a remarkable  story  of
                 family  life  surviving   despite   the   fact   that   the
                 relationship started in  difficult  circumstances  and  has
                 continued with the appellant in prison.  I have  no  doubt,
                 based on my assessment of the  appellant  and  B,  and  the
                 evidence of all of the expert witnesses, that  there  is  a
                 genuine and strong family bond between the appellant, B and
                 the children.
           104.   My  assessment  of  B  is  that  she  is  vulnerable   to
                 exploitation for a number of reasons.  One is that she  has
                 very limited education.  Another is that she  has  not  had
                 the benefit of the support of her family since the death of
                 her parents.  She was exploited by  the  landlady  and  her
                 son, K's father.  She was exploited in  being  forced  into
                 her first marriage, for immigration reasons.   She  clearly
                 felt that social services were not on her side  and  it  is
                 clear that she did lie to them about  the  appellant  being
                 her cousin, about him being the  father  of  S,  and  about
                 visiting him in prison.  For some  time  it  seemed  likely
                 that the children would be taken into care, and there  were
                 concerns about their welfare on prison visits.  Having said
                 all of that by the time of the hearing social services were
                 no longer involved, the children were no longer on  the  at
                 risk register and the expert  witnesses  were  all  of  the
                 opinion that B was doing well as a parent, despite the very
                 difficult circumstances.  The letters from the school  show
                 that  the  children  need  particular  help.   My   overall
                 conclusion is that B is vulnerable but  that  she  and  the
                 children are managing despite financial difficulties  in  a
                 way that does not mean that the children  are  at  risk  or
                 that the family need social services involvement."
 26. The Adjudicator then  considered  whether  the  discretion  to  deport
     should have been exercised differently.  Again, we shall have  to  set
     out his conclusions at some length.
           "105. I have decided to allow the appeal against the decision to
                 deport the appellant on the grounds that  his  presence  in
                 the United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good.   I
                 have come to the conclusion  that  discretion  should  have
                 been exercised differently.  My main reason is  my  finding
                 on the risk of re-offending.  I regard  this  as  the  most
                 significant  matter  counting  for   deportation   in   the
                 balancing exercise.  When the risk of re-offending is taken
                 out  of  the  balance  the  scales  tip   clearly   against
                 deportation on  conducive  grounds.   The  other  important
                 reason is  that  the  appellant's  family  need  him,  and,
                 because of their vulnerability, it would be very  difficult
                 for the  whole  family  to  relocate  either  to  Kenya  or
                 Dominica.
           106.  Looking at the factors in paragraph 364 of the  HC395  the
                 appellant is now 29 and has been in the UK for nine  years.
                 Although he has been recognised as a  refugee  he  has  not
                 been given leave to remain, so none of his time has been as
                 a settled person, and most of his time here has been  spent
                 imprison.  He has few connections in the UK apart from  his
                 family.  His  personal  history,  including  character  and
                 conduct, is that he  only  had  casual  jobs  before  being
                 imprisoned and he has pursued  some  education  in  prison.
                 His domestic circumstances are that he has a wife  and  two
                 children with whom he has a bond based mainly on visits and
                 other contact whilst he has been in prison.   His  wife  is
                 vulnerable and there has been a history of social  services
                 involvement.
           107.  He committed a very serious criminal offence for which  he
                 was sentenced to  a  long  prison  term.   He  was  clearly
                 disturbed, out of control and dangerous in 1994  and  1995.
                 He subjected a stranger to a horrific ordeal of  rape  with
                 threats of violence with a knife and scissors.  He did  not
                 plead guilty as he should have done.  Rather  than  dealing
                 with his feelings he was trying to escape  from  them  with
                 drink and drugs.  During more than seven years  in  prison,
                 however, he has changed so that his risk of re-offending is
                 now low.
           108.  The compassionate circumstances are  his  own  history  of
                 being victim of torture and the manner in which he lost his
                 family in Kenya.
           109.  The facts in each deportation case will be  different,  as
                 noted by paragraph 364, and in each case it is necessary to
                 decide  where  the  balance  lies  between  those   factors
                 counting in favour of the appellant not being deported  and
                 those indicating that the appellant's presence would not be
                 conducive to the public good.  In this case  the  appellant
                 has committed an extremely serious offence.   If  the  risk
                 that he would commit a similar offence again  was  anything
                 other than very low I would conclude that his removal  from
                 the  United  Kingdom  would  indeed  be   justified.    The
                 prevention of another crime of this sort in this country is
                 of very great importance, and is a matter that would  weigh
                 heavily in the balance in favour of deportation.
           110.  My conclusion in this particular case is that the  factors
                 counting in favour of the appellant not being deported,  in
                 particular the interests of his wife and two  children  and
                 the minimal risk of re-offending,  are  not  outweighed  by
                 those suggesting that his presence in  the  United  Kingdom
                 would not be conducive to the public good.  As a  result  I
                 conclude that the Secretary of State's discretion  in  this
                 matter should have been exercised differently and  I  allow
                 the appeal on this basis."
 27. On the assumption that the  Adjudicator's  primary  judgments  on  the
     evidence were open to him and were correct,  Mr  Underwood  criticises
     that conclusion on two principal  grounds.   The  first  is  that  the
     Adjudicator did not confine  himself,  as  he  should  have  done,  to
     evidence in existence or pointing to facts in existence at the date of
     the decision, 16th  September  2002.   Instead,  he  appeared,  in  Mr
     Underwood's submission, to stray into the area of facts at the date of
     the hearing.  In particular, Mr Underwood claimed that that error,  as
     he submitted that it was, invalidated the Adjudicator's conclusion  on
     the risk of the Claimant  re-offending,  because  he  had  based  that
     conclusion on evidence of improvement after the date of the  decision.


 28. In response to that, Ms Webber points to material in  earlier  reports
     dating back some six months before the date of  the  decision  showing
     that on the date of the decision and for some  time  previous  to  it,
     there was a clear prospect of the Claimant's rehabilitation,  that  is
     to say reducing the risk of re-offending by the time  of  his  release
     date.  She cites well-known  authorities  relating  to  the  value  of
     subsequent evidence that casts a flood of light on  the  circumstances
     at the date of the decision.  She refers in  particular  to  Kwok  Ong
     Tong [1981] Imm AR 214, a decision of Glidewell J, as he then was,  on
     Judicial Review of a decision by the Tribunal.  The learned  judge  in
     that case noted that in certain circumstances the fact that  something
     did happen may be powerful evidence and indeed  it  may  be  the  only
     available evidence that it is something which was likely to happen  at
     an earlier date.
 29. We accept Ms Webber's submission on this issue with some reservations.
      In a case of this sort, it is a datum that the Claimant is not  going
     to be deported until he is released from the custody  consequent  upon
     his defence.  Every deportation decision in a case of  this  sort  has
     necessarily to look forward to that date.  Thus  the  Tribunal  found,
     perhaps most notably in Chindamo, that  a  deportation  decision  made
     near the beginning of a very long sentence during which the offender's
     circumstances were certain to change, was a decision not in accordance
     with the law.  It cannot properly in  our  judgment  be  open  to  the
     Secretary of State to make a decision at a time when he is  not  going
     to act on it and then claim that the only consideration properly to be
     taken into account are those  in  fact  in  existence  at  that  time,
     regardless of any foreseeable subsequent change.
 30. On the other hand, in a case such as this we  would  urge  caution  in
     assuming that a change that happens is a change that was  predictable.
     Kwok was about the establishment of  a  business.   A  wrong  decision
     either way would  result  in  financial  consequences  only.   Without
     wanting to enter into the realm of speculation in  such  a  case,  the
     Appellate Authorities might well be more willing to  make  a  leap  of
     faith in such a case as that than where the question is the risk of  a
     very serious criminal offence being committed.
 31. In the present case, the evidence at the  date  of  the  decision  was
     somewhat equivocal.  There is a report dated 19th September 2002, just
     three  days  after  the  date  of   the   decision,   so   essentially
     contemporaneous with it,  making  it  clear  that  at  that  time  the
     Claimant was not yet suitable for release.  On the other hand,  it  is
     right to say that other reports do anticipate that the Claimant  would
     be in a low-risk category by the time of the completion of the Grendon
     Course and his release in May 2003.  That, as the  Adjudicator,  found
     is what happened.  In our view, the Adjudicator did not err in law  in
     his decision to take account  of  the  later  evidence  going  to  the
     assessment of risk.  He took into account matters which were genuinely
     foreseeable to some extent at the date of the decision.
 32. Mr Underwood's second principal complaint  was  that  the  Adjudicator
     over-valued the low  risk  of  re-offending  and  failed  to  consider
     whether the offence in question was one  whose  very  nature  was  the
     prime consideration in a deportation decision, making the risk of  its
     occurring again of somewhat lesser importance.  He pointed to a number
     of English  and  Strasbourg  decisions  indicating  that  a  state  is
     entitled to take the view that some offences are of such a nature that
     expulsion is merited where possible, regardless of any  propensity  to
     re-offend.  He submitted that the  Appellate  Authorities  should  pay
     very great regard to the Secretary  of  State's  judgment  about  what
     those offences are and in weighing the individual circumstances of the
     case against the public interest should  essentially  accept  what  is
     said by the Secretary of State to be the public interest.

 33. Ms Webber noted the force of the Secretary of State's  submissions  in
     general and in relation to judgments such as that in  Schmeltz  [2003]
     EWHC 1859 Admin in  particular.   She  submitted,  however,  that  the
     Adjudicator was entitled to have full regard to all the  circumstances
     and that this Adjudicator had done precisely that.  He had reached his
     own view on the exercise of the discretion.   His  conclusion  on  the
     deportation issue,  she  submitted,  was  well  within  the  range  of
     reasonable responses and we should not interfere with it:  indeed,  we
     lawfully could not.

 34. We note that paragraph 364 makes no specific reference  to  propensity
     to re-offend.  No doubt propensity to re-offend cannot and should  not
     be ignored because of the phrase "all relevant factors", but if it  is
     to be regarded as an important factor in cases relating to deportation
     of criminals, its omission from sub-paragraph (vi) of paragraph 364 is
     extremely surprising.
 35. Further, if the main concern is risk for the future, the reference  in
     that  sub-paragraph  to  "previous  criminal  record",   in   contrast
     specifically to the offence which is under consideration as the reason
     for deportation, is also surprising.   It  is  clear  to  us,  reading
     paragraph 364 as a whole, that  the  paragraph  sees  the  deportation
     decision  as  primarily  a  reaction  to   past   facts   of   present
     circumstances rather than future risk.
 36. We are satisfied that the Adjudicator's approach in paragraph  105  of
     his determination, exemplified in his statement that the risk  of  re-
     offending "is the most significant matter counting for deportation  in
     the balancing exercise" was fundamentally flawed.  We  do  not  accept
     that the Adjudicator is compelled to defer to the Secretary of State's
     judgment as to what crimes are so serious that society's revulsion may
     demand a deportation decision without regard to risk of  re-offending:
     but we do consider that the Adjudicator must take  into  account  that
     some crimes are of such a  nature,  and  he  will  therefore  need  to
     consider whether the offence with which he  is  concerned  is  one  in
     which evidence as  to  the  risk  of  re-offending  is  of  any  great
     relevance at all.  This was a matter on which, in  our  judgment,  the
     Adjudicator again erred in law.
 37. Thirdly, it is clear from paragraph 364 and all the  jurisprudence  on
     it, that the task is  to  balance  the  public  interest  against  the
     compassionate circumstances or the  individual  circumstances  of  the
     case.  The only trace of the Adjudicator having considered the  public
     interest at all is at paragraph 109 where he refers to "the prevention
     of another crime of this  sort  in  this  country  is  of  very  great
     importance".  This is, in our view, grossly insufficient.  The  public
     interest element in a deportation decision is constituted not only  by
     the need to secure the safety of the citizens  of  this  country  from
     future criminal acts by the Claimant himself:  it  consists  also  for
     the need for a decent society to express its revulsion  at  crimes  of
     this sort and to make it clear that the full rigour of the law will be
     unleashed on those who commit them.  It is simply not  right,  as  the
     Adjudicator has done, to ignore the past in favour of the future.  The
     past has a real importance,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  the  Kenya
     experiences casting a shadow over more recent events, but in the sense
     of the Claimant's history in the United Kingdom as well.
 38. Having found that the Adjudicator erred in law in his approach to this
     question, we move therefore to make our own assessment.   Although  we
     look forward from the date of the decision, we are concerned with  the
     facts as at that date.  At that date, given  the  decision  which  has
     been made, there was no reason to suppose that the Claimant and B  and
     K and S would have any more family life in  the  United  Kingdom  than
     they had had in the past. The Claimant had  been  found  guilty  of  a
     crime whose commission  arouses  revulsion.   He  was  a  party  to  a
     bigamous marriage but had never established life with the other  party
     to that relationship.  The relationship is not of no  importance,  but
     in  the  circumstances  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  of  the  highest
     importance.  Nor can the relationship with his  child,  who  was  born
     when he was in prison, or B's child K, whom he hardly knew before  the
     commission of the offence.  He had no real connections with the United
     Kingdom other than those which arose from his family  or  quasi-family
     relationships.  He had no leave to remain, no job,  no  property.   He
     had been in the United Kingdom for about eight years, of which  nearly
     seven had been spent in prison.
 39. The compassionate circumstances are said to arise from his own history
     in Kenya and the situation in Kenya at the date of the decision.   But
     his  own  history  is  not  of  itself  a  reason  militating  against
     deportation as a result of the offence, particularly in  view  of  the
     judge's remarks;  and the situation  in  Kenya  at  the  date  of  the
     decision is  not  such  as  to  indicate  any  particular  reason  for
     compassionate thoughts towards a citizen of that country  who  is  not
     protected from return by any international Convention (as must be  the
     case if the deportation decision was to be  carried  out  and  as  the
     decision itself must envisage).
 40. Weighing, as we do, all  the  relevant  factors,  including  those  we
     mention specifically, we have concluded that, on the  primary  factors
     found by the Adjudicator, the exercise of  the  discretion  to  deport
     this man who committed these serious crimes and who had merely  a  low
     risk of re-offending was entirely correct.  We do  not  consider  that
     the discretion should have been exercised differently and so we  allow
     the Secretary of State's appeal on this ground.
Article 8
 41. Following the starred determination of the Tribunal in SK [2002] UKIAT
     05613, the Adjudicator was concerned here with the facts at  the  date
     of his determination.  He found that  the  facts  that  had  been  the
     matrix within which the  Secretary  of  State  took  his  view  as  to
     proportionality  was  seriously  deficient.   He  therefore  wrote  as
     follows:
           "112. My  findings,  based  on  my  assessment  of  all  of  the
                 evidence, are different from those that formed the basis of
                 the respondent's decision.  The most  important  difference
                 concerns the risk of re-offending.  The decision was on the
                 basis that there was a risk of re-offending (based  on  the
                 2002 reports), whereas I have found that the risk  is  very
                 low.  Another difference is  that  the  decision  does  not
                 appear  to  have  taken   into   account   the   particular
                 circumstances of the appellant's family, in particular  the
                 history of social services involvement and the reasons  for
                 it.  As a result  of  these  differences  I  cannot  assess
                 whether the decision  was  within  a  range  of  reasonable
                 responses.   Instead  I  have   to   decide   whether   the
                 interference  would be disproportionate,  paying  deference
                 to the Secretary of State's view of the importance, in this
                 particular case, of preventing disorder and crime  and  the
                 protection of health and morals."
 42. In the following paragraph, he said this:
           "113. In the balancing exercise between the  legitimate  aim  of
                 preventing crime on the one hand and the interference  with
                 family  life  on  the  other  the  result  changes  in  the
                 appellant's favour when the risk of offending  is  assessed
                 as low.  In this way the Article 8  balancing  exercise  is
                 very similar to the conducive deportation exercise and  the
                 result is the same for the same reasons:  the balance  tips
                 towards the appellant not being deported because  the  risk
                 of re-offending is very low and the family are vulnerable."
 43. In her submissions, Ms Webber attempted to  support  that  process  by
     reference to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Razgar [2003] EWCA
     Civ 840, which had also been the subject of reference by Mr Underwood.
      That was one of a number of recent attempts, if we may so express it,
     both here and in the Court of Appeal to indicate what precisely is the
     judicial  role  in  assessing  questions   of   proportionality.    In
     paragraphs 40 and 41 of their judgment, the Court of Appeal say this:
           "40.  We note that both Moses J and Simon Brown LJ were  careful
                 to limit what they said to cases where there is  'no  issue
                 of fact' (Moses J) and "the  essential  facts  are  not  in
                 doubt or dispute" (Simon Brown LJ).  We recognise that,  if
                 the adjudicator finds the facts to be essentially the  same
                 as those which formed the basis of the Secretary of State's
                 decision, there will  be  no  difficulty  in  adopting  the
                 approach enunciated by Moses J and Simon Brown LJ [that is,
                 as  exemplified  in  Blessing  Edore].   But  what  if  the
                 adjudicator finds the facts to be materially different?  In
                 such a case, the adjudicator will have concluded  that  the
                 Secretary of State carried out the balancing exercise on  a
                 materially  incorrect  and/or  incomplete  factual   basis.
                 There is no power in the adjudicator to remit the  case  to
                 the  Secretary  of  State  for  a  reconsideration  of  the
                 balancing  exercise  on  the  facts   as   found   by   the
                 adjudicator.  There will, therefore, be cases where  it  is
                 not meaningful to ask whether the decision of the Secretary
                 of State was within the range of reasonable responses  open
                 to him, because his determination was based on an  accurate
                 analysis of the facts.  But even if the adjudicator were to
                 conclude that the Secretary of State's analysis was  wrong,
                 it would not necessarily follow that the Secretary of State
                 acted in breach of a claimant's ECHR rights in such a case.
                  It would remain open to the adjudicator to decide that the
                 conclusion reached by the Secretary  of  State  was  lawful
                 (and did not breach the claimant's human rights) because it
                 was in fact a proportionate response even on the  facts  as
                 determined by the adjudicator.
           41.   Where the essential facts found by the adjudicator are  so
                 fundamentally  different  from  those  determined  by   the
                 Secretary  of  State  as  substantially  to  undermine  the
                 factual basis of the balancing exercise performed  by  him,
                 it may be  impossible  for  the  adjudicator  to  determine
                 whether the decision is  proportionate  otherwise  than  by
                 carrying out the balancing exercise himself.  Even in  such
                 a case, when it comes to deciding how much weight  to  give
                 to the  policy  of  maintaining  an  effective  immigration
                 policy,  the  adjudicator  should  pay  very   considerable
                 deference to the view of the Secretary of State as  to  the
                 importance  of  maintaining  such  a  policy.    There   is
                 obviously a  conceptual  difference  between  (a)  deciding
                 whether the decision of the Secretary of State  was  within
                 the range of reasonable responses, and (b) deciding whether
                 the decision was proportionate  (paying  deference  to  the
                 Secretary of State so far as is possible).  In the light of
                 Blessing Edore, we would hold that the correct approach  is
                 (a) in all cases except where this  is  impossible  because
                 the factual basis of the decision of the Secretary of State
                 has been substantially undermined by the  findings  of  the
                 adjudicator.  Where (a) is  impossible,  then  the  correct
                 approach is (b).  But we doubt whether,  in  practice,  the
                 application of  the  two  approaches  will  often  lead  to
                 different outcomes."
 44. We are, of course, bound  by  that  decision.   We  do  not,  however,
     consider that the principles set out there were correctly  applied  by
     the Adjudicator in this case.  The judgment of proportionality  is  an
     executive one.  The judicial role is  solely  to  assess  whether  the
     executive decision was outside the range of lawful  responses  to  the
     facts.  If the facts turn out to be other than the original  decision-
     maker thought, that does  not  of  itself  or  necessarily  alter  the
     judicial function.  That function is not to assess  what  decision  on
     proportionality should be made in the light of the new facts,  but  to
     identify  the  boundaries  within  which  a  proportionality  decision
     lawfully could be made in the light of the new facts.  It may be  that
     an Adjudicator would, if he were making the decision, decide in favour
     of the Claimant.  But that  is  not  the  question.  The  question  is
     whether or not it would be lawful for the Secretary of State to decide
     against the Claimant.  The task of  distinguishing  between  making  a
     decision oneself and deciding the parameters within which  a  decision
     could lawfully be made by another is one  which  the  Courts,  and  we
     venture to say the Appellate Authorities, are well  able  to  perform.
     We are accustomed to saying that a decision was a lawful one  for  the
     decision-maker to make even if we may think it is not the decision  we
     would have made ourselves, and the issue is in  essence  no  different
     when the decision of the other is one which is to be made rather  than
     one which has been made.  In cases under approach (a) as well as those
     under approach (b), the question  will  be  whether  the  decision  to
     remove would be (in all circumstances) necessarily disproportionate.
 45. In the present case, there was, as it seems to  us,  no  proper  basis
     upon which the Adjudicator could pass to approach  (b).   It  was  far
     from impossible for the Adjudicator to  decide  whether  the  decision
     actually made was (or would remain) a lawful one in light of  the  new
     facts, particularly because the new facts were  foreseen  in  material
     available to the Secretary of  State.   We  therefore  find  that  the
     Adjudicator  erred  in  law  in  taking  it  upon  himself  to  assess
     proportionality.
 46. Even if we are wrong  about  that,  it  is  clear  that  in  assessing
     proportionality the Adjudicator failed to pay deference to the view of
     the Secretary of State that the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Razgar would have required.   The  only  deference  paid  is  to  "the
     Secretary of State's view of  the  importance  of  the  prevention  of
     crime" but in the letter giving  the  reasons  for  his  decision  the
     Secretary of State went much further than this.  He wrote:
           "The Secretary of State is satisfied that  upon  balancing  your
           rights to a family life and the legitimate  aim  of  the  United
           Kingdom to ensure the prevention of disorder or crime that  your
           deportation would not place the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
           Article 8 of the ECHR and the Human Rights Act 1998.
           The Secretary of State  has  concluded  that  in  light  of  the
           seriousness of your criminal  offence,  your  removal  from  the
           United Kingdom is necessary in  a  democratic  society  for  the
           prevention of disorder and  crime  and  for  the  protection  of
           health and morals."
      That clearly goes far beyond looking at the risk of  re-offending  and
      indeed expressly relies on the offence itself.
 47. The Adjudicator's failure to give proper weight to the offence itself,
     as distinct from the probability of its being repeated, was  an  error
     here as it was in his treatment of the  exercise  of  discretion.   We
     therefore make our own judgment of the question whether deportation of
     the Claimant would be outside the range of responses  allowed  to  the
     Secretary of State  under  Article  8(2).   We  are  assisted  by  the
     principles set out in Amrollahi v Denmark  (application  no  56911/00)
     and Boultif v Switzerland (2001)  33  EHRR  50,  to  which  Ms  Webber
     referred us, as well as those in Samaroo  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1139  and
     Mahmood, upon which the Secretary of State relied.  As we indicated in
     the course of argument,  however,  partial  comparisons  of  fact  are
     unlikely to be of much assistance in determining  an  appeal  of  this
     nature.
 48. The relationship between the Claimant and B appears to have moved on a
     little following the Claimant's release on bail.  Although at the date
     of the hearing before us they do not in fact live together, it is said
     that there is a further child on the way.  Although  the  Claimant  is
     subject to licence, there is no relevant current report from the  Home
     Probation Officer.  It seems to us that, on the primary facts found by
     the Adjudicator, there are  indeed,  as  Mr  Underwood  submitted,  no
     insurmountable reasons why B, K, S and any  unborn  child  should  not
     live in Kenya.
 49. But it may be that B, K, S and any newly born child cannot be expected
     to move to Kenya.  For that reason, we proceed to decide  whether,  in
     the circumstances of this case, a decision to deport the Claimant  and
     so divide this family grouping would be necessarily  disproportionate.
     We do not think that it would.  The family grouping such as it was had
     already been gravely compromised by the Claimant's  imprisonment.   It
     did not exist in any real sense before he went to prison and  we  have
     no evidence as to its status at the present time.   The  Secretary  of
     State takes the view that the seriousness of  the  Claimant's  offence
     justifies his deportation, even if that means that he has to leave his
     family group.  The decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Samaroo  shows
     that that is not out of the question as a lawful  response.   This  is
     not a long-established domestic grouping and none of the children have
     ever lived with their father until recently.  There is evidence that B
     married the Claimant in order to assist  in  his  immigration  status.
     The crime was a particularly unpleasant one and  the  family  life  is
     tenuous in the extreme.
 50. We have also considered the matters mentioned by Ms Webber relating to
     the circumstances in which the Claimant might find himself  in  Kenya.
     We do not think they, either alone as an interference with his private
     life or together with the family arguments, assist  the  Claimant  for
     the same reasons  as  we  have  expressed  in  relation  to  the  pure
     deportation appeal.   In  the  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the
     disruption to the lives of the Claimant, B, K and  S  and  any  unborn
     child is not such as  to  make  a  decision  to  deport  the  Claimant
     necessarily unlawful as disproportionate even if B  and  the  children
     could not move to Kenya with the  Claimant.   As  we  have  indicated,
     however, we think there is no reason why they should not  do  so.   If
     that is right, there is even less substance in the Article 8 claim.
The Adjudicator's assessment of the evidence
 51.  Mr  Underwood's  fourth  major  complaint  about  the   Adjudicator's
     determination related to his assessment of the  facts.   Mr  Underwood
     identified a very substantial number of points at which the Claimant's
     evidence appeared to  give  cause  for  concern.   He  seems  to  have
     presented an account of his experiences in Kenya to  the  Adjudicator,
     Mr Fox, which differed in some notable respects from  the  account  he
     gave to the Adjudicator, Mr Gibb.  He  had  admitted  lying.   He  had
     evidently  said  some  things  during  the  course  of  his  time   of
     imprisonment which either were not true or were extremely difficult to
     reconcile with other evidence.  The Adjudicator  did  decide  that  he
     could believe the evidence which was before him, but in order to do so
     he adopted in part a view that the Claimant, because  of  his  earlier
     experiences, had needed to construct a comfortable fantasy to  protect
     him from the reality of his history.  Although  he  did  not  use  the
     word, Mr Underwood implied that both the Adjudicator and those who had
     assessed the Claimant in prison,  whether  as  Probation  Officers  or
     Psychiatrists, had been unduly credulous.  It was suggested  that,  in
     those circumstances, the Adjudicator was not in law entitled  to  make
     the findings that he did.  He should,  submitted  Mr  Underwood,  have
     realised that the Claimant was not to  be  regarded  as  credible  and
     that, as a result, the evidence of the  experts  was  not  trustworthy
     because it was based on what the Claimant had told them, and contained
     no appreciation that the Claimant was telling inconsistent stories.
 52. If we were to reach that view, it would have to be on a  basis  of  an
     assessment of the credibility and trustworthiness of the  Claimant,  B
     and the experts, who gave evidence before the Adjudicator but who have
     not given evidence before us.  We note Mr  Underwood's  concerns,  but
     those concerns are allayed to some extent by Ms Webber's  analysis  of
     the psychiatric evidence in her submissions this morning.   Ms  Webber
     also submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  considered  the  evidence
     carefully.  We would not dissent from that view.  It is clear that  he
     took his fact-finding  role  very  seriously.   It  may  be  that  the
     assessments of credibility and the findings of primary  fact  are  not
     ones that we would have made ourselves or that Mr Underwood would have
     made, but the concerns expressed by Mr Underwood are not  such  as  to
     enable us to say that those assessments and findings were not open  to
     the Adjudicator or that he erred in law in making them.  We  therefore
     reject this fourth area of challenge.
Conclusion
 53. On the other three areas, however, we have  constructed  our  judgment
     and our assessments on the basis  of  the  Adjudicator's  findings  of
     primary fact.  We allow the Secretary of State's appeal on each ground
     and it follows that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  make  a
     deportation order against the Claimant is lawful and remains in force.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
