

             GY (refusal to allow cross-examination) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00264


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination notified  |
|On: 6 September 2004                               |                        |
|Prepared: 6 September 2004                         |22 September 2004       |

                                   Before:

                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                              Mr J G Macdonald

Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and




                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:           Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kerr of counsel, instructed  by  Punatar  &  Co,
solicitors


1.    The appellant ("the  Secretary  of  State")  appeals  with  permission
    against the determination of an adjudicator (Mrs P H Drummond Farrall),
    sitting at Taylor House, in which she allowed on both asylum and  human
    rights grounds the appeal of the respondent ("the claimant"), a citizen
    of Iran, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom after refusing an  application  for  asylum
    made by him.

2.    The claimant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  January  2003.   He
    applied for asylum on arrival.  The grounds on which he did so  may  be
    stated shortly.  His family was involved in  a  group  opposed  to  the
    Iranian government.  He himself worked as a taxi driver,  and  assisted
    his brother-in-law by distributing weapons in his  taxi.   In  December
    2002, his  son  was  detained  by  the  authorities  during  a  student
    demonstration.  The claimant went to the detention centre to  seek  his
    son's release.  He became involved  in  an  argument  with  the  police
    officers, and after his family had been insulted, he  took  out  a  gun
    which he was carrying and fired a shot into the air.

3.    He then fled from the scene in his taxi.  However, in  his  haste,  he
    became involved in a road traffic accident, and had to abandon his taxi
    to continue his flight on foot.  The Iranian authorities found a  cache
    of weapons which he had hidden in the boot of  his  taxi.   He  claimed
    asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom that he would  be  at  risk  of
    detention and persecution at the hands of the Iranian authorities if he
    were to be returned to Iran.

4.     In  her  determination,  the  adjudicator  accepted  the   claimant's
    evidence regarding the incident in which he fired a gun  into  the  air
    during the argument at the detention centre, and that he then fled from
    the scene in his taxi, which he abandoned after crashing it.   However,
    she rejected his evidence in all other respects.   In  particular,  she
    did not believe that he had been politically active as claimed, or that
    he had had a cache of weapons in the boot of his taxi when  he  crashed
    it.  Nevertheless, she allowed his appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds on the basis that if he were to be returned to Iran,  he
    would be detained and prosecuted for firing his gun into the  air,  and
    might then face a death sentence.

5.    Permission to appeal was sought by the Secretary of State on a  number
    of grounds.  However, permission was granted  limited  to  two  grounds
    only, which may be summarised as follows:

      1. The adjudicator erred in failing to identify a  Refugee  Convention
         reason when allowing the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds;
      2. She erred in concluding that the claimant would be likely to suffer
         treatment contrary to Article 3 (prohibition  of  torture)  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights on return to Iran.

6.    At the  start  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Parker,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary  of  State,  sought  permission  under  rule  20(1)  of   the
    Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003  to  amend  his
    grounds of appeal in order to raise two further points, namely:

      1. The adjudicator erred in law by finding that the appellant would be
         at risk of execution for firing a shot into the air as she did  not
         consider whether in practice such a punishment  would  be  enforced
         for that crime;
      2. She erred in law by refusing to allow the presenting  officer  (not
         Mr Parker) who appeared before her on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
         State to cross-examine the claimant when he gave oral evidence.

7.    Mr Kerr, who appeared for the claimant, opposed the  application.   He
    argued that the Secretary of State had given no reason for his  failure
    to raise these points in his original grounds of appeal.  In  addition,
    he had not been given  any  notice  of  the  application.   The  second
    amendment raised a point which was  an  obvious  one,  and  accordingly
    there was no reason for the Secretary of State not to have  pleaded  it
    before.  He submitted that it altered the complexion of the  appeal  to
    such an extent that  the  claimant  would  be  prejudiced  by  it.   It
    amounted to an ambush, and should not be allowed.

8.    We were not persuaded by Mr Parker's  arguments  in  relation  to  the
    first amendment which he sought to make.  However, the second amendment
    was one which we were prepared to allow.  We therefore made our  ruling
    to that effect.  At that stage, both representatives acknowledged that,
    in consequence of that amendment, the appeal would inevitably  have  to
    be remitted for rehearing by another adjudicator.  They were  right  to
    do so.

9.    The basis on which the second amendment was made is  to  be  found  in
    paragraphs 6 and 7 of the adjudicator's  determination  which  read  as
    follows:

         "6.           The Home Office representative, Mrs Greene, wished to
         cross-examine the appellant but I refused leave for her to  do  so.
         I formed the view that she was a very thorough  cross-examiner  and
         that of course is to her credit however,  in  [sic]  this  occasion
         such a formal cross-examination is  totally  unsuitable  and  could
         have led to further deterioration of the appellant's mental  state.
         I have also borne in mind that he had twice  been  interviewed  and
         further had twice been interviewed by two eminent doctors.


         7.        At  the  hearing  the  appellant  adopted  his  screening
         interview and further statements as correct and true  and  I  heard
         submissions from both parties.  Ms Greene relied on the  letter  of
         refusal.  Evidence had not been tested in  cross-examination.   She
         pointed out  that  Dr  Oakes  had  said  he  was  alert  and  fully
         orientated, furthermore the story he told was  an  incredible  one.
         The fact that his brother had ILR [indefinite leave to remain]  did
         not mean that this applied to the appellant and she referred me  to
         the CIPU [Country Information and Policy Unit] document and various
         case laws [sic] that she has submitted stressing that attendance at
         demonstrations does  not  form  the  basis  for  political  refugee
         status".

10.   It is not in dispute that the  adjudicator  allowed  the  claimant  to
    give evidence in chief,  but  then  refused  to  allow  the  presenting
    officer to cross-examine him for  the  reasons  set  out  above.   With
    respect to this experienced adjudicator, we are bound to say that in so
    doing, she manifestly allowed herself to fall seriously into error.  We
    find it difficult to conceive of any circumstances in which it would be
    proper for an adjudicator to allow one party to call a witness who  was
    allowed to give oral evidence in chief,  and  then  deny  the  opposing
    party an opportunity to submit the witness to proper cross-examination.
     If such cross-examination were to be conducted  in  an  oppressive  or
    improper manner, it would of course  be  open  to  the  adjudicator  to
    intervene in order to protect the witness from unfair treatment of that
    nature.  However, it cannot be right in  principle  that  either  party
    should be denied the  opportunity  to  subject  the  oral  evidence  of
    witnesses called on behalf of  the  opposing  party  to  proper  cross-
    examination.

11.    In  refusing  the  presenting  officer  leave  to  cross-examine  the
    claimant, the adjudicator committed such a grave  error  of  procedure,
    which appears on the face of the record, that it clearly amounts  to  a
    material error of law on her part.  Her error is compounded by the fact
    that, even without the benefit of cross-examination, she rejected  most
    (but not all) of the claimant's evidence.  We also note from the appeal
    file that the claimant was in a fit state to give instructions  to  his
    legal representatives on the day of the hearing which then enabled them
    to prepare a four-page additional statement on his behalf.

12.   In the circumstances, the adjudicator's determination  plainly  cannot
    be allowed to stand.  As both representatives before us were  right  to
    acknowledge, we are left with no alternative state to remit this appeal
    for rehearing by another adjudicator.

13.   This appeal is therefore allowed to the  limited  extent  that  it  is
    remitted for rehearing by an adjudicator other than Mrs  P  H  Drummond
    Farrall.


Signed                            Dated

L V Waumsley

Vice President



Approved for electronic distribution
