

        AC (Deportation, Article 8, Appellant) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00122 | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 24th March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               2nd June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                         Mr K Drabu (Vice President)
                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms R Chapman, instructed by Glazer Delmar
For the Respondent:          Mr S Kovats, instructed by Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Mr R McKee, promulgated on 13th June 2002, in which
     he allowed the Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds  against  the
     Secretary of State's  refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation  order  made
     against her.  He dismissed her asylum appeal and  that  is  not  being
     pursued. It is acknowledged to have been false from the very start.

  2. The Appellant before him, whom  we  shall  call  the  Claimant,  is  a
     citizen of Turkey, now aged 29, who arrived clandestinely  in  England
     in  August  1995  and  claimed  asylum,  falsely  it  transpired.   In
     September 1995, she married her fianc�, also a Turkish citizen who was
     then living in this country and by whom she had a daughter  in  August
     1996.  Some months later, the marriage broke down.  In April 1998, she
     attacked a lady of 79  who,  with  her  husband,  had  befriended  the
     Claimant.  She was convicted of  causing  grievous  bodily  harm  with
     intent to do so and was sentenced to eight years in prison (reduced on
     appeal from ten years) and she was recommended for  deportation.   Her
     asylum claim was not determined by the Secretary of  State  until  May
     2001 when it was refused.  In September 2001, the Secretary  of  State
     signed the deportation order.  In November 2001, she appealed  against
     the refusal of asylum and the Secretary of State's refusal  to  revoke
     the deportation order, a refusal which he maintained in May 2002  when
     he provided the substantive reasoning for his decision.   This  echoed
     his reasons for  detaining  her  in  immigration  custody  immediately
     following her notional release, in April 2002, from her sentence.

  3. In the letter of 1st May 2002, the Secretary of State referred to  her
     immigration history, her illegal entry and her attempts to  press  her
     application to stay on the basis of her marriage, even  after  it  had
     broken down.  He pointed out the gravity of the  offence,  noting  the
     comments of the Court of Appeal.  Her time in this country had  either
     been unlawful or in custody.  He considered  the  Probation  Officer's
     assessment that she presented only a low  risk  of  re-offending,  but
     thought  that  the  risk  was  higher  in  view  of   her   misleading
     characterisation of the attack as an  act  of  self-defence,  and  her
     absence of insight into her behaviour.  There was at that time limited
     contact with her  daughter  which,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  the
     Secretary of State accepted  as  constituting  family  life.   But  he
     concluded that her removal from the United Kingdom, in  the  light  of
     the serious offence of which she had been convicted, was necessary for
     the prevention of crime and the protection of health and morals.

The Adjudicator's determination

  4. The Adjudicator allowed the appeal of the  Claimant  on  human  rights
     grounds, but dismissed  the  asylum  appeal.   The  Adjudicator  noted
     evidence of what he described as a loving relationship between  mother
     and daughter developed on the prison visits  which  the  father,  with
     whom the daughter was by now living, had been made by court  order  to
     accept.  He referred to various  parole  assessments  which  spoke  of
     remorse, a low or nil risk assessment of  future  offending,  and  her
     desire to make up for the harm  which  she  had  caused,  which  would
     prevent her committing any further offences.

  5. Having summarised that evidence, the  Adjudicator  commented  that  it
     showed that the Secretary of State's worries about  re-offending  were
     misplaced.  The Claimant was anxious to resume a  normal  relationship
     with her daughter and could not bear the separation which  deportation
     would bring, especially as her former husband would  never  allow  the
     daughter to go to Turkey to visit her.

  6. He continued in paragraphs 5 and 6, paragraphs much criticised by  the
     Secretary of State:

           "5.   I found the appellant wholly credible in her feelings  for
                 [S], and was able to indicate my decision at the  close  of
                 proceedings.  All the evidence points to a nugatory risk of
                 the appellant re-offending.  Her offence was very grave, as
                 reflected in the sentence, but it was  a  crime  passionel,
                 which the appellant has greatly regretted ever  since.   It
                 is truly a 'one-off'.  The effect  upon  the  appellant  of
                 deportation  at  this  point  would  be  devastating.   The
                 hostility of her ex-husband would  ensure  that  she  would
                 never see her daughter unless she could return to  Britain,
                 and that she could not do for  at  least  the  first  three
                 years, and perhaps for several years longer.  Revocation of
                 a deportation order is not  automatic  after  three  years.
                 There is a very real risk that  deportation  would  prevent
                 any  contact  between  mother  and  daughter   during   the
                 formative years of [S]'s  life.   I  must  take  her  human
                 rights into account, as well as her mother's, in coming  to
                 my decision.  As Dr Storey puts it in Met Sula [2002] UKIAT
                 00295, 'in the context of an appeal brought by an appellant
                 with  family  dependants,  the   decision   made   on   the
                 appellant's appeal must not  amount  to  an  act  which  is
                 incompatible with the human rights of any relevant  members
                 of his family'.


           6.    The mother-child relationship is the most  fundamental  of
                 all human relationships.   If  the  appellant  were  simply
                 being removed, she might hope to get entry clearance  under
                 paragraph 246 of HC 395, to return and exercise her  rights
                 under the Contact Order which she has  been  granted.   But
                 deportation  precludes  that.    In   these   compassionate
                 circumstances, deportation is  clearly  a  disproportionate
                 interference with the family life of the appellant and  her
                 daughter.  The appeal is therefore allowed on human  rights
                 grounds."

  7. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the matters raised
     in the decision letter had been ignored;   (the  Secretary  of  State,
     once again, had not been represented before the Adjudicator).  It  was
     wrong for the  Adjudicator  to  have  seen  the  offence  as  a  crime
     passionel.  The Adjudicator had effectively considered the  merits  of
     the deportation order.  He had also omitted to deal with the fact that
     the father had been awarded custody  of  the  child.   She  had  spent
     nearly two years with foster parents but  had  been  living  with  her
     father since February 2000.


The Tribunal's preliminary ruling


  8. When the appeal first came on  for  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  in
     August  2002,  counsel  and  solicitor  were  present  purporting   to
     represent the daughter in addition to those representing  the  mother.
     It is  not  entirely  clear  upon  what  basis  the  daughter's  legal
     representatives  had  been  instructed.   However,  counsel  for   the
     daughter sought to argue that the daughter should be a  party  to  the
     mother's appeal, or should be allowed to intervene in it, or to  argue
     that her human rights fell to be taken into account  in  deciding  the
     mother's human rights appeal.

  9. The Tribunal rejected the claim that the daughter was a party  to  the
     appeal;  she had never appealed  to  the  Adjudicator.   Although  her
     nationality status was said at that time to be uncertain, the decision
     against which her mother appealed was not one which could properly  be
     made against the daughter.  It was not a case  in  which  the  child's
     position in this country fell to be determined as a consequence of  or
     in  line  with  the  determination  of  her  mother's  position.   The
     Adjudicator said that as the father was  now  settled  in  the  United
     Kingdom and as there was a Residence Order in force, she was  entitled
     to be registered as a British citizen by virtue of section 1(3) of the
     British Nationality Act 1981.

 10. The Tribunal concluded that as section 65 of the 1999  Act  refers  to
     the ground of appeal as being that the decision in question,  relating
     to the "appellant's"  or  "that  person's"  entitlement  to  enter  or
     remain, was a breach of "the appellant's human rights",  the  daughter
     had no appeal under section 65 because  no  decision  had  been  taken
     which related to her entitlement to enter  or  remain.   The  daughter
     could bring proceedings in the Administrative Court in respect of  any
     assertion by her that the Secretary of State's decision in respect  of
     her mother was a breach of her own rights;  section  7  of  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998.  The Tribunal rejected an argument that there  was  a
     power for the daughter to intervene in the mother's appeal.

 11. It then considered whether the human rights of the daughter fell to be
     considered at all in the mother's appeal.  It set out paragraphs 8 and
     9 from Kehinde (01/TH/2668*);   these  conclude  that,  for  the  same
     essential reasoning as precludes the daughter from appealing  herself,
     the rights at issue in a section 65 appeal were those of the appellant
     alone.  It distinguished and explained the Tribunal  decision  in  Met
     Sula upon which the Adjudicator had placed reliance.  It  pointed  out
     that the passage which he quoted appeared to  be  in  direct  conflict
     with the starred and binding decision in Kehinde.  It pointed out that
     the circumstances which arose in Met Sula  did  not  arise  here.   We
     shall return to that later.

 12. In paragraphs 26 and 28, the Tribunal said:

           "For those reasons, which we have set  out  at  much  too  great
           length, we conclude that  [S]  has,  as  such,  no  interest  in
           presenting her human rights in this appeal.   It  follows  that,
           when this appeal is determined  on  the  merits,  we  should  be
           concerned, of course, with the circumstances of the family as  a
           whole, but not by looking at [S's] right not to have her  mother
           removed, if she is said to have such a right, but to look at the
           mother's rights.  We shall be concerned to decide whether it  is
           right to say that the mother's removal  infringes  the  mother's
           human rights as a whole - including any right to be with [S].


           No doubt when the appeal  is  heard,  on  which  we  shall  give
           directions shortly, there will be evidence about the  daughter's
           position and the mother's relationship with the daughter  as  it
           was at the date of the decision.  We emphasise that we  are  not
           seeking to exclude evidence of such matters, but in a case where
           it is not suggested that the  removal  of  the  mother  is,   of
           itself,  something  which  is  necessarily  inhibited   by   the
           daughter's position, the daughter's own human rights do not fall
           to be taken into account at all."




The Judicial Review


 13. Judicial Review was sought of that last ruling.  Jack J gave  judgment
     on it in R (AC) v IAT and SSHD [2003] EWHC 389 Admin  in  March  2003.
     The judgment says (paragraph 24):

           "Section 65 makes plain that  an  appeal  under  it  is  on  the
           ground of a breach of the  appellant's  human  rights  and  that
           this is the question to be examined and that this is the  ground
           on  which  the  appeal  may  be  allowed.   The  appeal  is  not
           concerned with the human rights of others.  To that the  proviso
           must be added that the human rights of  others  may  impinge  on
           the human rights of the appellant.  It would therefore  be  more
           complete to say that  appeals  under  section  65  are  directly
           concerned only with the human rights of the appellant,  but  may
           become concerned with the human rights of others in  so  far  as
           they impinge on the human rights of the appellant."


 14. In paragraph 32, Jack J draws attention to the fact that the impact of
     events on the parties to the  relationship  which  constitutes  family
     life may  be  different  depending  upon  which  individual  is  being
     examined.

           "The consequences for a mother of losing contact with her  child
           will be quite different to the consequences  for  the  child  of
           losing her mother.  That is in part because one is a child of  a
           particular age and development whereas the other  is  an  adult.
           It is also because the relationship of child to  mother  is  not
           the same as that of  mother  to  child.   There  will  be  those
           differences even where the relationship  is  equally  strong  on
           either side.  But it may not be  equally  strong.   Thus  it  is
           possible that a mother might be relatively  indifferent  to  her
           child, while  the  child  very  much  needs  its  mother."    He
           continued: "If a child will be distressed,  perhaps  harmed,  by
           its separation from its mother, the impact of that on the mother
           is something to be taken account of in considering the  mother's
           position.  In that way the child's position has  its  impact  on
           the mother's position."

 15. He concluded in paragraph 38:

           "I conclude that the Tribunal was right in deciding that it  was
           not primarily concerned with the human rights of S.  The grounds
           of appeal under section 65 are restricted  to  breaches  of  the
           human rights of the appellant.   The  human  rights  of  another
           person will only be relevant if a breach of them impinges on the
           human rights  of  the  appellant.   I  also  conclude  that  the
           Tribunal was wrong if, as I think that it did, it concluded that
           in considering the rights of the appellant, AC, under Article  8
           it should  take  no  account  of  the  impact  of  the  proposed
           deportation on S.  On an appeal under 65 the adjudicator and the
           Tribunal should take account  of  the  impact  of  the  proposed
           deportation on the family life  of  any  person  with  whom  the
           appellant has established a family life."

 16. There is some scope for debate as to what this judgment decides in the
     light of paragraphs 33 and 34 which could be said to  run  counter  to
     what is said in paragraphs 24 and 32.  The first part of paragraph  38
     might be thought to sit ill with the last part.  The  Order  does  not
     directly quash or uphold the ruling and no order as to costs was made.
      It quashes paragraphs 26 and 28 of the Tribunal's ruling in so far as
     they conflict with paragraph 38  of  the  judgment.   There  was  some
     debate before us as to what the judgment decided and, in any event, as
     to what the true position in law is.


The relevance of rights of those who are not appellants


 17. It is not necessary to set out the statutory  provisions;   they  have
     been summarised above.  We regard it  as  clear  that  the  effect  of
     section 65 is to  require  the  Adjudicator  and  Tribunal  to  decide
     whether or not the decision breaches the appellant's human rights  and
     not whether it breaches the rights of others who are  not  appellants.
     An appellant's human rights are not breached by a decision relating to
     his entitlement to enter  or  remain  simply  because  the  rights  of
     someone else who is not an appellant may be breached by that decision.
      That other person has the ability, if a victim, to bring  proceedings
     in the Administrative Court under section 7 of the 1998 Act.   It  may
     be cumbersome, but it avoids an appellant  making  claims  related  to
     someone else who may be unaware of what is  being  said,  or  who  may
     disagree with it.  A child of divorced or separated parents may be  in
     a particularly difficult position in this respect.

 18. That is not to say that the position of others is  always  irrelevant.
     As the Tribunal pointed out in its ruling on this matter,  the  impact
     on the human rights of a third party may be relevant in this way.   If
     their return to the country to which it  is  proposed  to  remove  the
     appellant is precluded because that would put their Article  3  rights
     there at risk, that may be very material to the degree to  which  they
     might be able  or  unable  to  return  and  hence  to  the  degree  of
     interference with the appellant's rights which  the  latter's  removal
     might entail.  We also accept, as Jack  J  pointed  out  in  AC,  that
     although the right to family life and the effect of interference on it
     is examined, under section 65, from the viewpoint  of  the  appellant,
     the impact of separation on another may cause distress or  anxiety  to
     the appellant and that indirect impact  on  the  appellant  should  be
     taken into account.  It is  right  to  recognise  that  although  some
     family relationships may involve  complete  reciprocity,  others,  and
     parent-child relationships  are  the  obvious  example,  may  be  very
     different depending upon the person from whose viewpoint the matter is
     examined.

 19. Although there was room for some argument before us as to the  meaning
     of the judgment, we consider that, read as a whole,  it  is  accepting
     the point that an appeal  under  section  65  must  be  determined  by
     whether or not the decision breaches the rights of  the  appellant  in
     all the circumstances.  We agree with Jack J's observations if we  are
     correct in our understanding of them;  they are in line  with  Kehinde
     and with the paragraphs of the ruling referred to in the Order.

 20. We do not accept the submissions of Miss Chapman, who appeared for the
     Claimant, that the Adjudicator was correct.  She  submitted  that  the
     daughter was a dependant to her mother's appeal  and  that  her  human
     rights were before the Adjudicator  as  a  dependant,  that  no  legal
     distinction was drawn in AC between those dependants whose immigration
     status or entitlements depended on the appellant, who  were  therefore
     appellants, and those dependants whose status or entitlements were not
     so dependant.  She said that the daughter came within the category  of
     those "directly affected" by the decision whose human rights  fell  to
     be considered according to Met Sula.

 21. True it is that, in what the Adjudicator described  as  an  oversight,
     the Secretary of State refused the daughter's application to remain in
     the United Kingdom as a dependant of the Claimant,  and  the  daughter
     featured  in  the  Claimant's  statement  of  additional  grounds  for
     appealing, but the Adjudicator did not treat her as an  appellant  and
     accepted the Claimant's contention that  the  daughter  could  not  be
     removed from the United Kingdom without leave of the court because  of
     the Residence Order pursuant to which  the  daughter  lived  with  the
     father.  This restriction was a necessary component of the  Claimant's
     Article 8 case.  The  Adjudicator  set  the  daughter's  position  out
     correctly as Mr Kovats for the Secretary of State  accepted;   she  is
     entitled to stay.  The  daughter's  status  is  not  affected  by  the
     decision on her mother.  She is not an appellant, nor  could  she  be.
     She is not liable to be deported with her mother under sections 6  and
     3(6) of the Immigration Act 1971 and no such notice has been given  in
     respect of her.

 22. Section 74 of the 1999 Act, which deals with the disclosure of grounds
     of appeal and the one stop  notice  provisions,  refers  to  "relevant
     member of his family" as those upon whom the Secretary of  State  must
     serve notice requiring them to state any additional grounds which they
     may have for wishing to stay in the United Kingdom.  By section 74(8),
     the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (One-Stop Procedure) Regulations SI
     2000 No 2244, regulation 6(a) defines the relevant decisions and those
     people.  The decision here is not one  of  those  mentioned;   section
     74(3) (a) relates to a deportation order under  section  3(5)  of  the
     1971 Act.

 23. Met Sula does not assist in this case.  The passage relied on by  Miss
     Chapman and by the Adjudicator is at odds with the starred decision in
     Kehinde and should not have been applied in that way.  It has not been
     uncommon for that passage to be cited to urge a result contrary to the
     effect of Kehinde.  It is to be  hoped  that  that  will  cease.   The
     decision was concerned in certain passages to indicate  how  dependant
     appellants should be referred to, but as the Tribunal pointed  out  in
     its preliminary ruling here, those remarks were both  obiter  and  not
     applied consistently by the Tribunal in Met Sula itself.  It was  also
     concerned with the impact of the irremovability of someone other  than
     the appellant on the human rights of the appellant.  If a third person
     cannot be removed without breaching that third  person's  own  rights,
     that irremovability and the  rights  which  give  rise  to  it  become
     relevant in that way to the assessment of the existence of a breach of
     the appellant's human rights.  It is in that  context  that  what  was
     said in Met Sula can be reconciled with Kehinde and  is  the  position
     which arises here.

 24. However, that is not the way in which the Adjudicator  understood  the
     position  or  applied  it.   His  reliance  on  a  partial  quote  and
     misunderstanding has led him to make an appraisal not of the appellant
     mother's human rights but of her daughter's as well.  His decision  is
     erroneous in law in that respect.

 25. We point out that the appeal before the Adjudicator and us is  not  an
     appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order as such. An
     appeal on that basis, under section 63(1)(b) of the 1999 Act can  only
     be brought once the appellant has left the  country;   section  64(3).
     That is important because the  basis  of  such  an  appeal  under  the
     Immigration Rules is somewhat wider than the ground under section  65.
     It is in that context that the comment in Singh v IAT [1986] 2 All  ER
     721 HL about the potential relevance of the interests of third parties
     in a deportation appeal need to be considered;  see now paragraph  390
     of the  Immigration  Rules  which  deals  with  the  revocation  of  a
     deportation order.

 26. We  therefore  consider  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and  the
     Claimant's resistance to it on the basis that it  is  only  her  human
     rights, essentially those under Article 8 relating to her relationship
     with her daughter, which are at issue.  When the appeal came on  again
     before the Tribunal, there was no further attempt by the  daughter  to
     be represented or to claim to be a party, and no steps had been  taken
     to raise a claim in the Administrative Court on her behalf.

 The further material

 27. The Claimant had however sent further witness and  other  material  to
     the Secretary of  State,  which  the  Tribunal  had  before  it.   The
     evidence related to the daughter's welfare and  the  progress  of  the
     mother's level of  contact  with  her.  She  had  been  released  from
     immigration detention in April 2003 and her contact with her  daughter
     had developed since then.  The Claimant gave evidence  about  how  her
     relationship  with  her  daughter  was  progressing  and   about   the
     difficulties she experienced with her former husband over contact.  It
     was agreed that on the appeal it was necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to
     consider all the up to date material which bore upon the  relationship
     between the mother and her daughter.

 28. The Secretary of State responded to the  further  material  which  had
     been sent to him in a letter dated 18th March 2004.  He maintained his
     view that  deportation  was  a  proportionate  interference  with  the
     Claimant's family life and indeed that even taking  into  account  the
     rights of the daughter, he  did  not  consider  that  deportation  was
     disproportionate.  He relied strongly upon the gravity of the offence.

 29. There was an issue however as to the relevance of  the  latest  letter
     from the Secretary of State.  It was contended by Miss Chapman that it
     should not be considered by the Tribunal because  it  post  dated  the
     decision under appeal notified on 6th November 2001 and  the  reasoned
     letter of 1st May 2002.  She described it as inappropriate for further
     evidence and reasons to be given, and took issue with them.  We do not
     accept that argument in principle; whether the reasons given are sound
     is another matter.  It seems to us bizarre that  the  Claimant  should
     rightly be able to give evidence as to the current position and   send
     it to the Secretary of State to see if it changed his mind,  yet  seek
     to preclude any assessment of it by him being taken into account.  The
     comments which he makes upon  the  material  are  comments  which  for
     better or worse can be made by his advocate or they can be the subject
     of further evidence from the Secretary of State, but there can  be  no
     doubt but that the views in the letter are not the uninstructed  views
     of those who happen to be present in Court.  Taking  account  of  them
     through the letter does not mean that a fresh appealable  decision  is
     being considered.  It has the advantage that in so far as  there  have
     been changes  of  facts  which  significantly  undermine  his  earlier
     consideration of proportionality, there is an up to date assessment of
     proportionality by the person who is the primary decision taker.

 30. We now turn to the merits of the appeal having delineated its scope in
     the light of the first error by the Adjudicator.


The framework of the decision


 31. We accept Mr Kovats' submissions as to the framework for our  decision
     drawn by him from Samaroo  v  SSHD  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1139.   Is  any
     provision of the ECHR engaged?  There  was  agreement  that  at  least
     Article 8 was engaged through the  Claimant's  family  life  with  her
     daughter.  Would anything short of deportation achieve  the  Secretary
     of State's objectives?  The contrary was not  seriously  contended  in
     the general sense that it was  acknowledged  that  "the  objective  of
     preventing crime and disorder is  sufficiently  important  to  justify
     limiting a fundamental  right,  and  that  the  deportation  of  those
     convicted of serious criminal  offences...  is  a  measure  rationally
     connected to that objective", (Samaroo para 20,  Dyson  LJ).   It  was
     contended, in particular,  by  Miss  Chapman  that  the  Adjudicator's
     assessment of the offence and the risk of re-offending should  not  be
     interfered with either on its merits or as a matter of the  tribunal's
     powers,  and  that  was  very  relevant  to  whether  the  degree   of
     interference with the  Claimant's  rights  was  proportionate.   Would
     deportation be disproportionate in the light of the interference  with
     the Claimant's Article 8 rights?  There was an issue as  to  precisely
     how that should be approached.

 32. It is convenient at this stage to deal with Miss Chapman's contentions
     about the limits on the  power  of  the  Tribunal  to  re-examine  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions about the significance of  the  offence  and
     the likelihood of re-offending.  Miss Chapman  submitted  that  before
     interfering with the Adjudicator's conclusions we had to be  satisfied
     that there were objective grounds upon which we ought to conclude that
     a different view was the right one;  Subesh v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  56
     para 44.  Mr Kovats submitted that the test was satisfied here because
     the Adjudicator had clearly erred in his approach to the  offence  and
     offender, and so a fresh appraisal was called  for.   As  will  become
     apparent, we have concluded that the Adjudicator made a mistake of law
     in his characterisation of the  offence  and  of  the  offender.   His
     appraisal is legally inadequately reasoned and  is  erroneous  in  law
     because it proceeds upon a fundamental misunderstanding or  omits  the
     consideration of significant and  relevant  factors.   Once  that  has
     happened, the question for the Tribunal is the conclusion to which  it
     should come given that the appraisal below is not  one  which  it  can
     adopt.  That sort of error is outside the range  of  circumstances  to
     which Laws LJ's remarks in Subesh were being addressed.  Laws  LJ  was
     addressing what is an important issue as to the approach to  error  of
     fact which falls  short  of  being  an  error  of  law.   He  was  not
     purporting to curtail the error of law jurisdiction.  Either way,  the
     Adjudicator determination  requires  re-consideration  by  us  because
     objective grounds drive us to a different view.   In  any  event,  the
     Tribunal  has  to  reach  the  decision  overall  afresh  because  the
     Adjudicator has adopted an erroneous approach to the Claimant's appeal
     on Article 8, as we have explained and it is accepted  that  there  is
     fresh material for us to take into  account  after  the  date  of  his
     decision.


The assessment of the offence and the Claimant


 33. The components of the Adjudicator's assessment of the offence and  the
     offender,  of  which  the  Secretary  of  State  complained,  are  the
     reference to it being a "crime passionel", a  description  which  Miss
     Chapman conceded was at least unhelpful, the view  that  the  Claimant
     has regretted it ever since, that it was a one-off and  that  all  the
     evidence pointed to the risk  of  re-offending  being  nugatory.   All
     these were significant inputs to his assessment of proportionality.

 34. Some months after the Claimant had split from  her  husband  in  early
     1997, she met an elderly couple;  the wife was 79 and the  husband  73
     0r 74.  She was 23.  This couple befriended her  and  invited  her  to
     their home on number of occasions.  She had started seeing the husband
     occasionally on his own.  From the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,  the
     husband appears to have taken something of a shine  to  her.   On  one
     such occasion, she asked the  husband,  who  said  that  he  had  been
     invited to her flat for sex, to wait for her somewhere while  she  did
     some shopping.  She knew that the husband would therefore  not  be  at
     his home and would not return there soon, because he would instead  be
     waiting for her.  She went to their house where the  wife  was  alone.
     She attacked the old lady about ten minutes after  arriving,  in  what
     the judge described as a highly pre-meditated attack.

 35. From behind, when the victim was off-guard, she threw a  curtain  over
     the victim's head.  She beat the victim, tried to strangle  her,  hit,
     punched and bit her.  She tried to gouge out her eyes.  In response to
     some resistance, she grabbed the victim by  the  hair  and  repeatedly
     knocked her head against the door  frame  rendering  her  unconscious.
     The victim was in hospital for two weeks, two days of  which  were  in
     intensive care.  She said that the Claimant had been her assailant.

 36. It was plainly a very serious offence and the sentence of eight years,
     albeit reduced from ten years on appeal, shows that to be the case for
     a woman of 23 with no known previous  convictions  and  a  very  young
     child.  The Claimant had pleaded not guilty on the basis that she  had
     not  done  it,  had  not  been  there,  and  knew  nothing  about  the
     allegations made by the husband that she had offered him sex.  The DNA
     evidence arose from contamination.  The victim and  her  husband  were
     lying.  But her own evidence on oath was disbelieved.  She  maintained
     her story on appeal.  She did not appeal  against  the  recommendation
     for deportation.  She showed no regret.

 37. A psychiatric report prepared for  her  sentencing  hearing  concluded
     that if she had committed the offence that would be a "bad  prognostic
     factor" for the assessment of the future risk she posed.  In all other
     respects she was normal and of above average  intelligence.   All  the
     other  factors  including  her  personal  history  were  good  factors
     "meaning that apart from the alleged offence she is  unlikely  to  re-
     offend".  But, we note, she had committed the offence.  The PSR  faced
     the same  problem  that  the  Claimant  denied  having  committed  the
     offence, although she expressed sympathy for the victim.  It concluded
     that there did not appear to be any motivation for the offence nor any
     previous indications that she  could  be  a  danger,  leading  to  the
     conclusion that her actions were "uncharacteristic".

 38. After conviction, she would understandably have had parole in mind  at
     the earliest opportunity.  A parole assessment report of 2001 prepared
     in prison, upon which the Adjudicator relied, states that her  version
     of the offence was markedly different  from  the  prosecution's.   The
     author speculated that a possible motive  for  the  attack  was  that,
     following her divorce, the Claimant wanted the victim out of  the  way
     so that she could pursue a relationship with  the  husband  so  as  to
     advance her immigration status.  He recounts the Claimant telling  him
     that she had told the victim that  the  husband  was  making  unwanted
     advances to her, whereupon  the  victim  attacked  her  with  a  knife
     against which she was forced to defend herself by pushing  the  victim
     away, which caused her to fall and hit  her  head.   She  had  had  no
     intention of hurting her.  She was persuaded to plead not guilty  when
     she had wanted  to  plead  guilty.   Her  prison  behaviour  had  been
     excellent.  The Probation Officer  said  that  although  the  fact  of
     conviction of a very serious offence meant that  there  was  a  medium
     risk of re-offending and of  danger  to  the  community,  a  low  risk
     assessment was appropriate following  interview  and  discussion  with
     others.  She was desperate to be re-united  with  her  child  and  her
     concern for the victim was genuine.  He would  have  made  a  positive
     recommendation for release into the community.

 39. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that that assessment is  based
     solely on the Claimant's  account.   The  description  of  the  attack
     accepted by the jury could not possibly have involved self-defence  by
     the Claimant;  the injuries were not consistent with what the Claimant
     describes  as  a  push  leading  to  accidental  head  injuries;   the
     genuineness of the concern could not sensibly be assessed without  the
     Claimant acknowledging what she actually did. Regret and sympathy  for
     someone unintentionally hurt by a push given in self-defence against a
     knife is very different from regret and sympathy for someone  who  was
     subjected to a planned, unprovoked and seemingly motiveless attack, of
     the degree of violence sustained here.  Neither at trial nor at appeal
     had the Claimant shown any remorse.  She was in fact still  continuing
     to lie about the attack, and to distort and minimise what she did.

 40. The Adjudicator also  relied  on  an  assessment  for  deportation  of
     November 2001.  This describes how polite and helpful the Claimant has
     been in prison and the educational  opportunities  of  which  she  has
     taken advantage.  She had already obtained a  degree  in  Turkey.   It
     states that she has very much accepted responsibility for the offence,
     regrets very much ever going to see the victim but  thought  that  she
     was doing the right thing because  of  the  husband's  advances.   She
     again said that she reacted in self-defence to a quite violent  attack
     by the elderly lady, and had pushed her away, causing her to fall.  It
     was the Claimant's fault, she said, for going to see the victim at all
     to speak to her.  She felt great remorse, and the report described how
     she seemed a very sincere and genuine person;  the assessor could  see
     the depth of remorse in her face and eyes.  He had no doubts that  she
     would never re-offend again.

 41. The assessment make no reference at all to the prosecution case  which
     was accepted, to the lies told at trial that she had not been there at
     all and does not contemplate the variance between  what  the  Claimant
     said and the medical evidence which included evidence of  gouging  and
     biting.  It is simply untrue for the  Claimant  to  contend  that  she
     acted in self-defence or  that  she  merely  pushed  the  victim  away
     causing her to fall.  She did not  even  try  to  say  that  what  had
     started out as self-defence  changed  into  a  sustained  and  vicious
     attack against an old lady through a loss  of  her  temper  and  self-
     control.  This  assessment  of  remorse  and  risk  is  based  on  the
     acceptance of continued lies by the Claimant about what she  did,  and
     why.  She may  have  come  to  believe  her  own  lies;  the  assessor
     certainly did.  The Adjudicator could place no  sensible  reliance  on
     it.

 42. The material simply confounds any suggestion  that  the  Claimant  has
     shown regret ever since the offence.  In reality, on that material  it
     is difficult to see that she had ever done so.  It  is  impossible  to
     say that the evidence points  to  a  nugatory  risk  of  re-offending.
     Either there was no usable risk assessment  or  the  indications  were
     that there was some degree of risk, drawing  on  the  psychiatric  and
     probation reports to the extent that they refer  to  the  position  in
     relation to a very serious offence.  Accordingly, it  cannot  be  said
     that this was a one-off offence;  it  was  an  unexplained,  seemingly
     motiveless but planned, sustained and vicious  attack  on  an  elderly
     lady.   "Crime  passionel"  it  was  not;   if  by  that  phrase   the
     Adjudicator had in mind the possible motive of  doing  away  with  the
     victim to advance the immigration status of  the  Claimant,  it  would
     have pointed to a very dangerous person, although an attempted  murder
     charge was dropped.

 43. The Tribunal has had two further reports provided to it.  The first is
     a short letter saying that since her release on bail, the Claimant has
     complied with all the requirements of her licence.  The  second  is  a
     psychologist's report of October 2002, from Ms  Crassati  commissioned
     on behalf of the Claimant, and based upon documentation which included
     the Court of Appeal judgment and a two and a half hour interview  with
     the Claimant in prison.  It was asked to address the question of  risk
     in particular.  The report refers to the judgment and  then  provides,
     in considerable detail, the Claimant's  version  as  summarised  above
     from other reports.  She explained the curtain found on the  old  lady
     by saying that she had put it there to cover her up because her  skirt
     was open while she was lying unconscious.  She had intended to  go  to
     the police but had changed her mind so as to see her daughter.  Having
     changed her clothes and calmed down, she collected  her  daughter  and
     went home.  The police came early the next day and she told them  that
     she had done it.

 44. Her solicitors strongly advised her to plead not guilty and she  tried
     to change solicitors; but she was bewildered and frightened;  she  was
     not aware that she could have pleaded guilty in  court.   It  was  her
     solicitors who wished to appeal and told her what to say.

 45. Within the context of her account, Ms Craissati thought that there was
     no real attempt to avoid responsibility.  The Claimant seemed to  view
     her actions as na�ve and misguided.  She expressed apparently  sincere
     concern and was not annoyed at the victim  for  lying  about  how  the
     attack had occurred.  But she was unable to explain  the  bite  marks.
     She rejected the possibility that she  had  some  immigration  related
     motive for the attack.

 46. On the HCR 20 Checklist of risk  factors  she  scored  extremely  low,
     (assuming this to have been a first offence for which there  was  only
     the Claimant's word).  These factors chiefly related to chronic  anti-
     social behaviour.  On the Psychopathy Checklist, which had to be  used
     with extreme caution with female offenders, the report said:

           "There is also very little evidence for psychopathic personality
           traits such as  cold,  callous  and  disregarding  attitudes  to
           others, superficial emotions, lack  of  remorse  or  failure  to
           accept responsibility for her actions.  Clearly she may be lying
           about her entry into the country and the offence, but  there  is
           no suggestion that lying and manipulation are pervasive traits.


           Denial  of  offence  behaviour  is  not  considered  to   be   a
           significant predictor of future  violence  risk,  unless  it  is
           associated with  pervasive  psychopathic  trains,  as  described
           above.  Thus denial - or distortions in the offence account - is
           absent from all well established predication tools."

 46. In her summary, the psychologist says in  relation  to  the  differing
     account of events:

           "Ms [C] provides a detailed, measured and  vivid  account  which
           lends plausibility.  It is possible that the level  of  physical
           struggle was greater than she described or recalled.  However, I
           fully accept that she may be presenting a well rehearsed lie."


 47. The report says that the victim's account makes  motivation  difficult
     to discern, for the Claimant is an attractive  woman  who  could  have
     remarried easily when she was free to do so, which she had not been at
     the time of the offence.  The Claimant was not the sort to  carry  out
     an ill-considered, reckless and impulsive  plan.   It  was  recognised
     that  uncertainty  regarding  motivation  was  very  unsettling;   but
     motivation was only  related  to  risk  in  so  far  as  it  reflected
     underlying traits.  Denial and distortions were not  an  indicator  of
     risk;  any evidence based approach would lead to the  conclusion  that
     she posed a low risk of future violence.  The HCR 20 Checklist,  which
     did include the Psychopathy Checklist,  supported  that,  as  did  the
     conclusions of other experienced assessors.   She  had  no  antagonism
     towards the victim and if there were an immigration motive, resolution
     of that would remove that risk element.  She had not been manipulative
     in prison.  There was no  contrary  evidence  or  special  factors  to
     override that conclusion.

 48. Miss Chapman submitted that it would be quite wrong for the  Tribunal,
     whose area of expertise does not include the assessment of the risk of
     re-offending, to substitute a different view for those  of  the  three
     experts, and of the Craissati report in particular.   She  points  out
     correctly that the Home Office  Parole  Unit  granted  parole  at  the
     earliest date and would have applied criteria which required  them  to
     focus on the risk of re-offending.  Mr  Kovats  submitted  that  there
     were flaws in them of varying degrees which we were  obliged  to  take
     into account.

 49. We have already made comments about the difficulties of taking the two
     earlier  assessments  before  the  Adjudicator  at  face  value.    We
     recognise that risk assessment is not our area of expertise but we are
     not obliged to accept any expert report  at  face  value  and  we  are
     entitled to reject the evidence or assessment contained in it if there
     are proper reasons for  doing  so.   The  reasons  for  rejecting  the
     conclusions of the first two, which we have spelt out, involve no more
     expertise than reading the reports and pointing out the flaws  in  the
     factual material upon which they are based, and the factors which they
     say are relevant but  which  are  considered  on  a  false  or  wholly
     incomplete basis.

 50. We now turn to the 2002 Report of Ms  Craissati.   Again,  taking  the
     comments and criteria which she set out, it is not easy to see how the
     conclusion is at all sustainable at least  without  considerably  more
     explanation.  We have set out the description of  psychopathic  traits
     which Ms Craissati provided and now test the evidence in  relation  to
     it.  It is impossible to deny that the offence was callous.   It  was,
     as the sentencing judge pointed out, "highly premeditated".  This  was
     not criticised in the Court of Appeal. On the prosecution  case  which
     the jury accepted, it clearly was;  it is only  the  untruthful  later
     explanation of the Claimant which suggests otherwise.   There  are  no
     actions which suggest any remorse;  she pleaded not guilty,  persisted
     in an appeal, and subsequently changed her story to one which involved
     a falsely minimised admission of responsibility for injuries  somewhat
     less than she in fact caused.

 51. She has not accepted  responsibility  for  her  actions;   the  report
     refers to her accepting it in the context  of  her  version  but  that
     version is untrue.  She blamed  the  husband  for  his  advances,  the
     victim for attacking her, her former  solicitors  for  preventing  her
     pleading guilty and appealing on her behalf (although neither her  PSR
     nor the psychiatric report contain any hint of that), her husband  for
     making her make what she accepted later was a completely false  asylum
     claim and she takes no responsibility for what she, as an educated and
     intelligent middle class woman, must have known was an  illegal  entry
     into this country in the back of a lorry.

 52. Miss Chapman said that it was not surprising that a  twenty  year  old
     would go along with the suggestion  of  her  fianc�  and  someone  who
     appeared to be an interpreter about making and signing false claims of
     torture and political persecution.  She had not made a false statement
     at interview because she had never been  interviewed.   She  disavowed
     the claim before the Adjudicator for the first time because there  had
     been difficulties in obtaining legal advice in prison and a change  of
     solicitors from those who had  been  representing  both  her  and  her
     husband.   This  is  not  very  persuasive;   the   Claimant   is   an
     intelligent, well-educated, middle class woman and was  at  that  time
     too.  We do not think that her age is of any  great  weight  in  this.
     Grounds of appeal were lodged by her present  solicitors  in  November
     2001 repeating the allegations, although they say that  they  did  not
     obtain a signed statement from her and that they were doing what  they
     should do in her interests at a time when instructions were  difficult
     to obtain.  She could have withdrawn long before the appeal was lodged
     and long before the appeal hearing, if honesty had been her aim.   She
     knew she had gone  along  with  a  wholly  false  claim  following  an
     evidently illegal entry.

 53. She lied persistently about her involvement  in  the  offence  to  the
     Courts, to the Probation Service, and medical advisers, and also about
     her asylum claim which  she  was  still  allowing  to  be  pursued  in
     November 2001.  She persisted in her marriage  application  after  her
     marriage had broken down, pursuing both that and her asylum  claim  in
     solicitor's letters of November 1997 and March 1998, even  though  her
     husband had told the Home Office in July 1997 that  the  marriage  had
     broken down;  her material in relation  to  contact  proceedings  says
     that she left him in January 1997.  The decree was  made  absolute  on
     8th July 1998, according to her chronology in child care  proceedings,
     just some two and a half months after the offence.   (She  appears  to
     have told the psychologist that at the time of the offence the divorce
     was a long way from being settled, as part of her  puzzlement  at  the
     speculated immigration related motive.)  It is  difficult  to  believe
     that she was telling the truth when she said that  she  did  not  know
     that there was anything untoward about her journey in the back of  the
     lorry, by which she entered, until her papers were taken  off  her  by
     someone or that having a tourist visa for Germany was not a sufficient
     basis for legal entry into the United Kingdom.

 54. We are not persuaded by that report in view of the significance of the
     factors which it identifies as relevant to  risk  and  in  respect  of
     which there is readily available material which contradicts  what  the
     Claimant said and which on the face of it requires explanation  as  to
     why the conclusion could be reached in the light of it that there is a
     low  risk  of  future  violence.   It  makes  the  comment  that   the
     uncertainty over motivation for the  offence  is  very  unsettling  of
     greater significance.

 55. It is difficult for us to come to any very clear conclusion as to what
     the level of risk actually is.  Certainly there is no sound evidential
     basis for an assessment of  a  low  level  of  risk;   what  there  is
     suggests a significantly higher level of risk.   There  is  either  no
     motive for a vicious and planned attack on an  elderly  lady  who  had
     befriended her or the motive was to advance  her  immigration  status.
     But what she says about it is untrue.  The Claimant's  statement  says
     only that she committed a terrible offence  and  that  if  there  were
     anything which she could do to make up for the harm she has caused  to
     the victim and to her own daughter, she would do it.   That  does  not
     advance matters.

 56. Mr Kovats submitted that even if we were to conclude that this  was  a
     case in which there was clearly  no  more  than  a  low  risk  of  re-
     offending, nonetheless deportation was still in  the  public  interest
     and achieved a legitimate objective in relation to crime and  disorder
     and the protection of the health, rights and freedoms of  others.   He
     relied upon Goremsandu v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 250, in which the Court of
     Appeal held that it was open to the Secretary of State to decide  that
     certain offences were so serious, in the sense of  being  sufficiently
     repugnant to the generally accepted standards  of  morality  that  the
     continued  presence  of  the   individual   in   the   community   was
     unacceptable, irrespective of a propensity to commit further offences,
     that there was a proper public interest  served  by  the  deportation.
     That case involved incest by a father with a teenage daughter and fell
     within the category of morally repugnant offences.   As  Miss  Chapman
     pointed out that is not the same types of offence as the one which  we
     are dealing with, but Samaroo illustrates that the application of  the
     principle is not confined to cases which are morally repugnant in that
     way.  Samaroo was convicted of serious class A drug dealing  offences,
     and was not considered likely to re-offend.  The  Secretary  of  State
     had a general policy of deporting those  convicted  of  such  offences
     because of the gravity with which he viewed them.

 57. The Secretary of State's letter of 1st May 2002 does not identify  any
     statement of policy as such but says that there are certain  types  of
     offence which he regards as particularly  serious,  essentially  those
     involving violence,  sex,  drugs  and  arson.   The  sentencing  Court
     regarded the offence as serious and there was no  appeal  against  the
     recommendation for deportation.   We  regard  it  as  obvious  that  a
     serious violent assault upon an elderly woman, with intent to  inflict
     really serious harm, falls within those categories  of  offence  which
     are sufficiently repugnant to generally accepted  standards  that  the
     deportation of the Claimant serves a legitimate public objective  even
     if she had a no or  a  low  risk  assessment.   It  is  of  the  moral
     equivalence to  serious  drug  dealing  or  serious  sexual  offences,
     particularly when the circumstances of  this  particular  offence  and
     offender are taken into account.

 58. However, the Claimant's deportation  is  acknowledged  to  engage  her
     rights under Article 8 because of the family life which she  has  with
     her daughter.  Whether deportation is disproportionate depends on  the
     circumstances  of  that  relationship  measured  against  the   public
     interest which we have already discussed.


Article 8


 59. The Claimant married in October 1995 and her daughter, S, was born  in
     August 1996.  She says that  she  left  her  husband  because  of  his
     violence in early 1997 and took her daughter with her.  When  she  was
     arrested in April 1998, her daughter went to stay with  foster  carers
     who brought S to see the Claimant two or three times a week and S  was
     allowed to stay for a whole day  once  a  week.   After  sentence,  in
     January 1999, S was brought to see her once a week and stayed for  the
     whole day once month.  But in February 2000, S went to live  with  her
     father who appears to have been looking for her  and  who  obtained  a
     Residence Order for her.  There was a Contact  Order  for  the  mother
     which permitted her to see S once a week in  Holloway.   She  recounts
     the difficulties which she says the father made over  bringing  S  for
     visits and preventing her telephoning S, with  various  excuses.   She
     obtained a Court Order in July 2002.

 60. After her release from immigration detention in April 2003,  she  went
     to live initially with the  foster  carers,  who  then  acted  as  go-
     betweens in trying to arrange meetings  between  mother  and  daughter
     because the father was hostile to greater contact.  A new Court  Order
     provided for greater contact in May 2003, varied in  October  2003  to
     three hours on Wednesdays and six hours on Saturdays, with  continuing
     telephone contact.  The father had been difficult in  keeping  to  the
     arrangements, refusing to answer the door or telephone and  so  direct
     collection from school was  arranged.   The  Claimant  says  that  the
     father has tried to turn S against her and  that  means  that  S  only
     shows affection to her when away from where she lives.  The father has
     brought his mother over from Turkey to help  look  after  S  when  the
     father is away on  work,  which  he  is  quite  often.   The  Claimant
     complains that the grandmother is elderly, ill-educated, cannot  speak
     English or much Turkish, but only Kurdish, and cannot  help  with  S's
     homework.  Her immigration status is uncertain as she has no right  to
     stay.  In January 2004, the Claimant obtained  an  Order  for  staying
     contact.  Although she describes a number of  difficulties  which  the
     father and his mother have created in the difficult relationship,  the
     Claimant has been able to maintain contact with  S  and  have  her  to
     stay.  The Claimant accuses them of saying that  the  father  will  be
     angry if S stays with the Claimant and causing distress to S when  she
     does try to do so, by various tactics.   Much  of  her  statement  was
     devoted to  her  complaints  about  the  father  rather  than  to  her
     relationship with her daughter.

 61. She pointed out that the Court had ordered the father to surrender S's
     passport and not to take her abroad.  However, she also says that such
     is the father's antagonism to her that  he  would  never  bring  S  to
     Turkey to see her mother or allow her to go there, so that deportation
     would mean that she would never see her daughter again.  It  would  be
     very difficult to obtain any such Order if she were living  in  Turkey
     and to enforce it.  Even telephone contact would become very difficult
     in view of the obstructive tactics which could  be  readily  exploited
     and which it would be difficult to enforce  against  effectively  from
     Turkey.

 62. She gave oral evidence before  us  in  which,  despite  her  continued
     complaints against her former husband, she said  that  she  saw  S  on
     Wednesdays, collecting her from school and taking her to her  father's
     three hours later and had for two months or so been able to have S  to
     stay from Friday afternoon, from school, until  Saturday  4pm.   There
     had been  problems  with  her  being  frightened  of  her  father  and
     grandmother who were against her staying, but those  appeared  now  to
     have been overcome.  She is now trying to get  full  weekend  staying.
     She is looking to re-build  her  relationship  slowly  and  eventually
     would like S to live with her.  There is a  growing  demonstration  of
     affection from her daughter after a hesitant start.  They  do  various
     outings together and other things that parents and young  children  do
     at bedtime. They talk;  she knew the details of S's life.  The  mother
     says that S is the most important thing in her life and that she would
     suffer endlessly if she were unable to see her  daughter  again.   She
     thought that  her  daughter  would  suffer  too  if  she  were  solely
     dependant on her father and grandmother for her upbringing because the
     details of her life were not important to them.

 63. The Claimant also produced statements from the foster carers,  two  of
     which had been produced to the trial or  sentencing  Court  explaining
     how mother and daughter had been affectionate when the mother  was  on
     remand.  The third was recent and had not been before the Adjudicator.
      It described the love and affection between S and her mother  but  it
     also expressed concern about what they said was physical abuse  and  a
     lack of care for S from her father and grandmother.

 64. A CAFCASS Report, with addendum of January 2004, rehearses the history
     of the relationships between the father, mother and daughter  and  the
     various court hearings.   It  provides  support,  along  with  various
     Orders, for the Claimant's evidence that there has been, through anger
     and negative feelings towards her from  the  father,  a  lack  of  co-
     operation and instead a degree of obstruction  to  her  endeavours  to
     establish a relationship with S.  The Report  concluded  that  S  felt
     inhibited in  showing  affection  to  her  mother  in  the  reporter's
     presence but when off-guard showed attachment.  S's  needs,  physical,
     educational and emotional were being appropriately looked  after,  but
     she was torn in her loyalties between the adults in her life.  She was
     aware of the attitudes which father and grandmother  had  towards  her
     mother.  It was said that if she continued  to  be  exposed  to  those
     views it would be damaging to her and, to  avoid  that  leading  to  a
     complete breakdown in her relationship with her mother,  it  might  be
     necessary to transfer residence to the mother.  There was a risk  that
     the relationship with the mother would break down unless S  felt  free
     to visit and enjoy visiting her mother.  It was  not  clear  that  the
     father placed S's interests above his own.

 65. Neither in that Report nor in the addendum, nor in any  evidence  from
     the Claimant was there any support for  the  suggestions  of  physical
     abuse or lack of physical care which the foster carers alleged.  We do
     not consider that if there were any evidence, the CAFCASS Report would
     have omitted it.  The addendum related to a home visit to the father's
     house.  The grandmother  spoke  at  least  some  Turkish.   They  made
     allegations against the mother and would not accept that  S  might  be
     saying things which she thought they would wish to hear.  The reporter
     continued to recommend gradually increasing  contact  and  voiced  her
     concern as to the effect on S if she felt that she  had  betrayed  her
     primary carers.

 66. The Claimant also produced a report from a social worker who acts as a
     Children's Guardian, although not appointed so to act  in  this  case.
     It  was  dated  August  2002,   and   post-dated   the   Adjudicator's
     determination.  It was not based on any interviews with mother, father
     or daughter.  It said that it would be extremely traumatic for S  were
     her mother to  be  deported;   she  would  only  see  that  people  in
     authority had taken away her mother and that could lead to strong anti-
     authority feelings later in life.  She would lose trust in adults  and
     would require counselling through what would be a  traumatic  episode.
     The severe consequences might not be reparable.

 67. Mr Kovats submitted that there was a prospect that the mother would be
     allowed back into the country after three years, but we regard that as
     the minimum which the Secretary of State would require.  Miss  Chapman
     pointed out that the Immigration Directorate's instructions were  that
     the period normally appropriate before a deportation order was revoked
     in the case of someone convicted of inflicting  grievous  bodily  harm
     was ten years from departure.  Although it might be  possible  for  an
     application to be made which had some prospects of  success,  we  take
     the view that we have to approach this case  on  the  basis  that  the
     gravity of the offence, which is, to the Secretary of State,  the  key
     point  behind  the  deportation,  would  make  an  exception  somewhat
     unlikely.  Mr Kovats did not press the prospects of a  Court  ordering
     contact through  holidays  for  S  in  Turkey  in  view  of  the  past
     difficulties and the need, in view of the  Residence  Order,  for  the
     Court to permit the visit in the absence of the father's consent.

 68. Miss Chapman sought assistance, as to the  level  of  offending  which
     justified deportation where family life was engaged, from ECtHR cases,
     in some of which the level of offending, which was held not to justify
     deportation, was considerably more serious and  prolonged  than  here.
     But that is too simple an approach.  She is right in respect  of  some
     of the offending but the circumstances of the offenders are  different
     too and stronger than those present here.  We did not  find  any  real
     assistance in the comparison of facts in an area where so  much  turns
     on the precise mix of facts in a particular case.

 69. We have to decide whether the deportation would be disproportionate in
     the sense that deportation would be outside the  range  of  reasonable
     responses  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  all  the  relevant
     circumstances, balancing the public  interest  against  the  undoubted
     interference with the Article 8 rights of the mother.  The approach is
     set out in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 840,[2003]  INLR  543  at
     paragraph 41 and also in Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 716, [2003] INLR
     1361.  We do not accept Mr Kovats' submission that there have been  no
     changes since the 1st May 2002 decision which serve  significantly  to
     undermine the decision which the Secretary of State took, at least  in
     the sense that there  have  been  developments  which  mean  that  the
     position requires to be re-examined as of now.  This  is  because  the
     Claimant has been released from custody and has been in a position  to
     rebuild in part the relationship which she had before  she  was  taken
     into custody.  She also has the benefit  of  an  up  to  date  CAFCASS
     report and  other  material.  However,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
     considered the up to date position in his letter of 18th  March  2004.
     The Tribunal therefore knows what his view is on the current  position
     and it would be absurd to proceed as if that were irrelevant and as if
     we were unaware of it.  It is our view that we  should  ask  ourselves
     whether  that  letter  represents  an  unreasonable  approach  to  the
     balancing of the conflicting interests.

 70. Even if that were not so, we would adopt the approach  set  out  in  M
     (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT 00024* paragraph 28 which  would  lead  to  the
     same result.


Conclusions


 71. We regard it as obvious that the interference with the mother's family
     life would be very severe indeed.  She would be likely to lose  direct
     face to face contact with her daughter for many years as her  daughter
     grows from seven to quite possibly seventeen years old.  The  prospect
     of visits by the daughter to Turkey  to  see  her  mother  are  fairly
     remote in reality because of the father's hostility and the difficulty
     of obtaining and then enforcing any Order while living in Turkey;   it
     cannot be ruled out though as S grows and  can  undertake  independent
     travel.  We are also conscious that the father has been  uncooperative
     at times and has impeded telephonic contact.   Although  in  fact  the
     mother has been able to make such contacts while in prison  and  after
     she was released, the probability is that telephone contact  could  be
     difficult.  Over time, the hostility which  the  father  has  for  the
     mother and which he and the grandmother express to  S  would  have  an
     effect which makes it at least possible that S herself would  come  to
     regard such contact as undesirable and cease to look for  it  herself,
     in order to maintain  relationships  with  her  primary  carers.   The
     relationship between mother  and  young  child  is  one  of  the  most
     important there is viewed from either person's viewpoint.  We  see  no
     reason to doubt the genuineness of the mother's feelings  for  S.   It
     has not been suggested by the Secretary of State that  there  was  any
     benefit in breaking the relationship, though that may well be the sort
     of thing that the father may say to S.  Even if after many years,  the
     Claimant were allowed back into the United Kingdom, it is difficult to
     see that it can be thought with any real degree of confidence that the
     relationship could be resumed, transformed as its potential  would  be
     by the passage of time.  The Claimant would naturally feel an  anxiety
     for the well-being of the child and the feelings of loss and  distress
     which S would feel would heighten that  anxiety.   We  say  that  even
     though we do not accept that there is any evidence that the father  or
     grandmother are falling down in their caring  obligations,  let  alone
     ill-treating S.

 72. The Claimant does not have a Residence Order and it would be a  matter
     of speculation as to whether she ever would. She cannot see herself as
     the primary carer.  The relationship suffered  a  severe  break  as  a
     result of her own acts, when she decided to attack  her  victim.   She
     knew that she had a child, who was not then living  with  her  father,
     and from whom she would be separated for  a  long  time  if  she  were
     convicted.   A  relationship  was  maintained  in  custody   and   has
     progressed in the  time  after  release  during  which  she  has  been
     fighting deportation;  in large measure that  progress  reflects  what
     she has been able to achieve while contesting  action  properly  taken
     against her.

 73. Set against that degree of interference with her Article 8  rights  is
     the gravity of the offence, and it was a very serious offence  indeed.
     There is also the risk of re-offending as to which no  assessment  can
     be made, other than that the material relied on does not support a low
     risk assessment and perhaps suggests a rather higher risk  assessment.
     She also entered  the  country  illegally,  and  has  only  been  here
     illegally except when she was in lawful custody.  She made and pursued
     a false asylum claim.  So her family relationship has  only  developed
     while her presence here was  either  unlawful  or  while  she  was  in
     prison.  She has always been liable to removal and she has known  that
     she was liable to deportation as  a  result  ever  since  sentence  in
     January 1999.  It was her actions which have made  it  impossible  for
     her to take her child with her.

 74. There are no other family or private life reasons which tell in favour
     of the Claimant remaining.  She  has  no  job  or  property  or  other
     significant relationships here.   She  was  not  brought  up  in  this
     country.

 75. We make it clear that we have not considered  the  position  from  the
     viewpoint of S. We recognise that the decision in  this  case  affects
     her rights and interests, but for the reasons which we have  given  we
     do not bring those into the balance in this decision.

 76. We have come to the conclusion that the  decision  that  the  Claimant
     should be deported is not one which is outside the range of  responses
     open to a reasonable Secretary of State.  We attach the greater weight
     to the very serious offence of violence and to the repugnance which we
     consider the public would rightly feel for someone who committed  such
     an offence,  showed  no  remorse  of  real  significance  and  has  so
     frequently lied about it. She has offered no credible explanation  and
     what she says about self defence is  untrue.   So  it  is  at  best  a
     motiveless but very violent offence.  The low risk  assessment  cannot
     be sustained on the current material.  To deport a mother who  is  not
     the primary carer and who does not live with the child,  and  who  has
     not lived with her for most of the years of  the  child's  life  as  a
     result of  her  own  criminal  acts,  is  not  unreasonable  in  those
     circumstances, even though it will put in real jeopardy her continuing
     relationship with the child.  She may be anxious for the well-being of
     the child but the report from CAFCASS does not  provide  a  foundation
     for her concerns in that respect.  She may be concerned about how  the
     child will develop without her and in view of the attitude the  father
     is likely to adopt.  We do not regard  the  impact  on  her  of  those
     concerns, though not shown  to  be  well-founded,  as  inconsiderable.
     Nonetheless, the deportation is in our  judgment  a  not  unreasonable
     balancing of the competing interests.








                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT




