
JH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |ZB and AK (Kurds - Article 3|
|                           |        |- Risk - IFA) Syria [2004]  |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00217                 |
|On 2 July 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|5 August 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |


Between

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation


For the Secretary of State: Mr  J  Morris,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer
For Mr Bharko: Mr Patrick Lewis of Counsel instructed by Atkins  Public
Law.
For Mr Khlil: Mr S Symonds of the Refugee Legal Centre (London)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. These appeals were listed before the Tribunal  with  the  intention
        that they should give general country guidance on the  position  of
        ethnic Kurds of Syrian nationality, but at the commencement of  the
        hearing, Mr Morris indicated for the Secretary  of  State  that  he
        would not seek to  contest  either  appeal  further  and  that  the
        Secretary of State accepted that in the case of  each  claimant  he
        was entitled to succeed both in his asylum claim under the  Refugee
        Convention 1951 and in his claim that return would be in breach  of
        his human rights under Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  of
        1950.


     2. For convenience, we shall refer to the two claimants  as  B  and  K
        respectively.

     3. It is right to record that  a  considerable  amount  of  background
        material had been filed for the  purposes  of  these  hearings,  in
        particular on the part of B, but we are of the view that it is  not
        appropriate to designate this determination as a  country  guidance
        determination in view of the fact that it has been resolved on  the
        basis of limited concessions made by the Secretary of State so that
        we have not heard full argument on the range of the evidence before
        us. Nevertheless, we have decided that it is appropriate that these
        should be reported appeals because they will define the position of
        the Secretary of State in relation  to  the  situation  of  certain
        Syrian  citizens  as  at  today's  date  in  these   appeals.   The
        concessions made, however, will, of course not bind  the  Secretary
        of State other than in relation to their effect upon the status  of
        B & K and there will be nothing to prevent him taking  a  different
        view in the case of other applicants in the future if he  considers
        that the evidence which has led him to make the  concessions  which
        we record below has changed.

     4. B and K have certain common characteristics in that they  are  each
        citizens of Syria of  Kurdish  ethnicity  as  distinct  from  those
        Syrian born ethnic Kurds, who, or whose fathers or remote  paternal
        ancestors, had been deprived of their Syrian citizenship under  the
        policy of Arabisation which took place following the 1962 census in
        Syria in accordance with policies of the ruling Ba'ath party.  Each
        of them also left Syria illegally in order to come  to  the  United
        Kingdom to seek asylum.  Each  also  claimed  that  they  or  their
        families in the past had been  associated  with  Kurdish  political
        support although in neither case  had  the  full  extent  of  their
        claimed support of pro-Kurdish parties in Syria  been  accepted  by
        the Adjudicator. Those claims would, had the hearings proceeded  on
        a contested basis, have been part of the issues which we would have
        been asked to resolve because each claimed that to the extent  that
        adverse  credibility  of  findings  had   been   made   they   were
        unsustainable. Nevertheless, in each  case,  there  was  some  past
        family political association accepted, and in the case of K a  more
        direct political involvement on his part in  Syria  had  also  been
        accepted.


     5. It is appropriate that we should also record at this point that  in
        the case of B the Adjudicator had dismissed his asylum  appeal  but
        had allowed his Article 3 claim on the basis of risk  upon  return.
        The Secretary of State had sought and been  granted  permission  to
        appeal against the allowing of his appeal on Article 3 grounds, and
        shortly thereafter permission had also  been  given  to  B  on  his
        application for permission to challenge the dismissal of the asylum
        claim by the Adjudicator, so that there was a cross appeal  in  the
        case of B.

     6. The Secretary of State had filed  in  evidence  the  United  States
        Department of State Country Report on Human  Rights  Practices  for
        2003 in relation to Syria, which had been published on 25  February
        2004, together with the Amnesty International Report on  Syria  for
        2003, covering the period to December 2002, with a  note  from  the
        Canadian section of Amnesty International of December 2002  dealing
        with the concerns of Amnesty International regarding risk on return
        to Syria.

     7. The State Department  Report  summarised  the  Syrian  Government's
        human rights record in the following terms:

           "The Government's human rights  record  remained  poor,  and  it
           continued to commit serious abuses. Citizens did  not  have  the
           right to change their Government. The Government  prevented  any
           organised political opposition, and there  have  been  very  few
           anti-Government  manifestations.   Continuing   serious   abuses
           included  the  use  of  torture  in   detention;   poor   prison
           conditions; arbitrary arrests and detention; prolonged detention
           without trial;  fundamentally  unfair  trials  in  the  security
           courts; and  infringement  on  privacy  rights.  The  Government
           significantly restricted freedom of speech  and  of  the  press.
           Freedom of assembly does  not  exist  under  the  law,  and  the
           Government restricted freedom of association. The Government did
           not officially allow independent domestic human rights groups to
           exist; however, it permitted  periodic  meetings  of  unlicensed
           civil society forums throughout the year. The Government  placed
           some limits on freedom of  religion  and  freedom  of  movement.
           Proselytizing by groups who  were  considered  Zionist  was  not
           tolerated. Violence and societal  discrimination  against  women
           were  problems.  The  Government   discriminated   against   the
           Stateless  Kurdish  minority,  suppressed  worker  rights,   and
           tolerated child labour in some instances."

     8. That general summary is, of course, examined in more detail in  the
        remainder of the document and it is clear  that  Kurdish  ethnicity
        may be an exacerbating factor for those who  come  to  the  adverse
        attention of the State Authorities.


     9. The Amnesty International report for the  preceding  year  recorded
        that scores of people  were  arrested  during  2002  for  political
        reasons, including Syrian exiles who had voluntarily  returned  and
        others suspected of membership of unauthorised political groups. It
        recorded also that those arrested for  political  reasons  included
        former political activists affiliated to the Muslim brotherhood who
        had been in exile but had been given clearance to  return  home  by
        the authorities  as  well  as  suspected  members  of  unauthorised
        Kurdish political organisations and Islamist activists suspected of
        links with Al Qa'eda. In the case of such arrests,  there  followed
        incommunicado detention, apparently without charge or  trial,  with
        fears that those so detained might be tortured or ill-treated.

    10. The note regarding risk  on  return  to  Syria  said  that  Syrians
        seeking political asylum abroad  are  perceived  to  be  Government
        opponents by the Syrian authorities  and  that  the  very  fact  of
        leaving the country to seek  asylum  abroad  is  imputed  to  be  a
        manifestation of opposition to the Syrian Government. If the asylum
        seeker has been affiliated with an unauthorised political party  or
        group, then there is a risk of arrest and torture  upon  return  to
        Syria in order to extract  information  about  the  group  and  its
        members. According to recent reports torture in Syria was  said  to
        continue to be systematic. Former political prisoners who had  been
        released had been constrained  to  sign  documents  in  which  they
        renounce their political opposition activities so  that  when  such
        persons sought asylum abroad that also was likely to be  considered
        as proof of their continuation of  opposition  activities  so  that
        they would risk persecution if  returned  to  Syria.  Nobody  could
        leave without authorisation and those who  did  so  illegally  were
        generally at risk of arrest and detention upon their return with  a
        risk of imprisonment in Syria for between 1 month and 2  years  and
        an additional sentence of imprisonment if the seal  of  the  Syrian
        authorities had been falsified on documents used for departure.  If
        a refused asylum seeker  was  accompanied  by  officials  from  the
        deporting country, the Syrian Government  would  be  likely  to  be
        aware of the person's demand for asylum and,  additionally,  Syrian
        secret service agents working abroad might become aware of requests
        for asylum as their task is to monitor  the  Syrian  community  and
        opposition abroad. In general terms the report said that beyond the
        risk of  being  detained,  interrogated  and/or  tortured,  Amnesty
        International had limited information about the  ultimate  fate  of
        returned failed asylum seekers but that over the  past  years  they
        had registered an increase in cases of detention of refused  asylum
        seekers  after  their  return  to  Syria  and  that  supporters  of
        unauthorised  organisations  were  usually   at   risk   of   being
        persecuted.


    11. It was on the basis of this filed evidence that in the case of both
        B and K and having regard to their characteristics  which  we  have
        identified earlier in this determination, the  Secretary  of  State
        conceded that each would be likely to be  identified  as  a  failed
        asylum seeker who had left the  country  illegally  and  was  being
        returned on the basis of temporary papers obtained for that purpose
        from the Syrian Embassy. This would lead to a real risk  that  each
        would be stopped and detained on return. The  real  possibility  of
        persecutory treatment for the combined  reasons  of  ethnicity  and
        perceived or imputed political  opinion  contrary  to  the  Refugee
        Convention 1951, and of treatment prohibited by Article  3  of  the
        European Convention of 1950, must be accepted to exist.

    12. On the basis of the concessions made by Mr  Morris  it  accordingly
        follows that in the case of B the Secretary of  State's  appeal  is
        dismissed and B's cross appeal is allowed; in the  case  of  K  his
        appeal is allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds.





                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
