
ar

           UK (Use of N judgment as a benchmark in ill-health cases)
           Rwanda [2004] UKIAT 00262


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 2 August 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           21 September 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                Mr B D Yates
                                Mrs W Jordan




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives  Ms  R  Brown,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  for   the
appellant; Mr A Okai of Counsel instructed by Phoenix  Nova  Solicitors  for
the respondent (hereafter the claimant).




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This appeal is reported as an illustration of how the Court of  Appeal
      judgment in N [2004] EWCA Civ 1369 serves as a benchmark for  deciding
      cases said to be similar or more serious on the facts.

   2. The appellant, the Secretary of State, appeals against a determination
      of Adjudicator, Mr F.E.P. Meadows, allowing on Article 3  grounds  the
      appeal of the claimant against a decision of 19 September 2001  giving
      directions for removal following refusal to grant asylum.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted that  the claimant is a national  of  Rwanda.
      He believed her account that soldiers went to her house in  June  2001
      looking for her husband. They had raped her. The  following  day  they
      had abducted her husband. He had been a member of the  Interhamve  who
      carried out much of the killing during  the   1994  genocide.  Despite
      considering the authorities were justified in taking away her husband,
      the Adjudicator  was satisfied their treatment of her was unlawful.

4.    However, he decided to dismiss the asylum grounds  of  appeal  because
      there was no evidence  that she was of continuing adverse interest  to
      the authorities.

5.    He took a different view when it came to the human rights  grounds  of
      appeal. He noted that her health was  extremely  poor:  she  was  HIV-
      positive and "may need more intense mental health   treatment  in  the
      future, which she would not receive in  Rwanda".    He  noted  that  a
      representative of the   UNDP had commented  in  March  2001  that  low
      income prevented many  HIV/AIDS  patients  in  Rwanda  from  accessing
      treatment even if prices for anti-retroviral  drugs  were  drastically
      cut. Accordingly he considered it a "gamble as to whether or  not  the
      appellant would be able to receive the  drugs necessary  to  stabilise
      her health and extend her life".

6.    The grounds of appeal  contended  that  having  accepted  that  mental
      health care does exist in Rwanda, the Adjudicator was not entitled  to
      speculate as to the likely development of the  claimant's  health  and
      future treatment. He did not give proper weight,  they  contended,  to
      the  Glaxo Smith Kline bulletin of 30 October  2002.    Reference  was
      also made to a previous Tribunal determination [2002] UKIAT 06707  and
      the  European Court of Human  Rights judgment in 13669/03.

7.    In amplifying the grounds of appeal Ms Brown  submitted  that  in  the
      light of the  Court  of  Appeal   judgment  in  N,  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment was plainly erroneous. Mr Okai urged the Tribunal  to  find
      that the Adjudicator had not erred  n  law.    The  claimant  faced  a
      combination of  serious   health  problems,  an  inability  to  afford
      necessary  drug  treatment  and  a  lack  of   any   family   support,
      accommodation or employment.

8.    We consider that the grounds of appeal are made out. As the  Court  of
      Appeal has clarified in its judgment in  N [2004] EWCA  Civ  1369,  in
      cases based on a claim of a  serious  threat  to  physical  and  moral
      integrity posed by serious illness, the threshold set by Article 3  is
      high and it is necessary to  show  that  one's  case  is  extreme  and
      exceptional.  Laws, LJ said:

             'I intend only to emphasise that an Article  3  case  of  this
             kind must be based on facts, which are not  only  exceptional,
             but  extreme: extreme, that is, judged in the context of cases
             all or many of which (like this one) demands one's sympathy on
             pressing grounds' (emphasis added).

      Thus the facts of N also furnish a  benchmark as to what is  necessary
      to cross the  Article 3 threshold.

9.    In comparison with the facts in N, it is  clear  that  the  claimant's
      state of health was less serious. The applicant in  N  had  full-blown
      AIDS by November 1998. The claimant in  this case is as yet  only  HIV
      positive.  In N the applicant's  CD4 count prior to treatment  was  20
      cells/mm; in this case the claimant's  CD4 count  prior  to  treatment
      was 91 (it is now 321).  In N life-expectancy  was  less  than  twelve
      months. In this case the prognosis was one to two years.  In  addition
      the  applicant  in  N  had  developed  additional  serious  illnesses:
      disseminated mycobacterium TB, a  form  of  cancer  known  as  Kaposis
      sarcoma.

10.   It is true that in contrast to the situation of N (who  only  suffered
      from clinical depression),  there  is  said  to  be  a  mental  health
      dimension to this appeal.  However,  there  was  no  medical  evidence
      concerning the extent  of  the  claimant's  mental  and  psychological
      problems.  The  Adjudicator's  reference  to  serious  mental   health
      problems rested on pure speculation. His substitution  of  speculation
      for firm evidence constituted an error of law.

11.   The Adjudicator also erred in his  approach  to  the  availability  of
      medical treatment in  Rwanda. On  his  own  findings,  "treatment  for
      severe mental disorders  is  available  at  the  primary  level".  Yet
      without explaining why, he reasoned that the claimant  "may need  more
      intense mental health treatment in the future,  which  she  would  not
      receive in Rwanda".

12.   Not only was this mere speculation on the  part  of  the  Adjudicator,
      but he effectively treated  Article  3  as  guaranteeing  a  right  to
      health. However, as the  European Court of Human Rights has  clarified
      in  SSC v Sweden [2000] 29 EHRR CD 245,  neither  Article  3  nor  any
      other provision of the ECHR guarantees a right  to  health.  What  the
      Adjudicator failed to do was explain why he considered  the  available
      facilities for treatment of mental  health  in   Rwanda,  even  if  of
      lesser quality than she would enjoy in the UK, would be so ineffective
      as to seriously threaten her physical and moral integrity.

13.   Compounding the Adjudicator's error about  the  availability  of  some
      level of mental health treatment in  Rwanda was his treatment  of  the
      issue of the affordability of anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs in   Rwanda.
      In the first  place he was wrong to  treat  want  of  resources  as  a
      decisive factor: see N paragraphs 10-11 and 38.   Mr Okai's submission
      that Article 3 would be breached wherever  a  person  would  not  have
      wholly free availability of ARV drugs also wholly overlooks  the  high
      threshold set by the Court of Appeal in  K  [2001]  IAR  41.   In  the
      second place he overlooked evidence before him relating  to  cost.  He
      based his assessment that the claimant would not  be  able  to  afford
      ARV drugs on a UNDP comment of March 2001.  However,  he  had   before
      him more recent evidence in the  forms of a Glaxo Smith Kline bulletin
      of 30 October 2002: see paragraph 5.2 , stating  that  the  course  of
      ARV drugs had been brought down to the equivalent of $1 a day.

14.   Although at one point Mr Okai sought to argue  that  upon  return  the
      claimant would have no family support, he accepted that  her  evidence
      was that she still has a friend and several siblings and mother there.
       It may be that she did not wish for her mother to have  to  care  for
      her, but there was no evidence to show the mother would  be  unwilling
      or unable.

15.   Mr Okai did not raise the issue  of  whether,  even  if  the  claimant
      could not succeed on Article 3 grounds, she was entitled to succeed on
      Article 8 grounds. However, we note that in N Mr Justice Laws did  not
      consider that her case could succeed under Article 8 either.  We  note
      too that in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, the House of Lords  considered that
      to succeed  in an Article 8  claim a person would  need  to  show  not
      just that the right would  be threatened, but that it would be subject
       to flagrant denial or nullification. We do not consider the  evidence
      in this case demonstrated either a breach of Article 3 or Article 8.

16.   In deciding to allow the appeal under Article 3 the Adjudicator  erred
      in law.

17.   For the above  reasons  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      1


