

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 11 August 2004          |        |MA (risk from any political |
|                           |        |activity) Libya [2004] UKIAT|
|                           |        |00252                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|14 September 2004                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr S L Batiste - Vice-President                                   |
|Mr J Perkins - Vice-President                                     |
|Mrs E Hurst JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr E Fripp of Counsel  instructed  by  Noden  &
            Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms T Hart

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Libya.  He was born on 23 May 1981 and  so  is
now 23 years old.  He  appeals  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr
Charles  Vaudim  d'Imecourt,  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  18
December 2003 dismissed his appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of
State that he was not entitled to refugee status and that removing him  from
the United Kingdom was  not  contrary  to  his  rights  under  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.  It is against that decision that the  Appellant
now appeals.

At paragraph 28 of the determination the Adjudicator said:  "I  accept  that
this Appellant is now known  to  the  authorities".   It  is  common  ground
between the parties that the Adjudicator did not mean  this.   Paragraph  28
as written makes little sense.  The Tribunal is satisfied, and the  parties,
agree, that the Adjudicator intended to say: "I accept that  this  Appellant
is not known to the authorities".

It was the Appellant's case that he had  joined  and  actively  supported  a
political group founded by his cousin.   The  Appellant  distributed  tracts
against the government.  The Appellant had never been caught doing that  and
there was no reason to find that he was suspected of any political  activity
against the regime.  He left Libya freely on his own passport.  It  was  his
case that whilst out of Libya, in Malta, his cousin  was  arrested  and  the
appellant was afraid that his cousin would be tortured and made to  identify
the Appellant as a supporter of the cousin's political movement and that  he
would be at risk having been so identified.  The Appellant  did  not  return
to Libya.  Rather he made his way to the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.

The  Adjudicator  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  had  contact  with   his
grandfather and other family members but had not produced any evidence  that
the authorities in Libya were seeking him.   It  was  the  Appellant's  case
that his family was known to the authorities.  In 1980  one  of  his  uncles
had been arrested and since that uncle's arrest the Appellant's  father  has
from time to time been summoned  to  the  offices  of  the  Libyan  security
service to be interrogated.   His  father  complained  of  ill-treatment  on
those occasions.

Regrettably the Adjudicator does not expressly  deal  with  the  Appellant's
concern that he would be at risk because his cousin would have  said  things
against him.  However the Adjudicator does say in perfectly clear  terms  at
paragraph 28 of his determination that there "is not a jot of evidence  that
there is any real likelihood that the authorities  in  Libya  are  concerned
with this Appellant in any way."

The grounds of appeal extend to some fifteen paragraphs but really make  two
points.  They complain that the Adjudicator has made no proper  findings  of
fact about the Appellant's case and they  claim  that  the  Adjudicator  has
wrongly assessed the risk on return to the  Appellant  as  a  failed  asylum
seeker.

Regrettably the grounds are right when they complain  that  the  Adjudicator
made no finding expressly on the Appellant's claim that he would be at  risk
because his cousin  would  have  been  tortured  and  would  therefore  have
incriminated him.  However we recognise from the  background  material  that
people detained for engaging in activities against the government  generally
risk ill-treatment. The grounds of appeal complain at paragraph 4 that  "the
Appellant's family were constantly harassed and  persecuted  by  the  Libyan
authorities prior to March 2003...because of the Appellant's maternal  uncle
(a political prisoner since 1980)" and such conduct is what we would  expect
of the Libyan authorities in such  circumstances.   The  Libyan  authorities
would have been very interested in the Appellant's family if his cousin  had
incriminated the appellant during interrogation.  We cannot accept that  the
Libyan authorities would have left  alone  the  Appellant's  family  if  his
cousin had said things against him yet the Appellant gave evidence that  his
family were left  alone  at  least  in  the  period  immediately  after  the
cousin's arrest.  There has been no evidence at  any  stage  of  the  family
having further problems.  Whilst the Adjudicator can  be  criticised  justly
for not explaining his position more clearly we do not accept there  is  any
error of law in his conclusion that there is not "a jot  of  evidence"  that
the authorities would be interested in the Appellant.

This finding is sufficient to dispose of the appeal but  there  are  further
points that have to be made.

Grounds  8-11  criticise  the  Adjudicator  for  findings  made  about   the
Appellant's passport.  We do not go into more detail  about  these  because,
as Mr Fripp quite properly and realistically explained, these do not  go  to
the substantial issues in the  case.   If  the  Appellant  is  known  to  be
politically active he is at  risk  notwithstanding  any  passport  he  might
have.  Conversely if he is not  known  to  the  authorities  or  wanted  for
political activities  then  the  absence  of  a  passport  will  not  create
problems.

An analysis of appeals such as  this  must  consider  the  decision  of  the
Tribunal in ME (Risk-failed asylum seekers - Hassan) Libya CG [2003]  UKIAT.
 One member of the Tribunal that heard  that  appeal  is  a  member  of  the
Tribunal deciding this appeal.  It was the conclusion of the Tribunal in  ME
(Risk-failed asylum seekers -  Hassan)  Libya  CG  that  a  returned  asylum
seeker will not necessarily be perceived as  someone  who  had  opposed  the
government of Libya and would not necessarily risk persecution.

Mr Fripp accepted that ME (Risk-failed asylum seekers  -  Hassan)  Libya  CG
was right subject to two clarifications.

Firstly, at paragraph 20 in ME (Risk-failed asylum seekers -  Hassan)  Libya
CG the Tribunal said "Although the background material is sensitive  to  the
theoretical risk facing  people  who  have  done  nothing  more  serious  to
undermine the regime of Libya than to seek asylum somewhere else,  there  is
no direct evidence of such a  person  being  persecuted.   The  examples  of
people being seriously ill-treated all appear to relate to  those  who  have
been involved, or  at  least  seriously  suspected  of  being  involved,  in
serious political activity or are radical  Islamic  supporters."   Mr  Fripp
submitted  that  the  phrase  "in  serious  political  activity"  could   be
interpreted as meaning that the  Libyan  authorities  discriminated  between
different degrees of political involvement.

Mr Fripp drew to our attention a  report  from  Alison  Pargeter  who  is  a
research follow at the International Policy Institute at King's College,  at
the University of London.  Her report before us  is  dated  7  August  2004.
This report emphasises how the authorities in Libya still  regulate  society
closely.  She said that the regime "is  particularly  suspicious  of  people
who have spent unauthorised time in Britain.  This is because the UK is  the
centre of Libyan opposition activity abroad."  She contained that  "applying
for asylum is generally considered as a betrayal of Qadhafi's  revolutionary
system and anyone doing so is looked upon unfavourably by the  regime."   We
accept that Ms Pargeter  offers  these  opinions  in  good  faith  with  the
benefit of her experience as an academic and  the  opinions  are  consistent
with other material before us. We find that the  fact  that  seeking  asylum
abroad is viewed with disfavour does not mean that  every  person  known  to
have claimed asylum abroad risks persecution.  Generally there  is  no  such
risk unless the  returned  asylum  seeker  is  linked  with  some  political
activity.

The decision in ME (Risk-failed asylum seekers - Hassan) Libya CG does  not,
and was never intended to, suggest that only people  who  were  involved  in
particular activities to a high degree would be at  risk  on  return.   Each
case must be considered on  its  own  merits.   The  evidence  is  that  the
authorities in Libya are deeply suspicious and that even  now  anything  but
the most fleeing political activity might be enough  to  create  a  risk  of
serious ill-treatment.  We are happy to provide this clarification.

Secondly Mr Fripp submitted that returned asylum seekers  remained  at  risk
in Libya both because the  authorities  would  be  suspicious  of  them  and
because the regime is volatile.  Evidence for the proposition that a  failed
asylum seeker remains at risk even if he enters  the  country  safely  comes
from the end of Ms Pargeter's report.  Ms Pargeter says that  a  person  who
had claimed asylum would for that reason have "a black  mark  against  their
name".  She said "It  is  possible  that  they  may  face  intimidation  and
harassment as they would be considered as soft targets."  We accept that  it
is possible.  That is how the regime in  Libya  has  behaved  in  the  past.
However we do not accept that there  is  a  real  risk  of  an  unsuccessful
asylum seeker being persecuted on some future occasion  because  he  claimed
asylum abroad and then returned to Libya.  There is no direct evidence  that
that has happened but there is  evidence  in  the  Dutch  report,  to  which
reference is made in ME (Risk-failed asylum seekers - Hassan)  Libya  CG  of
people who had returned to Libya going about  their  lives  unhindered.   We
are not aware of any evidence of unsuccessful asylum seekers having  trouble
with the authorities after they have entered Libya.  There  is  evidence  in
the Dutch report that such people have not had problems.

We agree with Mr Fripp that Colonel  Qadhafi  can  be  described  fairly  as
"volatile".  Again there is a risk of a change in  attitude  by  the  regime
but in the light of events in recent years we cannot describe it as  a  real
risk.  We do not accept that there is, generally, a real risk to people  who
have returned to Libya just because they are known to  have  claimed  asylum
in the United Kingdom.

It follows that although we are happy  to  explain  ME  (Risk-failed  asylum
seekers - Hassan) Libya to  the  extent  indicated  above  we  dismiss  this
appeal.





                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice-President

                                                            7 September 2004
