
Heard at Field House | | | |
|On 14 July 2004            |        |MN (Town Tunnis regarded as |
|                           |        |Bravanese) Somalia CG [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00224                 |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|16 August 2004                                                    |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr - Vice President                                        |
|Mr A  Jordan - Vice President                                     |
|Mr J Perkins - Vice President                                     |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Before us  the  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  R  Toal  of  Counsel
   instructed  by  South  Manchester  Law  Centre  and  the  respondent  was
   represented by Mr A Sheikh a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He was born on 1 March  1987  and
   so is now 17 years old.  He appeals the decision of the Adjudicator,  Mrs
   A K Simpson, who in a determination  a  promulgated  on  7  January  2004
   dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  that
   he was not entitled to refugee status and  that  removing  him  from  the
   United Kingdom  was  not  contrary  to  his  rights  under  the  European
   Convention and Human Rights.


3. The appellant was given discretionary leave to remain until  28  February
   2005.  His appeal before the Adjudicator was brought under Section  83(2)
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


4. The appellant came from the  Mini  district  of  Brava.   He  speaks  the
   Bravanese language, also called Chimina.  He is a  member  of  the  Tunni
   clan.  He is diabetic.


5. The Adjudicator considered leading cases  of  the  Tribunal  including  J
   (Somalia) [2003] UKIAT 00147 and M (Somalia) UKIAT  00129.   These  cases
   both concern the circumstances of members of  the  Tunni  clan  and  both
   decided, in general terms, that Tunnis did not normally risk  persecution
   in the event of their return to Somali.


6. The Adjudicator also had before her a report and letter from Dr  Virginia
   Luling.  Dr Luling identified 2 sets of Tunni: those from Brava and those
   from the countryside.  It was the appellant's  contention,  supported  by
   the evidence of Dr Luling, that the Tunnis of Brava were identified  with
   the Bravanese and thus at risk of persecution.  The Adjudicator  did  not
   engage with that evidence.  She clearly acknowledges it at paragraphs  21
   of her determination  and  noted  at  paragraph  23  when  considering  J
   (Somalia) and M (Somalia) that "it is unfortunate that Dr Luling's report
   was not considered by either Tribunal".  However  the  Adjudicator  noted
   that those who prepared the British-Dutch-Danish Minority Report  dealing
   with the situation  of  the  Tunni  discussed  their  circumstances  with
   Bravanese elders and clearly distinguished between the Tunni  from  Brava
   and Tunni Torre, a Negroid group federated  to  the  Tunni  of  Brava  as
   vassals.  The elders made no mention of the Tunnis  from  Brava  being  a
   separate group.  The  Adjudicator  was  clearly  not  satisfied  with  Dr
   Luling's evidence.


7. Having considered all the material before us we are  satisfied  that  the
   Adjudicator here was wrong in law.  She did not understand  properly  the
   evidence of Dr Luling and that led her to the  wrong  conclusion  in  the
   case before her.


8. Unlike the Adjudicator we have the advantage of reading the  decision  of
   the Tribunal in AH (Town Tunnis regarded  as  Bravanese)  Somalia  [2004]
   UKIAT 00144 that was promulgated  on  8  June  2004.   One  of  the  Vice
   Presidents in this Tribunal was a member of the Tribunal  that  had  made
   that decision.  Unlike the Adjudicator, the Tribunal in AH  and  in  this
   appeal had the benefit of hearing Dr Luling give evidence and be  crossed
   examined.  I set out below paragraphs 6 -  15  of  the  decision  of  the
   Tribunal in AH.  The Tribunal said:


  6   "We found Dr Luling a very authoritative and impressive witness.   Dr
 Luling is qualified in  social  anthropology.   She  has  a  first  degree
 awarded by the University of Oxford and a Masters  and  a  Doctorate  from
 London University.  She has made a particular study of Somalia and a  town
 in Southern Somalia.  Although she did  her  initial  field  work  in  the
 1960's she has kept abreast with affairs in the country and most  recently
 visited it in 1996.  [The Presenting Officer] did  suggest  that  she  may
 have been a little out of touch because she had not been  to  the  country
 more recently.  We reject that submission.  Dr Luling's reputation depends
 on her being familiar with the current situation in  Somalia  and  we  are
 satisfied that she was able to, and did, give honest  and  sound  evidence
 about circumstances there today.

 7    Dr Luling is very familiar  with  the  documents  that  are  commonly
 produced at hearings concerning Somalia.  She knows the Report on Minority
 Groups in Somalia which was the result of  a  joint  British,  Danish  and
 Dutch Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi in September 2000  and  the  Somalia
 Country Report.  We look to the report dated October 2003.  Section  B  of
 the CIPU report sets out major Somalia clan families and under number 5 it
 mentions the Digil clan family made  up  of  the  Dabarre,  Jiddu,  Tunni,
 Geledi and  Garre.   Dr  Luling  agreed  that  this  annex  does  identify
 correctly the major Somali clan families  but  said  that  it  had  to  be
 understood that "major" in this sense meant the major  groups  within  the
 Somali clan family structure.  This was not the same as  saying  that  the
 groups were politically powerful or important.  By and  large  Digil  land
 has been occupied by Hawiye  armed  groups  and  Digil  cattle  have  been
 confiscated.  Whilst it is correct to think of the Digil as a historically
 significant group it is wrong to think  they  are  powerful  and  able  to
 protect themselves against others.

 8    Dr Luling then explained to us something about the Tunni sub-clan.

 9    The background material  identifies  a  group  known  as  the  "Tunni
 Torre".  This appellant is not a Tunni Torre and this determination is not
 about Tunni Torres.  We mention them simply  to  distinguish  the  present
 case from them.

 10   Dr Luling said that the background material failed to recognise  that
 there were two distinct Tunni groups and their circumstances and  problems
 were not the same.  At paragraph 6.5 of the report on minority  groups  in
 Somalia the relationship between Brava  and  Tunni  are  considered.   The
 reports states:

   "The elders from Brava told the delegation that they  consisted  of  two
  sub-groups: The Bravanese and the Tunni.  Both groups are from Brava  and
  they share to a large extent the same culture.  They inter-marry  between
  their groups.  However,  the  Bravanense  consider  themselves  Benadiri,
  while    the    Tunni    do    not.      The     Bravanese     are     of
  Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish  origin.   According  to  the   Bravanese
  elders the Tunni belong to the Digil clan family.   They  are  originally
  from the region of Brava.  However, the elders gave the delegation a copy
  of a letter, written by the Bravani elders in  Nairobi  to  a  number  of
  organisations (including the UNHCR, the  US  Immigration  Department  and
  Amnesty International), on their situation in Kenya, in which  the  Tunni
  are mentioned in Bravanese as part of the Baravani Community."

 11   Dr Luling agreed with all this but said that the comments had  to  be
 explained further to be understood properly.  Those Tunnis who  live  away
 from Brava have preserved, and would be seen to have preserved, their  own
 distinct identity.  They would be recognised as part  of  the  Digil  clan
 family and should be considered accordingly.  However,  those  Tunnis  who
 lived near to Brava have been practically  simulated  into  the  Bravanese
 community.

 12   Dr Luling had spoken to the appellant and understood her to have come
 from a particular village near to Brava.  Dr Luling did not  herself  know
 that village but she knew of it and its  whereabouts.   She  was  entirely
 satisfied, and the Tribunal finds, that the appellant was a member of  the
 group of Tunnis closely associated with the Bravanese and she accepted the
 Tribunal's slightly tongue in cheek suggestion that that  group  could  be
 identified as "Town Tunnis".

 13    Dr  Luling  explained  that  although  the  "Town  Tunnis"  and  the
 Bravanese, as explained in the report on minority groups, inter-marry  and
 to a large extent share the same culture, they remain aware of  their  own
 identity.     The    Bravanese    believe     that     they     are     of
 Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish origin and the Town Tunnis,  in  contrast,
 are aware that they come from the Digil clan family.  A Town Tunni who was
 asked to describe his clan origins would see himself as separate from  the
 Bravanese and connected to the Digil clan family.  Similarly  a  Bravanese
 who was asked the same question would identify himself with  the  Benadiri
 and  would  see  himself  as  someone  of  Persian/Arab/Portuguese/Spanish
 origin.  Dr Luling accepted entirely that the elders from Brava would have
 explained that the Bravanese and the Town Tunnis  were  separated  groups.
 That is how the people saw themselves.  However they preserved their sense
 of ethnic identity by descent through the male line.   Inter-marriage  was
 common and, in reality, the two groups were intermingled.

 14   Dr Luling's point was that the "Town Tunnis" would  be  perceived  by
 others as Bravanese.

 15   In the simple terms, a "Town Tunni" faces exactly the same  problems,
 including the risk of persecution, as does a Bravanese.  A decision  maker
 assessing the risks faced by a Town Tunni should assess them  as  if  they
 were Bravanese."


9. Dr Luling gave substantially the same evidence on these points before  us
   and was cross-examined by Mr Sheikh.  The reliability of her evidence was
   not in any way diminished by the questions asked and the  answers  given.
   While it is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  Dr  Luling  has  even  greater
   expertise about different parts of Somalia we were quite  satisfied  that
   the opinions she gave us were the result of proper academic  analysis  of
   relevant  and  recent  evidence  about  the  circumstances  in   Somalia.
   Contrary to Mr  Sheikh's  suggestions  in  cross-examination  it  is  not
   important that Dr Luling has not visited the country since 1996  or  that
   she did not supplement her report with copies of the interview notes made
   when she has discussed the situation with Somali people.  Dr  Luling  was
   not sharing her holiday memories.  She was offering an  informed  opinion
   arising from her academic work.  We are quite satisfied that Dr  Luling's
   conclusions were the result of proper academic analysis  consistent  with
   her role and reputation as anthropologist.


10. It is significant that Dr Luling did not suggest that the other  sources
   of evidence before us were wrong.  She did not take issue with any of the
   descriptions of the clan origins of the Tunnis that  were  given  in  the
   Secretary of State's evidence. It was Dr Luling point that  the  evidence
   relied on by the Secretary of State was  incomplete  in  this  particular
   respect.  Dr Luling was satisfied that  the  Tunnis  from  Brava  were  a
   distinct group different from other Tunnis and they should be regarded as
   Bravanese when their risk of persecution was being considered.


11. We do not find it in  the  slightest  bit  significant  that  the  other
   background material does not comment on this.   There  is  no  suggestion
   that enquiries were made about there being a group of  Tunni  people  who
   would be regarded as Bravanese.  There is no reason why anyone should ask
   such a question unless they were expressly prompted so to do.  We do  not
   know what the Somalia elders would have said  if  they  had  been  asked.
   They were not asked.  We have every expectation that they would have said
   much the same as did Dr Luling.  As indicated above it was not her  point
   that she uniquely was right.  It was  Dr  Luling's  point  that  she  had
   spotted a gap in the report and had explained how a person who identified
   himself as Tunni would be regarded as a Bravanese.


12. There is no evidence before us that Dr  Luling  is  wrong.   However  Mr
   Toal also drew to our attention parts of  the  background  material  that
   supported Dr Luling's description  of  the  inter-mingling  of  the  Town
   Tunnis in Brava with the Bravanese and this reinforced our  finding  that
   Dr Luling was not "on a frolic of her own" but was explaining how  people
   from Brava who thought of themselves  as  Tunnis  would  be  regarded  as
   Bravanese.


13. We are quite satisfied that she is right and, as the  Tribunal  said  in
   AH, a decision maker assessing the  risks  faced  by  Town  Tunni  should
   assess them as if the claimant were  Bravanese.   AH  is  not  a  country
   guidance case.  This is.  On this point  it  should  be  followed  unless
   there is clear evidence that Dr Luling is wrong, in which case the  point
   will have to be reconsidered.


14. This is not to say that  every  "Town  Tunni"  is  entitled  to  refugee
   status anymore than is every Bravanese.


15. Mr Sheikh submitted that the appellant would not be at risk because  his
   family had been able to stay in Brava for many years after  the  troubles
   started and we should infer that he would be safe in  the  event  of  his
   return.  We do not find any merit in this submission.  We do not know how
   the appellant's family managed to live safely in  Brava.   The  appellant
   cannot be expected to tell us because he was a boy aged about 10 when  he
   left.  There is no reason at all to find that  the  protection  mechanism
   that appeared to have lasted until 1998 would be available to him in  the
   event of his return now or that the appellant could look to his family in
   Kenya for any kind of financial or other support.   It  is  a  reasonable
   assumption that they had money and used some of it to get  the  appellant
   to the United Kingdom.  That is not any kind of evidence that members  of
   his family have money now.


16. Dr Luling said that the  appellant,  who  she  had  not  met,  would  be
   recognised as Bravanese because he speaks Chimina.  She said that she has
   never met anyone who spoke Chimina who was not Bravanese (a word that was
   clearly intended to include Town Tunnis).


17. Additionally Dr  Luling  said  that  Bravanese  people  are  also  often
   recognised by their fairer skin colour and their features.  She was shown
   a picture of the appellant.  She initially said that she did  not  regard
   him as fair skinned in his picture but modified that answer  slightly  on
   reflection to say that he was "fairly fair  skinned".  We  did  not  find
   questions about the fairness of the appellant's skin to  be  particularly
   helpful.   The  photograph  was  an  integral  part  of  a  Home   Office
   identification document.  We do not know how  accurately  the  photograph
   reproduced the appellant's  complexion  but,  for  what  its  worth,  the
   Tribunal has seen Somali people with apparently darker skins.  Dr  Luling
   also said that the appellant's features look Bravanese.  Unlike his  skin
   tone, his features are less vulnerable to the whims  of  the  camera  and
   printer.  These are not decisive points but do tend to suggest  that  the
   appellant would be recognised as a member of a minority clan whenever  he
   travelled.


18. We accept Dr Luling's evidence that Somali people are expected to  state
   their clan when mixing with Somalis who do not know them.  Doubtless some
   Somalis are accomplished liars  but  we  accept  that  people  who  claim
   untruthfully to be a member of a particular sub-clan are  taking  a  huge
   risk which could lead them into serious trouble if they are  caught  out.
   We do not accept  that  this  appellant  would  be  able,  or  should  be
   expected, to pass himself off as a member of a different clan.


19. The report on minority groups  in  Somalia  in  the  appellant's  bundle
   confirms that the Bravanese were those most affected by  the  civil  war.
   Bravanese people lost their homes  although  sometimes  were  allowed  to
   remain in one room.  Political control in Sudan is often in  a  state  of
   flux and from time to time the Bravanese people are able to  resume  some
   degree of  control  of  their  lives.   Dr  Luling  had  only  a  limited
   understanding of how people managed in Brava but, based on her experience
   and  understanding  of  the  country,  suggested  that  some  reached  an
   arrangement with other clans.  Essentially they pay protection money.  We
   accept that that is a likely explanation of how some cope.  We are  aware
   that there is some evidence of calm and  stable  government  in  Bay  and
   Bakwol but we can see no sensible reason to find that this appellant,  as
   a young man without any known connections  or  wealth  will  be  able  to
   establish himself there.


20. The plight of internally displaced people (IDPs) in Somalia is a  matter
   of considerable concern.  A United Nations Report  on  Somalia  for  2004
   shows that about 5% of the population of Somali are internally displaced,
   that is about 350,000 people.  The report noted "that  they  are  largely
   from minority  groups,  and  despite  their  often  extended  periods  of
   displacement, have  not  been  integrated  geographically,  economically,
   socially or politically into their host communities.   For  many,  income
   received from regular, cheap casual labour barely covers all  their  food
   needs and, isolated from their relatives, they  often  face  difficulties
   accessing transport systems and receiving  remittances.   Moreover,  they
   lack full protection and, often viewed as undesirables or "guests" by the
   local community, can be subjected to an array of human rights violations,
   including beatings, robberies and other forms of  harassment,  especially
   if they compete with local labour or beg in the streets.   Most  live  in
   sprawling shanty towns on the outskirts of urban areas."  The same report
   showed how the growing number of IDP's arriving in  Southern  Somalia  in
   Puntland and Somaliland are causing difficulties to the social structures
   there.  They often find themselves at the mercy of  "camp  managers"  who
   restrict their movements and dishonestly use aid for their own  purposes.
   Such IDP's are vulnerable to prostitution, human trafficking and forcible
   recruitment by militia leaders.  The same report shows how nearly half  a
   million exiles have returned with some form of international  assistance,
   mainly to Northern Somalia.  This is clear evidence that the situation is
   not necessarily hopeless.  It is not the case that no citizen of  Somalia
   can return there.  Neither is it any  evidence  that  an  isolated  young
   person such as the appellant would be safe.  The same  report  emphasises
   the extreme difficulties facing members of minority groups.


21. We also have to consider the ability of the appellant  to  travel  to  a
   point where there might  be  some  chance  of  his  establishing  himself
   safely.  We accept that a  person  returning  to  Somalia  would  attract
   interest and would be suspected to have  access  to  considerable  funds.
   This would make the appellant a target for kidnap  and  extortion.   This
   danger could arise anywhere in the country.  We  accept  that  travel  is
   hampered by numerous internal road blocks  where  inquires  are  made  of
   travellers and bribes have to be paid.


22. As indicated above, we are entirely satisfied that this appellant  is  a
   "Town Tunni" and therefore would be treated as a Bravanese.


23. It is not the case that every Bravanese necessarily risk persecution  in
   the event of return.  We are satisfied that such a  risk  exists  in  the
   case of this appellant who is a young man with little experience of  life
   in Somalia and no support system that he can access or funding.  He would
   be extremely vulnerable and we are satisfied there is a real risk of  him
   being persecuted or otherwise severely ill treated.


24. He is entitled to refugee status and returning him would be contrary  to
   his rights under Article 3 of the European Convention and Human Rights.


25. In the circumstances we allow this appeal.


26. In summary, the adjudicator erred by not paying proper regard to  expert
   evidence. Unlike the adjudicator we had  the  advantage  of  hearing  the
   expert give evidence.  If the adjudicator had been able to  do  that  she
   would have reached a different conclusion.


27. This case is reported as a  "country  guideline  case"  to  support  the
   proposition that a "town Tunni"  would  be  regarded  as  Bravanese  (see
   paragraph 13 above).  Unless there is fresh  evidence  to  show  that  Dr
   Luling is wrong the matter should be regarded as settled.


28. We allow this appeal.





                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President


                                                                15 July 2004



