
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |_A (Benadiri - Findings of  |
|                           |        |Fact - Somaliland) Somalia  |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00080 _A (__)  |
|                           |        |Somalia APPEAL NO:          |
|                           |        |HX/31926/2001[2004] UKIAT   |
|                           |        |00080 A (Somalia)           |
|On:19 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..............23/04/2004...................................       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Chairman)                              |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                   |
|Ms V S Street                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|Zaki Aboirahim Ali                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms. S. Naik
For the respondent: Mr. A. Sheikh


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This  is  an  appeal  by  the  claimant  from  the  determination  of
      Mr Woodcraft sitting on 27 June 2003.

2.    The claimant is a Somali who was born in 1981 or 1982 and who arrived
      in this country on 22 January 2001  claiming  asylum  on  2 February
      2001.  His claim was refused on 15 March 2001.

3.    Not all the grounds of appeal were pursued before us.  The ground  of
      appeal that was pursued  before  us  was  that  the  claimant  was  a
      Benadiri who would thus be at real risk of persecution if returned to
      Somalia.  It was argued that the Adjudicator  had  made  no  specific
      finding as to whether the  claimant  was  of  that  clan  albeit  the
      claimant had given evidence to the effect that he was  and  that  the
      Secretary of State had conceded the claimant's mother  was  Benadiri.
      ..... a lie in many of its essential aspects.  The Adjudicator made a
      blanket credibility finding against the claimant and against  a  lady
      whom he said was his mother who  also  gave  evidence.   It  will  be
      necessary for us to deal with the various  accounts  that  have  been
      given and with the finding of the Adjudicator.

4.    In his first statement he said that he was born  on  2  May  1981  in
      Mogadishu.  He said that his parents separated when he was very young
      and that his father was a Reer Hamar of the  Benadiri  and  that  his
      mother was of the Issaq clan.  The Issaqs are  one  of  the  dominant
      clans in Somaliland.

5.    When his parents separated he  went  to  live  with  his  mother  and
      siblings In Hargeisa in Somaliland which is where his mother had come
      from originally.

6.    Presumably he was stating in his account that he had moved  to  north
      in the mid or late 1980s.  He said that prior to 1991  he  remembered
      the family had to live in the  bush  on  the  outskirts  of  Hargeisa
      because the Issaq tribe were at odds  with  Siad  Barre  who  was  of
      course then President.  By 1993 his family were able to return to the
      towns although his mother,  having  married  a  Benadiri,  was  never
      accepted by her own clan.  She went to live in  BirbiraBerbera,  also
      in Somaliland but some distance from Hargeisa.   When his mother left
      he went to live with two uncles.  This situation did not last because
      in 1993 and 1994 there was inter-clan fighting and one of his  uncles
      was killed.  He then managed to gain employment,  although  he  would
      only have been about thirteen or so but said that in 1998 he was  the
      victim of three attempts on his life  and  he  was  sacked  from  the
      employment he then had as a bus conductor in Hargeisa.

7.    In 1998 he said he heard his father had been arrested  and  that  his
      father was still in  jail.        He  was  asked  why  when  he  left
      Somaliland and he  said  he  left  on  10  February  2001  going  via
      Mogadishu to Kenya and thence to the United Kingdom. He was asked why
      he had come to the United Kingdom rather than joining his  mother  in
      BirbiraBerbera and he said that his mother  wanted  him  to  learn  a
      trade and work for the family and he said that, and to study were the
      reasons why he had come to the United Kingdom.

8.    There was a reasons for refusal letter which of course relied heavily
      which was in the statement.  The contents of that letter are  perhaps
      not particularly germane to this appeal.

9.    His second statement, upon which he now  wishes  to  rely  is  rather
      different.  He states that he was  born  in  1982  rather  than  1981
      although he still insists that he was born  in  Mogadishu.   He  also
      continues to maintain that his father  was  a  Benadir.i.   He  said,
      however, that the account he had given about his upbringing  was  not
      correct.  He called as a witness a lady called UnaMuna Hassan  Sharif
      who he said was his mother.  He said that she was not  the  woman  he
      had grown up with in Hargeisa and Birbira.Berbera.  He said that what
      had happened was that he had separated from his mother in about  1991
      to  live  at  the  home  of  his  mother's  cousin  who   is   called
      Maynena.Maymuna.  His mother was a BenadirBenadiri but MaynenaMaymuna
      was a an Issaq.  For a year after going to  Maynena'sMaymuna's  house
      he carried  on  living  in  Mogadishu,  scarcely  seeing  his  mother
      although she seemed to live quite nearby.   What  then  happened  was
      that it was MaynenaMaymuna who went north to  BirbiraBerbera  and  he
      accompanied her.  The two uncles who had helped look after  him  were
      Maynena'sMaymuna's brothers and not his mother's.  He then says  that
      he lived as a "hustler" for seven years until he  left  Somalia.   He
      also described the attack on him in Hargeisa as being in 1996 or 1997
      when he would only have been fourteen or  fifteen.   In  his  earlier
      account he stated he was beaten up and stabbed with a screwdriver but
      this time said he was beaten with sticks and struck on the head.   He
      said this happened because he was identified by men who knew  he  was
      not from the Issaq clan.  He says  that  he  left  Somalia  on  money
      provided by an elderly man whom he befriended, travelling by land  to
      Nairobi and then flying to the United Kingdom.

10.   The lady claiming to be his mother said in her evidence that she  had
      been separated from her husband in 1991 and also separated  from  her
      son but was reunited with her husband in 1993.   She  said  she  left
      Somalia on 2 July 2002 coming to the United Kingdom later that month.

11.   Whatever the circumstances of her arrival in the United  Kingdom  she
      was granted refugee status on the basis, it would appear, of a postal
      application that was made by her in about October 2002.  It is stated
      by Counsel appearing for the claimant that the  Home  Secretary  gave
      her asylum  on  the  basis  that  she  was  Benadiri.   This  is  not
      concludedconceded nor is there any evidence  before  us  as  to  this
      matter.  We were given no satisfactory reason as to why that evidence
      was not placed before us.

12.   An account was given as to how  it  was  that  mother  and  son  were
      reunited in the  United  Kingdom  but  we  need  not  deal  with  the
      circumstances of that because they are not relevant to this appeal.

13.   When dealing with credibility the Adjudicator found that neither  the
      claimant nor his witness were  credible.   Unfortunately,  we  cannot
      detect any  finding  on  the  papers  before  us  to  show  that  the
      Adjudicator came to any clear reasoned  finding  as  to  whether  the
      claimant was Benadiri.  It seems permissible to infer that he came to
      the conclusion that the claimant was not but  we  do  not  know  what
      reasons lie behind that if that was the conclusion to which he  came.
      Certainly  the  Adjudicator  was  mistaken  when  he  said   in   the
      determination that the claimant in interview did not know  what  clan
      his father came from, it  was  the  father's  sub-clan  that  he  was
      unaware of.  Insofar as theythis may have influenced him  plainly  he
      was influenced by a mistake.

14.   We are urged to conclude that the evidence in this case points to the
      claimant being Benadiri and he should be taken as being such for  the
      purposes of the appeal before us.  That argument is advanced  on  the
      basis that the Secretary of  State  has  concludedconceded  that  his
      witness was Benadiri and it is now said before us that there  is  DNA
      evidence showing thewith certainty that he is the son  of  the  woman
      whom he claims to be his mother.

15.   We have seen the DNA evidence and it is as near conclusive  as  makes
      no difference.  The Home  Secretary  is,  however,  not  disposed  to
      accept that the DNA evidence actually relates to the claimant and his
      alleged mother.  The Home Secretary states in plain terms that  in  a
      case such as this where it is admitted that lies have been  told  one
      is entitled to be sceptical about any evidence that is produced.   He
      raised the issue of the possibility  of  impostors  who  are  genuine
      mother and son going before the scientists to have their DNA  tested.



16.   We cannot deal with this assertion because it is impossible to do  so
      on the material that we have.  We can only say what appears to us  on
      the material before us to be the case, which is that a mother and son
      claiming to have the identities of the claimant and the lady he  says
      is his mother appeared before themthe scientists on a particular date
      and were tested.

17.   It is further submitted to us that the Secretary of State is bound by
      the concession that he made as to the  mother's  Benadiri  ethnicity.
      We do not consider on the material before us that there  is  anything
      to show that the Secretary of State was even told that the mother was
      Benadiri.  We therefore do not feel that we  have  to  consider  this
      point.

18.   The fact has to be faced, however, that the Adjudicator has not given
      any clear reasons for stating that the claimant is not  Benadiri,  in
      this case in the face of evidence from him and from a woman  claiming
      to be his mother that he is.  However  unsatisfactory  that  evidence
      may have seemed to be it was as it seems to us important to  for  the
      Adjudicator, if he was to dismiss it, specifically  to  isolate  this
      fact as an important fact and then give reasons for  discounting  the
      evidence of the claimant.  That has not been done  and  therefore  it
      seems to us that the options that are left open to us are to consider
      whether either to remit this matter so that there can be findings  of
      fact or to examine the claimant's case on the assumption that  he  is
      Benadiri and see whether even in those circumstances his  case  would
      fail.  We have had the  advantage  of  having  a  certain  amount  of
      background material submitted to us  including  the  CIPU  Report  on
      Somalia for October 2003, the Operational Guidance Note on Somalia of
      February 2004 and the UNHCR Position Statement of January 2004.

19.   We start from what is common ground which  is  that  members  of  the
      Benadiri  minority  groups  have  been  identified  as   targets   of
      persecution and it has been  held  on  a  number  of  occasions  that
      membership of the Benadiri group of is a fact capable  of  causing  a
      person of that group to be considered as a refugee in  this  country.
      But here the position is highly unusual because the claimant is not a
      Benadiri who would be returned to Mogadishu or to any  of  the  areas
      where Benadiri have always lived between Mogadishu and Kismayo but he
      is a Benadiri who might have the option of going to another  part  of
      the country which is simply not open to the great bulk of  those  who
      are of his particular ethnicity.  At least that is the submission  of
      the Home Secretary before us.  We feel it appropriate to examine this
      submission with  some  care.   We  have  already  stated  that  being
      Benadiri in itself is sufficient in many cases to give rise  to  what
      can almost amount to a presumption of refugee status but the position
      of the Benadiri  in  Somaliland  has  seldom  been  analysed  by  the
      Tribunal.  The matter is touched on in paragraphs 6.68  of  the  CIPU
      Report in the following terms:

            "Some areas have provided a safe refuge for people  from  other
           clans and minority groups displaced from elsewhere  in  Somalia.
           The Majerteen-led  Puntland  administration  has,  for  example,
           permitted Somalis from all clans and non-Somali minority groups,
           even former supporters of Siad Barre, to move freely through and
           settle in the area under its control.  The SNM administration in
           Somaliland has allowed Somalis who originate from the north-west
           and minorities such as the Bantu to  settle  in  its  territory.
           Even Ogaden clan members, from  the  north-west  and  minorities
           such as the Bantu to settle in its territory. Even  Ogaden  clan
           members, who had moved into the north-west  under  Siad  Barre's
           administration, have been able to remain in Somaliland and  live
           without undue harassment. While occasional localised  clan-based
           outbreaks of fighting may occur, there is no general  clan-based
           persecution in Somaliland. The authorities in the  Hiran  region
           also allow all Somalis to  move,  and  settle  with  permission,
           within their territory."


      The material that has led to this paragraph was  all  dated  1996  to
      1998 and thus it may reflect a position  that  no  longer  exists  in
      Somaliland.  It is referred to, however, in  the  recent  operational
      guidance note at paragraph 3.7.5 which states as follows:

           "In most cases members of minority groups other than the Bajuni,
           Bravanese/Benadiri  are  unlikely  to  qualify  for  asylum   or
           Humanitarian  Protection  unless  they  demonstrate   individual
           circumstances to the contrary.  There is  no  specific  risk  to
           members of minority groups  who  originate  from  or  have  been
           permitted to settle in Somaliland or Puntland.  However, members
           of minority groups in southern Somalia  are,  inevitably,  at  a
           greater degree of risk and the circumstances of each  individual
           case will need to be taken into account."


20.   The UNHCR Position Statement contains a number of useful  indications
      as to what the risks would be for a person such as  the  claimant  in
      Somaliland.  We will begin our citations at page 5 of  that  Position
      Statement:

           "For purposes of voluntary repatriation,  UNHCR  policy  divides
           the country into north and south, i.e. areas recognised as being
           stable (north) and areas recognised as not yet stable because of
           the absence of  civil  administrative  structures  to  guarantee
           security (south).  The areas administered by the Somaliland  and
           Puntland authorities  fall  into  the  northern  sector  of  the
           country, and the rest into the  southern  sector.   Accordingly,
           UNHCR considers the part of the country from the city of Galkayo
           to the north as the northern sector.  Areas  south  of  Galkayo,
           constitute the southern sector of the country.


           In view of the improvements in peace,  security,  stability  and
           governance in northern Somalia (Somaliland and Puntland),  UNHCR
           is promoting  the  voluntary  repatriation  of  Somali  refugees
           originating from  there.   The  reintegration  of  returnees  is
           assisted   primarily   through    community-based    activities.
           Voluntary repatriation of refugees who wish to return to pockets
           of peace in southern Somalia has been facilitated by UNHCR on an
           individual basis.


           When UNHCR promotes repatriation to any area, the  understanding
           is that the factors that drove refugees out of  that  area  have
           broadly ceased to exist.


           In the case of Somalia, UNHCR has assessed that the majority  of
           refugees who fled areas which are now in the northern sector can
           safely return to their habitual areas of former abode,  although
           their right to return  is  seriously  challenged  by  the  over-
           stretched absorption capacity.  Also, importantly, it cannot  be
           ruled out that some individuals originating from Somaliland  and
           Puntland may have a well-founded fear of persecution. Claims  to
           this effect should therefore be dealt with in line  with  global
           standards of refugee status determination.


           Prior  to  arranging  repatriation  movements,   UNHCR   Somalia
           requests clearance from the local authorities for  all  refugees
           wishing to repatriate  to  Somalia.   This  is  to  ensure  that
           repatriants are welcome in their area of return,  and  to  avoid
           any negative consequences  arising  from  their  being  possibly
           considered to belong to an  area  different  than  their  chosen
           destination.  This is of  particular  relevance  in  Somaliland,
           which,  because  it  considers  itself  an  independent   state,
           considers    non-Somalilanders    as    foreigners....      Clan
           considerations play an important role.  Generally, the  lack  of
           local clan and other support-systems forces most Somalis who  no
           do not originate from the area to join the misery of the  31,000
           IDPs, who live in squalid conditions below the poverty line with
           very limited access to basic services  and  physical  and  legal
           protection. "


      The position paper goes on at page 8 as follows:


           "The general pattern of human  settlements  prevailing  in  many
           parts of Africa, including Somalia, is  often  characterised  by
           common ethnic, tribal, religious and or/cultural factors,  which
           enable access to land, resources and protection from members  of
           the community.  Consequently, this commonality appears to be the
           necessary condition to live in safety.  In such  situations,  it
           would not be reasonable to expect someone to take  up  residence
           in an area or community where persons with a  different  ethnic,
           tribal, religious and/or cultural  background  are  settled,  or
           where they would otherwise be considered as aliens.


           The only conceivable alternative could be to move to  the  slums
           of a big city, where internal migrants from the countryside lead
           a precarious existence, often in  appalling  living  conditions.
           Persons with a  rural back  ground  may  be  rendered  destitute
           there and thus be subjected to undue  hardship.   Therefore,  it
           would be unreasonable to expect a person to move to an  area  in
           his or her own country other  than  one  where  he  or  she  has
           ethnic, tribal, religious and/or cultural ties.


           This is true also in Somaliland and Puntland.  They already host
           some 60,000 and 31,000 IDPs respectively, which by  far  exceeds
           their absorption capacity. In the absence of clan protection and
           support, which means  weak  or  negligible  social  networks,  a
           Somali originating from another area would be likely to join the
           many  other  underprivileged  IDPs  who  suffer  from  lack   of
           protection, limited access to  education  and  health  services,
           vulnerability  to  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  and  labour
           exploitation, eviction, vulnerability to sexual exploitation and
           abuse  and  labour  exploitation,   eviction   destruction   and
           confiscation of assets. Specifically,  in  Somaliland,  a  self-
           proclaimed independent state, those not  originating  from  this
           area would be considered as  foreigners,  and  face  significant
           acceptance and integration problems,  particularly  taking  into
           account the  extremely  difficult  socio-economic  situation  of
           those native to the territory.


           .....


           In this regard, it should be noted that 'place of origin' should
           not necessarily be equated with 'place of birth'.  ...A case  to
           illustrate this point is the voluntary repatriation  by  air  to
           Puntland of Somali refugees from  the  Dodaab  camps  in  Kenya.
           Whilst most of them fled to Kenya from the south of Somalia they
           returned  to  their  clan  basis  in  Puntland.   Therefore  the
           determining factor in defining where a person originates from is
           where the person has effective clan and family  ties  and  where
           clan protection is thus available."

21.   It seems to us that the position for someone who is a Bajuni and  has
      no connections whatever with Somaliland would be such as to render it
      wholly impracticable to consider his relocation to that part  of  the
      country.  That is not the position here.  On the claimant's own  case
      he has lived since childhood from the age of nine to  about  nineteen
      in the Hargeisa  area  or  perhaps  sometimes  the  Birbira  part  of
      Somaliland.  During that time there has only been one incident as  it
      seems to us where he has been attacked.  If there had been more  than
      one there have been very few and they were some time ago when he  was
      little more than a boy.  He also plainly has family members who  live
      in that area.  He has one uncle who remained at least,  he  may  have
      brothers and sisters there although there is no clear evidence  about
      that and we will not assume that he does.  He either had a mother  or
      a cousin of his mother who lived there and plainly during the time of
      his childhood and adolescence he was living among the Issaq  who  are
      the dominant clan of the area.  No doubt life was difficult  for  him
      but this clan treated him as family and they must have known what his
      actual clan background was.

22.   In those circumstances it seems to us that this is a  very  different
      case from the ordinary run of cases that one would come across,  even
      when considering a Bajuni who is being considered as a candidate  for
      relocation to the north of the country, for this is someone  who  has
      lived in the north of the country  without  encountering  persecution
      for a Convention reason and it seems to us that  if  he  were  to  go
      there he would not be cast adrift, for he has  established  a  family
      network of some sort there.  That must be the case for  him  to  have
      survived as he did and to have obtained some employment at some stage
      as well.

23.   It thus seems to us that in the circumstances of this  case,  however
      unusual it may be so to hold despite the fact that he may be a Bajuni
      even if he is a Bajuni, and this is putting his case as  high  as  it
      fairly can be put, we do not feel that he is  at  any  real  risk  of
      persecution if he is returned to  the  Somaliland  part  of  Somalia.
      Accordingly, and for the reasons given above we feel that this appeal
      must be dismissed for it cannot  be  put  any  higher  than  we  have
      accepted it to be and accordinglysucceed even  on  his  own  account.
      Accordingly, we consider that a remittal would serve no purposes.





                                            His Honour Judge N AinsleyAinley
                                                              Vice President

