
H-MH/11-V3

|Heard at Field House       |        |FT (National Service - Fear |
|                           |        |of GIA) Algeria [2004] UKIAT|
|                           |        |00212                       |
|On 28 May 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|04 August 2004.                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                    |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                    |
|Mr D R Bremmer JP                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr D Krushner, Counsel instructed by
                             Selvarajah & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria.

2.    With permission, he appeals the determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr.
    A.C.B.  Markham  David)  promulgated  on  28th  April  2003.   In  that
    determination the Adjudicator  dismissed,  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds, the appeal against the Respondent's decision,  made  on
    1st October 2000  to  issue  directions  for  his  removal  to  Algeria
    following the refusal of his asylum application.

3.    This being a very old decision the appeal was under Section  8(4)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993, on refugee  grounds  only.
    Although the Adjudicator purported to deal with human rights, he had no
    jurisdiction to do so.

4.    The basis of the Appellant's claim to asylum was  that,  having  been
    born on 3 March 1975, at the time that he arrived in the United Kingdom
    (12 September 2000) he was liable to  conscription  into  the  Algerian
    army.  He had received threats from terrorists that they would kill him
    if he did his military service.  The Appellant said  that  the  threats
    came by way of letter but they have not been produced because he  burnt
    them.  In his interview and witness statement, the Appellant  said  his
    problems first arose around 1998/1999 and that he received  is  call-up
    papers in 1999.  However when he gave oral evidence to the  Adjudicator
    he said the threats started in 1994 when his brother was  killed.   His
    brother was doing his national service, having started in 1992.  It  is
    not clear whether the Adjudicator accepted that his brother was  killed
    by the GIA, but he did record that the Appellant said he did not report
    any threats to the authorities, because friends who  had  done  so  had
    been killed by the GIA.

5.    Although the Appellant expressed fear of the authorities as  well  as
    the GIA, the Adjudicator concluded that any fear of the authorities was
    simply that he would be sent to do his national service  and  therefore
    be vulnerable to attack by members of the GIA.  The Appellant's concern
    about doing national service as such was not regarded as significant by
    the Adjudicator who noted that the penalties for evading the draft  are
    a lot less severe than those for desertion.  His fear was of the GIA.

6.    The Adjudicator noted that then current CIPU Report (May  2002)  said
    that most reports of young men being killed by the GIA for doing  their
    national service happened around 1994 and 1995. The  CIPU  Report  said
    there were still occasional  reports  of  young  men  being  victim  to
    terrorist attacks having just finished their military service.

7.    Quite properly, the Adjudicator said the GIA  are  non-state  actors.
    He considered the case of Horvath (2000 Imm AR 205)  which  he  quoted.
    He then found that there is a system of law in place in Algeria  making
    violent attacks by persecutors  punishable  by  sentences  commensurate
    with the gravity of  the  crimes.   He  also  found  that  there  is  a
    reasonable willingness by  the  law  enforcement  agencies  to  detect,
    prosecute and punish offenders.  He noted that the  security  situation
    generally in Algeria had been improving greatly over the last few years
    and that there is effective security in the big cities.  He came to the
    conclusion that there was a sufficiency of protection.

8.    The appellant's grounds of appeal start by attacking the  Adjudicator
    for having found the Appellant credible.  Mr. Krushner said  he  wished
    to abandon that ground and distance himself from the author of it.

9.    Thereafter the grounds deal with issues  arising  from  the  asserted
    fear of the GIA.  The Adjudicator accepted the Appellant had a  genuine
    subjective fear of the GIA arising from the possibility  of  him  doing
    national service.  Mr. Krushner accepted that it was the assessment  of
    the objective evidence which was the key to this appeal.   He  took  us
    through the objective evidence which consists primarily of the 2003  US
    State Department Report, published in February 2004,  and  the  current
    CIPU Report published in April 2004.  In  making  his  submissions  Mr.
    Krushner confirmed that military service as such wais not an issue  for
    us to consider.  He took us to a  number  of  parts  of  the  US  State
    Department Report.  At page 2 it is said:-

         "The country is gradually emerging from over  a  decade  of  civil
         strife between proponents  and  opponents  of  an  Islamic  state.
         During that decade actions by government  authorities,  insurgents
         and terrorist groups,  some  of  which  have  ties  to  al-Qa'ida,
         deprived citizens of their fundamental right to security,  created
         serious  human  rights  problems,  and  set  back  the   country's
         transition toward a democratic system."

10.   A little later on, the Report says  that  press  estimates  are  that
    approximately 1,162 civilians, terrorists, and security  force  members
    died  during  2003,  a  61%  decrease  in  violent  deaths  from  2002.
    Unfortunately that part of the Report does not distinguish between  the
    component parts of the 1,162.  Later in the  Report  it  is  said  that
    civilian deaths attributed to terrorists decreased from 1,375  in  2002
    to 258 during 2003.  The Report suggests that in many cases the victims
    were randomly  targeted  in  an  attempt  to  create  social  disorder,
    although in other cases, there were violent reprisals  for  failing  to
    pay a "tax" to the terrorists.  It notes that the violence  appears  to
    have occurred primarily in the  countryside  "as  the  security  forces
    largely forced terrorists out of the cities".  The Appellant comes from
    Baraki, a suburb of Algiers.  The Report, referring to  disappearances,
    says the government had said in 2001 that it  would  investigate  4,880
    disappearances.  It also said that terrorist groups continued to kidnap
    scores of civilians.  And, the general  situation  among  the  security
    forces is improving such that in September 2003 it was  announced  that
    2,269 gendarmes and 211 policemen had been dismissed over the last  two
    years for abuse of authority, including arbitrary arrests.  At page  14
    of the Report, it is said that the Algerian  government  maintains  the
    majority of the disappeared have  joined  terrorist  groups,  left  the
    country  for  economic  reasons,  or  been  kidnapped  and  killed   by
    terrorists (again there is no analysis of the numbers, or  proportions,
    as between the different categories).  Mr. Krushner suggested that  the
    government's control over the press, and media information, as set  out
    on  page  9  of  the  Report  means  that  government  information   is
    unreliable.

11.   We observe that the US State Department Report seldom  refers  to
    the GIA as such but generally to terrorists.  Mr Krushner  had  to
    accept there was nothing specifically in the report about the  GIA
    in Algiers.  He also had to accept that, although the Report dealt
    with abuses by the security forces in places, it did not deal with
    incompetence.  He suggested that if the security  forces  operated
    in an unlawful way, as it was clear they did from  the  number  of
    gendarmes and policemen that had been dismissed, then  they  would
    be unlikely to be in a position  to  protect  the  Appellant.   We
    observe that the government has  rid  the  security  forces  of  a
    number of their personnel which may mean things are  improving  as
    suggested by the report.

12.   Mr. Deller concentrated on the CIPU Report and the section  under
    the heading "Armed Groups", starting at 6.39.  At 6.40 it is  said
    that the violence in Algeria has  generally  decreased  since  the
    1990s and that  according  to  the  Algerian  press,  as  well  as
    official statistics, the violence blamed on armed  Islamic  groups
    declined sharply in 2003.   It  quotes  the  US  State  Department
    Report as to numbers and to the facts  that  the  violence  occurs
    primarily in the countryside.   In  particular  it  deals  with  a
    report from the Swedish Immigration Authorities in 2003  (referred
    to at 6.42).  It said

       "It should normally be possible to  avoid  threats  from  armed
       groups by the person concerned going  to  any  of  the  largest
       cities which are to be considered as  safe.   However,  in  the
       present situation, terrorism is not  a  great  problem  in  the
       major cities.  Cities such as Algiers, Oran and Constantine are
       surrounded by police forces.  Terrorist violence has  decreased
       enormously and attacks occur more and more rarely in comparison
       to the difficult years in the 1990s".


    Mr. Deller argued that any asserted risk to the Appellant  now  is
    pure speculation.  Any risk whilst in  the  military  would  be  a
    generalised untargeted risk arising from hostility to an  opposing
    army.

13.   In the section on the threat to military  servicemen  from  armed
    groups at 5.111, the CIPU Report says that most newspaper  reports
    about draftees who felt caught between  the  military  authorities
    and the rebel groups were dated 1994 and 1995.  It  also  mentions
    that, in April 1999, there were still occasional reports of  young
    men who had just finished their military service being the victims
    of insurgents.  At 5.112 the CIPU Report says it has been  claimed
    that a number of measures taken by the government  had  diminished
    Islamist activity and that armed groups  mainly  launched  general
    attacks against the civilian population  in  the  regions,  rather
    than targeting specific individuals.  It then says:-

         "A  country  report  of  January  2003  by   the   Netherlands
         authorities states that 'At present, armed Islamists no longer
         focus  violent  actions  on  the  conscripts  who  have   just
         fulfilled their military service and are returning to  society
         or who  are  just  about  to  start  their  military  service,
         contrary to the first year of terror'".


14.   There are sections about the GIA at 6.48, and in Annex C, to  the
    CIPU Report.  The matters dealt with do not go specifically to the
    issues in this appeal, save that there is no mention of individual
    conscripts being targeted.

15.   The objective evidence does not deal very well with the  question
    of protection.  The US State Department  Report  deals  with  past
    abuses by members  of  the  security  forces,  but  that  is  both
    historic and off the point.

16.   What is striking is that the objective evidence shows  the  basis
    for the Appellant's fear appears to have receded.   The  objective
    evidence  supports  the  Appellant  in  that  there  were  serious
    problems around 1994/1995 when his brother was killed.  But,  both
    the Canadian and Dutch reports now make it clear that the  GIA  no
    longer targeting conscripts.  Even if they did,  the  evidence  is
    that they do not have a presence in  the  larger  cities  such  as
    Algiers where the Appellant lives.

17.   The Appellant has said that he does not fear the  authorities  as
    such and he is not pursuing any claim  that  he  fears  doing  his
    military service as such.  As to  the  latter,  any  risk  arising
    during the performance to his service  is  a  generalised,  not  a
    targeted risk, which would not  bring  the  Appellant  within  the
    Convention.

18.   In all the circumstances, the Adjudicator's  conclusion  was  the
    correct one.  There  is  no  real  risk  of  persecution  to  this
    Appellant if he is returned to Algeria.  His fear no longer has an
    objectively well-founded basis.   The question of protection  does
    not arise.

19.   The appeal is dismissed.


                                                         C P Mather
                                                         Vice President



Approved for electronic distribution.

Algeria/National Service/Fear of GIA


