
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |IS (Fair hearing - natural  |
|                           |        |justice) Belarus [2004]     |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00114                 |
|On 5 April 2004            |        |                            |
|Prepared 5 April 2004                                             |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|25 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Mr T S Culver                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel
For the respondent:                Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen   of   Belarus,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  P  J  Wynne,  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the decision made on 5 April 2001 giving directions for
      his removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  January  2000  and
      claimed asylum on 14 January  2000.  He  claimed  that  he  had  faced
      persecution from a neighbour who was in the  police  force  due  to  a
      dispute over a plot of land and more generally with the authorities in
      Belarus because of his connections with  the  Belarus  People's  Front
      (BNF).  He claimed that he had been detained  on  six  occasions,  the
      last resulting in the need for hospital treatment.  The  Secretary  of
      State had doubts as to whether the appellant was a citizen of Belarus.
       He also doubted his account of events and for the reasons set out  in
      the reasons for refusal letter dated  21  March  his  application  was
      refused on both asylum and human rights grounds.

3.    The appeal against this decision was listed before the Adjudicator  on
      27 February 2003. The appeal was adjourned part  heard  at  16.45  and
      resumed on 2 April  2003.   In  the  interim  period  the  appellant's
      solicitors filed a  supplementary  witness  statement  giving  further
      details of an  incident  during  the  appellant's  last  detention  in
      October 1999.

4.    The Adjudicator summarised the appellant's case  in  paragraph  21  of
      his determination.  The appellant had considerable difficulties from a
      neighbour who was a police officer arising from a dispute about  land.
      This dispute did not lead to the appellant's arrest  or  detention  or
      engender in him any fear of persecution.  This arose  because  of  his
      membership of the BNF.  He first encountered  trouble  in  April  1996
      when  he  attended  a  large  demonstration.   When  interviewed   the
      appellant had said  that  he  was  detained  whereas  in  his  witness
      statement he said that he had managed to escape.   The  next  incident
      was in October 1996 when the appellant  attended  a  demonstration  in
      Minsk.  He asserted that he was  detained  for  two  days  and  beaten
      whilst interrogated sustaining a broken nose and  a  lowering  of  the
      left kidney.  He believed that the  police  released  him  because  he
      required medical treatment.  He did go to a casualty department in the
      Central Hospital in Pinsk.  The wound on his nose  was  stitched.   He
      did not report the incident to any higher  authority  because  he  was
      aware that such complaints were not pursued.

5.    The appellant attended a further demonstration on 25 March  1997.   He
      was charged with instigating mass disorder.  He was ill-treated whilst
      in detention.  He appeared in court where  he  was  found  guilty  and
      fined.  He asserts that following this incident his wife was dismissed
      from her employment following a report from the police to her employer
      that the appellant was politically active. The  appellant  attended  a
      few minor demonstrations between March 1997 and March 1998 but did not
      have any serious problems in that period.

6.    He took part in a march in Vitebsk on 25 March 1998.  He was  detained
      for holding posters and banners in support  of  independence.  He  was
      detained for a few hours and fined.  He did not allege that he was ill-
      treated on this occasion.    On 17 October 1999 the appellant attended
      a freedom march in Minsk.  He and  several  other  demonstrators  were
      arrested and taken to Minsk police station.  The following day he  was
      transferred to Pinsk police station and detained for two days.  Whilst
      in detention he was beaten up and asked to cooperate with  the  police
      as a non-salaried worker gathering information on  BNF  activists  and
      leaders.

7.    On 20 October 1999 he claimed that  three  police  officers  took  him
      from the police station towards a village.  They went into  the  woods
      and forced him to dig a pit in which they said they intended  to  bury
      him.  He was beaten up.  He was later thrown into  a  car  and  driven
      back into town.  He was then left by a street in  the  hospital.   The
      hospital admitted him and he spent about a  month  there.   Whilst  in
      hospital the police kept contacting both him and his wife.  He  feared
      remaining in hospital and decided to  flee.   A  priest,  who  was  an
      acquaintance of the appellant, helped him to escape from the hospital.
       He spent some time in the priest's country  house  and  then  he  was
      helped to leave the country.

8.    In his witness statement of 4 February 2003 the appellant provided  an
      explanation as to why he had not mentioned this incident prior to that
      witness statement.  He said that he had mentioned  it  to  his  former
      representative but they seemed to have  concentrated  on  the  problem
      with his land and had omitted the latest and most important  incident.
      At interview he was asked to answer questions put to him  rather  than
      mention anything else. This was the reason that the incident  had  not
      been mentioned.

9.    In his supplementary witness statement of 6  March  2003  and  in  his
      oral evidence to the Adjudicator the appellant maintained that he  had
      found the experience in October  1999  humiliating  and  that  as  the
      interpreter at his interview was a woman  he  found  it  difficult  to
      express anything about what had happened to him in  the  woods  on  20
      October 1999.

10.   The appellant repeated that the police had taken him into  the  woods.
      They told him that it was time  to  exorcise  his  political  opinion.
      When he refused to dig a hole he was beaten up.   The  police  used  a
      shovel hitting him on the head and his back to force him to  dig.   It
      took a long time to dig the hole.  At one time he stopped  because  he
      was tired.  At that stage the policeman  said  he  could  be  sent  to
      prison under an article of the Criminal Code.  They then said that  if
      that happened other prisoners would rape him.  The  appellant  started
      digging again.  When it started raining the police went back to  their
      car close to the place where he was digging.  One of them came to  him
      and told him to go on his knees to the car  and  threatened  him  with
      oral sex with one of the policeman. He was told that he would have  to
      do that every time he reported to the police  even  if  he  agreed  to
      cooperate.  The appellant refused.  Then two other policemen came from
      the car and beat him up again.  They forced him to swallow a big green
      frog.  They put it in his mouth and pushed his head into a swamp.  The
      appellant did not remember much of what happened afterwards because he
      was semi-conscious.

11.   The appellant was cross-examined about his evidence.  The  Adjudicator
      records that he got into  difficulties  about  the  dates  of  various
      things that allegedly happened following his detention on  17  October
      1999.  He said that he had spent a month in hospital following release
      by the police and  this  was  between  October  and  his  escape  from
      hospital on 17 or 18 December 1999.  Later  he  agreed  that  he  left
      hospital on 16 or 17 November 1999.  He said that his house  had  been
      searched whilst he was in hospital but later said  that  it  had  been
      when he was not in hospital.  He said that he had been kept in a  cell
      from 18 October 1999 up to the evening of 20 November 1999.   When  it
      was put to him that he was supposed to have been in hospital  from  21
      October 1999 he changed his mind.  He was asked about his evidence  at
      interview when he said the police had kept him  in  custody  until  23
      October 1999 as compared with his oral evidence that he had been taken
      to the woods and ill-treated on 22 October 1999.  He repeated that  he
      had been released by the police on the evening of 22 October 1999  and
      kept in the woods overnight.

12.   The appellant's account about his journey from Pinsk to St  Petersburg
      was also considered at the hearing.  The appellant had said  that  the
      priest had taken him in a motorcar from Pinsk to St  Petersburg  where
      the  priest's  brother  had  an  abandoned  summerhouse.   The  priest
      arranged for his journey to the United Kingdom by lorry. The appellant
      said at the hearing on 2 April that  the  journey  from  Pinsk  to  St
      Petersburg  had  taken  three  hours,  perhaps  a  little  more.   The
      Presenting Officer referred to a map of the area and submitted that as
      the distance from Pinsk to St Petersburg was at least 500  miles  even
      as the crow flies the journey could not have taken three hours.

13.   In his submissions Mr Giovannelli of  Counsel  who  appeared  for  the
      appellant before the Adjudicator submitted that the appellant  had  no
      choice about this journey as he left the matter  to  the  priest.   He
      submitted that the essential elements of the appellant's  claims  were
      true.

14.   The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant  had  joined  the  BNF  in
      about 1996 and may well have attended various demonstrations.  He  had
      been detained on several occasions by the police and on some of  these
      occasions he had faced a court appearance, been convicted more  likely
      than not of a public order offence and fined.  He  accepted  that  the
      appellant had a scar on his nose and that it was likely that this  was
      as a result of an injury sustained during his detention by the  police
      in  October  1996.   However,  the  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's version of  events  about  the  incident  starting  on  17
      October 1999. This was the most important  incident  in  the  evidence
      given by the appellant but nothing about it had been mentioned in  the
      SEF or during interview.  The Adjudicator did  not  believe  that  the
      incident in the woods had ever occurred.  It was his view that it  was
      much more likely that the original account both  in  his  SEF  and  at
      interview that the appellant  had  been  arrested  by  the  police  in
      October  1999  and  released  on  23  October  1999  was  true.    The
      Adjudicator did not believe that the appellant had suffered any severe
      ill-treatment during this period of detention nor that the police  had
      tried to get him to become a police informer.  So far as  the  journey
      to St Petersburg was concerned it could not possibly have been made in
      just over three hours.

15.   In summary the Adjudicator accepted that the appellant did  have  some
      trouble with the police in about 1996 and may  well  have  suffered  a
      broken nose arising out of an incident taking place at that time.   He
      was not satisfied that the appellant had come to the attention of  the
      police in any meaningful way since then nor had he suffered any severe
      ill-treatment at their or anybody else's hands in the last three years
      of his life in Belarus.  The appeal was dismissed on both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.  The Adjudicator concluded his determination  by
      thanking both advocates for the spirit in which they had conducted the
      appeal.  Their arguments were clear and helpful and had  assisted  him
      in what had been a difficult case.

16.   However, it is clear from the grounds of appeal  that  Mr  Giovannelli
      on behalf of the appellant was not satisfied with the conduct  of  the
      appeal nor with the spirit in which it had been conducted.  In lengthy
      grounds it is submitted in ground one  that  the  Adjudicator  entered
      into  the  arena  during  the  appeal  hearing,  cross-examining   the
      appellant at some length in an adversarial and hostile  tone.   It  is
      asserted that his role went far beyond that of a silent  listener  and
      that his interruptions of the respondent's  cross-examination  of  the
      appellant amounted to more than mere clarification. Ground two  argues
      that by his conduct at the hearing there was cause for concern  as  to
      whether  the  Adjudicator  approached  the  appeal  from  a  fair  and
      impartial perspective.  He had made adverse  credibility  findings  in
      respect of evidence inaccurately  recorded  at  the  hearing.   Ground
      three argues that the Adjudicator erred in dismissing the appeal  even
      on the  basis  of  the  appellant's  evidence  which  he  accepted  as
      credible.

17.   When granting permission to appeal the Vice President noted that  most
      of the first ground was devoted to  complaints  that  the  Adjudicator
      entered into the arena during cross-examination and did not conduct  a
      fair hearing. There were many generalised assertions and statements of
      law but the specific items mentioned did not inherently  suggest  that
      the  Adjudicator  acted  improperly.    Paragraph  9  of  the  grounds
      revealed that the claimant got into  considerable  difficulties  about
      the dates when he was in  hospital  and  the  Adjudicator  had  sought
      clarification.  Paragraph 12 suggested that the Adjudicator intervened
      on several occasions when the claimant was not answering questions  in
      cross-examination directly to remind him  to  do  so.    Paragraph  14
      showed that when the claimant raised in cross-examination an  entirely
      new and potentially significant issue that had not been raised  before
      the Adjudicator intervened to establish  if  it  was  meant  and  then
      adjourned the hearing to enable a supplementary proof of  evidence  to
      be provided.  The Vice President also noted that Mr Giovanelli did not
      complain at the hearing about the Adjudicator's conduct as  he  should
      have done if there was anything in the complaint.  However, permission
      was granted in view of the seriousness of the allegations to which  Mr
      Giovanelli had put his name. The second ground of  appeal  was  linked
      with the first.  The Vice President commented that there  was  nothing
      of arguable substance in the third ground. There was no arguable error
      in the Adjudicator's dismissal of the appeal on the basis of the facts
      established.

18.    At  the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  we  had  in   evidence   the
      Adjudicator's typed record of proceedings together  with  comments  by
      the Adjudicator on the grounds in a letter dated 9 July  2003.   There
      is a witness statement from Mr Giovanelli dated 8 October 2003  and  a
      copy of his notes of the proceedings.  The Tribunal were  referred  to
      the authorities cited in paragraph 4 of  the  grounds:   Oyono  (2002)
      UKIAT 02034,  Kamil  At  (00/TH/01382),  MNM  (00/TH/02423*),  Manzola
      [2002] UKIAT 08073 and Demir [2002] UKIAT 01943.

19.   Mr Lee submitted that the Adjudicator's intervention  in  the  hearing
      affected the way the appellant gave evidence. He had intervened on too
      many occasions.  At one point in the evidence there appeared to  be  a
      sequence of 11 questions from  the  Adjudicator  with  two  interposed
      questions from the  Presenting  Officer.   The  Adjudicator  had  also
      intervened in an adversarial and hostile way.  Mr Lee referred  us  to
      Mr Giovanelli's notes of the proceedings at page 9 where he noted that
      the Adjudicator's comment "just tell us who it was" was in  "an  angry
      voice". At paragraph 10 of his  notes  the  Adjudicator  is  noted  as
      saying "just answer the question!".  The Adjudicator had  gone  beyond
      asking questions in clarification.  The  manner  of  the  intervention
      could indicate that he was hostile to the appellant who in  any  event
      had been affected by the interventions.

20.   In his witness statement Mr Giovanelli said that the tone, the  manner
      and timing of the questions asked by the Adjudicator were such  as  to
      increase the pressure on the appellant in giving  his  evidence.   The
      Adjudicator had often repeated the same question in a  more  insistent
      manner, interrupted the appellant during the course of his explanation
      of an answer and used a forceful and at times dismissive  and  hostile
      tone in questioning the appellant.  According to paragraph  8  of  the
      witness statement after some sustained questioning on the  subject  of
      the incident in the woods, the Adjudicator rose in order  to  let  him
      take instructions from the appellant.  This  was  at  4.45  pm  on  27
      February 2003.  The appellant was visibly distressed and it took  some
      time for counsel to calm him down.  Mr Giovanelli explained to him the
      importance of giving as full an account of the incident as he was able
      to.  The appellant said that he did not wish to give this evidence  in
      the presence of a female interpreter.  As this conference  lasted  for
      between 30 and 40 minutes the hearing was adjourned at  5.30  pm,  the
      Adjudicator directing that any further statements should be filed  and
      served at least seven days prior to the next hearing date. The witness
      statement records that at the resumption of the  hearing  on  2  April
      2003 the Adjudicator interrupted the appellant in the  answer  to  the
      first and fifth questions of the day and he recorded that it was in an
      angry voice.

21.   Mr Giovanelli concedes that he did  not  raise  the  question  of  the
      Adjudicator's  interruptions  at  the  hearing.   As  credibility  was
      central to the issue the Adjudicator's  goodwill  was  paramount.   He
      considered that an attempt to restrict or control the interventions by
      raising concerns would be counter-productive.

22.   Mr Lee referred the Tribunal to the authorities referred to above  and
      in particular to MNM at paragraph 19, Manzole at paragraph 5 and Oyono
      at paragraph 10.  He submitted that considering the interventions from
      the Adjudicator and their tone, the Tribunal should  be  left  with  a
      feeling of unease as to the findings of fact and the appeal should  be
      remitted.  The Adjudicator's hostile attitude was inappropriate and it
      affected the appellant's evidence.

23.   Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
      criticising an Adjudicator's conduct of a hearing.  The starting point
      should be that there had been no complaint  by  the  advocate  at  the
      hearing.  This was not necessarily fatal but  if  matters  of  concern
      arose at the hearing they should have been raised then.   Mr  Blundell
      referred to the Tribunal's comments in paragraph 9 of Oyono that if  a
      hearing was unfair those matters should be put to the  Adjudicator  at
      the time rather than waiting for the determination.  In any event  the
      issues raised by counsel were  answered  by  the  Adjudicator  in  his
      letter.  His explanations were entirely  valid.   It  was  clear  from
      reading the record of proceedings that the  Adjudicator's  use  of  an
      "angry voice" was preceded by an indication that the  Adjudicator  was
      attempting to get the appellant simply to answer the questions he  was
      asked.  The Adjudicator could not be faulted for attempting to clarify
      matters which were in issue or trying to keep  the  appellant  to  the
      point.

24.   The issue in this appeal is whether the Adjudicator's conduct  of  the
      hearing has led to a breach of natural  justice  or  to  a  procedural
      irregularity which either vitiates his findings of fact or means  that
      the appellant has not had a fair hearing  before  an  independent  and
      impartial Tribunal.

25.   Guidance on how an appeal should  be  conducted  is  set  out  in  the
      authorities the Tribunal have been referred to. In  MNM,  which  dealt
      primarily with a situation where the respondent was  not  represented,
      the  President  reminded  Adjudicators  that  they  must  not  involve
      themselves directly in questioning appellants or witnesses save as was
      absolutely necessary to enable them to ascertain the  truth  and  they
      must never adopt or appear to adopt a hostile attitude.

26    In  Oyono,  the  Deputy  President  reminded  Adjudicators  that  when
      evidence  is  being  taken  from  a  witness  and   where   there   is
      representation on both sides,  an  Adjudicator's  role  is  of  silent
      listening.  It may very occasionally happen that an Adjudicator is  so
      unclear as to what he has heard that he needs to ask for something  to
      be repeated. There may occasionally be difficulties with  interpreters
      causing the Adjudicator's general control over the proceedings to come
      into play.  But it is for the parties to bring  out  evidence  in  the
      order that they think appropriate and to put  whatever  contradictions
      in the evidence need to be put to the witness.  When the evidence  has
      been finished in the sense that there has been  examination  in  chief
      and  cross-examination  and  re-examination,  it  may  be   that   the
      Adjudicator wishes to put matters arising out of the evidence  to  the
      witness:  but the time for  that  is  after  re-examination.   If  the
      Adjudicator does ask the witness any questions  he  must  then  always
      give an opportunity to the parties to ask any further questions  which
      arise from this.  An Adjudicator who intervenes during the  course  of
      evidence is running the risk that he will be seen  to  be  taking  the
      side of one party or the other.  This advice was repeated in Kamil  At
      where the Tribunal reminded Adjudicators  that  in  cases  where  both
      sides are represented questions from the court are best  reserved  for
      the conclusion of the taking of evidence from the witness  and  should
      ideally be few.

27.   However, these guidelines must be looked at  in  the  context  of  the
      Adjudicator's primary duty to manage the hearing to ensure  that  both
      parties have a fair hearing.  Rule 37  of  the  Procedure  Rules  2003
      which came into force  on  1  April  2003  makes  it  clear  that  the
      Appellate Authority  may  decide  the  procedure  to  be  followed  in
      relation  to  any  appeal.   Rule  38  sets  out  the  directions   an
      Adjudicator may give to ensure that an appeal is properly managed.  If
      the  parties  are  represented  an  Adjudicator  should   permit   the
      representative to put the case in the way he thinks  best  subject  to
      keeping proper control of the hearing and intervening where  necessary
      to ensure that all issues are covered and that  any  uncertainties  in
      the evidence  are  clarified.   It  is  entirely  appropriate  for  an
      Adjudicator to intervene during the examination of a witness to ensure
      that the witness answers the question  asked  rather  than  takes  the
      question as an opportunity to add matters which are either  irrelevant
      or will be covered in any event in  a  proper  examination  or  cross-
      examination.

28.   This was a case where according to the Adjudicator's letter of 9  July
      2003 there were problems in getting the appellant to give  a  coherent
      account.  He seemed unable or unwilling to answer questions put to him
      by both advocates. The Adjudicator accepts that he did intervene  when
      this occurred.  He says that there were many occasions when he had  to
      remind the appellant to answer the question that he had been asked and
      not to make speeches.   This  appears  from  pages  9  and  10  of  Mr
      Giovanelli's notes of evidence.  This reads

            "Q.  Name of person took to STP?

            A.   Father Bogdan ...

            Adj.  Just tell us who it was (angry voice)."

      And on the following page:

            "Q.  Passed through other countries?

           A.   No neighbouring country  -  not  crossed  another  country.
           Arrived at Slitansky prospect ....


           Adj.  Just answer the question!"

      The Tribunal are satisfied that here the Adjudicator  was  intervening
      to tell the witness to limit his answers to the question he was  asked
      rather than seeking to expand  upon  it  at  any  great  length.   The
      Adjudicator was perfectly entitled to take this  action  to  keep  the
      hearing under some sort of control and to  ensure  that  the  evidence
      came out in a logical and coherent way.

29.   The Adjudicator is also  criticised  for  asking  too  many  questions
      during the Presenting Officer's cross-examination.   Allegations  that
      an Adjudicator has intervened excessively during the evidence must  be
      looked at in context.  This was a hearing which started on 27 February
      2003.  According to the Adjudicator's notes it started at 2.55 pm  and
      continued until 4.45 pm when it was  adjourned  for  counsel  to  take
      instructions.  It was finally adjourned at 5.30 pm.   At  the  resumed
      hearing there was further cross-examination but no times are  recorded
      on the record of proceedings but the hearing on 2 April 2003 of cross-
      examination and submissions covers pages  8-13  of  the  Adjudicator's
      record of proceedings in comparison with pages 1 to 7 for the  hearing
      on 27 February 2003.  The interventions of  the  Adjudicator  must  be
      considered in the light of the fact that this was  a  relatively  long
      hearing.  The  interventions  also  went  to  the  core  part  of  the
      appellant's claim, the incidents of 20 October  1999  and  the  issues
      which arose from the failure  to  mention  the  full  details  of  the
      incident in his original evidence and interview.

30.   It is argued  that  the  appellant  was  upset  by  the  Adjudicator's
      intervention but again this must be looked at in the  context  of  the
      Adjudicator adjourning the appeal at 4.45 pm for further  instructions
      to be taken.  The appellant was given an opportunity of putting  in  a
      further witness statement and the hearing was  adjourned  part  heard.
      The appellant was not required  to  continue  giving  evidence  on  27
      February 2003 when it is said  that  he  was  in  an  emotional  state
      because of the Adjudicator's interventions.  At  the  resumed  hearing
      the Adjudicator required the appellant to  stick  to  the  point  when
      answering  questions.   Counsel  in  his  notes   has   recorded   the
      Adjudicator speaking in an angry  voice.   Mr  Lee  argues  that  this
      indicates that the Adjudicator was hostile to the appellant and it may
      have coloured either his assessment of the appeal or  would  give  the
      impression that he was not objective.  The  Tribunal  accept  that  an
      Adjudicator must not adopt or appear to adopt a hostile  attitude  but
      there will inevitably be times when an Adjudicator has to take a  firm
      approach. There may well equally be times when the  way  an  appellant
      answers questions or perhaps even the way a  representative  puts  his
      submissions will test the patience of  the  Adjudicator.  However,  an
      Adjudicator is a professional judge and it can reasonably  be  assumed
      in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary that he will not  let
      feelings of irritation or exasperation interfere with  his  assessment
      of the evidence.

31.   Mr Blundell makes the point that if the proceedings were or seemed  to
      be unfair, why was the issue not raised at the hearing.  This issue is
      dealt with in Mr Giovanelli's witness statement.  He concedes that  he
      did not raise these points at  the  hearing.   He  says  that  in  his
      experience each Adjudicator has his own style and approach.  Some  are
      more given to intervention than others.  He  took  the  view  that  it
      would be counter-productive to raise the issue before the Adjudicator.

32.   This echoes the comments of Schiemann LJ in  Maheshwaran  [2002]  EWCA
      Civ 173 albeit made in  the  different  context  of  whether  specific
      discrepancies should be raised by an Adjudicator.  Schiemann LJ  wrote
      as follows:

           "Where much depends on the credibility of a party and where that
           party makes several inconsistent statements which are before the
           decision-maker, that party manifestly has  a  forensic  problem.
           Some will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight on and
           make evidential or forensic submissions on  them.   Others  will
           hope that least said soonest mended and consider  that  forensic
           concentration on the point will only make matters worse  and  it
           would be better to try and switch the  Tribunal's  attention  to
           some other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly it is  open  to  the
           Tribunal expressly  to  put  a  particular  inconsistency  to  a
           witness because it considers that the witness may not be alerted
           to the point or because it fears it may have perceived something
           as inconsistent with an earlier answer which  in  truth  is  not
           inconsistent.  Fairness may in some circumstances  require  this
           to be done but this will not be the  usual  case.   Usually  the
           Tribunal, particularly if the party is represented, will  remain
           silent and see how the case unfolds.


           The requirements of fairness are very much  conditioned  by  the
           facts of each  case.  This  has  been  stressed  in  innumerable
           decisions - see the many citations to  this  effect  in  Rees  v
           Crane [1994] 2AC173.  We  have  no  doubt  that  the  claimant's
           submission is framed in terms which are  far  too  wide  and  in
           words which are not to be rigidly applied  to  every  situation.
           Whether a particular  course  is  consistent  with  fairness  is
           essentially an intuitive judgment which is to  be  made  in  the
           light of all the circumstances of a particular case -  see  R  v
           Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  ex  parte  Doody
           [1994] 1AC531 per Lord Mustill at page 560D.   We  turn  to  the
           facts of the present case."

33.   The Tribunal must assess whether there has been a material  procedural
      irregularity or a breach of natural justice  in  the  context  of  the
      facts of this appeal.  In our judgment it is clear that  for  whatever
      reason the appellant found it difficult to give concise answers to the
      questions  put  to  him.  The  Adjudicator  cannot  be   faulted   for
      intervening to try and keep him to the point.  It was not unreasonable
      for the Adjudicator to raise questions during the respondent's  cross-
      examination to try and elicit just what the appellant was saying about
      the incident on 20 October 1999.  Following that intervention he  gave
      the appellant the opportunity of an adjournment to enable him to speak
      to his own counsel.  To permit the appellant to speak to  his  counsel
      during the course of his  evidence  was  a  generous  concession.  The
      Adjudicator also permitted a further witness statement to  be  put  in
      evidence.  If the  appellant  had  been  upset  by  the  Adjudicator's
      questions, ample opportunity was given for him to recover  and  resume
      his evidence at the adjourned hearing.

34.   The Tribunal are not satisfied that the fact that the Adjudicator  may
      have appeared angry at the resumed hearing has any material bearing on
      the fairness of the proceedings.  The Tribunal are not satisfied  that
      any irritation or appearance of anger affected  the  fairness  of  the
      hearing.  The whole of the record of proceedings  must  be  considered
      together with the way the Adjudicator actually dealt with  the  appeal
      in his determination.  He took a more generous view of the appellant's
      evidence than the Secretary of State who had  submitted  in  substance
      that the whole account was incredible.  The Adjudicator  has  recorded
      in paragraph 31  of  his  determination  that  during  the  Presenting
      Officer's submissions he asked what  the  Presenting  Officer's  views
      would be if he found the appellant to  be  credible.   This  does  not
      indicate to the Tribunal that the Adjudicator had  shut  his  mind  at
      that stage to the issues raised.  In the event the Adjudicator  whilst
      rejecting the appellant's evidence about the incidents of the night of
      20 October 1999 did accept that the likelihood was that the  appellant
      had been detained by the police for five days and was released  on  23
      October 1999.  In the light of the fact that further  graphic  details
      of this last incident were given, which had not been raised  when  the
      appellant had first been interviewed or made his SEF, the  Adjudicator
      was  clearly  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  from   those
      omissions.

35.   It was for the Adjudicator to decide what  weight  to  attach  to  the
      appellant's confusion about  when  he  was  in  hospital  and  to  the
      inconsistencies as to whether he was in hospital when  his  house  was
      searched.  There were other matters in the evidence which  cast  doubt
      on the appellant's credibility such as his account of his journey from
      Pinsk to St Petersburg and to the  contradiction  highlighted  by  the
      Adjudicator in paragraph 21(e) as to whether he had escaped  following
      the demonstration in 1996 or whether he had been detained.  These were
      issues of fact for the Adjudicator to resolve.

36    In summary the  Tribunal  is  not  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator's
      conduct of the hearing was in breach of the rules of  natural  justice
      nor did it amount to a procedural irregularity such  as  to  undermine
      his findings.  Looking at the determination as a whole  together  with
      the record of proceedings and the comments of both the Adjudicator and
      counsel, the Tribunal is not satisfied that  the  proceedings  can  be
      categorised as unfair in any way.

37.   It follows that this appeal is dismissed.


                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
