

                          YV (Fresh credibility evidence) Sri Lanka
                                                      [2004] UKIAT 00124 | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 13th May 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                03 June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                               Miss J Grimmett

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms P Gandhi, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                 Association
For the Respondent:          Mr S Bilbe, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal from the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Ms  S
     Kaler, promulgated on 11th September 2003.  In that determination, the
     Adjudicator dismissed the appeals  of  the  Appellant  on  both  human
     rights and asylum grounds.  The Appellant is a  Tamil  male  from  Sri
     Lanka born in October 1970.  He entered the United Kingdom on 4th  May
     2003 and claimed asylum on arrival.

  2. The Adjudicator sets out the Appellant's story in some detail  in  her
     determination.  Essentially, he says that although he had  joined  the
     LTTE in 1987 he had ceased to be a member a year  later,  although  he
     had continued to work for them as a driver.  He was arrested  in  June
     1997 by Security Police because of his LTTE  membership  and  detained
     for a week or so during which time he was tortured and made to confess
     to being an LTTE member.  He was sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment
     for a year, but  managed  to  escape  from  a  toilet  before  he  was
     transferred to prison.  There was a debate about  his  consistency  in
     saying that a security guard assisted him or that the  security  guard
     was incompetent.  Having escaped, he fled to Batticaloa where the LTTE
     were in control.  However, after the signing of the  peace  treaty  in
     February 2002, he moved to an army-controlled area where he set  up  a
     tea business but the LTTE suspected him of  providing  the  EPDP  with
     information and wanted to question him.  He was being taken on a  boat
     by the LTTE, but was able to jump overboard and  escape  and  fled  to
     another army-controlled area, remaining there until May 2003  when  he
     left for the United Kingdom fearing both the LTTE and the authorities.

  3. Part of the evidence which the Appellant produced was a photocopy of a
     newspaper cutting which said that he had been linked with an attack on
     a television station, an attack on a  radio  station  and  a  plot  to
     assassinate the head of government.  He said that his  photograph  had
     been shown on  national  television  shortly  after  his  escape  from
     detention.  Later, he said that was in Colombo only.

  4. The Appellant was cross-examined about a number of matters by the Home
     Office Presenting Officer;  the Home Office had refused the  claim  on
     the grounds that he was not credible.   The  Appellant  was  therefore
     well aware before his appeal to the Adjudicator was made,  that  there
     was going to be an issue as to the credibility of almost all  that  he
     had to say and he was therefore on the clearest notice as to the  need
     to produce the evidence which would support the contentions  which  he
     wished to make.

  5. The Adjudicator expressed  her  views  of  his  credibility  in  clear
     language.  It is not necessary to set out all of it,  but  because  of
     the way in which this appeal has been developed it is necessary to set
     out part of it.

           "19.  The Appellant originally said that  he  was  detained  for
                 involvement with the LTTE.  He added to this  later  on  by
                 saying that he was suspected of an incident at a television
                 station.  The newspaper article he produces names  him  and
                 links him with this, as  well  as  an  attack  on  a  radio
                 station and a plot  to  assassinate  the  head  and  senior
                 minister  in  the  government.   These  are   substantially
                 different to his  original  account.   The  explanation  he
                 gives is that he could not remember  everything,  and  also
                 that it was not true he was linked with the  conspiracy  to
                 assassinate.  These are serious  matters,  and  it  is  not
                 every  LTTE  suspect  who  is  suspected  of  such  serious
                 charges.   The  Appellant  must  have  been  aware  of  the
                 contents of the newspaper  articles  and  would  have  been
                 expected to at least refer to its presence and the  details
                 it contains, whether true or not.


           20.   Even if the allegations were not true, the  fact  that  he
                 was suspected of them would have  made  him  a  high  level
                 prisoner,  who  would  have  been  closely  guarded.    The
                 Appellant has changed the details of how  he  escaped  from
                 custody.  He originally mentioned that this  was  with  the
                 assistance of a guard and his  reasons  for  doing  so  are
                 mentioned specifically in answer to question 36 of the Home
                 Office interview.  He changes this account in his statement
                 saying that the guard was sympathetic to him  but  did  not
                 assist him.  In his oral evidence, he said that  the  guard
                 had been sacked for his involvement.  I also note  that  he
                 claims to have suffered  severe  torture,  leaving  lasting
                 scars, yet he managed to escape from the  toilet  and  walk
                 through a tea plantation to get away.  The whole  story  of
                 escaping from the toilet, the guard being complicit (it  is
                 not even suggested he was bribed) and his walking  away  in
                 spite of  his  injuries  from  serious  torture  is  highly
                 implausible.  Coupled with the fact that the Appellant  has
                 changed his story, it is incredible."


  6. The Adjudicator dealt with a newspaper article produced  to  her,  the
     photographs of scars, the  uncertainty  as  to  whether  he  had  been
     sentenced or remanded, and the fact that he had lived  in  government-
     controlled areas even though he was suspected of serious crimes.   She
     said this, in that respect:

           "24.  The Appellant's story is that he lived under a false name.
                  However he moved freely  in  government  controlled  areas
                 after 2002.  Even though he was using a false name, he  had
                 escaped from custody and was a high level prisoner.  It  is
                 surprising and not credible that he was never suspected and
                 had no problems with the  authorities  at  this  time.   My
                 disbelief as to his story is further enforced by  the  fact
                 that his own photograph was in his passport  when  he  left
                 the country.  He seems to have had remarkable luck  in  not
                 only being able to escape from a toilet, not being detected
                 in an army camp and controlled area for  months,  and  also
                 being undetected at the airport.  In my view, this  is  not
                 good fortune but implausible."

  7. The Adjudicator then said that she found the Appellant's story of  his
     escape from the boat fanciful and concluded, in paragraph 26:

           "In summary, I find the  entire  account  put  forward  by  this
           Appellant riddled with inconsistency and implausibility.  I find
           that he has not been truthful about what he has said.  I do  not
           believe he left  Sri  Lanka  because  he  was  in  fear  of  the
           authorities or that the LTTE were interested in him.  He has not
           shown that he would of interest to either on return."


  8. Finally, the Adjudicator considered whether there was anything in  the
     background material which would  have  prevented  the  return  of  the
     Appellant to Sri Lanka.

  9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Tribunal against that
     determination.  The grounds of appeal, which raised a number of points
     of criticism of the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  the  evidence,  were
     supported by a letter dated 25th September  2003  from  a  Sri  Lankan
     attorney, Mr G Rajagulendra.  No explanation was provided  as  to  how
     that letter had come into being.  There was no reference as to whether
     it could have been provided at an earlier stage.

 10. The Vice President refusing leave to appeal on  a  point  of  law,  to
     which his relevant jurisdiction was restricted, criticised the grounds
     of appeal for referring to a case with an  impenetrable  citation  and
     for suggesting that the Tribunal  was  obliged  to  look  at  material
     obtained after the Adjudicator's decision in deciding whether to  give
     permission to appeal.  He said that the  decision  relied  on  clearly
     dated from before the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  grant  leave  was
     restricted to points of law and commented that  it  could  not  be  an
     error of law for an Adjudicator not to consider something which it was
     for a party to put before him, but which the party had failed  to  do.
     He refused permission to appeal.

 11. The Appellant sought Statutory Review  of  that  refusal  and  in  the
     grounds for Statutory Review said that the letter in question had been
     obtained from the  lawyer  "in  light  of  the  Adjudicator's  adverse
     credibility findings on the newspaper report".  In other words, it was
     being asserted that  the  material  had  been  obtained  in  order  to
     criticise credibility findings which had been  made  on  the  evidence
     which the Appellant had chosen to place before the Adjudicator.  Still
     no explanation was provided as to how that letter had come into being,
     nor  reference  to  whether  it  could  have  been  provided  for  the
     Adjudicator to consider.

 12. Silber J reversed the decision of the Tribunal.  However, he did so on
     the basis that the Tribunal should have considered  the  admissibility
     of the letter from Mr Rajagulendra in order to determine if permission
     to appeal should have been  granted.   He  required  the  Tribunal  to
     reconsider the application for leave to appeal and to consider whether
     to admit the letter.  It is plain  that  Silber  J,  in  reaching  the
     decision he did, was under the misapprehension that the effect of  the
     Order which he made  would  simply  be  to  require  the  Tribunal  to
     reconsider whether or not to grant leave to appeal.  That  would  have
     been the position in relation to an application for  Judicial  Review.
     It is not the position in relation to Statutory Review.  The effect of
     his decision, although not his intent, was that leave to appeal to the
     Tribunal was in fact granted.

 13. The matter then came before  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the
     appeal should be allowed on the basis of  the  various  matters  which
     have been raised in the grounds of appeal including  the  question  of
     the admissibility of the letter upon  which  the  Appellant  seeks  to
     rely.  We emphasise, however, in considering these  matters  that  the
     appeal is brought, not on fact but on a point of law.

 14. We first examined, however, the compliance of the Appellant  with  the
     Tribunal's Rules.  Rule 21  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
     (Procedure) Rules 2003 deals with what an  Appellant  must  do  if  he
     seeks to persuade the Tribunal to admit new  evidence  which  was  not
     before the Adjudicator.  Rule 21(2) provides that the party must  file
     with the Appellate Authority and serve  on  the  other  party  written
     notice to the effect that he is going to ask the Tribunal to  consider
     that new evidence.  That  notice  must  indicate  the  nature  of  the
     evidence and, importantly, explain why it was  not  submitted  to  the
     Adjudicator.

 15. The Appellant did not comply with the requirements of that  Rule.   Ms
     Gandhi said that the solicitors may have thought that the inclusion of
     the brief reference to the evidence in the application  for  Statutory
     Review sufficed for compliance with that Rule.  It does  not.   It  is
     necessary, if leave to appeal is granted upon  Statutory  Review,  for
     the requirements of Rule 21 to be met.  The explanation  proffered  as
     to why it was not submitted to the Adjudicator was that  the  evidence
     was only submitted in order  to  deal  with  the  adverse  credibility
     findings.  That cannot be an explanation within the  contemplation  of
     the Rules.  What is required in those circumstances to  constitute  an
     explanation is why material which was  available  beforehand  was  not
     sought, obtained and presented beforehand.  The  relevant  explanation
     is not concerned with the tactical way in which an appellant seeks  to
     organise an appeal, providing such evidence as he thinks necessary and
     then when unsuccessful, serving further evidence on an appeal.

 16. Ms Gandhi realistically accepted that, notwithstanding the  number  of
     points which had been raised in her Notice of Appeal  and  application
     for  Statutory  Review,  she  would  be  unable   to   criticise   the
     Adjudicator's determination in such a way to suggest that it showed an
     error of law unless she were able to persuade the  Tribunal  to  admit
     the letter from Mr Rajagulendra.

 17. The approach which the Tribunal should adopt to the  admissibility  of
     new evidence is considerably assisted in relation to  a  case  falling
     under the 2003 Rules by the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  on  the
     1999 Rules in E v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]
     EWCA Civ 49.

           "92.  In relation to the role of the IAT, we have concluded
                 i)    The Tribunal  remained  seized  of  the  appeal,  and
                       therefore able to take account of  new  evidence,  up
                       until  the  time  when  the  decision  was   formally
                       notified to the parties;
                 ii)   Following the decision, when it was  considering  the
                       applications for leave to appeal to  this  Court,  it
                       had a discretion to direct a re-hearing;  this  power
                       was not dependent on its finding an arguable error of
                       law in its original decision.
                 iii)  However, in exercising such discretion, the principle
                       of finality would be important. To justify  reopening
                       the case, the IAT would normally need to be satisfied
                       that there was a risk of serious  injustice,  because
                       of something which had gone wrong at the hearing,  or
                       some important evidence which  had  been  overlooked;
                       and in considering whether to admit new evidence,  it
                       should be  guided  by  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles,
                       subject to any exceptional factors.
                 We should emphasise that this  analysis  is  based  on  the
                 regime applicable to this case, under which  the  right  of
                 appeal to the IAT was not confined to issues of law (before
                 the change made by the 2002 Act, s 101: see para 17 above).


           93.   Applying those principles to the present cases, the actual
                 reasons given by the IAT for refusing to consider  the  new
                 evidence were erroneous in law. We understand its desire on
                 practical grounds to confine the evidence to that  produced
                 at the hearing. However, where, as in these cases, there is
                 substantial  delay  before  the  decision  is  issued,  new
                 evidence may emerge  which  undermines  the  basis  of  the
                 conclusions reached  at  the  hearing.  If  so,  it  cannot
                 automatically be excluded, where justice requires it to  be
                 taken into account."


 18. Paragraph 23 sets out the Ladd v Marshall principles:


           "23.  ii)   New evidence  will  normally  be  admitted  only  in
                 accordance with 'Ladd v Marshall principles'  (see  Ladd  v
                 Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489), applied with  some  additional
                 flexibility under the CPR  (see  Hertfordshire  Investments
                 Ltd v Bubb  [2000]  1  WLR  2318,  2325;  White  Book  para
                 52.11.2). The Ladd v Marshall principles are,  in  summary:
                 first, that the fresh evidence could not have been obtained
                 with reasonable diligence for use at the  trial;  secondly,
                 that if given, it probably  would  have  had  an  important
                 influence  on  the  result;  and,  thirdly,  that   it   is
                 apparently    credible     although     not     necessarily
                 incontrovertible. As a general  rule,  the  fact  that  the
                 failure to adduce the evidence  was  that  of  the  party's
                 legal advisers provides no excuse: see  Al-Mehdawi  v  Home
                 Secretary [1990] 1AC 876."

 19. Ms Gandhi very frankly accepted that the evidence  in  question  could
     have been made available with reasonable diligence to the Adjudicator.
      Nonetheless, as E makes clear, it is not the end of the case that the
     evidence fails the Ladd v Marshall test.  There may  be  circumstances
     in which  evidence  which  fails  that  test  may  be  admitted  where
     exceptionally the interests of justice so require.  One of the matters
     which it is important to consider  in  that  context  is  whether  the
     evidence is, on the face of it, credible and supportive  of  what  the
     Appellant has been saying, but which has been  rejected.   Of  course,
     different considerations will apply where the new evidence consists of
     evidence  as  to  changes  in  background  conditions   following   an
     Adjudicator's determination or a change in personal circumstances, for
     example in an Article 8 case.

 20. The Tribunal  emphasises,  however,  in  view  of  the  importance  of
     finality in decision making, that it is wholly appropriate  for  those
     granting permission to appeal, and we would respectfully say for those
     considering Statutory Review applications, to be very  cautious  about
     endorsing any practice which would enable somebody who is dissatisfied
     with the credibility findings of an Adjudicator to seek out a piece of
     further evidence with which to take issue with those  findings,  where
     that evidence could,  as  in  this  case,  have  been  made  available
     beforehand.

 21. We turn, however, to examine the document which has been provided.  We
     observe first of all that there is  no  explanation  as  to  how  this
     document came into  being,  as  to  what  exchanges  brought  it  into
     existence.  Ms Gandhi told us that she had been instructed that  after
     receipt of the Adjudicator's determination, her solicitors had written
     to Mr Rajagulendra and the upshot was this letter in reply.   She  had
     not yet received the letter which her solicitors wrote.  There  is  no
     explanation in any material  provided  by  the  Appellant  as  to  his
     relationship to Mr Rajagulendra.  Indeed,  it  appears  from  all  the
     material that Mr Rajagulendra features for the first time only in this
     letter which has been produced after the Adjudicator's determination.

 22. That, by itself, is sufficient to raise very considerable doubts as to
     the value which could be placed  upon  such  a  document.   One  would
     normally expect the provenance of the  document  to  be  very  clearly
     explained and the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  new
     evidence to be expressed clearly.

 23. However, the document itself gives considerable cause for doubt as  to
     its truthfulness.  The essential feature of it is that it is  intended
     to support the Appellant's contention that he was taken  into  custody
     by a security unit of the police and that while he was  there  he  was
     tortured and that he had been subsequently able to escape and that his
     photographs have been displayed on wanted lists.  It  also  says  that
     the basis of his being taken into custody was an alleged conspiracy to
     kill the President of Sri Lanka.  However, as the Adjudicator  pointed
     out, there had been no reference to the Appellant  being  involved  in
     any such assassination plot when the Appellant  was  originally  asked
     about his asylum claim.  It was only later that he remembered that  he
     had been involved in a plot to assassinate the  Prime  Minister.   The
     Adjudicator, understandably, did not regard as credible the idea  that
     the Appellant, if taken into  custody  on  suspicion  of  having  been
     involved in that plot, would not have had that at the forefront of his
     mind when asked about his involvement with the LTTE and  his  fear  of
     the authorities.  It fitted implausibly  with  the  Appellant's  later
     residence in government-controlled areas.  The document  suffers  from
     the inherent incredibility of the story it purports to support.

 24. It is very surprising, if Mr Rajagulendra did visit the  Appellant  in
     custody, that he was able to do so  where  the  security  policy  were
     detaining him,  very  shortly  after  he  had  been  tortured  and  in
     circumstances where the effects of that torture were readily visible.

 25. Even more surprising is the fact that the  Appellant,  when  asked  at
     interview  (Q  35)  whether  he   had   been   provided   with   legal
     representation for his trial in Sri Lanka, replied that he had had  no
     chance  to  obtain  a  solicitor.   No  mention   was   made   of   Mr
     Rajagulendra's purported visit.  (The reference to a lawyer earlier is
     to an English lawyer in the United  Kingdom.)   This  lawyer  and  his
     visit was not even mentioned to the Adjudicator.

 26. Mr Rajagulendra's letter is vehement as to the  Appellant's  notoriety
     and risk - yet the Appellant, on his claim, was sentenced  (if  tried)
     to no more than a year's imprisonment, was loosely guarded,  lived  in
     government-controlled  areas  after  his  escape,  and  had  his   own
     photograph in his passport when he left.  None of this is even touched
     on.  Ms Gandhi said that if this letter was admitted, the error of law
     which  it  would  enable  her  to  show  was  that  the  Adjudicator's
     credibility findings were perverse, or, when pressed as to the realism
     of that, "something along those lines".

 27. We decline to admit this evidence.  The Rules were not complied  with.
     No explanation has been offered as to its production or why it was not
     sought earlier.  The explanation that it was not necessary to  produce
     further  evidence  until  the  appeal  was  dismissed  is   a   wholly
     unsatisfactory explanation;  the Tribunal will not regard this sort of
     tactic as a basis for reopening findings of fact or credibility.

 28. The Appellant's credibility was plainly at issue from the Secretary of
     State's letter of refusal.   All  relevant  evidence  which  could  be
     obtained with reasonable diligence should have  been  obtained.   This
     could have been obtained.  There are no grounds for an exception being
     made so as to admit it.  Far from assisting the Adjudicator's findings
     to be undermined, the contents of the  document  and  the  manner  and
     timing  of  its  production  reinforce  her  conclusions  as  to   the
     Appellant's lack of credibility.

 29. This appeal is dismissed.   It  is  reported  as  an  example  of  the
     application of E to the 2003 Rules.

















                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


