



                         FZ (Fingerprint evidence) Afghanistan [2004]
                                                             UKIAT 00304 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 19 October 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:

                    Before                    19/11/2004
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                             Mr J J B Nicholson
                               Mrs D E Taylor

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr Shafiq of Molesworths Bright Clegg
For the Respondent:          Miss L Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Fingerprint evidence produced by the Respondent should be assessed  as  part
of the evidence in the  case  as  a  whole.   It  should  not  be  taken  in
isolation.  Not all fingerprint evidence is of equal weight.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   He  appeals,  with
     permission, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr K S Levin,
     dismissing on asylum and human rights grounds his appeal  against  the
     decision of the Respondent on 13 May 2003 to give directions  for  his
     removal as an illegal entrant having refused asylum.

  2.  The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  had  suffered
     difficulties in Afghanistan amounting, in  his  view,  to  persecution
     from  about  the  end  of  2001  onwards.   As  a  result   of   those
     difficulties, he travelled to Iran where he stayed for  two  or  three
     days, and then travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  where  he  arrived
     illegally on 28 August 2002.  That, as we say, was the  basis  of  his
     claim as put and we should say at this point that, in  elaboration  of
     those facts, he emphasised that he had not  previously  left  his  own
     country.

  3. When the matter came before the Adjudicator,  there  was  produced  at
     very short notice a certain  amount  of  material  on  behalf  of  the
     Respondent which was said to demonstrate that the Appellant had indeed
     previously left Afghanistan and had in fact claimed asylum in Germany.
       On  the  production  of  that  material,  there  was,  we  find,  no
     application for an adjournment  but  the  Appellant  was  specifically
     asked whether it was  right  to  say  that  he  had  been  in  Germany
     previously.   He  positively  denied  it.   The  Adjudicator,  in  his
     determination, assessed the oral evidence  before  him  and  concluded
     that the Appellant had not been telling the truth.

  4. The Adjudicator then went on to consider what the position would be if
     the Appellant's story were indeed to be regarded as credible,  and  he
     found that in that case too the appeal would fail because, taking  the
     Appellant's story at its best, it was not  one  which  demonstrated  a
     well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason or any reason
     to show that, if returned  to  Afghanistan,  the  Appellant  would  be
     subject to treatment that would breach Article 2 or Article 3  of  the
     European Convention on Human Rights.

  5. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal relate particularly to  the  way
     in which the Adjudicator dealt with the fingerprint evidence.  At this
     point, we should indicate with some precision what that evidence  was.
     It consisted of three pages and a covering letter.   One  page  was  a
     photocopy of the Appellant's fingerprints as they were  taken  in  the
     United Kingdom.  A second page was a letter,  apparently  accompanying
     those fingerprints, with a  request  to  the  authorities  in  Germany
     asking whether the person who had  those  fingerprints  was  known  in
     Germany.  The third page is a form apparently filled in on  behalf  of
     the Germany Refugee Agency, indicating that the Appellant was a person
     who had arrived in Germany and applied for asylum on 30  August  2001,
     stating that his name was Fazel Jan and that his date of birth  was  1
     October 1971.  That form was completed on 12 February 2003 and, as  we
     have indicated, was produced to the Adjudicator only  at  the  hearing
     which took place on 28 July 2003.

  6. The  Adjudicator  clearly  took  that  evidence  very  seriously.   He
     mentioned it in paragraph 13 of his determination.  He indicated there
     the reason why fingerprints are taken in many European  countries  and
     concluded, at the end of paragraph 13:

           "In such circumstances, I am satisfied to the required  standard
           of proof that the Appellant in this case applied for  asylum  in
           Germany on 30 August 2001 in the name of Fazel Jan and that  his
           application for asylum in Germany was finished on  18  May  2002
           and that his application was unsuccessful."


  7. Having reached that conclusion, the Adjudicator went on as follows:

           "14.  At the  hearing  before  me  the  Appellant  under  cross-
                 examination from  the  Respondent's  representative  denied
                 categorically that  he  had  ever  applied  for  asylum  to
                 Germany or for that matter that he had ever knowingly  been
                 to  Germany.   Under   cross-examination,   the   Appellant
                 maintained that he had never been out of Afghanistan  prior
                 to fleeing to the United Kingdom in August 2002.  Moreover,
                 the Appellant in his two Witness Statements and in his  SEF
                 interview makes no mention whatsoever of ever  having  been
                 in Germany or of having made an application for  asylum  in
                 that country.  In the face of the fingerprint evidence from
                 the Germany immigration authorities which  I  have  already
                 found to be reliable evidence,  I  reject  the  Appellant's
                 evidence that he has never been to  Germany.   I  therefore
                 reach the conclusion that the  Appellant  has  deliberately
                 lied to me in evidence.  That finding inevitably taints the
                 credibility of the whole of the Appellant's evidence and it
                 follows from that finding that I am unable  to  accept  the
                 credibility of his claim to have been targeted by  both  of
                 the  rival  warlords  in  his  home  area  and   by   their
                 supporters."

  8.  We  are  entirely  persuaded  that  those  two  paragraphs   of   the
     Adjudicator's determination  reveal  what  we  must  categorise  as  a
     serious error of law in the assessment of the evidence that was before
     the Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator had before him documentary and  oral
     evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant, some of which went to  an
     assertion that the Appellant had not previously left Afghanistan.   He
     had,  on  the  other  hand,  documentary  evidence  produced  by   the
     Respondent which tended  to  assert  that  the  Appellant  had  indeed
     previously left Afghanistan.  In our view, it was quite wrong for  the
     Adjudicator first to reach a conclusion  on  the  credibility  of  the
     fingerprint evidence in  isolation,  and  then  view  the  Appellant's
     evidence solely in the light  of  that  conclusion.   It  is  a  trite
     observation that evidence needs  to  be  assessed  as  a  whole.   The
     Adjudicator should, in our view, have balanced  the  evidence  of  the
     Appellant against the evidence of the Respondent and reached  whatever
     conclusion he thought appropriate as a result of that balance.

  9. This was a case where there was clear, direct oral  evidence  (whether
     true or not) on the one side, and what may be regarded as rather  thin
     documentary evidence on the other side.  We do not say that, in  those
     circumstances, it would not have been proper for  the  Adjudicator  to
     reach the view that he preferred the evidence adduced on behalf of the
     Respondent to that of the Appellant.  But what is clear  is  that  the
     weaker the evidence which the Respondent adduces, the more  likely  it
     is that an Adjudicator, undertaking  a  proper  balancing  process  in
     deciding which evidence is worthy of credit and which is not, is going
     to rely on the evidence of an oral witness before him rather than that
     of documents.

 10. In the present case, as we have indicated, there was no indication  of
     an expert assessment of the fingerprints  or  their  comparison.   The
     Adjudicator did not have the advantage of seeing a  photocopy  of  the
     fingerprints on the German database.  Further material which Mrs Singh
     has shown us indicates that the  evidence  adduced  from  Germany  may
     itself have been second-hand.   We  do  not  wish  to  lay  down  what
     fingerprint evidence should consist of.  We  only  wish  to  emphasise
     that it is for Adjudicators to determine whether the evidence which is
     before them is sufficient to show what the Respondent  asserts:   that
     is to say, that there is no reasonable likelihood that the Appellant's
     story is true.

 11. For that  reason,  we  agree  that  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of
     credibility was seriously flawed.  If the Adjudicator's  determination
     had depended on that assessment, we should have had no  hesitation  in
     remitting this appeal for rehearing.  But, as we have  indicated,  the
     Adjudicator went on, very properly in our view, to consider  what  the
     position would be if the Appellant's story were indeed the truth.

 12. Mr Shafiq has urged  us  to  take  the  view  that  the  Adjudicator's
     treatment of the  fingerprint  evidence  and,  in  that  context,  his
     disdain of the oral evidence, should  be  regarded  as  infecting  the
     whole of his  determination  with  an  apparent  injustice.   We  have
     considered that ground most earnestly, but we are not  persuaded  that
     it is a proper basis  for  setting  aside  the  determination  in  the
     present case.

 13. The Adjudicator asserts that he is looking at the matter on the  basis
     that the Appellant's story is credible.  He goes on  to  consider,  in
     some detail, the objective evidence that was before him.  Nothing that
     is before us today suggests that the views that he reached  are  views
     either that were not open to him, or that he would not have reached if
     he had not had the  view  that  he  did  have  about  the  Appellant's
     credibility.

 14. For those reasons, it appears to us that the  Adjudicator's  judgement
     to the effect that even if the Appellant's story  were  the  truth  he
     would have not succeeded in his claim is a judgement which must stand.
      For that reason, despite our very serious concerns about the  process
     by which the Adjudicator  reached  his  findings  of  credibility,  we
     dismiss this appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
