
      DM (Proportionality - Article 8) Croatia * [2004] UKIAT 00024
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 9th December 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                       ..12/02/2004.........................

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                               Mr P R Moulden
                                 Mr P R Lane

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr P Nathan, instructed by Sutovic and
                 Hartigan
For the Respondent:          Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M  E
     Taylor, who, by  a  determination  promulgated  on  28th  March  2003,
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds from the decision of the Secretary of State refusing his claim
     and directing his removal to Croatia in a letter of 24th January 2002.
      The Appellant is a Croatian citizen, an  ethnic  Serb,  from  Eastern
     Slavonia, who was born on 6th March 1981 and applied for asylum on his
     arrival in the United Kingdom on 24th October 1999.

  2. The Adjudicator heard evidence to the effect that  the  Appellant  was
     harassed in Croatia, subjected to threats and frightened  of  carrying
     out military service because of his ethnicity and his moral principles
     about serving in the Croatian Army as a Serb.  The Adjudicator did not
     accept the asylum claim.  He took  the  view  that,  in  reality,  the
     evidence of the Appellant had  been  embellished  and  exaggerated  in
     relation to his treatment and in part had been  untruthful.   He  said
     that he did not think the Appellant was of any interest to the police,
     that he had never been interviewed by them, and that no  interest  had
     been shown when he obtained a passport or when he  left  the  country.
     The incidents to which he referred were of a relatively  minor  nature
     and there never had been a physical  attack  on  the  Appellant.   The
     Adjudicator said that he  was  satisfied  that  the  main  reason  the
     Appellant left Croatia was to avoid being drafted into the Army.   The
     Adjudicator noted that his brother had served in the Army and a number
     of his Serb friends from the same village presently were serving.

  3. The Adjudicator was satisfied that the Appellant would not suffer ill-
     treatment in breach of Article 3 or  persecution  if  he  were  to  be
     returned  and  undertook  his  military  service.    The   Adjudicator
     considered the position in relation to those matters in the  light  of
     the Tribunal decision in SK [2002] UKIAT 05613.

  4. Although a challenge was raised in the grounds of appeal  against  the
     Adjudicator's decision on asylum and Article 3 grounds,  the  Tribunal
     refused permission to appeal on those grounds.  It granted  permission
     on only one ground, which is the sole ground which  is  being  pursued
     before it. This is related to Article 8 ECHR and to the effect of  the
     decision of the Court of Appeal in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233  on  what
     was said to have been the delay between the making of the asylum claim
     and the Secretary of State's decision on it.  As  we  have  said,  the
     claim for asylum was made on 24th October 1999 but the refusal  letter
     was not produced until 24th January 2002,  something  over  two  years
     later.

  5. The Appellant's evidence, relevant to this ground, was  summarised  by
     the Adjudicator in paragraph 11:

           "The Appellant says that he has settled in the  United  Kingdom.
           The Appellant is now married, lives in rented accommodation  and
           has been working for  the  last  two  and  a  half  years.   The
           Appellant states he met his wife at Christmas  2001,  started  a
           relationship in January 2002 and  married  her  just  after  she
           attained 16, with the consent of  her  mother,  on  24th  August
           2002.  The Appellant says his wife could not  leave  the  United
           Kingdom because her family is here and that  she  would  not  be
           able to go to Croatia as she cannot speak the language."


      It was submitted to the Adjudicator, and accepted by him in the  light
      of the decision in SK, that it was proper for the Adjudicator to  take
      that marriage into account when considering whether return to  Croatia
      would breach any Article 8 ECHR rights.  When the Secretary  of  State
      rejected the Appellant's claim in January 2002, he had done so on  the
      basis that the Appellant was not married, as  was  the  case  at  that
      time.  The Secretary of State simply said that he  was  not  satisfied
      that the removal of the Appellant would  be  contrary  to  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR.  There was no explicit reference
      to proportionality, and no obvious reason why there should have been.

  6. The Appellant said  that  the  relationship  had  started  before  the
     Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum  and
     submitted that there would be insurmountable obstacles in the  way  of
     his very young wife  going  to  Croatia  and  therefore  it  would  be
     disproportionate for him to be returned.  She was  young;   she  could
     not speak the language;  the economic situation was deplorable and  it
     was said that she would  be  discriminated  against  because  she  was
     married to a Serb.  The Appellant also said that as his  passport  had
     expired and for other reasons, there would be an inordinate  delay  in
     his obtaining entry clearance and in any event there was a  risk  that
     an application would fail as his wife would not be able to satisfy the
     maintenance test in the Immigration Rules.

  7. The Adjudicator said, in paragraph 27:

           "I am satisfied that the Appellant married Roxanne White on 24th
           August 2002.  I have heard evidence from Roxanne  and  have  had
           sight of the original marriage certificate."


      We read that paragraph as accepting that there was an actual marriage.
       The Adjudicator later expressed reservations,  in  the  circumstances
      perfectly understandably, about whether the marriage  was  in  fact  a
      genuine marriage.  He said, in paragraph 33:


           "Although I  am  satisfied  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  live
           together in rented accommodation, it has not been proved to  the
           required standard that their relationship is that of  a  closely
           married couple.  I noted that the  Appellant,  at  the  hearing,
           believed his wife was still attending a hairdressing college yet
           the Appellant's wife stated that she had left  the  hairdressing
           college  in  November  2002.   I  have  also  noted   that   the
           Appellant's wife was only 15 years old when they met  and  would
           have been quite impressionable and they appeared to have married
           in undue haste.  I have, as previously indicated, not found  the
           Appellant to be totally truthful and has exaggerated his  claims
           and have no doubt that the speed in  which  he  married  was  in
           order to remain in the United Kingdom."


  8. The Adjudicator recognised that there would be  an  interference  with
     Article 8 rights if the Appellant were returned to Croatia;   he  said
     that the wife had ruled out the first option of accompanying  him  for
     the reasons which we have already adverted to, but had said  that  she
     would support an application for entry  clearance  by  the  Appellant.
     The Adjudicator then considered whether the return of the Appellant to
     Croatia would be disproportionate in the light of the  lawfulness  and
     necessity for the  proper  control  of  immigration  in  a  democratic
     society.  He pointed out  that  the  Appellant  became  aware  of  the
     refusal of asylum very shortly after the  relationship  had  commenced
     and at a time when the wife-to-be was just over 15�.  If  her  husband
     returned to Croatia, she would move in with her family nearby.  In the
     light of all that, the Adjudicator concluded  that  it  would  not  be
     disproportionate for the Appellant to return to Croatia and  concluded
     that there were no insurmountable obstacles to prevent an  application
     being made for entry as a  spouse.   He  thought  there  would  be  no
     difficulty in obtaining a passport.  He concluded by saying:

           "I believe if the Appellant seeks to apply for  entry  into  the
           United Kingdom it will test his commitment to the  marriage  and
           indicate whether the marriage was for the purpose of settling in
           the United Kingdom."


  9. Events had moved on by the time the appeal came before  the  Tribunal.
     There was a further statement from Roxanne Mikac, the wife, dated 24th
     October 2003.  In it she said, as was obvious from her  appearance  in
     front of us, that she was pregnant.  She said in this statement, which
     without opposition from the Respondent we admitted, that on  1st  June
     2003, the very date upon which permission to appeal was  granted,  she
     learned that she had become pregnant.  She said "we did  not  plan  to
     have a family so soon.  We wanted to wait until  Dragan's  immigration
     case was resolved ... ."  Because of the pregnancy, they moved out  of
     the accommodation they had been occupying and moved into her  parents'
     home in August.  She referred to the  support  that  her  parents  had
     offered both of them.  She emphasised that her  husband  worked  full-
     time and supported her.  She earned some money part-time herself.  She
     thought that she would not be able to cope financially without him  or
     in other ways and said that their lives would be severely disrupted.

 10. Like the Adjudicator, we accept that the decision in SK obliges us  to
     look at the application of Article 8 in the light of circumstances  as
     they now are and that we are not confined to  examining  circumstances
     as they were at the time of the Secretary of State's decision.

 11. Fundamental to the Appellant's case in relation to Article 8 before us
     was the contention that there had been a delay  by  the  Secretary  of
     State in his decision-making process, which delay  was  a  significant
     factor  in  making  the   return   of   the   Appellant   to   Croatia
     disproportionate.  It was said that this delay had  been  unreasonable
     and had deprived the Appellant of the opportunity of having his asylum
     claim determined in line with a then  favourable  policy.   Mr  Nathan
     relied upon Bulletin 2/99 from the Home Office which set out advice to
     caseworkers in relation to Serb issues.  That advice said:

           "There is no 'group policy' towards Serbian asylum seekers  from
           Croatia and so each case is determined on its own merit.


           The general presumption is that Serbs (or  those  with  a  mixed
           Serbian background through parents or marriage)  from  the  war-
           affected areas of Eastern  Slavonia,  Baranja  &  Sirmium;   the
           Krajina and Western Slavonia, may  be  able  to  substantiate  a
           claim to asylum on the grounds of their ethnicity."


      Mr Nathan drew attention to the fact that  another  seemingly  earlier
      version of  the  advice  said  that  such  Serbs  "will"  be  able  to
      substantiate a claim rather than  "may"  be  able  to  substantiate  a
      claim.  He submitted that, in any event, the effect of the change  was
      not significant, read properly.


 11. Shortly after the  Appellant's  claim  was  made,  Bulletin  4/99  was
     produced which, in slightly different language, said something  fairly
     similar:

           "While not every case of an ethnic Serb will meet the Convention
           criteria, caseworkers should be aware  that  the  likelihood  is
           that many ethnic Serbs will be able to make a  case  for  asylum
           under the Convention and each application  should  therefore  be
           considered very carefully before reaching a decision."


 12. Mr Nathan emphasised the legitimacy of the arrival of the Appellant in
     1999 in the sense that  he  arrived  with  what  was  at  the  time  a
     legitimate claim to asylum.  Mr Nathan prayed in aid the  decision  of
     the Court of Appeal in  Shala  v  SSHD.   He  submitted  that  it  was
     relevant to consider the effect of the time taken by the Secretary  of
     State to reach his decision and the consequences which the  delay  had
     had on the prospects of the  Appellant  receiving  the  benefit  of  a
     policy or an expectation.  The Court of Appeal concluded that delay by
     the Home Office in determining the application of Shala  had  deprived
     him of the advantage of making an application  for  variation  in  his
     leave from within the United Kingdom.  This ought to  have  gone  into
     the balance in considering proportionality, because it was unfair  for
     the balancing exercise to  be  conducted  "without  any  weight  being
     attached to the fact that the policy being put into one  side  of  the
     scales would not have been applicable at all but for the delay on  the
     part of the Home Office", Keene LJ at paragraph  16.   It  was  unfair
     that the Appellant in that case should suffer because  of  uncertainty
     arising not from his fault but from the Home Office's  failings.   The
     Home Office's concern was that  allowing  Shala  to  apply  in-country
     would encourage others to exploit the established procedures, but  the
     Court of Appeal concluded that it would be clearly disproportionate in
     the circumstances of that case to require that Appellant to leave  the
     United Kingdom and apply from Kosovo.

 13. Those factors in  that  case  were  seen  as  militating  against  the
     application of facets of the approach to this sort of problem set  out
     in R v SSHD ex parte Mahmood [2000] EWCA Civ 315, [2001] 1WLR 840,  in
     which, at paragraph 55(i)-(vi), a number  of  aspects  were  discussed
     including:

        "(ii)          that Article 8 did not impose on a state any general
                 obligation to respect the choice of residence of a  married
                 couple;
            iii) that removal or exclusion of one family member from a state
                 where other members of the  family  are  lawfully  resident
                 would not necessarily  infringe  Article  8  provided  that
                 there are no insurmountable obstacles to the family  living
                 together in the country of  origin  of  the  family  member
                 excluded, even where this involves a degree of hardship for
                 some or all members of the family;
             iv) Article 8 is likely to be violated by the  expulsion  of  a
                 member of a family that  has  been  long-established  in  a
                 state  if  the  circumstances  are  such  that  it  is  not
                 reasonable to expect the other members  of  the  family  to
                 follow that member expelled;
              v) knowledge on the part of one spouse at the time of marriage
                 that rights of residence  of  the  other  were  precarious,
                 militates against the finding that an order  excluding  the
                 latter spouse  violates  Article  8.   Nonetheless  whether
                 interference  with  family  rights  was  justified  in  the
                 interests of controlling immigration depended on the  facts
                 of the particular cases and the circumstances prevailing in
                 the state whose action is impugned."


 14. Mr Nathan submitted that there were two  aspects  to  the  Appellant's
     rights under Article 8 ECHR which would  be  interfered  with  by  his
     removal and in respect of which  the  circumstances  showed  that  the
     interference would be disproportionate.  He had a private  life  which
     comprised his job as a fork lift truck operator, but  he  also  had  a
     family life, based on the marriage which post-dated the  Secretary  of
     State's decision, which now included the  pregnancy  which  post-dated
     the Adjudicator's decision.  It was anticipated that the baby would be
     born on the 2nd February 2004.

 15. He also submitted that relevant factors to go into  the  balance  were
     that the Appellant's  wife  would  not  wish  to  go  to  Croatia  for
     perfectly understandable reasons.  It would be harsh in the extreme to
     expect her to go and that  amounted  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle.
     There was, he said, no justification in inflicting misery to avoid the
     impression of someone jumping the queue.  The Appellant would have  to
     do military service which would be an additional misery factor leading
     to a disproportionate and lengthy separation.

The approach to determining proportionality

 16. It was submitted by Mr Nathan and by Mr Phillips for the Secretary  of
     State that where the Secretary of State has not considered  the  issue
     of proportionality in relation to Article 8, whether as  here  because
     he did not think it was engaged or because, as again is  the  position
     here, circumstances have changed before the Adjudicator  or  Tribunal,
     it was for the Adjudicator and for the Tribunal on  appeal  to  decide
     for itself whether removal of the Appellant would be disproportionate.
      We had no power to remit the matter to the Secretary of State for him
     to reach any conclusion on it.  Neither sought that the appeal  should
     be dismissed in order that the matter be placed before  the  Secretary
     of State for his consideration of any issue of proportionality in  the
     light of the particular facts as they now turned out.

 17. Mr Nathan supported his approach by citing a passage from the judgment
     of Dyson LJ in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 840, [2003] INLR 543.
      At paragraph 41, Dyson LJ said:

           "Where the essential facts  found  by  the  adjudicator  are  so
           fundamentally different from those determined by  the  Secretary
           of State as substantially to undermine the factual basis of  the
           balancing exercise performed by him, it may  be  impossible  for
           the  adjudicator  to   determine   whether   the   decision   is
           proportionate otherwise  than  by  carrying  out  the  balancing
           exercise himself.  Even  in  such  a  case,  when  it  comes  to
           deciding how much weight to give to the policy of maintaining an
           effective immigration policy, the adjudicator  should  pay  very
           considerable deference to the view of the Secretary of State  as
           to the importance  of  maintaining  such  a  policy.   There  is
           obviously a conceptual difference between (a)  deciding  whether
           the decision of the Secretary of State was within the  range  of
           reasonable responses;  and (b) deciding whether the decision was
           proportionate (paying deference to the Secretary of State so far
           as is possible).  In the light of Edore v Secretary of State for
           the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 716, INLR 361, we would hold
           that the correct approach is (a) in all cases except where  this
           is impossible because of the factual basis of  the  decision  of
           the Secretary of State has been substantially undermined by  the
           findings of the adjudicator.  Where (a) is impossible, then  the
           correct approach is (b).  But we doubt whether, in practice, the
           application of the two approaches will often lead  to  different
           outcomes."


 18. Dyson LJ, in the passage to which we have referred, was  probably  not
     addressing the issue which arises here.  He  was  addressing  the  not
     uncommon  problem  which  arises  where  an  Adjudicator  finds  facts
     relating to a proportionality issue which  are  different  from  those
     which were the basis for the Secretary of  State's  consideration  and
     conclusion on the issue.  Here,  we  are  concerned  with  changes  of
     circumstance after the Secretary of  State's  decision.   But  it  was
     submitted that the logic of what Dyson LJ said should apply equally to
     this situation.  We are also bound by the starred determined in SK  as
     to the admissibility of  evidence  about  matters  arising  after  the
     Secretary  of   State's   decision   when   considering   Article   8,
     notwithstanding what might  be  thought  the  implicit  limitation  in
     sections 77(3) and (4) of the 1999 Act.  It is a  common  problem  for
     the circumstances which engage Article 8 to evolve over the time after
     the Secretary of State interview and his later decision.

 19. Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 716, [2003] INLR  361,  as  does  Razgar,
     holds, as a general  proposition,  that  the  question  of  whether  a
     decision is proportionate is one where the Tribunal should ask  itself
     whether the decision of the Secretary of State is outside the range of
     responses reasonably open to him;  it should not  reach  decisions  on
     proportionality itself.  But Edore did not have to  grapple  with  the
     problem of a change in the appraisal of  facts  as  a  result  of  the
     appeal to the Adjudicator, let  alone  the  problem  of  a  change  in
     circumstances which could occur at any time.

 20. In Djali v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1371, 16th October 2003, the Court  of
     Appeal again considered the position which arises where the  Secretary
     of State has not taken a decision on the  proportionality  issue.   It
     had not been raised before him;  the question of  Article  8  did  not
     arise until the appeal was before the Adjudicator.   For  that  reason
     the Court did not regard the approach  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision as falling within the Edore principle.  Simon Brown LJ  said,
     at paragraph 24:

           "Although no doubt the Secretary of State at some point  in  the
           course of the appeal proceedings must be taken to  have  decided
           the question  of  proportionality  against  the  appellant,  the
           appeal process itself is necessarily  directed  to  his  earlier
           decision."

      He then said in paragraph 25:


           "I proceed, therefore, on the basis that the Adjudicator and the
           IAT were entitled to reach their own independent conclusions  on
           the  question  of  proportionality  (assuming  always  that  the
           Article 8(2) stage was reached).  Could  they,  on  this  basis,
           reasonably conclude that the interests  of  immigration  control
           did not require the appellant  and  family  to  be  returned  to
           Kosovo?"


     The Court  of  Appeal  reached  the  view  that  the  only  reasonable
     conclusion on proportionality which the Tribunal could reach was  that
     removal was proportionate.  So it did not feature in fact  a  decision
     in respect of  which  two  reasonable  but  different  decisions  were
     possible.  Nor did it suggest that the Court of Appeal, on appeal on a
     point of law, ask itself any question other than whether the  decision
     appealed from was reasonable.

 21. There are two possible approaches where there has been no decision  on
     the new facts by the Secretary of State.  One is to say that it is now
     for  the  judicial  decision-maker  to  make  the   decision,   giving
     appropriate weight to  the  public  need  identified  in  relation  to
     immigration control.  This would be consistent with  the  approach  in
     Razgar in relation to cases where the basis of  factual  appraisal  by
     the Adjudicator is different from the basis relied on by the Secretary
     of State.  This of course may involve material which  was  not  before
     the Secretary of State  but  which  related  to  something  which  had
     happened by the time he made his decision.  It would be very  sensible
     to have the same approach for both the circumstances.   This  is  what
     Djali concludes.

 22. We confess to some unease about the implications of this.  It is plain
     that two reasonable views can be held in many situations about the way
     in which  the  competing  interests  should  be  weighed.   Where  the
     Tribunal  considers  that  there  are  two  reasonable  views,  it  is
     difficult to see how one  can  be  described  as  unlawful.   Yet  its
     jurisdiction to allow an appeal is founded on  the  power  to  hold  a
     decision unlawful, as one which breaches human rights.  Nor can it  be
     said that the Secretary of State's decision is unlawful simply because
     the Secretary of State did not consider the question;  the  issue  may
     not have been raised and the circumstances may later have changed.

 23. An alternative but consistent approach is to  say  that  the  question
     which arises under section 65 is whether the decision of the Secretary
     of State is an act which breaches the Appellant's  rights,  using  the
     language of section 65(5) and (3). This  is  taken  by  the  Court  of
     Appeal and SK to involve consideration of whether the  decision  under
     appeal, essentially that the Appellant can be removed, is unlawful  if
     carried out in the present circumstances.  The  relevant  decision  is
     not as such a decision about  proportionality.   It  is  that  removal
     would not breach his human rights.   If it is said that  there  is  no
     Secretary of State decision about proportionality, it is difficult  to
     see where the jurisdiction  to  deal  with  it  comes  from,  for  the
     Tribunal can only deal with the decision appealed against, but must do
     so in the current circumstances as it finds  them  to  be.   The  real
     question, regardless of whether  the  Secretary  of  State  considered
     proportionality or whether the  relevant  facts  have  been  appraised
     differently or have changed, is whether, at the date of  hearing,  the
     decision that the Appellant can be  removed  is  lawful.   That  means
     asking whether or not  the  decision  that  the  Appellant  should  be
     removed falls outside the range of reasonable responses as to  whether
     removal would be proportionate to the interference with family life.

 24. This reflects the emphasis on the limit of the powers of the  Tribunal
     and Adjudicators which underlay the reasoning of Moses J in Ala  which
     was approved by the Court of Appeal in Edore.  The latter approach has
     the advantage of setting the powers of the Adjudicators  and  Tribunal
     firmly in the context of the statutory powers  which  govern  it;   it
     avoids such judicial bodies having to decide for themselves  how  much
     weight they consider that Government policy should have, at  least  in
     form, and it emphasises that it is not for  such  bodies  to  exercise
     what might appear to  be  an  original  jurisdiction  in  relation  to
     decisions which have not been made.

 25. We consider, however, that in the light of the authorities to which we
     have referred that where a decision on proportionality  has  not  been
     taken by the Secretary of State as here, the Adjudicator is obliged to
     reach his own conclusion on whether removal would be disproportionate.
      The first approach has to be followed.  The Tribunal, if dealing with
     an appeal on a point of law, is only entitled to interfere  with  that
     decision if it is unreasonable,  or fails to follow  the  guidance  of
     the Tribunal or higher authority.  The ability to reach an independent
     conclusion does not belong to each appellate body in turn.

 26. But this does assume that the facts  and  evidence  remain  the  same.
     Where the facts have evolved or have been found to be  different  from
     those  which  formed  the  basis  for  the  Secretary  of   State   or
     Adjudicator's decision, the logic of Djali  and  Razgar  is  that  the
     Tribunal has to reach its own independent judgment on proportionality.

 27. In each case, however, the appellate body has to have  regard  to  the
     interests of immigration control,  and  it  will  usually  be  a  very
     weighty consideration indeed.  In view of the  consistent  recognition
     by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Edore,  Razgar  and  Djali  that   the
     proportionality of removal is essentially a matter for  the  Secretary
     of State within the limits of individually defined reasonableness, the
     two approaches which we have  discussed  should  not  yield  differing
     results, as Dyson LJ expected.  It was a pragmatic aim of enabling the
     decision-making process to proceed which underlay those decisions  and
     not  a  desire  for  the  judiciary  to  determine   how   significant
     immigration control and its procedure was.   The  way  in  which  that
     independent decision is reached must reflect the Secretary of  State's
     primary role in the assessment of proportionality, the fact that it is
     pragmatism which puts the judiciary in  the  position  of  making  the
     assessment in certain circumstances and the judicial expectation  that
     the two sources of assessment would rarely lead to different  answers.
     In our judgment, Adjudicators and the Tribunal should grapple with the
     issue of proportionality in the following way,  so  as  to  achieve  a
     degree of consistency and to recognise the weight to  be  attached  to
     immigration control and the system for its maintenance.

 28. The starting point should be that if in the circumstances the  removal
     could reasonably be regarded as  proportionate,  whether  or  not  the
     Secretary of State has actually said so or applied  his  mind  to  the
     issue, it is lawful.  The  Tribunal  and  Adjudicators  should  regard
     Shala, Edore and Djali  as  providing  clear  exemplification  of  the
     limits of what is lawful and proportionate.  They should normally hold
     that a decision to remove is unlawful only when the  disproportion  is
     so great that no reasonable Secretary of State could remove  in  those
     circumstances.  However, where the Secretary of State,  eg  through  a
     consistent decision-making pattern or through decisions in relation to
     members of the same family, has clearly shown where within  the  range
     of reasonable responses his own assessment  would  lie,  it  would  be
     inappropriate to assess proportionality by reference to a wider  range
     of possible responses than he in fact uses.  It would  otherwise  have
     to be a truly exceptional case, identified and reasoned,  which  would
     justify the conclusion that  the  removal  decision  was  unlawful  by
     reference to an assessment  that  removal  was  within  the  range  of
     reasonable assessments of proportionality.  We cannot think of one  at
     present;  it is simply that we cannot rule it out.  This  decision  is
     starred for what we say about proportionality.

Applying that approach

 29. We deal first with the contentions in relation to  Shala,  recognising
     that the impact of delay on the consideration  of  proportionality  is
     relevant to both private and family life, although the  weight  to  be
     given to it is likely to be very much greater in the  latter  than  in
     the former.

 30. The Court of Appeal in Shala held that  there  were  circumstances  in
     which the delay on the part of the Secretary of State in dealing  with
     the asylum claim was  an  exceptional  feature  which  took  the  case
     outside the significant area of judgment which the courts would  allow
     him in balancing the conflicting interests of the  proper  maintenance
     of immigration control and interference with Article  8  rights.   The
     exceptional feature  in  that  case  was  that  the  Appellant  had  a
     legitimate claim to enter because at that time he would have been  the
     likely beneficiary of the Secretary  of  State's  policy  of  granting
     asylum to ethnic Albanians from Kosovo but  his  claim  had  not  been
     determined for some four years despite his chivvying the Secretary  of
     State for an answer, which was an unreasonably  long  time.   Had  the
     decision been made within a reasonable time, he would have been likely
     to have been granted some form of leave to remain.   This  would  have
     enabled him to make an in-country application for a variation  in  his
     leave to stay as a spouse and the  Secretary  of  State's  policy,  of
     requiring those who had no leave, to apply for entry clearance out  of
     country, would not have applied, and the interference with family life
     would not have occurred.  The  Appellant  in  that  case  had  married
     someone who had  no  connection  with  Kosovo,  who  already  had  two
     children and who had already  been  granted  refugee  status  in  this
     country.  The interference was expected to be temporary and was to  be
     inflicted in order  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  immigration
     control system, to encourage others to abide by it and  to  discourage
     its breach in circumstances where the  asserted  need  to  uphold  the
     system in its vigour and harshness in that particular case, arose from
     the Secretary of State's failure to deal with matters in a  reasonably
     prompt fashion.

 31. There are a number of factors here which make this rather a  different
     case from Shala.  First, there was no equivalent policy in  force,  at
     the time of entry, as the Bulletins 2 and 4/99 make reasonably  clear.
     There was, however, a good prospect that at the time of  entry,  if  a
     decision had been made then, the Appellant  would  have  been  granted
     some form of leave to remain.   We  are  prepared  to  assume  that  a
     Government committed to speedy decision-making could  reasonably  have
     made a decision within a year, by late 2000.  However, we are not in a
     position to say whether the Appellant would have received a favourable
     decision then.  The situation had  changed  in  Croatia.   It  is  not
     possible to say that throughout a reasonable  decision-making  period,
     the Appellant would have had good prospects of a  favourable  decision
     from the Secretary of State.

 32. Second, the Appellant had only just commenced  his  relationship  with
     his  girlfriend,  whose  age  would  have  put  a  legal  bar  on  its
     completeness, when the refusal was issued.  It is not  entirely  clear
     anyway what constituted the  "relationship"  in  early  January  2002.
     Although the relationship flowered into  marriage  shortly  after  the
     wife became 16, it was dependant on parental consent which might  have
     been withheld.  The  consent  was  given  and  the  marriage  ceremony
     occurred, while the Appellant had an appeal pending to the Adjudicator
     against that refusal and all  parties  knew  that  his  situation  was
     precarious.  His wife became pregnant at a time when they did not know
     whether the Appellant would  even  be  granted  permission  to  appeal
     against the adverse Adjudicator's decision.  The sole content  of  his
     private life as opposed to his family life upon which Mr Nathan relied
     was the fact of the Appellant's employment.

 33. The position in which the Appellant finds himself is one  of  his  own
     making;  he was found to be someone who exaggerated and at  one  point
     lied to the Adjudicator.  It would not be an illegitimate inference to
     say that he did what he did to assist an unlikely claim  to  stay,  as
     the Adjudicator found.  This is very different  from  what  faced  the
     Court in Shala.

 34. We conclude that there would be an interference with  family  life  of
     some significance.  After all, the Appellant now  is  married  and  is
     shortly to be a father.  The imminent arrival of the baby supports the
     view that the marriage is genuine, at least from the point of view  of
     the mother-to-be, notwithstanding the wholly understandable doubts  as
     to its durability expressed by the Adjudicator and which  continue  in
     our view.  The interference with the private life of the Appellant  in
     the way suggested by Mr Nathan is of no significance at all.

 35. However, the relationship, whatever precisely may  be  encompassed  by
     that expression in  this  case,  began  but  three  weeks  before  the
     Secretary of State's adverse decision and  cannot  have  attained  any
     real depth by that time.  Even before that, the  Appellant  knew  that
     his position was uncertain and precarious.  After that date,  he  knew
     even more clearly how precarious it was.  The  relationship  developed
     after that date, when both of them, and especially the Appellant, were
     fully aware of the position.  They were married  in  circumstances  of
     exceptional haste.  The baby was  conceived  after  the  Adjudicator's
     decision was promulgated.  It is quite clear that the first, and maybe
     both, of these acts were at least from the Appellant's point  of  view
     intended to assist his otherwise unmeritorious claim to stay -  indeed
     to provide it with a foundation, as the Adjudicator concluded.

 36. Even if that were too severe a judgment,  it  would  be  difficult  to
     avoid the conclusion that a hasty marriage and fatherhood, at  a  time
     when  the  adverse  immigration  position  was  certain  or  obviously
     precarious, would generally enable people to jump  the  queue  and  to
     avoid the normal entry requirements.  This would be to  send  a  quite
     clear message as to how those controls could be evaded.  It  would  be
     all the more troubling if marriage to and fatherhood through the young
     and impressionable were to become the route to the  avoidance  of  the
     normal rules of immigration control.

 37. This is also not a case where the Secretary  of  State's  unreasonable
     delays have deprived the Appellant of the benefit of  the  application
     of a favourable policy.  The family circumstances, as  they  developed
     against the actual chronology of decision-making, are wholly different
     from those in Shala.

 38. We do not accept that  their  family  life  cannot  be  undertaken  in
     Croatia, though the circumstances may be harsh and the  Appellant  may
     have to undertake military service before he can leave.  We apply  the
     Tribunal's guidance in DK v SSHD [2003] UKIAT  00153K  (Croatia).   Mr
     Nathan referred to the more recent electoral success of the  HDZ,  the
     right wing party of  the  former  President  Tudjman.   But  the  same
     material refers to the change in  its  nature  to  become  a  moderate
     conservation party, as had been already observed in  the  material  in
     DK.  Its success was seen as due  to  economic  problems  rather  than
     resurgent nationalism.   Its  leaders  were  moderate.   Some  of  its
     coalition parties were moderates.  There was concern over  the  likely
     inclusion of a neo-fascist group, but one trying  to  distance  itself
     from the Ustashe regime of  the  Second  World  War.   This  does  not
     persuade us that there is a material change in circumstances.

 33. The fact that his wife may not wish to  go  there  for  understandable
     reasons does not mean that she cannot.  Still less does it  mean  that
     they  can  impose  on  the  Respondent  their  choice  of  country  of
     residence, in the light of Mahmood.  After all, she too  knew  of  his
     precarious position, of what he thought the conditions would  be  like
     in Croatia and that she did not speak the language, and has taken  the
     risks with him.  We  are  not  in  a  position  to  say  how  long  an
     application for entry clearance will take, nor how  successful  it  is
     likely to be.  He has some prospects of success in his application but
     his position under the Immigration Rules is not necessarily  clear-cut
     because of the prospect of maintenance from public funds.

 34. There has been a  change  in  circumstances  since  the  Adjudicator's
     decision  and  so  we  are  not  limited  to  deciding   whether   the
     Adjudicator's decision was reasonable, although it plainly was on  the
     material before him.  The decision to remove continues to  involve  no
     breach of  the  Appellant's  human  rights;   it  is  a  proportionate
     response to the interests of immigration control, falling  within  the
     range of reasonable conclusions available to the Secretary  of  State.
     If the decision on  proportionality  is  one  for  us  to  make  on  a
     different basis, we regard the interference with family life  in  this
     case as  proportionate  paying  proper  regard  to  the  interests  of
     immigration control and the due operation of the  system  of  control.
     We  cannot  say  that  a  different  conclusion,  however,  would   be
     unreasonable.  It follows that  we  consider  that  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision does not involve a breach of  the  Appellant's  human
     rights.  The appeal is dismissed.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

