

                              MS (Adjournment Refused) India [2004] UKIAT
00287 | |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                               |                   |
|Date of Hearing:                               |17 September 2004  |
|Date Signed:                                   |14 October 2004    |
|Date Determination Notified:                   |19 October 2004    |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr J Perkins                                                       |
|(Vice President)                                                   |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                     |
|Mr C Thursby                                                       |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|and                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|                     |                                             |
|                     |                                             |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |

|For the Appellant:   |Ms S Ahmad from Ahmad  & Williams Solicitors |
|For the Respondent:  |Mr R Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer  |




The appellant is a citizen of India.  She was born on 13  October  1974  and
so  is  now  twenty  nine  years  old.   She  appeals  the  decision  of  an
Adjudicator, Mr D N Bowen, who in a determination promulgated on 5 December
2003 dismissed her appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
that she was not entitled to refugee status and that removing her  from  the
United Kingdom was not contrary to her rights under the European  Convention
on Human Rights.

It was the appellant's case that he feared persecution or other serious ill-
treatment at the hands of an international  criminal  gang  known  as  Gazie
Baba.  The Adjudicator noted diverse discrepancies in the  various  versions
of the appellant's story  and  found  him  unreliable.   In  any  event  the
Adjudicator found that if the appellant did have any problems he could  have
avoided them by removing to a different part of India.

He dismissed the appeal.

The  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  criticise  the  determination  that   the
Adjudicator prepared except in one respect.  According to the grounds:
   "a valid medical certificate was presented which clearly stated that the
  patient cannot travel and according to  the  instructions  of  the  Chief
  Adjudicator, the Adjudicator should have  taken  into  consideration  the
  medical problems he was having at the time of  his  court  hearing.   The
  Adjudicator by not adjourning the case prejudiced the  appellant's  right
  of giving oral evidence."

The grounds continue:
  2.  The appellant should be given a chance as it is not fair that even on
  presenting a medical certificate no  attention  was  given  to  his  oral
  evidence.  The case should be remitted to another Adjudicator for a  full
  hearing.

The Adjudicator was well aware of the medical evidence.  He had  before  him
a certificate from a General  Medical  Practitioner,  Dr  N  G  Shaffu,  who
practices from an address in Leicester.  The certificate stated:
  This is to certify that [          ] of [an  address  in  Leicester]  was
  under my care from 30 September 2003 to present and has attended  surgery
  on 24 October 2003.  Will need rest for the next three days.

It was signed and dated 24 October 2003.  The medical certificate  is  in  a
form commonly used  by  General  Medical  Practitioners.   It  is  partially
printed and it leaves spaces for the doctor to add comments.  We  note  that
the words "is now  unable/able  to  attend  his/her  occupation"  have  been
struck through.  That clearly required a conscious act.  It is very hard  to
look at that certificate and conclude that the doctor intended a  reader  to
find that the appellant was unable to attend an Immigration Appeal  hearing.
 Mrs Ahmad, who then appeared for the appellant, asked for  the  hearing  to
be  adjourned.   The  Adjudicator  did  not  adjourn   the   hearing.    The
Adjudicator indicated that the report was inadequate.  It did not  say  that
the appellant  was  unfit  to  attend  court.   Mrs  Ahmad  could  not  take
advantage of the opportunity given her to provide better evidence that  day.
 However, she did provide a letter sent  by  facsimile  to  the  Immigration
Appellate Authority on 27 October indicating that  she  had  spoken  to  the
appellant's General Medical Practitioner and  had  been  informed  that  the
appellant had been involved in an accident  a  week  ago  and  had  suffered
injuries.  The  letter  indicates  that  the  General  Medical  Practitioner
attended to the appellant regarding  that  and  also  "to  a  bout  of  food
poisoning as the appellant was suffering from diarrhoea".

The Adjudicator then instructed  his  clerk  to  write  to  the  appellant's
solicitors in a letter dated 27 October 2003  telling  them  that  he  would
decide the case on the papers before him  unless  a  more  detailed  medical
certificate was supplied within seven days.  It is not entirely  clear  that
the Adjudicator had any power to do this under the rules but it  shows  that
the Adjudicator was not acting with undue haste and had not  forgotten  that
he should act very carefully before deciding a case of this  kind  when  the
appellant had not given  evidence.   If  there  had  been  a  mistake  or  a
misunderstanding the appellant had a chance to remedy it.

No further medical evidence was produced.

At paragraph 9 of the determination the Adjudicator shows that he  addressed
his mind to the requirements of rule  44(1)(a)(b)  of  the  Immigration  and
Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.  These say:
  (1) An Adjudicator ... must hear an appeal in the absence of a  party  or
  his representative, if satisfied that the party or his representative -
      (a)   has been given notice  of  the  date,  time  and  place  of  the
           hearing; and
      (b)   has given no satisfactory explanation for his absence.

It is plain that this rule imposes  an  obligation  on  the  Adjudicator  to
decide the case unless there is  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  absence.
The Adjudicator did not regard the explanation for absence as  satisfactory.
 We do not see how he could  have  found  it  satisfactory.   There  was  no
medical evidence that the appellant was not  fit  to  attend.   Indeed,  the
parts of the standard form prompted the Medical  Practitioner  to  say  that
the appellant was unfit to attend had  been  struck  through.   The  opinion
that the appellant needed to rest does not mean he was unfit to  attend  the
hearing.  Very much depends on the kind of  rest  the  medical  practitioner
had in mind and the reasons for  rest  being  needed.   The  medical  report
before the Adjudicator gave no indication of the reasons for  needing  rest.
Subsequent  information  refers  to  an  accident.   The  details  are   not
explained and it is not suggested that  that  was  an  explanation  for  the
appellant  not  attending.   The  fact  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
diarrhoea, if he did, is not a reason, of itself,  for  concluding  that  he
could not attend the hearing.  We know that diarrhoea can vary from  a  life
threatening condition to a minor nuisance.  So much depends  on  the  nature
of the complaint.

Mrs Ahmad appeared before us.  We cannot think that she would have  been  in
any way hesitant or obscure in indicating to the  Medical  Practitioner  the
kind of evidence that was necessary.  If there had been any  sort  of  error
there has been plenty of time for it to be  corrected  and  explained  in  a
statement before the Tribunal.

It is quite clear to us that the Adjudicator was absolutely  right  to  find
the evidence before him did not amount to  a  satisfactory  explanation  for
the appellant's absence and decide the case before him.

As  indicated  above  the  grounds  of  appeal  make  no  criticism  of  the
Adjudicator's approach  to  the  evidence  that  was  before  him.   He  was
entitled to disbelieve the appellant and on the evidence before him  he  was
entitled to conclude that internal flight was available in any event.

In the circumstances we dismiss this appeal.






                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                             Vice President.

APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION


