

|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 18th May 2004           |        |SS (ILR - Article 8 -       |
|                           |        |Return) Sri Lanka [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00126                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Date of Hearing:  18th May 2004                                   |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|4th June 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|The  Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)                    |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Between:                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr I Burnett, instructed by Waran & Co,
Solicitors (N17)
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity who arrived
     illegally in the United Kingdom on 4th October 2001  and  subsequently
     claimed asylum on 8th  October  2001.   Her  screening  questionnaire,
     completed on 10th October 2001, recorded her as being  married  to  Mr
     Tharmaseelan Sithrangan but said that she did  not  know  his  present
     address;  the box concerned with whether the husband was in the United
     Kingdom and had  made  an  asylum  claim  was  left  blank.   Somewhat
     confusingly, under applicant's details the Appellant referred  to  her
     marital status as being that of a single woman.  Following  submission
     of a self evidence form the Appellant was  then  interviewed  and  her
     application was refused for the reasons set out in a letter dated 27th
     November 2001.  On 5th December 2001, the Secretary  of  State  issued
     directions for her removal to Sri Lanka as an  illegal  entrant  after
     refusal of her asylum application.  She appealed against the  decision
     on both asylum and human rights grounds, but these did not include any
     claim to relief under Article 8 of the European Convention nor,  apart
     from the identification of her husband  in  the  screening  form,  was
     there any other reference whatsoever to him  in  connection  with  her
     asylum and human rights application.

  2. Her appeal was heard on 30th January 2003 by Mr  Jonathan  Holmes,  an
     Adjudicator, who  dismissed  her  appeal.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
     believe her account of why she feared persecution  or  breach  of  her
     Article 3 rights in Sri Lanka, but we do not need to refer further  to
     that  basis  of  claim  because  there  is  no  appeal   against   the
     Adjudicator's decision in this respect.   The only issue raised before
     us is whether the Adjudicator erred in law  in  his  approach  to  the
     relief sought by her under Article 8 of the European Convention  based
     on the family  life  which,  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  she  had
     established in this country with  a  Mr  Thanabalasingham  Sithrangan,
     whom she claimed to be the person to whom  she  had  referred  as  her
     spouse in the screening application under  the  name  of  Tharmaseelan
     Sithrangan.

  3. The Adjudicator  deals  with  her  evidence  as  to  her  marriage  at
     paragraphs 9 to 19 of his determination including the oral evidence of
     Mr Sithrangan.   He noted that, in evidence before him, the  Appellant
     now said that she was in the United Kingdom by  late  September  2001.
     She claimed that she  had  been  married  on  18th  January  1998  and
     produced what she described as her marriage certificate accompanied by
     a translation from Tamil certified as being made by  a  retired  Court
     interpreter in Sri Lanka  on  11th  April  1999.   This  recorded  her
     husband's name as "Thanapalsingam Sithrangan".  She said  in  evidence
     that it was an arranged marriage  and  that  she  had  never  met  her
     husband prior to it.  Her husband said they had met one week prior  to
     the marriage.  When he left Sri Lanka on 28th April 1999  he  did  not
     take her with him and his only contact with her had  been  one  letter
     sent to her in Sri Lanka because, he said, there was nothing  for  him
     to say to her although he was  frequently  in  contact  with  his  own
     parents.  The Appellant said that  the  letter  provided  her  with  a
     telephone number as a contact in the United Kingdom who was  a  female
     Tamil who had provided her with accommodation when she  arrived.   She
     had contacted her from Sri Lanka prior to leaving  but  had  not  been
     able to make any contact with her husband because he  had  moved  away
     from that address.  In his evidence he said he had only one friend  in
     the United Kingdom whom he identified as a single man.  He said he did
     not know who met the Appellant at the airport and  denied  having  any
     friends other than this  man.   The  Adjudicator  noted  that  on  the
     original marriage certificate produced to him the date of the marriage
     appeared to have been overwritten.

  4. He deals with his factual findings in relation to the claimed marriage
     and the relationship  established  with  the  witness  in  the  United
     Kingdom at paragraphs 46 to 53 of the determination.  He accepted that
     the Appellant and her witness were the parents of the  child  born  on
     17th November 2002 here, that they lived as tenants  or  lodgers  with
     another family of Sinhalese and had established a family unit  in  the
     United Kingdom with a stable and loving relationship existing  between
     them.  He rejected,  however,  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
     married in Sri Lanka on 18th January 1998 adding "I accept that it  is
     likely that they now consider themselves to be married,  but  whether,
     and if so when and  in  what  circumstances,  their  relationship  was
     formalised in the United Kingdom I obviously do not know".

  5. His reasons for rejecting the claimed marriage in Sri Lanka were based
     on the clear difference in the evidence which they  had  given  before
     him as to when they first met and how they came  to  meet  each  other
     again in the United Kingdom some  two  months  after  the  Appellant's
     arrival;  the lack of contact following his departure;  and  the  lack
     of any reference at all to her husband in the  account  given  by  the
     Appellant.  He dealt with the weight to  be  placed  on  the  marriage
     certificate produced at paragraph 51 as follows:

           "Although the Appellant has placed before me a document that she
           says is her Sri Lankan  marriage  certificate  I  can  place  no
           weight upon the content or existence of that  document  at  all.
           As set out above, not only does it have alterations to its face,
           but it has not been fully completed.   It  was  agreed  by  both
           parties that I should follow the  Tanveer  Ahmed  approach  when
           considering the weight to be given to this document.   Given the
           damage to the Appellant's credibility as to my findings of  fact
           on the core of her asylum claim, together with my  concern  that
           over this aspect of her evidence, together with my concern as to
           the context of the document itself, it would not be safe for  me
           to put any weight upon the existence of this document".


  6. Whilst, therefore, the Adjudicator accepted that  a  relationship  had
     been formed in the United Kingdom there does not appear to  us  to  be
     any error of law on his part in his approach to the evidence as to the
     marriage having taken place earlier in Sri Lanka.

  7. When leave to appeal was granted it was noted by  the  Vice  President
     that the Adjudicator appeared to have arrived at no formal finding  as
     to whether he accepted that the parties were married as they  claimed,
     and he added "no doubt that is a matter which is susceptible of  proof
     and it might be advisable to do so".  No new evidence in  relation  to
     the marriage has been provided  to  us  with  the  exception  of  some
     photographs which it is said relate to the marriage  ceremony  but  we
     have heard no oral evidence and Mr Burnett rested upon the submissions
     which he made to us.  He submitted that the Adjudicator had  erred  in
     regarding the marriage certificate  as  being  incomplete  because  it
     appeared that the passage to which he was referring  in  this  respect
     was a part of the form of certificate  which  needed  completion  only
     where the marriage was solemnised  by  a  Minister  as  opposed  to  a
     Registrar.  But that does not, in our view, deal with the fact that it
     is clear that there has been  some  alteration  to  the  date  on  the
     original certificate.  Nor does it take into  account  the  suspicious
     factors arising from the differences in the evidence of the  Appellant
     and Mr Sithrangan, in respect of which the Adjudicator had noted  that
     when he gave evidence the Appellant was trying to prompt him as to the
     answers he should give in relation to  the  identity  of  the  claimed
     mutual friend in the United Kingdom.  There  is  in  our  judgment  no
     arguable basis upon which  we  could  or  should  interfere  with  the
     factual findings made by the Adjudicator in  this  respect  which  are
     clearly reasoned on the basis of the totality of the  evidence  before
     him.

  8. The Adjudicator then went on to consider the Article 8  claim  on  the
     basis of his acceptance that there was now a family  life  enjoyed  in
     the United Kingdom.  He wrongly thought that it was not appropriate to
     take into account  matters  which  post  dated  the  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State, but it was agreed before us  that  this  error  in
     failing to apply the law as clarified by the starred Tribunal decision
     of SK [2002] UKIAT 05613 has  made  no  practical  difference  to  the
     outcome  of  the  hearing  before  him.   The  Adjudicator   correctly
     considered the issue of proportionality by reference to the  ratio  of
     the decision in Mahmood [2001] Imm AR 229 and, making  the  assumption
     that Mr Sithrangan was unable to travel to Sri Lanka by virtue of  his
     acknowledged status as a refugee,  followed  by  grant  of  indefinite
     leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  7  January  2002,  he
     nevertheless concluded that the Appellant and the baby could return to
     Sri Lanka to  make  an  application  for  leave  to  enter  under  the
     Immigration Rules from abroad.  He deals with this at paragraph 56  of
     his determination where he says this:

           "A waiver of the requirement to obtain entry  clearance  in  Sri
           Lanka  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  when  she  has  no  other
           legitimate   claim   to   enter   would   require    exceptional
           circumstances to justify the disruption  and  undermining  of  a
           firm immigration control system.  It would  also  be  unfair  to
           those who follow the rules, and who patiently  wait  their  turn
           for their application to be processed.  Ms Bayley [who  appeared
           for the Appellant below] advanced no  exceptional  circumstance.
           ... In my judgment therefore I have been given no reason  as  to
           why the Appellant would be unable to apply from  Sri  Lanka  for
           entry clearance, and no reason why in the fullness of time  such
           application would not be granted.  I cannot see any  exceptional
           features of the position of the Appellant ... "


  9. Mr Burnett did not seek to argue before us that  the  Adjudicator  had
     erred in law in his approach to proportionality  if  his  findings  in
     relation to the marriage were sustainable.

 10. He did seek to uphold the approach of the Adjudicator to the effect of
     the  grant  of  refugee  status  to  Mr  Sithrangan  as   raising   an
     insurmountable obstacle to his return to Sri  Lanka,  submitting  that
     the burden of proof that this was not the case  would  rest  upon  the
     Secretary of State.   We  do  not  agree  and  we  consider  that  the
     Adjudicator was wrong  in  his  assumption  of  the  existence  of  an
     inability for Mr Sithrangan to return to Sri Lanka simply by reason of
     his having been recognised as a refugee.  That means no more than that
     the Secretary of State cannot give directions for his  removal  whilst
     his indefinite leave to remain exists but it does not mean that  there
     is, in the sense in which it is explored in Mahmood, an insurmountable
     obstacle to his return.  The fact of  former  recognition  of  refugee
     status  does  not  of  itself  show  that  there   is   a   continuing
     insurmountable obstacle to returning to the country of  origin.   Such
     cases will depend upon a consideration  of  the  specific  facts  upon
     which the claim had been recognised.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the
     Refugee Convention cessation provisions to be applied to someone  with
     refugee status and ILR in order for the potential for  his  return  to
     the country of origin,  so  as  to  remain  with  his  family,  to  be
     contemplated  in  an  Article  8  case.    There   is   no   automatic
     insurmountable hurdle in the mere fact of the past grant of  ILR.   Of
     course, that person is not expected to prove his  asylum  claim  again
     and there would need to be  a  proper  basis  for  contemplating  that
     circumstances had changed significantly since the grant  of  ILR.   If
     they  have,  and  it  is  contended  that  a  person  still  faces  an
     insurmountable obstacle to return with his family,  evidence  will  be
     needed as to why.

 11. In Sri Lanka there has been a  substantial  change  in  the  situation
     following the cease-fire in February 2002 shortly after the  grant  of
     indefinite leave to remain.  There was no evidence either  before  the
     Adjudicator or before us  to  show  that  there  existed  any  current
     insurmountable obstacles to Mr Sithrangan returning to Sri Lanka  with
     the Appellant and their child.  For this reason  alone,  there  is  no
     evidential basis for saying that the  removal  decision  made  by  the
     Secretary of State is unlawful, or was so at the date of  the  hearing
     before the Adjudicator, in the sense that no Secretary of State  could
     reasonably  have  regarded  removal  as  proportionate  to  the  state
     interest in enforcing effective immigration control.

 12. In any event, however, there was no error of law on the  part  of  the
     Adjudicator in the way in which he approached the  proportionality  of
     removal on the basis of the ability of the Appellant to make an out of
     country application under the Immigration Rules.

 13. Had the Adjudicator's findings in relation to the claimed marriage  of
     the Appellant been unsustainable, however, there would have been force
     in Mr Burnett's  submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  family
     reunion policy would have rendered removal  disproportionate.   Since,
     however, we are satisfied that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  in  this
     respect are sustainable, the Appellant cannot  succeed  before  us  on
     this basis.

 14. It follows that there has been no error on the part of the Adjudicator
     in his dismissal of the Article 8 claim and for the reasons  which  we
     have set out above, and in respect of which we  differ  slightly  from
     the Adjudicator in our reasoning, this appeal is dismissed.

 15. This decision is reported for what we say about  the  significance  of
     refugee status as an insurmountable obstacle to return in an Article 8
     case.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
