
H-TW-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |AZ (risk on return) Ivory   |
|                           |        |Coast CG [2004] UKIAT 00170 |
|On 4 May 2004              |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane Vice President                                        |
|Ms D K Gill - Vice President                                      |
|Miss J Grimmett                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A. Barcello, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                 Douglas & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Phillips, Senior Home Office Presenting
            Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of  Ivory  Coast,  appeals  with  permission
    against the Determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D M  Page,  sitting  at
    Cardiff, in which he dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  on  16  June
    2003 to give directions for the Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.    According to the Appellant, he left Ivory Coast on 15 April 2000.  He
    travelled first to Mali and then to Senegal and Mauritania,  whence  he
    took a boat to Spain, arriving there in May 2000.  Having spent a  week
    in Spain, he travelled on to France.   He  lived  in  France  for  five
    months.  He told the Interviewing Officer that he did not wish to claim
    asylum there and was told that it would "be  better  for  me  to  claim
    [asylum] in England or Ireland" (A6; question 27).

3.    The Appellant next went to Holland, having been told  that  he  could
    get a job there in order to earn money to get to  the  United  Kingdom.
    He said he did not seek asylum in Holland  "because  of  the  language"
    (question 30).  In March 2001 the Appellant  travelled  by  coach  from
    Amsterdam  to  Victoria  Coach  Station  in  London.   He  utilised   a
    Portuguese passport, to which he was not entitled.  When encountered on
    17 March 2001 in the United Kingdom, he stated that he  came  from  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo. When asked why  he  had  said  this,  the
    Appellant replied, "I didn't really know where I was from.   Everything
    was getting on my nerves". (A9; question 39).  The Appellant  indicated
    that his intention was to travel on to Ireland.   However,  upon  being
    detected in the United Kingdom, he claimed asylum here.

4.    That claim can be summarised as follows.  The Appellant said that  he
    had been a member of the RDR Party in Ivory Coast since 1994.  Although
    apparently originating from West Ivory Coast, the  Appellant  lived  in
    Abobo, a suburb of Abidjan (A6; question  5).   On  24  December  1999,
    there was a coup in Ivory Coast.  The Appellant had been working  in  a
    shoe factory "But once the coup happened, there was no  more  work  for
    us, and I had to fend for myself" (A3; question 3).  The Appellant lost
    his job on 2 February 2000 (A6; question 9).

5.    As a member of the RDR, the Appellant said that he  took  part  in  a
    rally, with thousands of others, and although many at  the  rally  were
    arrested, he himself was not.  Whilst running away from the  rally,  he
    stumbled and fell, injuring his face and neck.  The Appellant  saidtold
    the Adjudicator that he felt lucky not to have been  arrested  "because
    he did participate in many rallies and demonstrations.   At  the  rally
    where he fell over and injured his neck there were  some  ten  thousand
    people in attendance.  Under cross-examination  the  appellant  claimed
    that he had been stood over by soldiers when he fell at this rally  and
    [was] hit with wooden clubs"  (determination, paragraphs 12 and 13).

6.    At paragraph 14, the Adjudicator recorded that the Appellant  claimed
    to have been a member of the committee of the youth wing of the RDR  in
    Abobo Samake in Abidjan.  Since arriving in the United Kingdom, he  had
    not done anything to support the RDR "because there are,  according  to
    the appellant, no RDR activities taking place in  Bristol.   Also,  the
    appellant  intended  going  to  Ireland  to  get  away  from  politics"
    (paragraph 14).

7.    At paragraph 15, the Adjudicator  recorded  that  the  Appellant  was
    asked how many RDR members were in the  current  government's  cabinet.
    He replied that he "knew their names but did not know these RDR members
    by sight".  The appellant was asked about the amnesty where RDR members
    who had been captured had been released  during  the  year  2000.   The
    appellant claimed that he did not know about this amnesty  but  claimed
    that the leader of the RDR was in exile (paragraph 15).

8.    Asked under cross-examination why he would  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities in the Ivory Coast at the present time,  given  that  there
    were members of the RDR in government, he replied that he would  be  of
    adverse interest to the authorities upon return  because  he  had  been
    residing at Abobo and had  been  a  member  of  the  RDR.   Members  or
    supporters of the RDR, the Appellant claimed, "are seen  as  rebels  or
    rebel supporters" (paragraph 16).  At  paragraph  17,  the  Adjudicator
    records that the Appellant said he had been baptised into the  Catholic
    Church in May 2002.

9.    The Adjudicator sets out his conclusions at paragraphs 19  to  25  of
    the determination.  From this, it would  appear  that  the  Adjudicator
    accepted that the Appellant had been a member  of  the  RDR  in  Abobo,
    Abidjan and that the Appellant may have attended a demonstration on  14
    February 2000, together with thousands of others, at which he fell down
    and hurt himself.  That much seems to be apparent  from  paragraphs  19
    and 20 of the determination, where the Adjudicator records (without any
    comment on his own part) the Appellant's case as being "that  he  would
    be at risk upon return as a former  RDR  member  with  no  profile  and
    someone who has never been arrested by the authorities" (paragraph 19).

10.   At paragraph 20 the Adjudicator has this to say: -

         "20)     I have been  referred  by  the  respondent  to  objective
             evidence which contradicts the  appellant's  alleged  fear  of
             return and confirms the appellant's evidence  that  there  are
             RDR members in government in the Ivory Coast  at  the  present
             time.  I judge the appellant's  claim  against  the  objective
             background  evidence  and  find  that  there  is  no   serious
             possibility, or reasonable likelihood, of this appellant being
             of the slightest interest to the authorities upon return.  The
             appellant's  evidence  when  viewed  against   the   objective
             background evidence does not engage this country's obligations
             to provide him with international protection".


11.   Permission to appeal to the Tribunal was given on the basis  that  it
    was arguable that the Adjudicator  had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    address the findings "of the expert report by Thalia Griffiths".

  12. The report of Thalia Griffiths which was before the Adjudicator is  a
      two and a half page  document  dated  30  August  2003  and  entitled
      "Expert Report in the appeal of" the Appellant.


Background to recent events in Ivory Coast:

13.   Before the Tribunal turns in detail  both  to  that  report,  to  the
    subsequent report of Miss  Griffiths  served  in  connection  with  the
    Tribunal hearing, and the oral evidence given by her to  the  Tribunal,
    it is necessary briefly to give a  description  of  the  background  to
    recent events in Ivory Coast.  In doing so, we draw primarily upon Part
    1 of the UNHCR Position on Return of Rejected  Asylum-Seekers  to  Cote
    d'Ivoire of 20/01/2004, submitted by the Appellant, and the Home Office
    Bulletin  of  March  2003  on  Ivory  Coast,  which  was   before   the
    Adjudicator.

14.   Since becoming independent from France in 1960, Ivory Coast  was  for
    some three decades seen as "an island of relative calm  and  prosperity
    in a region which has been  turbulent  since  the  late  1980s"  (UNHCR
    paper).  During  that  period  of  prosperity  and  calm,  citizens  of
    neighbouring countries were encouraged to live and work in Ivory Coast.
     There are at present now more than 60 ethnic groups in the country.

15.   Following the death of the first President, Felix Boigny, in December
    1993, an era of political tension began. There were disputes  over  the
    succession to Mr Boigny, culminating  with  the  military  coup  of  24
    December 1999, which removed the government of Henri Bedi,  the  second
    President.

16.   Prior to that coup, President Bedi had sought to disqualify from  the
    forthcoming elections, Alassane Ouattara, a former Prime Minister,  who
    had become a leader of the RDR.  On 9 December 1999 a warrant had  been
    issued for Mr Ouattara's arrest.  However, following the  coup,  on  29
    December 1999, a court "cancelled the arrest warrant and  decreed  that
    there was no justification for pursuing  the  investigation.   Ouattara
    returned to the country, immediately  following  the  decision,  having
    spent the  previous  three  months  in  France"  (Home  Office  Country
    Assessment of October 2001).

17.   Following almost a year of military administration, headed by General
    Guei, Laurent Gbagbo came to power in October 2000, in the wake of what
    was said to have been a disputed presidential  election.   Mr  Ouattara
    had again been barred from  standing  in  those  elections  and,  as  a
    result, a significant part of the population, who were sympathisers  of
    the  RDR  and  its  leaders,  felt  that  they  had  been  deliberately
    marginalised from the affairs of the nation.

18.   On 19 September 2002, a group of soldiers  protesting  against  their
    planned  demobilisation  by  the  government   successfully   organised
    themselves into a rebel movement and attempted a  coup.   General  Guei
    lost his life in the immediate aftermath of this  rebellion.   A  month
    earlier, four RDR members had, in fact, taken up ministerial  posts  in
    the government, at the invitation of President Gbagbo.

19.   The rebels, mostly concentrated in the centre and northern  parts  of
    Ivory Coast, intended to march towards  Abidjan.   However,  the  rapid
    deployment of French forces stationed in the country  resulted  in  the
    rebels' advance being halted.  Since then, Ivory Coast has  effectively
    been split into two main parts: the northern part under the control  of
    the rebels of the "Mouvement Patriotique de la  Cote  d'Ivoire"  (MPCI)
    and  the  southern  part  under  the  administration  of  the   elected
    government.  In the west of the country,  two  other  rebel  movements,
    "Mouvement Patriotique Ivoirien du Grande Ouest" (MPIGO) and "Mouvement
    pour la Justice et la Paix" (MJP) were established.  These three  rebel
    movements are currently grouped under the "umbrella"  name  of  "Forces
    Nouvelles" (FN), under the leadership of the MPCI.

20.   The government and the MPCI  signed  a  ceasefire  agreement  in  the
    autumn of 2002.  In an effort  to  consolidate  this,  and  to  prevent
    violations of the ceasefire by both sides, France convened  in  January
    2003  peace  talks  in  Marcoussis,  near  Paris,  to  which  all   the
    protagonists were invited.  As a result, a Peace Agreement  was  signed
    on 24 January 2003 (the Linas-Marcoussis Peace Agreement").

21.   That agreement provided for, amongst other matters, the creation of a
    transitional  government  to  include  representatives  of  all  sides,
    regroupment, disarmament and demobilisation  of  all  armed  forces,  a
    revision of the nationality law and preparation  for  presidential  and
    parliamentary elections to be held in October 2005.

22.   A Ceasefire Agreement between the armed forces and rebel  groups  was
    signed in May 2003.  In July 2003 an Amnesty Law was passed.   However,
    in September 2003, the FN suspended their participation in  government,
    after President Gbagbo appointed two ministers to  his  government,  in
    contravention  of  the  Linus-Marcoussis  Peace  Agreement.   Following
    further negotiations, the FN rejoined the government in December  2003.



23.   Between November 2003 and January 2004, there was an increase in  the
    number of demonstrations and  political  rallies  in  Abidjan  (Country
    Bulletin 1/2004  paragraph  2.9).   There  were  also  "concerns  about
    militias and youth groups, such as the 'Young Patriots' and  the  Group
    Patriots for Peace ("Groupement des Patriotes  pour  la  Paix"  (GPP)).
    However, in October 2003 a government decision was taken to  impose  an
    immediate three-month ban on public demonstrations and marches and  the
    government also ordered the immediate disbanding of the GPP  (paragraph
    2.10).  The UNHCR paper of January  2004  describes  the  situation  in
    Ivory Coast at that time as remaining "fragile, with  frequent  violent
    incidents of killing,  intimidation  and  robbery,  occurring  on  both
    sides".   These  incidents  were  "attributed  to  uncontrolled   armed
    elements, particularly in  the  rebel-held  areas".   Nevertheless,  in
    December 2003 the Armed Forces of Ivory Coast (FANCI) and the FN  began
    dismantling their respective checkpoints and withdrawing heavy  weapons
    from the "zone of confidence" (a weapons-free zone established pursuant
    to the Linus-Marcoussis Agreement).

24.   During early 2004, it appears  that  the  various  political  parties
    opposed to  President  Gbagbo  became  increasingly  concerned  at  the
    latter's apparent reluctance to engage in a full implementation of  the
    Linus-Marcoussis Peace Agreement.  These political tensions  culminated
    on 25 March 2004 in a protest  march  in  Abidjan.   According  to  the
    opposition parties, government  security  forces  opened  fire  on  the
    protesters, killing between 350 and 500 people.  Government figures put
    the number of fatalities at 37, including two police officers (Bulletin
    1/2004;  paragraph  2.18).   The  Ivorian  Movement  for  Human  Rights
    estimated that about 200 people had died and another 400 were  injured.
    The most severely affected districts of Abidjan  included  Abobo,  Port
    Bouet, Youpougon, Adjamen and Koumassi.

25.   Immediately following the demonstration, both  the  FN  and  the  RDR
    announced  that  they  were  suspending  their  participation  in   the
    Government of National Reconciliation.

  26. According to a report of 14 April 2004 (noted in Bulletin  1/2004  at
      paragraph  2.23)  President  Gbagbo  is  continuing  to   press   for
      negotiations to be held with opposition parties.   That  report  also
      noted that "in response to the  many  reports  of  exactions  in  the
      poorer neighbourhoods of Abidjan,  committed  by  police  forces  and
      unidentified  'parallel  uniformed  forces',   the   government   has
      requested  international  military  forces  (LICORNE  and  UNOCI)  to
      conduct mixed patrols alongside the  Ivorian  armed  forces  to  help
      maintain law and order" (paragraph 2.24).  At paragraph 2.27,  it  is
      noted (from the OCHA report) that there have been numerous reports of
      abuse and raids  carried  out  by  the  security  forces  in  various
      districts of Abidjan  and  that  roundups  have  occurred  in  poorer
      neighbourhoods, inhabited primarily by west  African  immigrants  and
      northern Ivorians, often perceived as supporters of the RDR.


The evidence of Miss Griffiths:

27.   We can now turn to the first report of Miss Griffiths.   This  states
    that "the very fact that there have been so many  separate  ceasefires,
    agreements and other declarations of peace proves how  ineffective  the
    peace process is".  Although the  government  of  national  unity  "has
    nominal jurisdiction over the whole country" the President  "has  shown
    himself deeply reluctant to  implement  the  Marcoussis  Peace  Accord.
    President Gbagbo and his supporters in the Front Populaire Ivorien feel
    that peace undermines their sovereignty and was imposed by France,  the
    former colonial power".  Miss Griffiths expresses  the  view  that  the
    Government of National Unity "is something of  a  lame  duck,  and  the
    presence of a few rebels in minor Cabinet posts will not stop the  kind
    of atrocities that have been  well-documented  on  both  sides  of  the
    conflict".  Miss Griffiths refers to an NGO Human Rights  Watch  Report
    of August 2003 which she says "describes systematic and  indiscriminate
    attacks on civilians, summary executions of  non-combatants,  arbitrary
    arrests and detentions, 'disappearances' and  torture  carried  out  by
    three groups on the  government  side:  government  forces  themselves,
    Liberian and other mercenaries working with the Ivorian government  and
    state-supported civilian militias".  In many cases  the  names  of  the
    victims  alone  were  "considered   grounds   for   arbitrary   arrest,
    detentions, torture and executions, based on the identification of  the
    names of  potential  northern  or  immigrant  or  political  opposition
    members.  Victims have also been targeted on  the  basis  of  religious
    affiliation, for instance,  Muslims  have  often  been  assumed  to  be
    supporting the rebel forces".

28.   Later in the report we find  that  "those  connected  with  the  RDR,
    whether leading figures or ordinary members, have been singled out  for
    particularly harsh treatment.  Members of  [the]  RDR  are  seen  as  a
    security threat".  Miss Griffiths considers that "at  the  moment  [the
    RDR] are equated with the rebels in  the  minds  of  many  southerners.
    When RDR ministers  came  to  Abidjan  in  March  [2003]  to  join  the
    Government of National Unity,  they  stayed  at  a  city  centre  hotel
    guarded by West African peacekeepers  because  they  feared  attack  in
    their own homes".

29.   Turning to the Appellant's particular case, Miss  Griffiths  observes
    how the Appellant "says he fled Cote d'Ivoire in 2000 because he feared
    he would be arrested as an RDR member".  She  then  says  that  "if  he
    returned now, he would be in real danger not of  arrest  but  of  being
    killed by loyalist militias".  If he arrived in Abidjan  "as  a  failed
    refugee applicant, he would come immediately to the  attention  of  the
    security forces".   Reference  is  then  made  to  the  destruction  of
    shantytowns in Abidjan.  The  report  concludes  by  saying  that  "the
    amnesty law would not protect [the Appellant] from  a  revenge  attack,
    nor would the French and West African peacekeepers, since  they  cannot
    be in every village and on every street corner".

30.   Miss Griffiths's second report is in fact a  letter  dated  12  March
    2004, in which she comments on the Determination  of  the  Adjudicator.
    She is "not sure that it takes account of my report."   She  refers  to
    loyalist militias that "carry out attacks with impunity" and that  "RDR
    members are  still  being  harassed".   In  October  2003  "eleven  RDR
    activists from Abidjan's Abobo district were  arrested  on  trumped  up
    charges of  plotting  to  kill  senior  political,  administrative  and
    military officials.  They were freed on 21 October after a court  found
    that they had no case to answer".  The letter ends by noting  that,  in
    late February 2004, the United Nations "agreed to send a force of 6,240
    peacekeeping troops to Cote d'Ivoire, plus police  to  protect  the  UN
    operation.  This is in addition to the  4,000  troops  already  there".
    Whilst Miss Griffiths expresses the hope "that the situation will  soon
    stabilise to the point when refugees can safely return home, I  do  not
    feel that this point has yet been reached".

31.   Miss Griffiths gave oral evidence before the Tribunal.  She said that
    she  is  the  Deputy  Editor  of  Africa  Confidential,  a  fortnightly
    publication sold on  a  subscription  basis,  and  which  has  been  in
    existence for over 40 years.  She has written on  African  affairs  for
    eleven years.  Between 1993 and 1996 she was based in Abidjan with  the
    Reuters News Agency.  Her most recent visit to Ivory Coast occurred  in
    March 2003.

32.   Miss Griffiths was asked about the fact that her reports appeared  to
    be generally unsourced.  She said that she was in contact with  friends
    in Ivory Coast and that she  also  talked  with  the  Associated  Press
    correspondent in that country.   In  addition,  she  read  Ivory  Coast
    newspapers on the Internet.  She was in contact with the Ivorian  Human
    Rights League and researchers with Human Rights Watch.  She  considered
    that she had a good knowledge of security affairs in Ivory Coast.

33.   Miss Griffiths was asked about the position  of  the  Appellant  who,
    even on his own account, could only be described as a low-level  member
    of the RDR.  Miss Griffiths replied that as a returning  failed  asylum
    seeker he would come to the attention of the security forces.  Arrivals
    were closely monitored by the authorities at  Abidjan.   She  did  not,
    however, know what travel  documents  the  Appellant  would  be  using.
    There  was,  nevertheless,  a  large  police  presence  throughout  the
    Airport.  Plain-clothes  security  police  would  question  anyone  who
    looked as if they might be of interest.  She  herself  had  been  taken
    aside for questioning, despite having a letter  of  invitation  to  the
    country from the wife of the President.

34.   Miss Griffiths said that, if it was discovered at  the  airport  that
    the Appellant was a member  of  the  RDR,  he  could  be  detained  and
    questioned.  She then said it was likely that this would occur.  People
    with the Appellant's profile had suffered beatings and been taken  away
    and killed.  She considered that the more senior  members  of  the  RDR
    were less at risk than low-level members.  After the demonstrations  in
    March 2004, the authorities started taking people away in the night.

35.   Whilst Miss Griffiths considered that in  the  past  there  had  been
    lists of RDR members, she could not say whether the  authorities  would
    today have a list of such members available to  them  at  the  airport.
    She did not imagine that that would be the case.  They might,  however,
    have access to an old list.

36.   Miss Griffiths said that she had never met the Appellant.  She noted,
    however, that he was the child of a father  from  the  south  of  Ivory
    Coast and a mother from the north.  His surname would not  indicate  to
    the authorities that he was a northerner.  His mother's people could be
    described as, in general,  thinner  than  persons  from  ethnic  groups
    originating in the south.  It was, however, observed that the Appellant
    said that he had not personally come from the north of Ivory Coast but,
    rather, from the west.

37.   Miss Griffiths did not consider that there was  anything  else  which
    would mark out the Appellant as someone of interest to the authorities,
    at the airport.

38.   Miss Griffiths said that Abobo, where the  Appellant  had  previously
    lived, was a working class district of Abidjan, with a large population
    of northerners and migrant workers.  This area had  been  subjected  to
    "night raids" in the aftermath of the March 2004 demonstrations.  Abobo
    was seen as an RDR district.  If he returned to Abobo,  Miss  Griffiths
    considered that the Appellant might be recognised and denounced  as  an
    RDR member.  She believed that there were cases where such  things  had
    happened.  The authorities operated what  in  effect  was  a  reign  of
    terror.

39.   Miss Griffiths said that, despite the existence of the Government  of
    National Unity, the security services were still in practice under  the
    control of the Presidency.  The gendarmerie was overwhelmingly loyal to
    the President. Furthermore, following the  March  2004  demonstrations,
    the RDR ministers in the government,  including  the  Justice  Minister
    (Henriette Diabate) had withdrawn from the government.  But even if the
    RDR returned  to  government,  this  would  not,  in  Miss  Griffiths's
    opinion, make much difference.  Real power still resided  only  in  the
    President.

40.   Turning to the effect of the introduction  of  the  UN  Peacekeepers,
    Miss Griffiths considered that these were being deployed to oversee the
    disarmament of the government forces and the rebels.  The  peacekeepers
    could not stand on street corners in Abobo and protect  civilians  from
    the actions of loyalist militias.

41.   In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Miss  Griffiths  confirmed
    that, in her view, in the present climate, a  returning  failed  asylum
    seeker was as such at risk of detention or  worse,  upon  return.   The
    attitude of the authorities would be  that  such  a  person  should  be
    "locked away to be on the safe side". Miss Griffiths did not think that
    the authorities would infer that he had simply tried to  get  a  better
    life for himself abroad because she said that would be the rationale of
    a country at ease with itself, whereas, in  the  case  of  the  Ivorian
    authorities, the situation was one of paranoia.

42.   As for denunciations, Miss Griffiths referred to an incident that she
    had read about in the Human Rights Watch Report whereby  in  2003  some
    people in a shared taxi had been regarded by bystanders as  looking  as
    if they were foreigners.  The occupants of the  taxi  were  beaten  and
    possibly killed.

43.   If the Appellant returned to Abobo, Miss Griffiths considered that he
    would be at greater risk than the majority of the  population  of  that
    district, as he was an RDR member.   If  he  should  choose  to  go  to
    another suburb, he would be regarded as a stranger  and  liable  to  be
    investigated.

44.   Cross-examined, Miss Griffiths confirmed that the Appellant would  in
    her opinion be at risk merely as a returning failed asylum seeker.  She
    was not aware of any returning failed asylum seekers who  had  come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities in Abidjan Airport.   She  did
    not know if there had been any returns made by the Secretary  of  State
    to that country.

45.   At this point, Mr Phillips informed the Tribunal that  the  Secretary
    of State had no policy  of  refraining  from  returning  failed  asylum
    seekers from the United Kingdom to Ivory Coast.

46.   Asked what would happen if the Appellant  told  the  authorities,  if
    questioned at the airport, that he was merely an economic migrant,  she
    replied that he would be questioned at length and  they  would  try  to
    find out more about his background and if it transpired that he was the
    child of a northern mother "it might count significantly against him in
    their eyes".  Whilst she was unaware of any current lists of  suspected
    persons being held at the airport, this did not mean  that  such  lists
    did not exist.

47.   Asked about the absence of sources from her reports,  Miss  Griffiths
    said that she had not been asked to supply sources.   She  had  written
    sourced reports, however, for other asylum appellants.

48.   Re-examined, Miss Griffiths said that she did not know of anyone  who
    had returned as a failed asylum seeker to Ivory Coast.

      Assessment of the evidence of Miss Griffiths:

49.   In this appeal, we have to assess the oral  and  documentary  evidence
    of Miss Griffiths, which is being relied upon in this  case  as  expert
    evidence. Such evidence is an increasing feature in  asylum  and  human
    rights appeals. Claimants' representatives generally  imply  that  such
    "expert  evidence"  is  synonymous   with  "independent  and   reliable
    evidence". Whether expert evidence is to be regarded as independent and
    reliable is a matter which should be the subject of careful  assessment
    in each case. The Tribunal has frequently stated that  expert  evidence
    should be sourced. This is a necessary part of the Tribunal's  function
    to assess the reliability of the evidence adduced. In order to test the
    independence of the person put forward as an expert, the Tribunal  will
    generally compare the  opinion  with  information  contained  in  other
    reports. It is self-evident that different inferences may be drawn from
    the same sets of  facts,  even  when  those  facts  are  proven  to  be
    reliable. Inferences drawn by someone with a  certain  perspective  may
    well be  very  different  from  inferences  drawn  by  someone  who  is
    objective. As the Tribunal, we have to be careful in  placing  reliance
    on opinions of those who fall within the former category, although this
    is not to say that such a person's personal integrity  is  called  into
    question as he or she might genuinely hold the opinion he or she has.

50.   We have  difficulties  with  Miss  Griffiths'  evidence.  Her  written
    reports are largely unsourced. In her oral evidence,  she  informed  us
    that she obtained the information she  gave  us  at  the  hearing  from
    "conversations with friends in the Ivory Coast"  and  she  also  talked
    with the Associated Press correspondent. This is highly unsatisfactory,
    as we have no idea of the "expertise" of  those  to  whom  she  speaks,
    whether they are providing factual information  to  her  or  their  own
    opinions of events, whether she has independently verified any  factual
    information she was given, or  whether  there  was  any  room  for  any
    misunderstandings to arise. It is therefore difficult for us to  assess
    the reliability of the factual information upon  which  she  bases  her
    opinions.

51.   We are, however, able to assess whether she can  be  accepted  as  an
    impartial  expert.  We  accept  that  she  genuinely  believes  that  a
    returning failed asylum seeker  would  as  such  be  at  real  risk  of
    detention (or worse) at the Airport.  The Tribunal made it a  point  to
    ask Miss Griffiths when, in her view, such  a  risk  to  failed  asylum
    seekers per se arose.  She replied that it was in the period  following
    the September 2002 coup attempt, which led to the de facto division  of
    the country between rebel-held and government-held areas.

52.   Miss Griffiths's view runs counter to that of the UNHCR.  In its  May
    2003 Position Paper on Unsuccessful Asylum Seekers from  Cote  d'Ivoire
    (Appellant's bundle, page  14)  the  UNHCR  states  that  "unsuccessful
    asylum  seekers  remain...  at  real  risk  of   suffering   from   the
    indiscriminate effects of violence and disruption to  public  order  if
    forcibly returned to  Cote  d'Ivoire.   Consequently,  UNHCR's  current
    advice to governments is to suspend enforced  returns  of  unsuccessful
    asylum seekers to Cote d'Ivoire".   The  basis  upon  which  the  UNHCR
    considered that there are risks of "indiscriminate effects of violence"
    is contained in the preceding paragraph of the paper.  This  refers  to
    skirmishes taking place in the western part  of  the  country  and  the
    rebel positions in the north having not changed.  The  UNHCR  does  not
    suggest that, as of May 2003, low-level members of the RDR or returning
    failed asylum seekers as such, faced a real  risk  of  persecution  for
    actual or imputed political opinion.  Nor does the  UNHCR  assert  that
    the "indiscriminate effects of violence and disruption to public order"
    constitute a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment  occurring  to
    anyone who is forcibly returned to Ivory Coast.

53.   We also noted Miss Griffiths' response to our question as  to  whether
    the authorities in the Ivory Coast would infer that the  Appellant  had
    simply been trying to make a better life for himself abroad.  She  said
    that this would be the rationale of a  country  at  ease  with  itself,
    whereas, in the case of the Ivorian authorities, the situation was  one
    of paranoia. Miss Griffiths' perception that it is only in the case  of
    a country at ease with itself that security officials would think  that
    a failed asylum seeker's motive for leaving his  country  was  economic
    betterment  is  not  one  that  accords  with  the  Tribunal's  general
    experience of hearing and determining appeals  involving  a  very  wide
    range of countries. To take one example, we know from CIPU  Reports  on
    Turkey that the Turkish  authorities  are  aware  that  many  of  their
    citizens who leave Turkey do so in order to  make  a  better  life  for
    themselves abroad and not because they genuinely fear persecution.

54.   For the reasons we  have  given  in  paragraphs  51to  53  above,  the
    Tribunal is unable to accept Miss Griffiths's views  as  evidence  that
    compels the conclusion that returning RDR members and supporters are at
    real risk of persecution in Ivory Coast. We  must,  however,  emphasise
    that we accept she is not driven by any motive  other  than  a  genuine
    desire to assist the Tribunal.

55.   In her first report, Miss Griffiths considered that the Appellant, if
    returned,  "would be in real danger not of arrest but of  being  killed
    by loyalist militias".  This contrasts with his stated  fear  in  2000,
    which was that "he would be arrested as  an  RDR  member"  (Appellant's
    bundle page 5).  Miss Griffiths's conclusion  is at variance with  what
    she said in her oral evidence where, as we have noted,  she  considered
    it likely that the Appellant would  be  detained  by  the  authorities.
    Even in August 2003, however, when the first report was written,  there
    is no sourced material to show that RDR members were  all  as  such  at
    real risk of being killed by loyalist militias. Indeed,  as  previously
    noted, in October 2003 the government ordered the immediate  disbanding
    of the GPP militia.

56.   It is undoubtedly the case that tensions in Ivory Coast remain  at  a
    high level.  There are documented reports of raids being carried out by
    the authorities and their unofficial supporters in  areas  of  Abidjan,
    such as Abobo, where there are concentrations of persons emanating from
    the northern parts of Ivory Coast and of RDR  members  and  supporters.
    The evidence, however, is in the Tribunal's opinion  far  from  showing
    that there is either a presidential policy of targeting  low-level  RDR
    members and supporters or an unchecked campaign on  the  part  of  non-
    government militias against such persons, on such a scale as to put  at
    real risk any low-level RDR member or supporter.

57.   In short, were the Appellant to be  returned  today  to  Abidjan,  he
    would return to a turbulent atmosphere.  He would not, however, on  the
    evidence face a real risk of targeting, whether by the  authorities  of
    the President or non-government militias.  That is the  case,  even  on
    the basis that the Appellant decides to maintain his membership of  the
    RDR.  Since, however, he told the United Kingdom  authorities  that  he
    wished to go to Ireland in order to get away from politics, it must  be
    extremely doubtful whether the Appellant would choose  to  retain  that
    membership.

58.   Having considered all of the evidence, the Tribunal does not consider
    that the oral and documentary evidence of  Miss  Griffiths  constitutes
    evidence that this Appellant, a low-level member of  the  RDR  who  has
    never been arrested or detained by the authorities, and who left  Ivory
    Coast in 2000, would be  at  real  risk  on  return  today,  either  of
    persecution for a Refugee Convention reason or of inhuman or  degrading
    treatment or punishment, contrary to Article 3 of the EHCR.

      Assessment of the UNHCR's position:

59.   In connection with the Tribunal hearing, the  Appellant  submitted  a
    January 2004 UNHCR Position on the Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers to
    Cote d'Ivoire.  Apart from setting out the background  to  the  current
    difficulties in that country, this paper notes that there is  "a  state
    of insecurity" in the  country  and  a  "volatile  security  situation"
    (paragraph 16).

60.   The UNHCR's conclusions are to be  found  at  paragraphs  20  to  22.
    Noting that the situation "is precarious and may remain fluid for  some
    time to come, UNHCR is of the opinion that the question  of  return  of
    rejected asylum seekers should be approached with caution".   Paragraph
    21 reads as follows:-

            "21. As regards individuals originating from Abidjan,  where  a
                 relative level of  security  has  been  established,  such
                 persons  may  be  returned  there,  provided  that  family
                 members  have  been  identified,  to  avoid   creating   a
                 situation of internal displacement".

61.   The situation for those originating from  outside  Abidjan  is  dealt
    with in paragraph 22:-

            "22.  With  regard  to  individuals  originating  from  outside
                 Abidjan, where uncontrolled  armed  elements  continue  to
                 pose a serious threat to the security  of  the  population
                 and private property, return to Cote  d'Ivoire  should  be
                 avoided, lest  it  may  increase  further  the  number  of
                 internally displaced persons and/or their physical  safety
                 is put in jeopardy.  States should therefore refrain  from
                 forcibly returning such persons to Cote d'Ivoire and grant
                 them complimentary  forms  of  protection  instead,  until
                 further notice.  This position will  be  reviewed  in  the
                 second half of 2004".

62.   It is clear from UNHCR's conclusions as set out above that the  reason
    why UNHCR considers that individuals who originate from Abidjan may  be
    returned if their family members have been identified is because family
    members can reasonably be expected to shelter them, whereas individuals
    who originate from outside Abidjan would be likely to become internally
    displaced in Abidjan - a situation  which  UNHCR  considers  should  be
    avoided. This does not,  however,  mean  that  conditions  of  internal
    displacement in Abidjan are sufficiently severe as to reach the Article
    3 threshold, nor does it mean that the security concerns they  face  in
    internal displacement are such that they are reasonably likely to be at
    risk of Article 3 ill treatment.

63.   It must be borne in mind that UNHCR has  a  range  of  interests  that
    goes beyond the relatively narrow questions that Adjudicators  and  the
    Tribunal must answer in determining whether the return of a  particular
    individual to his  or  her  home  country  would  be  contrary  to  the
    obligations imposed by the Human Rights Act 1998.  In  particular,  the
    mass return of those who have sought asylum in a neighbouring state  to
    their own could well overstretch the reception facilities available  in
    the home state. That does  not,  however,  necessarily  mean  that  the
    return of a particular individual from the  United  Kingdom  would  put
    that person at real risk of inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  In  the
    present case,  if  UNHCR  considered  that  anyone  who  is  internally
    displaced in Abidjan faces as such a real risk of treatment that  would
    violate Article 3 of the ECHR or  any  similar  relevant  international
    instrument, they can be expected to say so. They have  not.  Whilst  we
    have no reason to suppose that conditions faced by  those  in  internal
    displacement in Abidjan would be anything  other  than  difficult,  the
    evidence does not establish that they would be sufficiently  severe  as
    to reach the Article  3  threshold.  We  therefore  conclude  that,  in
    general terms, the return of individuals to the Ivory Coast (whether or
    not they originate from Abidjan) would not be in breach of Article 3.

64.   Insofar as the general security situation in Abidjan is concerned,  it
    should be noted that, despite the difficulties which existed  there  in
    January 2004, the UNHCR concluded that "a relative  level  of  security
    has been established" in that city. This should  now  be  read  in  the
    light of the recent developments we have summarised at paragraphs 24 to
    26 above. Whilst we note that certain (poorer) neighbourhood have  been
    subject to raids and roundups, the evidence is that individuals face  a
    generalised risk in these areas. We accept  that  persons  in  internal
    displacement in these areas are at greater risk of being  subjected  to
    raids and abuse. However, it is  clear,  from  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgement in Hariri v. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 807 that, absent anything personal to a claimant  which
    puts him at real risk of serious ill-treatment, it  is  not  enough  to
    show that the ill-treatment feared occurs frequently or  routinely.  In
    order to satisfy the "real risk" standard, it must be shown that  there
    is  a  consistent  pattern  of  gross  and  systematic   violation   of
    fundamental human rights. In this case, the objective evidence does not
    show that raids and incidents of abuse by the security  forces  against
    persons in internal  displacement  are  even  occurring  frequently  or
    routinely, let alone that there is a consistent pattern  of  gross  and
    systematic violation of fundamental human rights.

  65. Given that the Appellant last lived  in  a  suburb  of  Abidjan,  the
      Tribunal sees no basis upon which it can be successfully claimed that
      the Refugee Convention or the ECHR currently precludes his return  to
      that city.  This  is  despite  the  fact  that,  as  far  as  can  be
      ascertained from his evidence, the Appellant  does  not  have  family
      members in Abidjan.  The Appellant is a  man  of  32.   There  is  no
      evidence that he is suffering from any  medical  problem  that  would
      preclude him from obtaining employment.  He has shown himself  to  be
      possessed of the resources and, indeed, resourcefulness to  undertake
      a protracted journey through many countries, before arriving  in  the
      United Kingdom.  In any event, the fact that  he  may,  initially  at
      least, face internal displacement is not in any sense to  be  equated
      with a real risk that he would suffer Article 3 ill treatment.



      Failed asylum seekers:

66.   There is nothing in the UNHCR documents to show that returning failed
    asylum seekers have  been  ill  treated  in  Abidjan  Airport  or  have
    disappeared upon arrival  there.   There  is  no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal that no one is at present being  forcibly  returned  to  Ivory
    Coast from Western Europe.  Miss  Griffiths's  views  upon  what  might
    happen to the Appellant at the Airport are,  in  essence,  speculation,
    unsupported by any particular evidence.  We have already noted how  her
    views on the position of returning failed asylum seekers relate to  the
    period beginning with the September 2002  coup  attempt,  thus  putting
    those views at variance with the UNHCR pronouncements to which we  have
    just referred.  The demonstrations of March 2004, serious  though  they
    were, have not been shown to  be  qualitatively  different  from  other
    setbacks  in  the  peace  process,  as   detailed   earlier   in   this
    Determination.  Accordingly, the Tribunal  does  not  accept  that  the
    evidence shows that there has been such a change  of  attitude  on  the
    part of the Ivorian authorities since March 2004, as to  render  otiose
    the earlier pronouncements of the UNHCR on the  position  of  returning
    failed asylum seekers.

67.   This appeal is dismissed.





            P R LANE
            VICE PRESIDENT

Approved for electronic distribution
