
                               HR (Proportionality) Serbia and Montenegro
[2004] UKIAT 00088

                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date of Hearing: 24th June 2003
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               28 April 2004
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)

Between:
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   He
     appeals, with leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R
     Norman, allowing on human rights grounds the appeal of the Respondent,
     a citizen of Yugoslavia from Kosovo, against his decision on 7th March
     2002 to direct his removal as  an  illegal  entrant.   Before  us  the
     Secretary of State has  been  represented  by  Mrs  Giltrow,  and  the
     Respondent by Mr Ikie of Ikie Solicitors.  The Respondent was  at  all
     material times accompanied by his wife and, to an extent, she will  be
     affected by the decision made in her husband's case.   We  shall  call
     the Respondent and his wife together the Claimants.

  2. The Claimants have a son resident in the United Kingdom as the  result
     of a grant to him of refugee status and indefinite  leave  to  remain.
     Following the son's flight from Kosovo,  the  son  and  parents  lived
     apart for, we think, rather over four years.  They were in contact  by
     letter and, in due course, there was a letter in which  the  Claimants
     described to their son the difficulties  which  they  said  they  were
     incurring in Kosovo.  It appears that the son thereupon  advised  them
     to leave Kosovo by whatever means they  could  and  join  him  in  the
     United Kingdom as  refugees.   They  travelled  through  a  number  of
     European countries before  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  2nd
     February 2002.  They claimed asylum a few days later:  their claim was
     refused and certified.  The Adjudicator found that there was no  truth
     in it at all and agreed with the certificate.  It is for  that  latter
     reason that there is no appeal on asylum grounds before us.

  3. The Claimants also claimed that their removal from the United  Kingdom
     would infringe their human rights  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  the
     European Convention on Human Rights.  The claim under Article  3  had,
     in essence, to be taken with the claim  to  be  refugees.   Given  the
     Adjudicator's findings of fact, there is no basis for any finding that
     the removal of the Claimants to Kosovo would breach their rights under
     Article 3.  We are concerned today with Article  8.   The  Adjudicator
     considered all the facts available to him including those arising from
     the evidence of the Claimants and of their  son  and,  we  understand,
     various financial matters relating to the  son's  employment  and  his
     ability to support his parents if they stayed.  Having considered  all
     those matters, the Adjudicator concluded as follows, in paragraphs  25
     and 26 of his determination:

           "25.  I find that if the Appellant [that is  to  say,  the  male
                 Claimant]  were  returned  to  Kosovo  there  would  be  an
                 interference with the right of himself, his  wife  and  his
                 only son to family life.  I find that the  UK  Government's
                 action in seeking to remove the Appellant is in  accordance
                 with the law and has the legitimate aim of the  maintenance
                 of immigration  controls,  which  is  an  accepted  element
                 required for the prevention of disorder or crime.   I  have
                 also considered whether removal by  the  UK  Government  is
                 proportionate in a democratic society to the legitimate aim
                 to be  achieved.   I  have  also  taken  into  account  all
                 relevant factors including:


                 (a)   the age of the Appellant and of his wife.
                 (b)   the fact that Mr Gezim Rusi is their only son,  that
                       he has an established life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                       that he has employment,  that  at  the  time  of  the
                       Respondent's decision he was in the process of buying
                       a house (which he  now  owns  (subject  to  mortgage)
                       where he and his parents live and that he is able  to
                       support them without recourse to public funds).
                 (c)   that the separation of four and a half years referred
                       to in the letter of refusal  was  the  result  of  Mr
                       Gezim Rusi having good reasons for not  returning  to
                       Kosovo rather than that he did not  have  close  ties
                       with his parents.
                 (d)   that Mr Gezim Rusi did  send  money  to  his  parents
                       while they were in Kosovo and that he  supports  them
                       now.

           26.   I have weighed these against the right and the need of the
                 UK Government to control the entry  of  non-nationals  onto
                 its territory and I find on the facts  as  established  and
                 balancing  all  material  factors  that   return   is   not
                 proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  to  be   achieved.
                 Therefore the Appellant has established that  by  returning
                 him,  the  UK  Government  would  be  in  breach   of   its
                 obligations under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention."


      And, for that reason, he allowed the Claimant's appeal.


  4. The Secretary of State has appealed against that  determination.   The
     principal grounds, if we may summarise them, are that the  Adjudicator
     erred in failing to follow the starred  case  of  Kehinde  01/TH/2668,
     which was binding on him, and that he erred in  his  consideration  of
     proportionality.  That ground raises implicitly the interpretation  of
     the starred decision in Noruwa 01/TH/2345 and subsequent decisions  of
     the Tribunal and of the higher courts.

  5. We sit today as a panel which has in common two members of  the  panel
     that decided Kehinde, and also two members of the panel  that  decided
     Noruwa, and we hope to provide assistance in  the  resolution  of  the
     issues raised by those two cases  and  by  this  one.   We  gave  this
     judgment in court at the end of the hearing.  During the  period  when
     we were attempting to make final corrections to it, the  decisions  of
     the Court of Appeal in Razgar  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
     Department [2003] EWCA Civ 840, followed by Djali v Secretary of State
     for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1371 and Schmelz v Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWCA  Civ  29.   Meanwhile,  the  Tribunal  has
     issued M (Croatia) [2004] 00024* and N (Kenya) [2004] 00009.   Nothing
     that we say here is intended to conflict with any of  those  decisions
     on the role of the Appellate Authorities in appeals raising issues  of
     proportionality.

  6. The first question then is whether, in making the  determination  that
     he did make, the Adjudicator was entitled to consider the human rights
     of firstly, the Claimant's son, who was in no sense  a  party  to  the
     appeal, and secondly, to the rights of the female  Claimant.   In  her
     case it is right to say that although she was not an Appellant to  the
     Adjudicator, Mrs Giltrow has not suggested that her human  rights  did
     not fall to be taken into account.  The relevant part of the  decision
     in Kehinde is as follows:

           "9.   In an appeal under section  65,  therefore,  there  is  no
                 obligation to take into account claims made about the human
                 rights  of  individuals  other  than   the   appellant   or
                 individuals who have not themselves been the subject  of  a
                 decision which is under appeal. Such matters  (save  in  so
                 far as they relate to the human  rights  of  the  appellant
                 himself) are irrelevant to the matter under consideration."

     We have emphasised the words in brackets  because  our  experience  is
     that they  are  often  ignored.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  the
     situation or the human rights of the  Appellant  should  be  taken  in
     isolation.   The  Appellant's  own  position  is  the  focus  of   the
     Adjudicator's determination, but  in  assessing  the  Appellant's  own
     position, the Adjudicator will  need  to  consider  all  the  material
     before him.  An Adjudicator could not have allowed an appeal  such  as
     the present simply on the basis that a  non-Appellant's  human  rights
     would be affected by  the  decision.   But  the  fact  that  a  family
     member's human rights  are  affected  may  well  be  relevant  to  the
     determination of the Appellant's own human rights.


  7. We say no more than that in order  to  avoid  pre-judging  any  future
     cases.  What we would emphasise is that  there  is  no  suggestion  in
     Kehinde that any matter relevant to the Appellant's own  human  rights
     is to be ignored.  It is quite clear that there are  circumstances  in
     which the human rights of someone  other  than  an  Appellant  have  a
     relevance;  but that relevance has to be confined to the  effect  that
     those rights have on the Appellant's own human rights.  We intend that
     the Tribunal's decision in Met Sula, where the facts were, to say  the
     least, complex, cast no doubt on that particular principle,  which  is
     also exemplified in R(AC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
     [2003] EWHC 389.

  8. We pass then to questions relating to proportionality.  Here, we  have
     had the enormous advantage of being shown a  recent  decision  of  the
     Court of Appeal in Blessing Edore v Secretary of State [2003] EWCA Civ
     716.  That is a decision in which Simon Brown LJ, with whom Waller  LJ
     and Kay LJ agreed, set out a number of issues relating to the task  of
     Adjudicators  and  the  Tribunal  in  assessing   appeals   based   on
     proportionality.  In the course of his judgment, Simon Brown LJ refers
     to what he perceives as the difficulty of understanding the Tribunal's
     decision in Noruwa.  He cites, at paragraph 19, a shorter statement of
     the law in the Tribunal's decision  in  Baah  [2002]  UKIAT  05998  as
     follows:

           "The question for us is whether or not the Respondent's decision
           is lawful  under  s  6(1):   that  is  to  say,  whether  it  is
           proportionate.  It is not open  to  us  to  substitute  our  own
           decision if the  decision  was  within  the  allowable  area  of
           discretion allowed to the Respondent."


  9. Simon Brown LJ then goes on to cite the analysis of Moses J in  Ala  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCH  521  Admin  of
     19th March 2003.  His summary at paragraph 20 is as follows:

           "For my  part,  I  find  Moses  J's  analysis  in  Ala  entirely
           convincing, and in the result conclude that in  cases  like  the
           present where the essential facts are not in doubt  or  dispute,
           the Adjudicator's task on a human rights appeal under s 65 is to
           determine whether the decision under  appeal,  ex  hypothesei  a
           decision unfavourable to the Appellant, was properly one  within
           the decision-maker's discretion ie was a  decision  which  could
           reasonably be regarded as proportionate and as striking  a  fair
           balance between the competing interests in claim.   If  it  was,
           then the Adjudicator cannot characterise it as a  decision  'not
           in accordance with the law' and so, even if he personally  would
           have preferred the balance to have been struck differently ie in
           the Appellant's favour, he cannot substitute his preference  for
           the decision in fact taken."


      We respectfully agree, and did not mean to say anything  different  in
      Noruwa.


 10. However, the matter cannot unfortunately be allowed to  remain  there.
     The task of the Adjudicator is a much  more  complex  one  than  those
     clear and accurate statements of the law indicate.  As we attempted to
     point out in Noruwa , the Adjudicator is concerned with a real appeal.
      For that reason, his fact-finding function remains alive.  He is  not
     merely concerned with a review of the Secretary of  State's  decision.
     In a case  based  on  proportionality,  therefore,  the  Adjudicator's
     primary function will be to find  the  relevant  facts.   He  is  then
     concerned with determining whether the decision which was made was  or
     was not a lawful one.  In Noruwa, we  were  concerned  to  distinguish
     cases governed by what was then paragraph 21(1)(a)  to  the  1999  Act
     from those covered by paragraph 21(1)(b).   The  mere  fact  that  the
     Secretary of State's decision involved a question  of  proportionality
     does not make it one in which the decision involved the exercise of  a
     discretion.

 11. It follows, as we decided in  Noruwa,  that  it  is  not  open  to  an
     Adjudicator to substitute his own judgment on proportionality for  the
     judgment of the Secretary of State.  The issue of  proportionality  is
     different from that of discretion and the Adjudicator is  confined  to
     his functions under paragraph 21(1)(a):  that is to say, and indeed as
     Moses J also said in Ala, he is concerned with discovering whether the
     decision against which the appeal is brought is a decision  which  was
     not in accordance with the law, subject  to  any  restriction  on  the
     grounds of appeal, such as is found in section 65 of the 1999 Act.  In
     order to decide that issue, however,  the  Adjudicator  will  have  to
     decide on issues of proportionality.

 12. We attempt here to be precise about the issue  which  the  Adjudicator
     must decide.  He is clearly not given a power to  decide  for  himself
     whether the removal of the Claimants would infringe Article 8 as being
     disproportionate.   He  is  concerned,  instead,  with  a  much   more
     difficult task.  He has to decide whether, on the facts he has  found,
     the decision is one which nobody could reasonably call  proportionate.
     It is if nobody could reasonably call the decision proportionate  that
     he will find that the decision breached the Claimant's  human  rights:
     he will therefore allow the  appeal,  having  found  that  the  ground
     specified in section 65 is made out.  If, on the other hand,  whatever
     may be his own inclinations, he is not  satisfied  that  the  decision
     which  was  made  is  one   which   nobody   could   reasonably   call
     proportionate, then the decision is lawful and  the  Adjudicator  must
     say so and dismiss the appeal.

 13. We do not underestimate the difficulty which Adjudicators are bound to
     have in applying the law on this topic.  It is all too easy to come to
     a conclusion that, because one thinks oneself that the decision  would
     be disproportionate, nobody could reasonably disagree.   Nevertheless,
     it is quite clear that the task imposed on Adjudicators by the statute
     is not themselves to make judgments on proportionality but  merely  to
     determine  whether  the  decision  which   has   been   made   is   so
     disproportionate that it falls outside  of  the  range  of  reasonable
     responses and was therefore unlawful.

 14. We turn then to the facts of this appeal.  As Mrs Giltrow pointed out,
     the Claimants could have applied to  join  their  son  as  the  family
     members of a refugee.  Owing to their advanced age,  they  could  have
     applied under the  Immigration  Rules  to  join  him  as  his  elderly
     dependant parents.  They did neither;  and  that  is  a  matter  which
     falls for consideration in this appeal.  We take into account also all
     the matters which the Adjudicator took into account.  We note that  in
     making his own decision,  the  Secretary  of  State  appears  to  have
     considered that there was no family life at all between the  Claimants
     and their son.  That, in our view, was an error.  Nevertheless, so far
     as the Adjudicator was concerned, he made a finding of fact that there
     was family life, exemplified, in the four and a half  years  when  the
     Claimants were separated from their son, by contact and the sending of
     money from time to time, and, in the  time  since  the  Claimants  had
     arrived in the United Kingdom, by their living together with  him  and
     becoming more strongly financially  dependant  upon  him.   Those  are
     facts found by the Adjudicator which needed to be fed into the process
     of deciding whether the Secretary of State's decision  to  remove  the
     Claimants was disproportionate in the sense of being outside the range
     of possible responses.

 15. The Adjudicator, in his determination, makes no reference to  what  we
     have decided is the correct test.  It is clear from the  passage  that
     we have cited from his determination that  the  Adjudicator  concerned
     himself  simply  with  his   own   view   on   whether   removal   was
     disproportionate.  We note that removal would return the family to the
     situation in which it was for so many years.  We  note  also  that  if
     that is done,  the  Claimants  would  have  the  opportunity  to  make
     application to come to the United Kingdom lawfully under at least  two
     heads.  Given those factors in addition  to  those  mentioned  by  the
     Adjudicator, the Secretary of State's response  was  clearly  not  one
     which nobody could reasonably call proportionate.  The Adjudicator was
     wrong  to  find  that  the  decision  was  illegal  as  breaching  the
     Claimants' rights under Article 8, which was the only basis upon which
     he could reverse it.

 16. This appeal is therefore allowed  and  we  restore  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision to remove the Claimants as illegal entrants.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

