
Heard at Field House
On 6 July 2004

YK (Citation of unreported decisions) Serbia and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT
00207
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                28 July 2004


                                   Before:

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                               Mr R. A. McKee
                               Mr S. S. Percy


Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant/Secretary of State:   Ms R. Brown, Home Office Presenting
                                  Officer
For the respondent/claimant: Mr J. Adler, Counsel, instructed by Gupta &
                                  Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an Adjudicator,
      Mr M. Rothwell, promulgated on 18 September 2003, following a  hearing
      at Hatton Cross on 9 September 2003  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  both  the
      claimant's asylum and human rights claims.

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro and was born on  21
      January 1988.  He is 16 years old.

   3. The claimant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  avoiding  immigration
      controls on 13 April 2002, when he was aged 14, and claimed asylum  on
      the same day shortly after arrival.  The Secretary  of  State  made  a
      decision on 13 March 2003 giving directions for the claimant's removal
      to Albania and refusing his asylum claim.  The basis  of  the  refusal
      included the fact that the claimant had failed  to  complete  and  SEF
      without reasonable explanation.  At the time of his arrival he was  14
      years old and was unaccompanied.

   4. The claimant comes from Kosovo in Serbia and Montenegro, not  Albania.
      He speaks Albanian.  He is of mixed ethnicity in that  his  father  is
      Roma, although his  mother  is  Albanian.   He  claimed  that  he  was
      persecuted as a result of his mixed  ethnicity  because  he  had  been
      discriminated against and  harassed  because  he  is  Ashkaelia.   The
      Secretary of State accepted that the removal  directions  should  have
      been made to Kosovo and not Albania.   An  undertaking  was  given  on
      behalf that the Secretary of State to the Adjudicator and repeated  by
      Ms Brown who appeared before us to the intent that the claimant  would
      not be required to return to Albania.

   5. The claimant lived in Gjakova.  His  father  worked  for  the  Serbian
      police between 1995 and 1999 and was killed by members of the  KLA  in
      September 1999.  His mother then moved  the  family  to  live  with  a
      relative, [                 ], of the claimant's  father,  where  they
      remained     without     incident     until     April     2002.      [
            ] worked as an electrician and the claimant's  brother  assisted
      him.  In a statement made by the claimant on 13 May 2002, the claimant
      set out what happened in paragraphs 21 to  24.  On  5  April  2002,  6
      Albanian men called at [                       ]'s home.  They  called
      him out and a fierce,  violent  altercation  ensued.   The  claimant's
      brother intervened and was shot.  The claimant continued:

           "My mother ran out of the house and I could see the men pointing
           their guns at my mother and threatening to kill her.  They  told
           my mother they knew who we were and  what  had  happened  to  my
           father and told her that gypsies had no place in  Kosovo.   They
           told my mother to go to Serbia  because  we  were  collaborators
           Serbs and that the Serbs would protect us.   Before  they  left,
           they said they will come back soon and if they  found  is  still
           around, they would kill all of us."

      The claimant's brother was nursed back to health.   Arrangements  were
      made for the claimant to leave Kosovo.   Those  arrangements  did  not
      include his mother or brother.  The Adjudicator recorded in  paragraph
      3.6 of the determination that the claimant had made no inquiries about
      his family since leaving.


   6. At the hearing before the  Adjudicator,  the  claimant  did  not  give
      evidence save to confirm his statement.  There appears  to  have  been
      arrangement made between the representatives that  no  other  evidence
      was to be provided.   Mr  Flegg,  who  appeared  on  behalf  that  the
      Secretary of State before the Adjudicator, submitted that there was no
      reason why the claimant should be  identified  as  a  Roma  or  would,
      indeed, identify himself as such.  Although he has dark hair, his skin
      is pale and there is nothing in his physical  appearance  to  identify
      himself as Roma.  His mother is, of  course,  Albanian  with  no  Roma
      blood.  The claimant himself does not speak Roma.  It was,  therefore,
      submitted that he could relocate in whatever part  of  Kosovo  he  may
      choose and no consequences would follow.  If he is out of  touch  with
      his family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  will  be  no  substantially
      different position in Kosovo.


   7. Mr Adler, who appeared before the Adjudicator as  he  appeared  before
      us, submitted on the claimant's behalf  that  the  claimant  had  been
      identified in the incident of April 2002 as a gypsy and as an  alleged
      collaborator with the  Serbs  and  was  at  risk  of  the  same  thing
      happening again.  It is apparent to us that the sole issue before  the
      Adjudicator was whether the appellant would be identified as  a  mixed
      ethnicity and/or of a family perceived to have collaborated  with  the
      Serbs.   In  paragraph  4.4  of  the  determination,  the  Adjudicator
      considered the background material and the fact that the  Gjakova  and
      Peje regions contain mixed communities of Roma and Albanians and  that
      it was reasonably likely that the claimant was not living  in  a  Roma
      community "so as to have any real identification of himself as one  or
      another".  He accepted that the claimant had had no  problems  between
      1999 and 2002.  The Adjudicator accepted the claimant's evidence  that
      [                                  ] was a Roma who had avoided making
      that public.

   8. The Adjudicator's determination was based upon his  interpretation  of
      the  UNHCR  Position  Paper  on  the  continued  protection  needs  of
      individuals  from  Kosovo  dated  April  2002.   He  was  referred  to
      paragraph 5 of the  document  and  the  three  categories  of  Kosovan
      Albanians who were then said  to  be  in  need  of  protection.   This
      passage is found page 301 of the bundle before the  Adjudicator.   The
      categories are:

                a) Kosovo  Albanians  originating  from  areas  where  they
                   constitute an ethnic minority
                b) Kosovo  Albanians  in  ethnically  mixed  marriages  and
                   persons of mixed ethnicity
                c) Kosovo Albanians perceived to have been associated  with
                   the Serbian regime after 1990.


   9. The Adjudicator decided the claimant fell into all three, or at  least
      two, of those categories.  Since the claimant originated from an  area
      in Kosovo where  the  Albanian  population  was  and  remains  in  the
      majority, it may be that the Adjudicator was not  satisfied  that  the
      claimant fell into this group.  The  Adjudicator  did,  however,  find
      that the claimant was from an ethnically  mixed  marriage  and,  as  a
      result of  the  April  2002  incident,  was  perceived  to  have  been
      associated with the Serbian regime after 1990.  In paragraph  4.10  of
      the determination, the Adjudicator said:


           "Of course, the  appellant  is  of  mixed  ethnicity.   Although
           having dark hair his skin is pale and he has clearly  been  able
           to live without being identified or suffering any  problems  for
           three years until the incident of 2002.  So  while  he  has  not
           strictly in the group of RAE it is still relevant to  note  that
           his family was targeted  with  the  perception  of  then  deemed
           gypsies and because  of  collaboration  with  the  Serbs...  the
           appellant's circumstances are also distinguishable from those of
           B (SMKosovo) because his family are specifically identified even
           though he was living in western Kosovo where  circumstances  are
           said to be improved.  It is not known how  his  family  identity
           and  background  was  established,  but  it  was  with  dramatic
           consequences for him."


  10. On the basis  of  this  reasoning,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      appellant  had  proved  past  persecution  and  the  risk  of  further
      prospective persecution.  Similarly, the consequences  that  he  found
      were reasonably likely to occur to the claimant on  return  to  Kosovo
      where sufficiently serious constitute a violation  of  his  Article  3
      rights.


  11. The Secretary of State appealed.  The grounds of appeal raise a single
      issue.  It is said that  the  claimant  could  pass  for  an  ordinary
      Albanian on return to Kosovo because he  is  light-skinned,  does  not
      speak Roma, has an Albanian surname and would  not  be  identified  as
      Roma on return to Kosovo except in his own village.  This issue is, in
      effect, the same issue canvassed before the Adjudicator.

  12. In our judgment, we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has made
      out the point raised in the grounds of appeal.   The  question  before
      the Adjudicator was whether  the  claimant  was  at  risk  of  adverse
      consequences on return to Kosovo as a result of his  past  history  as
      found by the Adjudicator.  This required the Adjudicator to assess the
      risk for this particular claimant.  In the circumstances of his  case,
      the issue of  risk  was  directly  related  to  whether  he  would  be
      identified.  It was, of course, for the claimant to establish that  he
      would be identified as a Roma  or  of  mixed  ethnicity  or  would  be
      perceived as a collaborator  with  the  Serbs  or  from  a  family  of
      collaborators.  On the basis of those findings, it  was  open  to  the
      claimant to argue that, on the facts of his particular case, he  would
      be at risk.  We say this because not all Roma are persecuted, just  as
      not all family members are persecuted as a result of the activities of
      one member of their family.   Nevertheless,  the  claimant  could  not
      realistically even begin the task of establishing a case unless he was
      able  to  establish  to  the  requisite  standard  that  he  would  be
      recognised or identified as a target.


  13. The Adjudicator did not approach the appeal in that way.  Instead,  he
      approached the issue of risk by examining whether  the  claimant  fell
      into one of the UNHCR  categories  as  if  classification  alone  were
      determinative of adverse consequences.  The Position Paper should  not
      be construed as a statute.  At most, it is a guide  from  one  of  the
      several organisations that seek  to  assist  decision  makers  in  the
      assessment of risk.  It is not a substitute for the Adjudicator making
      his own assessment on the facts of an individual case.  This is  clear
      from the terms of the categories.   A  couple  in  a  mixed  marriage,
      living together, in circumstances where the mixed ethnicity  is  clear
      and apparent might reasonably be identified as being at risk.  Yet, we
      doubt whether this category can properly be applied slavishly  in  all
      cases.  In our judgment, it could not properly identify a  risk  where
      the spouses in a mixed marriage separate  and  each  moves  away  from
      their home and begins an independent life.

  14. Mr Adler relied upon the fact that in April 2002 the claimant had been
      involved in a violent incident in which his brother had been shot.  We
      understand that [                         ]  was  a  relative  of  the
      claimant's father and himself a Roma.  For  obvious  reasons,  he  had
      managed to conceal his ethnicity for the most  part.   The  claimant's
      account  suggests  that  the  Albanians  who  attacked               [
           ] were targeting him, rather than the claimant or his family.   [
                             ]'s home is apparently some three or four hours
      away by car from where the  claimant  lived.   There  is  no  credible
      evidence that the attackers were from Gjakova and had managed to trace
      the claimant's whereabouts.  The claimant's mother is Albanian and the
      claimant himself does not have the physical appearance of  a  Roma  so
      there is no reason that, by appearance alone,  the  claimant's  family
      would have been targeted. Mr Adler did not seek to suggest he  knew  a
      means by  which  the  claimant's  mixed  ethnicity  had  come  to  the
      attention of the attackers.  He merely stated that it had and that  it
      was, therefore, liable  to  happen  again.   We  do  not  accept  that
      submission.  There  is  nothing  about  the  claimant's  lifestyle  or
      appearance that identifies him as Roma.  If, as he claims, the fact of
      being Roma or half-Roma places him at risk, it is reasonable to assume
      that this will be concealed.  There is no situation put forward by  Mr
      Adler in which the claimant will  be  required  to  reveal  his  mixed
      ethnicity.  It is not a factor that has to be  revealed  when  dealing
      with the authorities or applying  for  identity  cards,  passports  or
      other official documents.  It seems to us much more  likely  that  the
      incident          occurred          because                          [
            ]was identified as a Roma,  rather  than  as  a  result  of  the
      claimant's family's presence in his household.


  15. Unless the claimant can establish by credible evidence  the  means  by
      which he will be recognised either as a Roma, or of mixed ethnicity or
      the son of a Serbian collaborator, his  claim  must  inevitably  fail.
      Even if the attack in April 2002 was a result of somebody  identifying
      the claimant or his family as Roma, but by a means that no one is able
      to  establish,  the  claimant  fails  to  establish   the   reasonable
      likelihood that history will repeat itself.  In our  judgment,  it  is
      irrational to place the claimant in a category of risk by reference to
      the UNHCR Position Paper when the claimant is  unable  to  adduce  any
      credible evidence that anybody in Kosovo is capable of identifying the
      claimant as falling within the risk category.

  16. In the course of the appeal we were referred to various  decisions  of
      the Tribunal.  In the  [2003]  UKIAT  00013  B  (SM  Kosovo),  (Mr  J.
      Freeman, chairman) the Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the  appellant
      of mixed ethnicity, and who was found not to be easily identifiable as
      a Roma.  In paragraph 13 of the determination, the Tribunal was unable
      to see that a young single Albanian-speaking and-looking man  with  no
      family times could be identified by others as a  half-gypsy  or  would
      identify himself as such, if there was a risk in  doing  so.   In  our
      judgment, this determination  is  a  simple  matter  of  common  sense
      reached by the same method of reasoning that we have adopted.

  17. We were also referred to the decision of the Tribunal in an unreported
      case decided in 2004, HX18260-2003, (Mr P. Lane,  chairman)  in  which
      the Adjudicator had not been referred to the decision in B (SM Kosovo)
      which had been promulgated  only  three  days  before.   The  Tribunal
      decided that the murder of the applicant's father  because  he  was  a
      collaborator, and the shooting of the  applicant's  brother,  rendered
      relocation impossible.  The issue as to whether the claimant would  be
      identified as a half-Roma and  the  son  of  a  collaborator  was  not
      considered in the appeal as it has been before us.  The  decision,  in
      our judgment, does not assist the claimant in establishing a means  by
      which his past will become known to others on return.

  18. More importantly, we are satisfied that it is  inappropriate  for  the
      Tribunal to consider a case  that  has  not  been  identified  by  the
      Tribunal deciding it as suitable for reporting.   The  decision  of  a
      Tribunal not to report a case is a positive act.   It  should  not  be
      regarded as an oversight.  It may  be  that  issues  which  could  and
      should have been canvassed have not been canvassed.  In such cases, it
      is not for the Tribunal to deal with issues that have not been raised.
       Where this occurs, the Tribunal is unlikely to find that it would  be
      appropriate to report the decision.  Similarly,  in  an  appeal  where
      neither party  has  referred  to  sufficient  background  material  to
      satisfy the Tribunal that its decision is a  comprehensive  assessment
      of the issue of risk on return, the Tribunal will not direct that  the
      determination  is  to  be  reported.   The  fact   that   a   Tribunal
      determination has  not  been  reported  should  mean  either  that  it
      contains nothing of interest except to the parties to  the  appeal  or
      that it cannot safely be relied upon as offering guidance.

  19. In our judgment, it is not  for  the  parties  to  seek  to  introduce
      unreported determinations simply because  the  decision  supports  the
      outcome they seek.  The criteria for relying upon a decision that  has
      not been reported are strict.  Practice Direction No 10 (CA3 of  2003)
      provides:

           "5. Permission will be given only in exceptional cases, and even
           more  rarely  in  relation  to  Adjudicator  determinations.  An
           application for permission to cite an unreported determination:
                 (i) must include a full transcript of the determination,
                 (ii)must   identify   the   proposition   for   which   the
                 determination is to be cited,
                 (iii)must certify that that proposition is not found in any
                 reported determination of the Tribunal, and  has  not  been
                 superseded by a decision of higher authority, and
                 (iv)must be accompanied by a summary analysis of all  other
                 decisions of the Tribunal, and all available  decisions  of
                 higher authority, relating to the same  issue,  promulgated
                 in the period beginning six months before the date  of  the
                 decision proposed to be cited and ending two  weeks  before
                 the date of the hearing. This analysis is intended to  show
                 the trend of IAT decisions on this issue."


  20.   In the present appeal, no application was made in writing  prior  to
      the appeal.  The application was made orally.  We consider that it  is
      only in exceptional cases that the application can properly be made at
      the hearing, if only because the summary analysis of  other  decisions
      may require time for the opposing party to research and consider.   It
      is difficult to envisage any circumstances where the  application  can
      be made orally.  Our reasons are as follows.  The application requires
      the principle on which reliance is sought to be identified.  This  can
      rarely be properly considered by the Adjudicator unless it is  reduced
      to writing.  The summary analysis of other decisions by  the  Tribunal
      (and higher) must inevitably be put in writing.  More importantly,  it
      imposes upon the representative the burden of certifying that  he  has
      done sufficient  research  to  commit  himself  to  stating  that  the
      proposition  is  not  found  in  other  decisions  and  has  not  been
      superseded by higher authority.  A  written  certificate  focuses  the
      mind and emphasises the responsibility of certification.

  21. As is made clear in the notes to the Practice Directions, the  purpose
      of maintaining a  body  of  decisions  upon  which  practitioners  and
      Adjudicators can rely is to enable a check to be kept on the number of
      authorities that  are  cited  both  before  the  Adjudicator  and  the
      Tribunal.  In our judgment, it would be a retrograde step if it became
      commonplace  for  practitioners  to  seek  to   introduce   unreported
      decisions and to prolong the length of hearings unnecessarily  by  the
      consideration of applications to cite them when the real issue in  the
      appeal is whether the reasoning in the  reported  case-law  should  be
      applied in the particular  circumstances  of  the  appeal  before  the
      Adjudicator.

  22.  The Practice Direction is clear.  It should be applied strictly.   In
      the present appeal, the Tribunal considered the report de  bene  esse.
      That is not the approach that should be adopted in future cases  where
      there has been no compliance with the terms of the Practice Directions
      and, in particular, in the absence of the certificate.


Decision:  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
13 July 2004

