



|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 21 May 2004             |        |GK (Return- Sentenced by    |
|Dictated 20 May 2004       |        |Former Regime) Serbia and   |
|                           |        |Montenegro [2004] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00203                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|02 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr S L Batiste, Vice President                                    |
|Mr Richard Chalkley, Vice President                               |
|Mr Richard Hamilton                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




      Mr Adam Pipe, of Counsel, instructed by the Immigration  Advisory
      Service, appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Mr G Saunders, a
      Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro, who was born  on
    23 July 1959.  He appeals, with leave, against the determination of  an
    Adjudicator, Mr D J  Salmon,  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent on 22 September 2003,  to  refuse  to  grant
    leave to enter after refusing asylum.   We have decided to report  this
    determination because of what we have to say about the risk  on  return
    to Serbia Montenegro by someone who was sentenced by the former Serbian
    regime in Kosovo for supplying arms to the KLA.

2.    The Appellant is an ethnic Albanian from  Montenegro  who  fears,  if
    returned to his country of nationality, that he would be mistreated due
    to his race  and  perceived  political  opinion.   He  undertook  basic
    military service, but was later, in November 1992, called back  to  the
    army.  Instead of reporting for service, he escaped to Italy  where  he
    remained for a year.  He returned to Montenegro in  1994,  because  the
    atmosphere was he says, by then, much quieter.  He was not harassed  at
    all by the authorities over the next four years.  When the situation in
    Kosovo deteriorated  and  following  the  revolution  in  Albania,  the
    Appellant became involved in trafficking arms from  Albania  to  Kosovo
    and, to a lesser extent, to Montenegro.  On 1 May 1998, he claims  that
    he was arrested by  the  police,  beaten  and  whilst  in  custody  was
    mistreated.  He was charged with draft evasion, "attempting  to  topple
    the government" and arms smuggling to the KLA.  On 30 June 1998, he was
    released on bail of 20,000 Deutsch Marks and three days later left  the
    country.  Sometime in 1998, he was tried in his absence and, he claims,
    sentenced to eleven years' prison by the High Court in Pristina.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant had been arrested in  May
    1998.  But he considered  it  unlikely  that,  after  five  years,  the
    authorities would suddenly become interested in the Appellant's failure
    to undertake military duty and noted that the  allegation  of  toppling
    the government was unexplained.  However, he accepted that it was  most
    likely that the Appellant  had  been  arrested  on  suspicion  of  arms
    smuggling.  He accepted that the Appellant was  released  on  bail,  on
    payment of a large amount by his uncle and that there was some  finding
    against him in his absence by the High Court in Pristina.  This was  at
    the time when the Yugoslavia  authorities  were  still  in  control  in
    Kosovo.  The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  Appellant  remained  in
    Albania for two and a half years and, thereafter, made his way back  to
    Montenegro where he collected his family  and  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 15 April 2001.  However, he dismissed the Appellant's asylum
    and human rights  appeals  for  various  reasons;  he  noted  from  the
    objective evidence that Montenegro has a good record  of  human  rights
    and that he would not be threatened because of his Albanian  ethnicity;
    he doubted whether the sentence passed in Pristina in Kosovo  when  the
    Serbs  were  still  in  control  there,  would  even  be  recorded   in
    Montenegro; with regard to draft evasion, he noted that  there  was  an
    amnesty for deserters in 1998, the Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's
    claim that it did not apply to Albanians.  Insofar  as  there  was  any
    risk to the Appellant, it was, concluded the Adjudicator, in respect of
    the alleged gun smuggling; this was a matter arising from the  conflict
    in Kosovo and was for decision by the Montenegrin government.  He noted
    that the Appellant was sufficiently confident to return  to  Montenegro
    on his way to the United Kingdom to collect his family and doubted that
    he would have done so, even to collect  his  family,  if  the  fear  of
    persecution was as great as he had claimed.  The Adjudicator's  primary
    finding was that the Appellant would  not  be  at  any  risk  from  the
    Montenegrin authorities.  Alternatively, if there was any risk to  him,
    it would be of prosecution for illegal gun running  and  the  objective
    evidence suggested that he would receive a  fair  trial  and  that  the
    prison conditions in Montenegro, (were he to be sentenced) would not be
    such as to breach the Appellant's Article 3 rights.

4.    The grounds of appeal challenge the determination on  various  bases.
    First the Adjudicator,  it  is  alleged,  did  not  apply  the  correct
    standard of proof.  Second, there was no reason why a  prison  sentence
    imposed in one part of Yugoslavia would  not  be  recorded  in  another
    part.  Third the Montenegrin government would  not  make  an  objective
    decision in relation to the charge of gun-running to the  KLA,  as  the
    Appellant would be tried by a military court of high-ranking  officials
    in the armed forces.  Moreover, the CIPU Report showed that the  courts
    are not independent in practice or  free  from  state  interference  or
    corruption and that the military court system was under the control  of
    the federal authorities.

5.    In assessing the sustainability of the Adjudicator's primary  finding
    that the Appellant would not be at risk at all on return, we note  that
    the Appellant himself said in paragraph 4 of his written statement of 2
    December 2003, that:-

      "I have already stated that the authorities were arresting all ethnic
         Albanians at the time and they had no proof against  me.   In  any
         case the fact that my uncle paid a considerable sum of money which
         in reality would have ended up in the hands of the officials there
         meant that I was able to obtain bail at this time." (Our emphasis)

6.    In paragraph 2 of the same statement he said:-

      "In December 2000 I was charged with offences for not fighting during
         the war.  This was separate to the incident in  1998  when  I  was
         released on bail after my  uncle  paid  20,000  Deutsch  Marks  to
         secure my release.  In any case the police just  suspected  me  of
         the gun-running.  They did  not  have  any  evidence  against  me.
         There were many ethnic Albanians arrested at this  time.   When  I
         left the detention area I left Montenegro straight away.   It  was
         in my absence I was sentenced to eleven years.  As I  explained  I
         was sentenced due to the fact that I did not join  the  army,  was
         accused  of  arms  smuggling  and   attempting   to   topple   the
         government".  (Our emphasis)

7.    Mr Pipe addressed us at  some  length.   He  asked  us  to  note  the
    positive findings made by the Adjudicator.   In  paragraph  44  of  the
    determination, the Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was involved
    in arms smuggling and in paragraph 45 accepted that the  Appellant  was
    tortured.  In paragraph 51, the Adjudicator finds  that  the  Appellant
    was arrested because of gun-running, but it is not  clear  whether  the
    Adjudicator accepted the eleven-year sentence.  At paragraph 46 of  the
    determination the Adjudicator fails to make a clear finding in relation
    to the sentence although, in paragraph 49, it is clear that he  accepts
    that some sort of sentence was passed on the Appellant.

8.    There is no evidence to show  how  the  Appellant  was  told  of  the
    sentence that was passed on him.  He had been gun-running to Kosovo and
    to Montenegro.  He had been arrested in Kosovo and was bailed.  He then
    went to Albania where he remained  for  some  time  and  then  went  to
    Montenegro to collect his wife and child who had earlier gone  back  to
    Montenegro from Albania where they  had  been.   He  met  his  wife  in
    Albania.  She stayed there for some six  or  seven  months  before  she
    returned  to  Montenegro.   She  had  fled  to  Albania  following  the
    Appellant's arrest.  She was not able to remain  in  Albania.   Counsel
    confirmed that it appeared that after the Appellant's release  he  went
    to Albania via Montenegro, so that in fact, he had been  to  Montenegro
    on two occasions following his detention.

9.    Counsel suggested that the question for the Tribunal was whether  the
    Appellant would face a fair sentence in Montenegro, assuming  that  the
    sentence passed on him in his absence was effective.  Counsel  conceded
    that there was no evidence to suggest  that  the  Appellant  would  not
    qualify under the Amnesty for not having fought.

10.   In addressing us specifically on the  grounds,  the  first  was  that
    there was no reason to suggest that a sentence passed in  one  part  of
    Yugoslavia would not be recorded in another.   Counsel  confirmed  that
    there was no objective evidence showing the current  pursuit  of  those
    involved with the KLA except in relation to war crimes.  He agreed that
    enquiries made of the Serbia and Montenegro Embassy in London may  have
    assisted, but none had been made.  Counsel confirmed  that  he  had  no
    specific evidence to show that the Montenegro government is  likely  to
    be interested in  someone  who  had  been  sentenced  in  absentia  for
    allegedly gun-running.  The Tribunal enquired of  Counsel  whether,  in
    the circumstances, he was withdrawing the first ground.   He  confirmed
    that he would.  We pointed out to him that if he did withdraw it,  then
    the Appellant's appeal must fail in its entirety, because on return  he
    would not face any trial.  Counsel conceded that that must be  correct.
    He accepted that the Appellant was not a war criminal, but he could not
    withdraw this ground, or the appeal, but in the light of this could not
    take the matter any further.

11.   Addressing us briefly Mr Saunders suggested that the Appellant  could
    return to Kosovo if he wanted to.  There was nothing to stop him  going
    to Pristina, which is, of course, part of Serbia and Montenegro.  There
    is nothing specific in the  removal  directions,  which  would  prevent
    this.  There is no evidence that a person sentenced  by  the  Serbs  in
    1998 in Kosovo would now have to serve any sentence.  He invited us  to
    dismiss the appeal.

12.   We have concluded that we must dismiss the appeal.

13.   In paragraph  49  of  his  determination  the  Adjudicator  said,  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim that he had been sentenced to  eleven
    years in absentia, "nevertheless I think it  probably  true  that  some
    sort of sentence was passed on him in his absence.  One reason for this
    is that he refers to it being in the  court  of  Pristina.   I  see  no
    reason why he should mention a sentence being imposed in Kosovo  rather
    than  Montenegro  if  there  was  not  some  truth  in  this.   I  have
    reservations, however, as to whether  a  sentence  passed  in  Pristina
    while the Serbs were still in control there would be  recorded  in  any
    event in Montenegro."

14.   Counsel very fairly  accepted  that  he  had  no  credible  objective
    evidence on which he could rely to show that someone who was  sentenced
    in Kosovo to a term of imprisonment for assisting the KLA in  1998,  by
    supplying arms by the Serbs, would now have to serve  any  sentence  on
    return to Serbia Montenegro.  We  do  not  believe  that  he  would  be
    required to serve any sentence now, given that the sentence (if  indeed
    there was one) was imposed by the Serb regime that has now  gone.   The
    offence, in any event, is of the type that is  likely  to  be  seen  as
    being political in nature, imposed by a previous  hostile  regime.   It
    follows that, since he will not face any trial on return,  or  have  to
    serve the sentence  that  was  imposed  on  him  in  his  absence,  the
    remaining grounds of appeal fall away.  We have  concluded,  therefore,
    that this appeal must be dismissed.



                                                            RICHARD CHALKLEY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT


