
p Heard at Field House

 KK (Risk - Return - Suicide - Roma) Serbia and Montenegro [2004]   UKIAT
00228

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                              13 August 2004


                                   Before:

                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                                Mrs E. Morton


Between



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant:           Ms J. Wood, counsel
For the respondent:    Mr G. Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is Roma and a  citizen  of  Serbia  and  Montenegro  who
      appeals against the determination of an  adjudicator,  Mr  Michael  D.
      Oakley, promulgated on 5 February 2003, dismissing his appeal  against
      the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse both his  asylum  and
      his human rights claims.


   2. The appellant was born on 29 March 1980  and  is  24  years  old.   He
      claimed he entered the United Kingdom on 16 January 2002  and  claimed
      asylum on 18 January 2002.  The Secretary of State refused  his  claim
      and made a decision on 23  July  2002  to  issue  directions  for  the
      appellant's removal to Serbia.  This gave rise to a  right  of  appeal
      under section 69(5) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
      appellant duly appealed.


   3. The appellant comes from Bujanovc,  in  southern  Serbia.   He  is  an
      Albanian speaker. Bujanovac is one of the 3 municipalities  that  make
      up the Presevo Valley close to the border with Kosovo.  These comprise
      the  municipalities  of  Presevo,  Bujanovac  and  Medvedje.   It   is
      estimated that there are up to 100,000 ethnic Albanians living in  the
      area, where they form the majority of the population.   There is  also
      a Roma community living there.  The appellant claimed that, throughout
      his life, his parents have  suffered  harassment,  discrimination  and
      persecution  as  a  result  of  their  Roma  origin.   In  1999,   the
      adjudicator accepted that Serbian soldiers forced him and seven  other
      Roma to bury the bodies of Albanians killed in the conflict.  In 2001,
      he claims that he was accused by Albanians of supporting  the  Serbian
      authorities, as a result of which  they  set  fire  to  his  tent  and
      destroyed his home and possessions.   The  appellant  and  his  mother
      moved to another part of the village but, on 7 January  2002,  he  was
      threatened by local Albanians that he would be killed if  he  did  not
      move away.  Accordingly, he made arrangements to travel to the  United
      Kingdom.


   4. The adjudicator rejected the appellant's account of  events  in  2001,
      finding it implausible that the appellant had not sought redress  with
      the local police.  The adjudicator also found that it was possible for
      the appellant to move to  a  larger  Roma  community  where  he  might
      benefit from safety in numbers.  For these  reasons,  the  adjudicator
      rejected both limbs of the appellant's appeal.


   5. The appellant appealed.  In the Notice of  Appeal  dated  16  November
      2003, Ms Wood challenged the adjudicator's findings as to  sufficiency
      of protection in Serbia, internal relocation and adverse  credibility.
      No detailed challenge  was  made  to  the  adjudicator's  decision  to
      dismiss the human rights appeal.


   6. When the appeal came for hearing before the Tribunal on 17 March 2004,
      an application was made to enlarge the grounds of appeal on the  basis
      that the appellant's mental health was such that there was a  risk  of
      suicide were he to return to Serbia.  This application  had,  to  some
      extent, been presaged at  the  hearing  before  the  adjudicator.   In
      paragraph  3  of  the  determination,  Ms  Wood  had  applied  for  an
      adjournment to permit the appellant an opportunity to obtain a medical
      report dealing with psychiatric difficulties that  the  appellant  had
      experienced since arrival in the United  Kingdom.   It  was  indicated
      that the appellant had been receiving treatment  since  June  or  July
      2002.  Although this had not been advanced in the grounds  of  appeal,
      by the time the matter came before the Tribunal there was a volume  of
      medical evidence that the  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider.   In
      addition, it was clear that the grounds of appeal  required  amendment
      to cover the issue.  In due course, by amendment and re-amendment, the
      grounds of appeal were enlarged to cover both Articles 3 and 8 of  the
      ECHR.


   7. The Country Report of April 2004, prepared by CIPU deals with Roma  in
      these terms:





           Roma



           S.6.75. The Republic constitution  prohibits  discrimination  on
           ethnic or racial grounds.   However, discrimination against Roma
           is widespread in all fields including housing, education, social
           and health care and employment.  Intimidation and harassment  is
           common and violent attacks  by  skinheads  and  police  has  not
           always adequately dealt with similar groups.   There  have  also
           been cases of police brutality towards Roma  during  2002.  [2b]
           [3f] [9d] [9e] [63a](Section 1) [63b] [75a]


           S.6.76. The Humanitarian Law centre, a Serbian NGO and  advocacy
           group, investigated 241 cases of attacks on Roma in  the  period
           2000 - 2002, by individuals  and  groups,  and  by  the  police.
           [63a](Introduction) 'The most serious and typical incidents' are
           outlined in the HLC report Roma in  Serbia,  published  December
           2003. [63a] There were  examples  of  violent  attacks  on  Roma
           during 2003.


           S.6.77. Amnesty International has  reported  (in  its  September
           2002  report)  that  frequent  attacks  with   little   apparent
           protection provided by the authorities have  led  to  many  Roma
           feeling too scared to go out  in  the  evening.  [3f](p.17)  The
           Humanitarian Law Center (HLC) reported that judicial proceedings
           are unduly prolonged when Roma  appear  as  plaintiffs  and  the
           police response when Roma are assaulted by private  citizens  is
           often inadequate. [63b]  However, as  reported  in  the  Amnesty
           International  report  of  September  2002,  in  May  2001,  two
           skinheads were convicted for an attack on a Roma couple that was
           accepted by the court  as  being  motivated  by  ethnic  hatred.
           [3f](p.17)


           S.6.78. Incidents of police brutality against Roma continued  in
           2002 and 2003.  HLC investigated several cases of police  abuse,
           including beatings both at police stations and  in  the  street.
           [63a]   Complaints  reported  by  the  Humanitarian  Law  Center
           include as follows: 'the investigated  cases  show  that  during
           routine procedures  such  as  identity  checks  police  officers
           regularly  maltreated  and  physically  abused  Roma.  Cases  of
           physical abuse, even of children, were registered in  connection
           with other police work  such  as  execution  of  court  orders.'
           [63a](sect.1.1)  Complaints alleging use of excessive  force  by
           police officers have not been properly  investigated,  according
           to the HLC in its shadow report of  January  2003.   [63b](p.18)
           The report continues,  though  courts  have  started  sentencing
           officers for subjecting Roma to acts of torture,  sentences  are
           usually light. [63b](p.18)


           S.6.79. Societal  discrimination  against  Roma  is  widespread,
           ranging from  non-admittance  to  restaurants,  nightclubs,  and
           sports centres. [63a](Introduction) Only rarely have  Roma  been
           successful in gaining legal remedy for having been denied access
           to  public  places,  according  to  the  HLC  in  January  2003.
           [63b](p.18) In July 2002, the municipal court in Sabac ruled  in
           favour of Roma who were barred  from  using  a  public  swimming
           pool: this was the first time that existing law had been used to
           prove discrimination against Roma. [3f](p.18)  In  January  2002
           HLC filed a lawsuit against the Trezor  disco  in  Belgrade  for
           denying admission to Roma. [63b](p.17) No reports could be found
           to date (April 2004) as to whether  the  Trezor  case  has  been
           resolved.

           S.6.80. The US State Department  report  for  2003  and  Amnesty
           International (AI) (in Concerns in Europe: January - June  2002)
           state that estimates vary but there are  probably  about  45,000
           Roma Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)  in  SaM,  mostly  from
           Kosovo.  [3d](p.78)   [2c](p.12)   AI   continues   that   local
           municipalities are often reluctant to accept them and IDPs  have
           been deprived of humanitarian assistance because "as  a  nomadic
           people" they allegedly do  not  require  it.  [3d](p.78)      In
           Belgrade and other towns in Serbia  and  Montenegro,  many  Roma
           IDPs live in squalid  illegal  settlements,  without  access  to
           electricity, running water or sanitation, according  to  the  US
           State Department report for 2003. [2c](p.12)  There is a  higher
           incidence of ill-health and  infant  mortality  than  among  the
           general population, according to the Humanitarian  Legal  Center
           Shadow report of January 2003. [63b](p.19)


           S.6.81. Local authorities are inadequate in their  rehousing  of
           Roma, according to the US State Department report for 2003,  and
           have evicted Roma from tenancies arbitrarily, leading  to  great
           individual difficulty, such as, in July 2003, the Roma family of
           eight who were left homeless. [2c](p.17)


           S.6.82.  The  problems  for  Roma  IDPs   are   exacerbated   by
           difficulties  regarding  registration  and  acquiring   identity
           cards.  Most  who  fled  from  Kosovo  do  not   have   adequate
           documentation or  evidence  of  citizenship  and  are  regularly
           denied access to health, social welfare and education for  their
           children. [2b][3d][3f] For the most part Roma have  no  prospect
           of finding employment, according to  the  UN  Humanitarian  Risk
           analysis report 18, of July 2002. [61a](p.23)


           S.6.83. Information from the Humanitarian  Law  Center's  shadow
           report of 2002 and the  US  State  Department  report  for  2002
           concludes that Roma children  have  poor  access  to  education,
           owing partly to language difficulties and to entrance tests that
           have not been adapted to their circumstances:-


                  'Many Roma children never attend  primary  school,  either
                  for  family  reasons,  because  they  were  judged  to  be
                  unqualified, or because of societal prejudice. Due to this
                  lack of primary schooling,  many  Roma  children  did  not
                  learn to speak  Serbian,  and  there  was  no  instruction
                  available in the Romani language. Some Roma children  were
                  mistakenly placed in schools for children  with  emotional
                  disabilities because Romani language  and  cultural  norms
                  made it difficult for  them  to  succeed  on  standardized
                  tests in Serbian.' [2b](p.15)


           In Vojvodina, over 70% of Roma children are either semi-literate
           or illiterate. [63b](p.28) Some schools have refused  to  accept
           Roma children or they have been taught  in  separate,  all  Roma
           classes.  [63b](p.28)  However,  additional  lessons  have  been
           organised for Roma children  by  NGOs  and  there  has  been  an
           expansion  in  extra  mural   education   for   Roma   children.
           [63b](p.28) UNHCR, with support from the Serbian government, has
           begun head - start education programmes, to help Roma to achieve
           better results at school. [63b](p.28)


           S.6.84.  For  several  years,  Roma  organisations   have   been
           demanding recognition of their minority status, as is enjoyed by
           Roma in Romania and Hungary. This demand has been met  with  the
           2003 Framework  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  Rights  and
           Freedoms of National Minorities  which  specifically  designates
           the Roma community as  a  national  minority  in  Serbia.   [9c]
           [63b](p.6f.) Under Article 4 (2) of  the  law,  the  authorities
           have an obligation to adopt legislation and measures to "improve
           the  position  of  persons  belonging  to  the   Roma   national
           minority".  [63b](p.8.)  The  new  law  has  led   to   positive
           discussions between Roma leaders, government representatives and
           the OSCE on ways in  which  the  situation  for  Roma  might  be
           improved. [31d]


           S.6.85. Also, an inter-ministerial group on Roma rights has been
           established  to  draw  up  a  programme  of  affirmative  action
           measures for Roma,  coordinated  by  the  Federal  Ministry  for
           National and Ethnic Communities.  In  mid  September  2002,  the
           Ministry signed an agreement with international organisations in
           Serbia & Montenegro to set up a group of experts to formulate  a
           strategy for the integration of the Roma community. [63b] (p.12)
           (though no report has been found of such a group being set up to
           date (September 2003)).  There  has  been  an  increase  in  the
           number of Romani language programmes on radio and TV. [9c]


           S.6.86.  The BBC followed a Roma  family  returned  to  Belgrade
           from Germany in January 2004.  The report noted the family  felt
           they were harassed by their neighbours, including  the  bullying
           of  the  children  at  school,  and  faced  economic   hardship.
           [8l](p.1) The report  continued  in  general  terms  about  Roma
           returns from Germany, quoting comments by the Council of  Europe
           on returned Roma likely to face poverty upon  return.  [8l](p.2)
           The  report  continues,  reporting  that  the  cases  of  mixed-
           marriages are  a  concern  to  German  human  rights  activists.
           [8l](p.2-3)  The Serbian Government's response  is  reported  as
           '"Legally speaking, it's not formal discrimination, but a social
           problem. Their  rights  are  fully  recognised,  but  not  fully
           implemented."'(Vladimir   Djuric,   Roma   Rights   Secretariat)
           [8l](p.3)  The  report  ends  with  the  returned  Roma   family
           complaining of the Serbian Government's incapacity to assist  in
           their particular plight. [8l](p.3-4)


   8. Ms Wood did not argue the appeal  on  the  basis  that  all  Roma  are
      persecuted or at risk of a violation of their human  rights.   Rather,
      she focused upon the medical evidence  submitted  on  the  appellant's
      behalf.  For our purposes, this begins with a report dated 2 September
      2003 of Dr Laudin,  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  of  the  Whitecliffe
      community mental health centre to whom the appellant was  referred  by
      his GP in March 2003.  On page 1 of the report it is said that the  GP
      was concerned that the appellant was depressed and  suicidal  and  had
      commenced him on an anti-depressant, mainly fluoxetine. In paragraph 4
      of the report, the appellant's condition is described  as  a  moderate
      depressive disorder which had not yet responded to antidepressants and
      which would require ongoing monitoring of his mental health.   It  was
      noted that the  appellant  would  benefit  from  occupational  therapy
      and/or  psychological  therapy  to  address  his  depression  and   to
      stimulate rehabilitation.  Should he not receive ongoing treatment  by
      a psychiatrist with the relevant antidepressants,  his  mental  health
      was likely to deteriorate.   With  depression,  Dr  Laudin  considered
      there was a risk of suicide. The report continues:


           "In this man, the risk of suicide is elevated.  There is a  real
           risk that he would  complete  suicide  if  he  was  returned  to
           Serbia.  Should his depression not be adequately treated he  may
           develop chronic depression which would cause ongoing suffering."




      Although it is said that the appellant's depression would benefit from
      ongoing treatment in a mental health service, it is apparent that  the
      appellant has not taken up this opportunity.


   9. Dr Laudin's next report is dated 17 December 2003  and  recorded  that
      the appellant's depression appeared to be improving.   There  were  no
      suicidal thoughts or intent when assessed.  His medication included  a
      high dose Venlafaxine (a dual action anti-depressant).  Dr Laudin  did
      not know if it was available in Serbia.  Our particular attention  was
      drawn to paragraphs 3 to  8  of  the  report.   His  depression  could
      deteriorate if there was inadequate  social  financial  support.   His
      detention could cause a deterioration in his depression  and  increase
      the risk of suicide.  A forced removal of  a  person  with  depression
      would be psychologically  traumatic  and  may  increase  the  risk  of
      suicide.  In paragraph 7, the doctor was asked to assess  the  current
      risk of suicide and stated:


           "At his recent interview he had no suicidal thoughts or  intent.
           He has experienced  suicidal  ideas  following  nightmares.   He
           would contemplate suicide if forced to return  to  Serbia.   The
           suicide is a risk in depression and it is difficult to  predict.
           The mortality risk of suicide  in  major  depression  is  twenty
           times that expected."


  10. On page 3 of the report, Dr Laudin provided details of  the  treatment
      received.  There were outpatient reviews at monthly intervals  between
      April and July 2003 followed by  another  such  review  in  September.
      There was an outpatient appointment in December  2003,  prior  to  the
      preparation of the report.  Although the report suggests that  it  was
      the consultant who saw the appellant for the purposes of the  reviews,
      a letter from the Woodside Surgery dated 4 August 2003 indicates  that
      the appellant had  mainly  been  seen  by  Dr  Laudin's  Senior  House
      Officer, Dr S. Katragadda.  We have no report from the SHO and  it  is
      not clear by whom the appellant is usually seen.  Suffice  it  to  say
      that the appellant's treatment consists  of  medicine  alone  and  the
      outpatient reviews appear to be limited to reviewing  the  appellant's
      health and medication.  As far as we can  tell,  there  have  been  no
      therapeutic sessions.


  11. There is a third report from Dr  Laudin  of  17  February  2004  which
      contains the following:


           "He [the appellant] stated that if the Home Office came  to  his
           house, he would be scared and he would kill himself.  If he  was
           locked up, he would kill himself.  He stated "it  is  better  to
           die here."  He tried to explain that this is  because  he  is  a
           gypsy and in Serbia he would be caught  and  paraded.   He  felt
           that he had no hope if he cannot stay in this country.   He  did
           not know what the future held.  He appeared  depressed.   Whilst
           talking to me he was anxious and distressed.
           "In summary [          ] would be at high risk of suicide if  he
           was detainment and/or deported.  He is clearly  terrified  being
           returned to Yugoslavia and the probability is high that he would
           kill himself before or on return to Yugoslavia."


  12. A fourth report, dated 29 April 2004, followed a flare-up of events in
      Kosovo, not Serbia, in which  Roma  and  other  minority  groups  were
      subjected to violence.  Once again, paragraph  2  sets  out  what  the
      appellant himself had told Dr Laudin.  For example, the doctor records
      the appellant is saying, "It could be me,  it  could  be  my  family."
      This was said in relation to recent unrest in Kosovo and had little to
      do with the  position  in  Serbia.   Dr  Laudin,  however,  gives  her
      impression that the appellant has suicidal ideation and  is  still  at
      risk of suicide.  She concluded:


           "As he still has depression and  suicidal  ideas,  the  risk  of
           suicide would be high if he was detained and/or deported."


      Looking at the report as a whole, it is apparent that this  conclusion
      is reached by what the  appellant  has  himself  told  his  consultant
      psychiatrist.  On 17 May 2004, Dr Laudin  wrote  an  addendum  to  her
      report pointing out that the  appellant  comes  from  Serbia  and  not
      Kosovo and indicating that she was unable to  comment  on  why  recent
      events in Kosovo were disturbing to the appellant.


  13. The appellant himself, as recently as 28 April 2004,  in  a  statement
      that appears to have been submitted in support of the  hearing  before
      the Tribunal, has made his position very clear:


           "If I was ordered to return back to Yugoslavia then I would kill
           myself because I cannot  face  returning  to  that  country.   I
           cannot believe my problems would be treated and I  would  prefer
           to kill myself rather than to go back and face  a  life  without
           support and treatment and also to return to a  country  where  I
           have suffered so much in the past and would be likely to receive
           similar treatment on my return."


  14. Ms Wood referred us to a report dated 25 August 2003  from  Dr  Hudson
      who sets out his knowledge of Yugoslav successor states as an academic
      who speaks Serbo-Croat and is a graduate of the School of Slavonic and
      East European Studies at the  University  of  London.   He  is  Senior
      Lecturer in European History and Cultural Politics at  the  University
      of Derby. In his report, he draws upon  various  background  materials
      and gives his opinion as to whether the appellant would be at risk  of
      persecution and similar related  questions.   In  addition,  he  talks
      about  medical  facilities  and  the   availability   of   psychiatric
      treatment.  At page 10 of the report, paragraph 5, he says:


           "He [the appellant] has no brothers and sisters and  no  father,
           therefore it would be unlikely that [        ] would be provided
           with either family support or indeed any welfare support were he
           to return to southern Serbia.  Indeed, he would  be  obliged  to
           fall back on his own resources and it is likely that your client
           would find himself destitute on his return to  Bujanovac.   Were
           he to be forced to return to  his  native  country  under  these
           conditions, and given the psychological disability, I would find
           such  a  measure  to  be  very  insensitive   indeed.    Medical
           facilities throughout Serbia, and particularly in South  Serbia,
           are  rudimentary  and  mental-health  facilities   almost   non-
           existent."


      It seems to us that the Dr Hudson has omitted to  refer  to  the  fact
      that the appellant will be returning to his  mother,  who  is  in  her
      early or  mid-fifties.   Furthermore,  Dr  Hudson  is  not  a  medical
      practitioner and there is no reason to believe that his opinion of the
      mental-health  facilities  in  Serbia  is  better  informed  than  the
      information contained in the Country Report.


  15. The Country Report of April 2004 speaks of the  health  facilities  in
      Serbia in these terms:


           Medical Services


           S.5.46. Serb  citizens  are  legally  entitled  to  free  health
           treatment,  but  years  of  neglect  and  corruption  under  the
           Milosevic regime have seriously damaged the health service. [7g]
            A comprehensive survey of Serbia's health service in  2001  was
           undertaken by the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia.
           The report observed that in hospitals, as well as paying for the
           bed and food, patients usually have to pay for  everything  else
           they need for their treatment.  Most  hospitals  are  very  old,
           some lacking  running  hot  water  and  heating.  The  ratio  of
           hospital beds to patients is very low (1 bed for  184  patients)
           and yet they are under-utilised (70%) because  of  inefficiency.
           [7g] [48b][48c]


           S.5.47.  When the new government took over in October  2000,  it
           found  widespread  abuses   and   misappropriation   of   funds,
           describing the situation in the health service  as   "critical".
           In late 2000, the entire health system subsisted on foreign  aid
           in kind. The health services in 2001 remained characterised  by:
           an extreme lack of resources at all levels and spheres of  work;
           an urgent need for restructuring; poor organisation and  chronic
           inefficiency. There is  a  heavy  reliance  upon  foreign  donor
           support to enable the system to function even  at  its  existing
           low level. The pay of health workers has been very low  and  the
           quality of services suffered because some employees were reduced
           to moonlighting to earn a minimum subsistence. [7g]


           S.5.48. The state of the health service in Serbia is  paralleled
           by the deterioration in the health of its population.   As  well
           as inadequate treatment, likely causes are stress,  poverty  and
           poor  living  conditions.   The  1999  statistics  indicate  the
           highest death rate, the highest suicide rate (among the  highest
           in the world) and  the  lowest  birth  rate  since  1945.  [48b]
           Infant mortality is up by 3% in the last ten  years.   Cases  of
           tuberculosis, heart disease and cancer have  also  increased  in
           recent years, with numbers of cancer cases in  2000  up  by  63%
           from 1991. [48b]


           S.5.49.  The  mental  health  of   the   population   has   also
           deteriorated.  Massive consumption of Bensadine,  Bromazepam  in
           and Diazepam, suggests that one in every two  people  in  Serbia
           are reliant  upon  sedatives.  [7a][33a]  Treatment  for  mental
           health disorders is available,  though  numbers  of  psychiatric
           staff and bed spaces are limited. [48c]


           S.5.52. The Europa Regional Survey: Central  and  South  Eastern
           Europe 2003  gives  basic  indicators  of  health  and  welfare,
           covering total fertility  (1.6  children  per  woman);  HIV/AIDS
           (0.19 percent of the 15-49 years population  );  physicians  per
           1,000 (2.04 - 1998 figure) and health expenditure per head (US $
           237 in 2000). [1a] (p.545.)


  16.  We were also referred to a report from RH  Research  and  Consultants
      (of the same  address  as  Dr  Hudson)  written  by  Maria  Hudson,  a
      researcher.  This records that there would be  little  guarantee  that
      the appellant would receive the necessary medical treatment,  although
      positive developments have occurred in the level of healthcare offered
      throughout  the  former  Yugoslavia.    The   researcher   speaks   of
      discrimination against Roma and that medicine  would  be  provided  at
      private cost and "would probably not be available to him  for  reasons
      of ethnicity and expense".  There is no  source  provided  as  to  the
      conclusion that Roma do not have access to medicines.


  17. In [2003] UKIAT 00017 P (Yugoslavia) (Dr H. H. Storey, chairman),  the
      Tribunal considered whether the risk of  suicide  might  amount  to  a
      breach of the ECHR.  The Tribunal stated:

           The approach of the appellate authorities

           16. The grounds in this case are not unique in complaining  that
           the adjudicator failed to attach proper weight  to  (significant
           parts of) the medical evidence. The  appellate  authorities  are
           frequently called upon to evaluate medical  reports  which  deal
           with the risk facing asylum-seekers if returned in the light  of
           their medical history. How  should  they  go  about  this  task?
           Drawing on past cases such as  Ademaj  [2002]  00979  and  Cinar
           [2002]  UKIAT  06624  and   in   particular   on   the   starred
           determination of the Tribunal in AE and FE [2002]  UKIAT  05237,
           it is possible to identify the following principles:


           a) It is  not  the  job  of  an  adjudicator  to  make  clinical
           judgments. That is the job of medical experts. Equally, however,
           it is not the function of medical experts to evaluate conditions
           in an appellant's country of origin. Except in very  rare  cases
           they have no expertise about such matters.


           b)  Albeit  not  medical  experts,  adjudicators  are  perfectly
           entitled, when evaluating a medical report, to consider to  what
           extent it  is  based  on  established  medical  methodology  and
           criteria.  Adjudicators  should  obviously  be  cautious   about
           criticising medical reports  unnecessarily,  particularly  given
           that they do not have the benefit of a medical report  from  the
           respondent so as to enable a  comparison  to  be  made.  But  by
           virtue of the frequency with  which  the  immigration  appellate
           authorities have to examine and assess medical reports in asylum-
           related cases, a fund of experience and knowledge has been built
           up, making it possible to identify what is expected from a "good
           report", and to discern which medical experts,  among  the  many
           whose reports  they  see,  produce  reports  based  squarely  on
           established medical methodologies and criteria.  If  confronted,
           therefore, with a diagnosis (or prognosis), which departs for no
           good reason from methodology and criteria established within the
           medical profession, they cannot be  expected  to  overlook  that
           kind of deficiency. And to the  extent  that  a  medical  report
           fails to base itself on established  medical  methodologies  and
           criteria, an adjudicator may be justified  in  attaching  lesser
           weight to it as a consequence.  A medical report  purporting  to
           give an in-depth diagnosis of  PTSD  based  on  one  superficial
           interview is an obvious example.  As the Tribunal highlighted in
           AE and FE, an adjudicator is also entitled  to  assess  to  what
           extent a medical report is based on examination which  has  been
           conducted as soon as possible after the time of  the  injury  or
           event which is said to have caused the physical or psychological
           disorder.


           c) Irrespective of  the  quality  of  the  medical  report,  the
           assessment of risk upon  return  that  has  to  be  made  by  an
           adjudicator must  be  based  on  the  notion  of  real  risk  as
           established by refugee law and human rights law. That  will  not
           necessarily be the same concept of real risk applied by  medical
           experts.


           d)  Since  an  adjudicator  must  base  his  assessment   on   a
           consideration of all the evidence viewed in  the  round,  it  is
           always ultimately a matter for an adjudicator what weight if any
           to attach to medical evidence. In order to assess whether  there
           is a real risk, the medical evidence has to be placed  alongside
           all the other evidence. Where a doctor's report has  based  some
           of its key findings on the truth of what his  patient  has  told
           him about past experiences and/or current fears, it may well  be
           that an adjudicator who having made a  global  assessment  finds
           the appellant`s account not credible, will reject that  report`s
           principal findings. Depending on the  particular  circumstances,
           medical evidence stating that a person`s injuries  or  condition
           is "consistent with" his account of what happened to him in  his
           country of origin may or may not add credence to his claim.



           The treatment of self-harm by Strasbourg jurisprudence

           17. This case involves a claim based on a high risk  of  suicide
           being a foreseeable  consequence  of  removal.  How  should  the
           appellate authorities approach such  a  claim?  Insofar  as  the
           issues arising under the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights
           Convention are concerned, suicide is self-evidently  a  type  of
           serious harm: Pretty v UK (2002) 35 EHRR 1. Although suicide  is
           a form of  self-harm  and  is  to  be  distinguished  from  harm
           inflicted by others, if the real risk of  it  is  a  foreseeable
           consequence of a removal decision, then that may well be  enough
           to establish serious harm  under  both  Conventions.  Under  the
           Human Rights Convention we would accept in principle that if the
           evidence in a case establishes  that  a  removal  decision  will
           expose a person  to  a  real  risk  upon  return  of  committing
           suicide, then a decision requiring him to return could give rise
           to a violation of Article 3 and Article 8. So much we understand
           to be established by cases such as D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and
           Bensaid v UK [2001] INLR 325. In Bensaid at paragraphs 36 and 37
           it was  accepted  that  in  principle  deterioration  in  mental
           condition  causing  the  risk  of   self-harm   resulting   from
           difficulties in obtaining  medication,  could  fall  within  the
           scope of Art 3.


  18. The decision was again examined in [2004] UKIAT00053 N(Kenya)  (Mr  J.
      Barnes, chairman) in which the Tribunal stated:

           21. Whilst we  acknowledge  that  there  is  some  authority  in
           Strasbourg  jurisprudence   for   the   proposition   that   the
           prospective suicide by reason of removal is capable of  engaging
           both  Articles  3  and  8   (see   also   [2003]   UKIAT   00017
           P(Yugoslavia)), there would in our view need to be the  clearest
           possible evidence of a real risk that  this  would  occur  which
           would  not  otherwise  be  preventable  by  appropriate  medical
           supervision both on the part of the removing country and  having
           regard to facilities which might reasonably be expected to exist
           in the country of destination.


  19. In N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369, the Court of Appeal considered the place of
      differential medical treatment in the receiving state:


           40.  But I am no less clear  that  D  should  be  very  strictly
           confined.  I do not say that  its  confinement  is  to  deathbed
           cases; that would be a course rule and an unwise one: there  may
           be other instances which press with equal force.  That said,  in
           light of the considerations I have described I would  hold  that
           the application of Article 3 where the complaint in  essence  is
           of want  of  resources  in  the  applicant's  home  country  (in
           contrast to what has been available to him in the  country  from
           which  he  is  to  be  removed)  is  only  justified  where  the
           humanitarian appeal of the case is so powerful that it could not
           in reason be resisted by the authorities of a  civilised  State.
           This does not, I acknowledge, amount  to  a  sharp  legal  test;
           there are no sharp legal tests in this area. I  intend  only  to
           emphasise that an Article 3 case of this kind must be  based  on
           facts which are not only exceptional, but extreme; extreme, that
           is, judged in the context of cases all or many  of  which  (like
           this one) demand one's sympathy on pressing grounds. "


  20.  Finally, we must consider the case of Kurtolli  [2003]  EWHC  to  744
      (Admin) (Silber J.).  This was an application for judicial  review  to
      challenge the certificate given by the Secretary  of  State  that  the
      appellant's appeal was "clearly  unfounded"  in  the  sense  that  his
      appeal to Germany would reach his human rights.  The medical  evidence
      suggested a removal would have damaging  implications  on  the  mental
      health of the appellant's wife.  [          ] was concerned about  the
      risk of being returned to Germany.  She had suicidal ideation and  had
      attempted suicide by drinking bleach.  A report stated:


             "[                 ] subjective fear of  removal  from  the  UK
             including to Germany  is  exceptionally  high.   [            ]
             believes she is likely to be separated from her husband  either
             by death or imprisonment,  if  they  return  to  Germany.   The
             impact  of  her  perceived  fears  would   probably   cause   a
             deterioration in her condition such  that  she  would  probably
             succeed  in  committing  suicide  whether  prior  to  or  after
             removal.  Her previous suicide bid in similar circumstances  is
             an extremely serious indicator of a future attempt and evidence
             shows that someone who was already made a  suicide  attempt  is
             likely to be more successful in a subsequent attempt."


  21. It is apparent from paragraph 21 of the judgment  that  Silber  J  was
      considering whether if it was arguable on the evidence  whether  there
      was a real  risk  of  a  significantly  increased  risk  that  if  the
      appellant were removed to Germany she would commit suicide.  If such a
      real risk existed her claim based on Article 3 could not be classified
      as manifestly unfounded.  The judge was relying  upon  the  dictum  of
      Dyson LJ in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840.  Silber J was not  considering
      the merits of the claim but whether there  was  an  arguable  case  in
      relation to those merits thereby rendering the  certification  by  the
      Secretary of State impermissible.


  22. On the basis of  this  material,  we  come  to  consider  whether  the
      appellant's return to Serbia will involve a violation of his Article 3
      or 8 rights.  There are two separate enquiries.  First,  the  evidence
      that, if confronted with an adverse decision by the Tribunal, the risk
      that the appellant will commit suicide in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
      second aspect of the claim is whether, either during  the  journey  to
      Serbia or on arrival in Serbia, the appellant is reasonably likely  to
      commit suicide.

   The risk in the United Kingdom


  23. It is the appellant's evidence that if he receives an indication  from
      the Home Office that he  is  about  to  be  removed,  he  will  commit
      suicide.  This is what the appellant himself told Dr Laudin and  which
      she recorded in her report of 17 February 2004, which we have set  out
      above.  In her summary, Dr Laudin transposes what  the  appellant  has
      told her to an opinion that "[            ] would be at high  risk  of
      suicide if he was detained and/or deported.  He is  clearly  terrified
      being returned to Yugoslavia and the probability is high that he would
      kill himself before...  return  to  Yugoslavia."   This  part  of  the
      appellant's case does not revolve upon the adequacy of  facilities  in
      the receiving state.  Rather, it seeks to  prevent  the  Secretary  of
      State informing the appellant of an  event  that  the  appellant  will
      construe as an adverse.  In  our  judgment,  this  is  a  far-reaching
      claim.  It presupposes that the medical facilities within  the  United
      Kingdom will not be sufficient to contain the risk.   Furthermore,  it
      presupposes that, if the Secretary of  State  chooses  to  arrest  and
      detain the appellant, the secure accommodation in  which  he  will  be
      kept will be insufficient to contain the threat of suicide.


  24. We are bound to express our reservations as to  whether  this  permits
      the appellant to prevent the Secretary of State (or the adjudicator or
      the Tribunal) threatening to remove him.  It is not a  claim  that  is
      often raised in the context of civil litigation.  If, for  example,  a
      person is threatened with eviction upon service of a notice to quit or
      court order, we doubt whether,  if  the  litigant  threatens  suicide,
      Article 3 of the ECHR would prevent the service of either a notice  to
      quit or a court order.  We would expect the response to be that  there
      are adequate medical or legal facilities in the United Kingdom capable
      of minimising the risk, albeit without preventing it completely.   The
      risk of suicide cannot, in our judgment, be separated from  the  means
      of preventing it.  In the  case  of  this  appellant,  the  means  are
      limited to the provision of medication the level of which  has  varied
      from time to time as his condition has altered.

  25. We do not think that  the  threat  of  removal  or  detention  or  the
      commencement of the process of removal in  the  United  Kingdom  would
      violate the appellant's human rights.


   The risk on removal


  26. If the appellant is adequately protected from the risk of  suicide  in
      the United Kingdom by the existence of adequate healthcare,  including
      medicine, it is difficult to understand how the same  approach  should
      not be adopted  when  considering  the  receiving  state,  albeit  the
      medical facilities will often be less extensive.


  27. Dr Laudin has also given her opinion that the probability  of  suicide
      is very high should the appellant return to Serbia.  Once  again  this
      appears from the report of  17  February  2004  and  once  again  this
      appears to be the doctor's opinion resulting from what  the  appellant
      has told her.  It is within this context that we consider  great  care
      must be taken in evaluating the medical evidence.


  28. In our judgment the function of a doctor when interviewing his patient
      is very different from the  function  of  an  adjudicator  seeking  to
      evaluate the evidence.  It is not for a doctor, in most circumstances,
      to reject the account given by his patient.  Indeed,  it  is  normally
      necessary, particularly in cases of mental illness, for the doctor  to
      build up a relationship of trust that will be undermined if he rejects
      his patient's history.  There may, of course, be cases where a  doctor
      is required  to  confront  his  patient  with  the  untruths  of  that
      patient's account.  In the context of the present  case,  however,  we
      see no reason why Dr  Laudin  was  required  to  contradict  what  the
      appellant himself was telling her.  In the present case,  we  can  see
      that in action, as it were, in the appellant telling the doctor  about
      the recent problems in Kosovo when those had very  little  bearing  on
      difficulties that the appellant  might  face  in  Serbia.   They  were
      significant enough for the doctor to record  them  in  her  report  as
      being a foundation for the appellant's  fears.   The  difficulty  that
      emerges is that the medical opinion is based to some  extent  on  what
      the doctor has been told as well has upon his or her own  professional
      judgment.  Unfortunately, the report does not make it clear the extent
      to which the doctor's opinion is derived from what  the  appellant  is
      telling her.


  29. There is  another  difficulty.   The  doctor  is  concerned  with  the
      clinical risk of suicide by a person suffering from  depression.   The
      adjudicator is required to take a holistic approach  and  to  consider
      the conditions that the appellant will face on return.  We  note  that
      the appellant's mother continues to live in Serbia and  is  likely  to
      provide him with family support.  We do not know what other  relatives
      or friends or community members will also provide him with support and
      help.  We do not consider that it should be assumed that  he  will  be
      returned in isolation.  (At the very least, the  burden  is  upon  the
      appellant to establish that there will be no one in Serbia to whom  he
      can turn.)  The network of help in Serbia might properly be viewed  in
      the context of the support offered in the United  Kingdom.   There  is
      presently no therapeutic assistance provided and  clinical  assistance
      is confined to periodic reviews of the medication  supplied.  Ms  Wood
      told us that, although the wife of a cousin has a claim for asylum  in
      the United Kingdom, she did not  know  where  the  cousin's  wife  was
      living and, as far as she was aware, the appellant was not living with
      her.  We were told of no other family members in  the  United  Kingdom
      who were able to offer assistance.

  30. Furthermore, the doctor is comparing the known with the unknown.   The
      known is probably an NHS clinic,  whose  personnel  and  services  are
      familiar to the doctor.  Contrast this with what the doctor  knows  of
      the medical facilities in the receiving state.  He may well know  that
      the facilities are not likely to be as good or are  definitely  worse.
      Inevitably that colours his assessment of risk.  Yet, the  adjudicator
      is often in a much better position to  obtain  information  about  the
      availability of facilities and will know that he is not searching  for
      standards that equate with those in the United Kingdom.

  31. We were referred to an article in the Indian Journal  of  Pharmacology
      in 2001 showing the Drug Utilisation Trends in Kragujevac  in  Serbia.
      We cannot, of course, say whether this is typical of Serbia as a whole
      but it is apparent that a large range of medicine is available.

  32. In our judgment, it was a matter for the adjudicator to  consider  the
      entirety of the material before him, including the  medical  evidence,
      and make an assessment of risk.  The adjudicator accepted  the  events
      that took place in 1999 when the appellant was required to assist Serb
      soldiers in digging graves.  He found it noteworthy  that  no  further
      problems were experienced by the appellant  until  mid-December  2001.
      It was then that the appellant stated he was accused by some Albanians
      of supporting the Serbian authorities.  It is, however, apparent  from
      paragraph 18 of the determination, that the adjudicator had difficulty
      in accepting the entirety of the appellant's account of this incident.
       In particular, he concluded that if the Roma community in  which  the
      appellant lived was particularly small, the appellant  would  be  less
      vulnerable in a larger community.

  33. The appellant speaks Albanian and will be  returning  to  an  Albanian
      area.  His passport does not identify  his  Roma  ethnicity.   Neither
      does his name reveal it.  For that matter, there is no  evidence  that
      he will be identified as a Roma from his  physical  appearance.   That
      said, we are uncertain that this was ever raised as  an  issue  before
      the adjudicator and we do not consider it would be safe to  rely  upon
      it now.

  34. We are satisfied that the appellant is adequately protected  from  the
      risk of suicide whilst he remains in the United Kingdom.  The decision
      to remove him would not, therefore, breach  his  human  rights  within
      this jurisdiction.

  35.  As the Court of Appeal said in N [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1369,  where  the
      complaint is in essence a lack of resources in the receiving  country,
      a return will be  justified  unless  the  humanitarian  appeal  is  so
      powerful that it could  not  reasonably  be  resisted  by  the  United
      Kingdom government.  This does not apply in the  present  case,  where
      healthcare facilities in Serbia are  adequate  to  continue  the  drug
      regime provided for the appellant.  Following N (Kenya), it is for the
      appellant to establish a real risk of suicide that would not otherwise
      be   preventable   by   appropriate   medical   supervision.     These
      considerations apply whether or not there  is  evidence  of  care  and
      supervision provided by relatives and friends available to support the
      appellant in the receiving country.

  36. For these reasons, we consider the  adjudicator  reached  the  correct
      conclusion in dismissing the appeal.  We are not satisfied that it  is
      necessary for there to be any additional findings  of  fact  requiring
      the matter to be remitted  for  hearing  before  another  adjudicator.
      Whilst we do not seek to under-estimate the level  of  harassment  and
      discrimination experienced by the  Roma  community  in  Serbia,  there
      remains a sizeable Roma community into which the appellant is able  to
      place himself with adequate security and with  appropriate  safeguards
      to prevent his depression causing his suicide.

Decision:  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Andrew Jordan
Vice President
31 May 2004
Approved for electronic distribution
