

              KM (Ahmadi- risk-Rabwah) Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00302
 | |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing: 31 August 2004                                    |
|Date Signed:                                                       |
|Date Determination Notified: 12 November 2004                      |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr P D King TD - Vice President                                    |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                   |
|Ms J A Endersby                                                    |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |

For the Appellant:           Mr A Khan [Solicitor]
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    The Claimant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a Determination of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  Michael  Watters,
dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  giving
directions for removal having refused asylum.  Mr A  Khan,  a  solicitor  of
Thompson & Co., appeared for the Appellant.  Mr A Sheikh,  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer, appeared for the Respondent.

2.    The Appellant is an Ahmadi.  In 1997 he moved to Karachi and  was  the
subject of attack by members of the Khatne  Nabuwwat  (KN)  in  October  and
December of that year.  He received threats from the  KN  in  February  2001
and was attacked by police in October 2001.  He was also in an Ahmadi  youth
camp in November 2002 when it was attacked by  KN.   The  Adjudicator  found
the account to be credible, save that he did not find the  threats  made  in
May 2003 to have occurred.

3.    The Adjudicator further found that the Appellant  could  not  live  in
certain parts of Pakistan because of a well-founded fear of persecution  for
a Convention reason.  He did however find that the Claimant  could  live  in
Rabwah.  In paragraph 21  of  the  Determination  the  Adjudicator  said  as
follows:-

      "The background evidence equally makes it clear that there are a  very
    considerable number of Ahmadis who live in Rabwah who are able to  live
    normal lives without significant difficulty.  There is some evidence of
    discrimination in employment but equally there is  evidence  indicating
    that Ahmadis make up the bulk of the employed population."

4.    The Adjudicator went on at paragraph 22 to say as follows:-

    "The appellant might well come to the notice of members of  the  KN  in
    Rabwah if he continued to preach  the  Ahmadi  faith.   However  inside
    Rabwah the authorities at all  levels  include  many  persons  who  are
    themselves of the Ahmadi faith including members of the  police  force.
    If the KN sought to  inflict  harm  on  the  appellant  then  effective
    protection would be available."


5.    The grounds of appeal take issue with the Adjudicator's  finding  that
the Appellant may relocate to Rabwah.  In particular  the  grounds  seek  to
argue that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  consider  all  the  evidence  of  an
objective nature which was placed before him.  Such  would  have  shown  him
that it was not safe for the Appellant to  return  and  that  there  was  no
sufficiency of protection available to him.  This would be  particularly  so
were he to preach.

6.    On the issue of returnability to Rabwah (now known as  Chenab  Nagar),
Mr Khan invited our attention to  the  objective  material.   A  very  large
bundle of such material had been presented although only a small part of  it
was referred to specifically in the course of argument.

7.    Mr Khan submitted that  in  Rabwah  there  were  approximately  35,000
Ahmadis and that the population was 95 per cent Ahmadi.  He  was  unable  to
find any recent figures but believed that might have increased.  He  further
submitted that Ahmadis in Rabwah suffered the same abuse and persecution  as
they did in any other part of the country.

8.    Our attention  was  drawn  to  a  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
Association UK dated 11 May 2003.  This is to be found at pages 106  to  108
of the Appellant's bundle of documents.  The letter seeks  to  suggest  that
Rabwah, in many  ways,  is  less  safe  for  Ahmadis  than  other  towns  in
Pakistan.  The country's  anti-Ahmadiyya  and  religious  laws  are  equally
applicable in Rabwah.  As the majority of the  local  population  is  Ahmadi
there is no shortage of targets in  respect  of  action  taken  against  the
community.  The letter goes on to say that  there  are  no  Ahmadis  in  the
police, judiciary or other administrative  offices  in  Rabwah.   There  has
long been a deliberate policy of the government to  disallow  such  postings
even at low level.  There is no representation of Ahmadis in the local  city
council.

9.    The letter goes on  to  say  that  there  have  been  attacks  against
Ahmadis and their properties in the recent  past.   There  have  been  anti-
Ahmadi  demonstrations and marches by  non-local  participants  through  the
town.  The police failed to take any action.

10.   The letter further states  that  fundamentalist  groups  have  focused
upon Rabwah as a matter of policy for the past 25 years aided by the  state.
 Residential land to the east side of the town has been forcibly taken  over
by the authorities.  There has been a  big  mosque  and  seminary  built  to
provide the  muslim clerics with a solid base  for  anti-Ahmadiyya  presence
and action.  There are a number of  mosques  in  the  outskirts  of  Rabwah.
Resident
  mullahs in collaboration with the police, registered three criminal  cases
on religious  grounds  against  thirteen  Ahmadis.   It  is  said  that  the
authorities in Rabwah are not even-handed but are  biased  against  Ahmadis.
An example was cited of 12 March 2003 in respect of a visit to  an  Ahmadi's
shop by an inspector.  No agricultural land is available  in  the  outskirts
of Rabwah for building and the town cannot expand.

11.   Our attention was also  drawn  to  the  report  by  the  Human  Rights
Commission of Pakistan "State of Human Rights 2003  -  Freedom  of  thought,
conscience and religion".  That report is to be found at pages  181  to  198
of the Appellant's bundle of documents.  It speaks of the  continued  growth
of intolerance in the society, in  particular  of  increased  discrimination
against  non-Muslims.   It  speaks  of  the  Ahmadi  community   confronting
violence, widespread  discrimination  and  harassment.   Our  attention  was
drawn to page 187 of the Appellant's  bundle,  which  is  page  163  of  the
report.  It speaks of a visit in March 2003 by the local police  to  a  shop
where was displayed a large framed photograph of the founder of  the  Ahmadi
movement.  The photograph was removed and a criminal  case  was  instituted.
In June Rabwah police registered a case  for  writing  the  kalima  (Islamic
Creed) on a house.  A youth spent four weeks in prison before being  bailed.
 Another man  was  charged  in  May  for  leading  Ahmadis  in  prayers  and
propagating the faith.  The man was released only after  several  months  in
jail.  In September 2003 police registered a case against an Ahmadi.

12.   A matter, which was stressed by Mr Khan, was to be found at  page  189
of the Claimant's bundle and 165 of the report.   The  head  of  the  global
Ahmadi community, Mirza Tahir Ahmad died in London.   The  community  wanted
to bury their leader in  his  own  country.   That  was  refused  given  the
potential  breach of law and order which  was  threatened  by  the  orthodox
clerics.  Ahmadis continue to be barred from holding  religious  conferences
in  Rabwah  although  the  KH  are  permitted  to  hold  numerous  open  air
gatherings in the town.  As to the Khatam -e-Nabuwwat,such is
 becoming more militant.   According to  the  Amnesty  International  report
dated  15  May  2001  "Pakistan  -  insufficient  protection  of   religious
minorities" KH in 2000 formed a new  Mujahideen  force  with  the  intention
that such units be established all over the country.

13.   Thus, submits Mr  Khan,  the  situation  in  Rabwah  is  that  Ahmadis
continue to suffer discrimination in respect of land,  education,  religious
practice and are the victims of violence.  Even the name  of  the  town  was
changed by the Provincial Assembly.  We were invited to have regard  to  the
fact that the letter from the Ahmadiyya Association reflected  the  accurate
position on the ground.  Mr Khan  submitted  that  there  was  no  effective
protection, rather there was active and persistent discrimination.

14.   Given the letter from the Ahmadiyya Association, which was before  the
Adjudicator at the time of the hearing, it was not open to  him,  argued  Mr
Khan, to find that inside Rabwah the  authorities  at  all  levels  included
many persons who are themselves of the Ahmadi  faith  including  members  of
the police force.  The reality within Rabwah is that  the  KN  are  able  to
inflict harm and that no effective protection is available.

15.   Mr Khan accepted that the Adjudicator was following  the  guidance  of
the Tribunal in two cases.  The first  being  that  of  MN  (Ahmadi-internal
relocation) Pakistan GC [2002] UKIAT 05714, notified in December  2002.   In
that decision Dr Storey, the Vice President, indicated in paragraph 13  that
inside Rabwah the authorities at all levels include  many  persons  who  are
themselves of Ahmadi faith including members of the police force.   Mr  Khan
submitted that there was no citing of any objective evidence  to  show  that
that was the case and indeed the evidence which he seeks to rely upon  would
show to the contrary.  The second  decision  was  that  of  MC  (Ahmadi-IFA-
Sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00139.  In that  case  Miss
Eshun, the Vice President,  effectively  followed  the  lead  given  by  the
previous case and indeed made similar observations.  It was submitted by  Mr
Khan that that was in error.

16.   A linked but distinct aspect of the grounds  of  appeal  is  the  fact
that the Appellant would not  be  protected,  particularly  were  he  to  be
preaching.  Although there  are  some  three  to  four  million  Ahmadis  in
Pakistan, not all of those seek  to  preach  or  to  publicise  their  faith
openly in accordance with their religious requirements.  For those  who  do,
however, it exposes them to  considerable  danger.   The  case  of  Iftikhar
Ahmed [IAT RF 99/0490/C] was cited in support of the  proposition  there  is
no protection for those who preach.

17.   Mr Khan submitted that there were essentially  two  groups  of  Ahmadi
living in Pakistan.  One  group,   possibly  the  majority  group,  did  not
proselytise.   These  did  not  come  to  the  adverse  attention   of   the
authorities.  Those who did incurred the  wrath  of  KN  and  there  was  no
sufficiency of protection.

18.    Mr  Sheikh,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  submitted   that   the
Adjudicator had not accepted the evidence of any difficulties in  May  2003.
The last time  the  Appellant  had  any  difficulties  in  Pakistan  was  in
November 2002.  He had drawn attention  to  himself  by  attending  a  camp.
However  there was no suggestion that he  is  or  was  a  preacher  of  long
standing, such as to attract  the  attention  of  the  authorities  to  him.
Indeed for a number of years nothing would seem to  have  happened  to  him.
He was not a preacher trying to convert people  but  on  his  own  admission
took a job as an estate agent.  He had other  interests  and  pursued  them.
There was, therefore, notwithstanding the  evidence  as  presented,  nothing
likely to draw the attention of the Appellant to the authorities.  His  case
fell into a different category to that which was considered by the Court  of
Appeal in  the  case  of  Iftikar  Ahmed.   Ahmadis  run  businesses,   hold
professional positions,  attend schools, living  their  normal  lives.   Our
attention was drawn to the CIPU  Report  in  particular  paragraph  6.7  and
6.89.

19.   We turn first to consider the general evidence relating to  Rabwah  as
presented before us.  May we  comment  first  of  all  that  it  is  perhaps
somewhat unhelpful to receive a bundle on behalf of the  Appellant  of  some
304 folios, when our attention was drawn but to  a  small  fraction  of  the
bundle.  We invited Mr Khan to draw our  attention  to  any  other  passages
which he felt it were appropriate in the circumstances of this  appeal.   He
indicated, however, that  he  had  invited  our  attention  to  the  salient
passages.  Smaller 'bundles' more focused to the issue would have been    of
greater assistance.

20.   Our attention was drawn  to  the  suggested  formation  of  KT  action
groups in 2000.  We were not, however,  given  any  indication  as  to  what
progress ,if any, such groups  have  made  in  the  subsequent  years.   The
article pre-dated the September 11 events.  It is clear that  the  President
of Pakistan and the government have clamped down strongly against  extremist
groups.  It might have been more helpful to  us  had  some  indication  been
given as to the effect, if at all,  such a clamp down has had on the KN.

21.   Mr Khan, first of all, seeks to persuade us that Rabwah is unsafe  for
Ahmadis  generally.   He  presents  two  particular  arguments.   The  first
relates to the concentration of Ahmadis in Rabwah with the  suggestion  that
given such a concentration it  is  easier  for  the  authorities  to  locate
Ahmadis for persecutory activities.  There are, however,  no  statistics  to
indicate whether the incidence of persecution or  difficulty  in  Rabwah  is
greater, lesser or in proportion  compared  with  the  other  parts  of  the
country.  As a matter of common sense it  may  be  imagined  that  there  is
strength in numbers and protection by being part of a  greater  whole.   For
an Ahmadi family living in a largely Muslim area the scope  for  protection,
or for unification of action or assistance is  limited.   Nothing  has  been
presented before us to indicate that the incidents  of  alleged  persecutory
activity  are  greater  in  Rabwah,  if  at  all.   Clearly  there  will  be
discrimination;  that cannot be  avoided  given  the  legal   and  religious
situation as exists in Pakistan.  With Ahmadis  in  a  particular  place  it
might be reasonable to assume that there would be  a  greater  incidence  of
anti-Ahmadi activity.  There is no indication, however,  that  that  is  the
case in Rabwah.  The examples cited and quoted above are very  specific  and
are not supportive  of  any  suggestion  of  widespread  or  systematic  ill
treatment  to  members  of  this  faith  in  Rabwah  itself.  Nor   do   the
difficulties experienced in burying  the  leader  and  in  the   barring  of
holding  of   religious   conferences,   albeit    distressing,   themselves
constitute a  "consistent pattern of gross  and  systematic   violations  of
the fundamental human rights" of Ahmadis in Rabwah.  Hariri [2003] EWCA  Civ
807.

22.   The letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association of  the  UK  is   one
which perhaps sheds some  light  upon  life  in  Rabwah.   It  is  ,however,
written from a particular viewpoint and the criticisms which are offered  as
to the administration must  necessarily  be  seen  in  that  light.   It  is
clearly distressing that there are demonstrations and  marches  through  the
town organised by mullahs and the building of mosques in  the  outskirts  of
the town to strengthen the Muslim presence in  Rabwah  may  be  viewed  with
concern. Such, however, has to be set against the seeming  ability  of  some
35,000 Ahmadis to conduct their lives in the town.   The  letter  speaks  of
the registration of  three  criminal  cases  on  religious  grounds  against
thirteen Ahmadis.  There is no indication, however,  for  example  how  many
cases in total would have been brought in a course of a  year.   The  letter
speaks of violent action against Ahmadis but  gives  no  particulars  as  to
those matters.  Our attention was not drawn specifically to  any  widespread
violent activity entered into  in  Rabwah.  The  lack  of  participation  by
Ahmadis in the levels of administration is not  a  suggestion  supported  by
any other report or  document  as  presented  to  us,  as  for  example  the
Commission of Pakistan report 2003.

23.   As the case  of  Subesh  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  56  makes  clear,  country
guidance cases are of importance in giving general  advice  and  maintaining
consistency.  We are grateful to  Mr  Khan  for  drawing  our  attention  to
matters which perhaps will  merit  further  consideration  in  updating  the
advice to be given to Adjudicators  in  considering  relocation  to  Rabwah.
We find, however, that the case of MC Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00139 should  be
taken  to reflect the reality of the situation particularly as expressed  in
paragraph 15 of that decision. In any event, notwithstanding  the  potential
issue of administrative involvement, we do not find that  the  incidents  of
violence in Rabwah against Ahmadis are of such a  scale or so endemic as  to
demonstrate  any consistent pattern of gross, fragment  or  mass  violations
of the human rights of those Ahmadis living there. Nor do we find  that  the
authorities are generally  unable  or  unwilling  to  afford  local  Ahmadis
effective protection should such a need arise on a more individual basis.

24.   Mr Khan next urged us  to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
personal circumstances of the Appellant and the fact  that,  as  a  preacher
and one who seeks to proselytise, he would be exposed to  a  greater  danger
on return. However, we do not find that the case for his falling  into  that
category is made out.  There is nothing to indicate that  he  is  driven  by
his faith to preach and to seek to proselytise in any particular  way.  Even
accepting the incidents at the hands of the KN in 1997 it  would  seem  that
thereafter for some four years the Appellant experienced no difficulties  on
account of his faith.  He received a threat in February 2000 that  seemingly
was  not  translated  into  action.   Ten  to  fifteen  mullahs  attacked  a
convention  which he had played a part in organising  in  October  2001  and
which led to his arrest and detention for 24 hours.  He was released on  the
payment of money. Thereafter for the following year nothing is suggested  of
an  adverse  nature  having  occurred.  There  is  no  indication  that  the
Appellant placed himself in the  forefront  of  attention  by  preaching  or
attending any other particularly overt meeting.  In November 2002  when  the
Ahmadi youth  organisation  arranged  a  free  medical  camp  to  distribute
medication and to preach the faith  there was a further clash with  the  KN.
The Appellant managed to escape and there is no suggestion  that  thereafter
he experienced any difficulties at the hands of the  authorities.   We  note
that the Adjudicator did not find that the incident in May  2003  had  taken
place.

25.   It is to be noted  that  the  Appellant  had  graduated  from  Karachi
University as a Bachelor in Commerce  and had joined a city bank as a  sales
executive. It is to be noted that as from November 2002 the Appellant   went
to Rawalpindi, where he rented  a  house  and  was  employed   by  Al-Khleel
Estate Travel, the owner of the  firm  being  a  non-Ahmadi  and  a  friend.
There he lived in relative peace .

26.   It would seem that the Appellant  was  able  to  earn  his  living  in
various parts of Pakistan without difficulty,  particularly  in  Rawalpindi.
The Appellant had also lived in Lahore where he remained until he  departed.
 There is nothing in the statement of the  Appellant  dated  10  July  2003,
which was before the Adjudicator, to say that he  was  compelled  to  preach
and to proselytise.  It is not a matter  that  seems  to  have  been  raised
before the Adjudicator.  The case of Iftikhar Ahmed  is to be  seen  in  the
context of a person for whom an obligation to profess  and  disseminate  was
persistent and unrelenting.  We  do  not  find  that  characteristic  to  be
demonstrated in the life of the Appellant as presented.

27.   The situation as faced the court in Iftikhar  Ahmed   is  set  out  by
Simon Brown LJ in his judgment, perhaps best encapsulated by  the  following
paragraph on the seventh page of the judgment:-

    "The present case, however, seems to  be  strikingly  different.   This
    appellant, it is common ground, has suffered  persecution  in  his  own
    country, often daily, over a period of years.   His  religion  requires
    him to proselytise, although it is true not all - indeed, perhaps few -
    Ahmadis carry that obligation to the lengths he  does.   His  assertion
    that 'If he returned to Pakistan and went to live in a  different  part
    of the country he would still  follow  the  command  of  his  spiritual
    leaders and still be vocal in his proclamation of Ahmadis  beliefs'  is
    in these circumstances highly likely to be true.   After  all,  had  he
    wished to avoid persecution in the past he  could  always  simply  have
    ceased his activities.  Moreover, not only is his assertion  inherently
    credible, but in any event his evidence was  accepted  by  the  special
    adjudicator and, as I understand it, was assumed to be truthful by  the
    IAT."


28.   We do not find that that situation is one which the  Appellant  faces.
His statement is silent as to that requirement and his  lifestyle  does  not
reflect such an uncompromising attitude as was  found  to  be  the  case  in
Iftikhar Ahmed.

29.   In the circumstances, on the totality of the evidence,  we  find  that
it would not be unduly harsh to expect the Claimant to relocate  to  Rabwah.
We do not find that he is   reasonably  likely  to  be  the  object  of  any
specific targeting in Rabwah on account of his religion or at  all.  Nor  do
we find, on the evidence as presented,  that  he,  as  an  Amadi  living  in
Rabwah ,would be  the  subject  of  any  consistent  pattern  of  gross  and
systematic violation of his fundamental human rights or  to  be  exposed  to
any flagrant denial or gross violation of  such  fundamental  rights,  which
would be persecutory in nature  or  which   would  cross  the  threshold  in
respect of Article 3 of ECHR.  Ullah [2004] UKHL 26. We  do  not  find  that
his faith compels him to speak out  when  others  around  him  may  be  more
discreet in their public and overt activities.



30.   We conclude, therefore, that  the  Adjudicator  in  his  determination
made a full and fair assessment of the case as presented for  the  Appellant
and paid due regard to the objective material. His  findings  were  properly
supported by the evidence when set in the overall context of  the  objective
material. No error of law is disclosed.


31.       In  the  circumstances  therefore   the   appeal   is   dismissed.





      P D KING TD
      VICE PRESIDENT
