
H-DJ-V2

|                           |        |                            |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 5 November 2004         |        |                            |
|                                            NH (Iraq - Yazidis)   |
|Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00306                                        |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified: 25/11/2004                           |
|                                                                  |
|.................................................                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr A R Mackey (Vice President)                                    |
|Mrs M L Roe                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who appeals to the  Tribunal  with
    permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs J  N  Reid,
    in which she dismissed his appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 29 December 2003 issuing directions for  his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom, asylum having been refused.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 5 November 2004.   Mr  J  French,
    for Halliday Reeves Solicitors, appeared on behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    and Mr C Avery appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    Although the wording is not of the clearest, we consider that it  can
    properly be concluded  that  the  Adjudicator  accepted  the  following
    aspects of the Claimant's claim.  Firstly, she accepted that  he  is  a
    Yazidi and worked in the family liquor store which was destroyed  after
    the downfall of Saddam Hussein's regime.  She did not  accept  that  he
    left as he was the best known member of  his  family,  given  that  his
    father had worked in the liquor store for a number of years  previously
    and he also had an elder brother.  She  did  not  accept  that  he  was
    persecuted in Iraq because  of  his  connection  to  the  liquor  store
    although it might be that the family  business  was  the  victim  of  a
    criminal attack, nor did she accept that he was at risk of  persecution
    on return on account of having sold alcohol previously.   Nor  did  she
    accept that there was nowhere he could  go  in  Iraq  to  practise  his
    faith.  She gave consideration to an expert report from Dr K  Rashidian
    and other aspects of the documentary evidence  concerning  Yazidis  and
    the situation in Iraq generally, and concluded that he was not at  risk
    on return.

4.    The Claimant challenged the Adjudicator's determination on the  basis
    that she had not given sufficient weight to his ability to practise his
    religion and to the question of attacks by religious fundamentalists on
    those who sell alcohol.  He also referred to persecution of the  Yazidi
    by the Kurds.  Permission was granted in  order  for  the  Tribunal  to
    assess the risk on return to Iraq for a Yazidi such as the Appellant.

5.    Mr French reminded us of the Claimant's history and referred us to Dr
    Rashidian's report and to other aspects of the  objective  evidence  in
    the bundle.   Specifically,  he  referred  us  to  page  18  concerning
    attempts by the previous  regime  to  undermine  the  identity  of  the
    minority  religions  such  as  the  Yazidis,  and  also  in  the  State
    Department Report further evidence concerning the Yazidis, who had been
    defined by the Ba'ath regime as being Arabs.  They had been  forced  to
    turn on the Kurds and that had clear relevance to risk on return.  From
    the "World and Nation" Report beginning at page 23 of the bundle, there
    was a point at page 24 that  the  number  of  Yazidis  appeared  to  be
    something between 100,000 and 600,000.  Although they had won a seat on
    the town council in Mosul, it was unclear how many seats there were  in
    total.  It seemed that in fact the Yazidis were not represented on  the
    Iraqi Governing Council.  It could be  seen  from  the  Tharwa  Project
    Document beginning at page 58 that many Yazidis feared that they  would
    be at risk in the new Iraq, and there  was  reference  to  an  incident
    which was blamed on water pollution in March 2004 which  had  led  many
    inhabitants of the villages to believe that they had been  deliberately
    poisoned because of their religion.  Their faith was not  accorded  the
    same respect by Muslims as was the case for Christians and Jews.

6.    There were no specific examples of problems  for  Yazidis  since  the
    downfall of the regime.  The Tribunal was, however,  invited  to  infer
    that,  given  the  relatively  small  numbers  of  Yazidis  and  points
    concerning other religious minorities  in  Iraq  to  be  found  in  the
    Country Report, in particular at paragraphs 6.42 to 6.54 and  6.55  was
    indicative of the kind of risk that the Yazidis might  well  face.   As
    regards the failure to get a seat on the governing council,  it  seemed
    that the Yazidis were being subsumed into  the  Kurds  who  claimed  to
    represent them.  They faced the problems of a small religious  minority
    whose religion was misunderstood.  Mr French  was  instructed  to  seek
    remittal of the appeal.

7.    In his submissions Mr Avery argued that there was no error of law  in
    the determination.  The available evidence had been considered in  some
    detail and the conclusions come to were not unreasonable.   In  general
    there was no evidence that the Yazidis faced  persecution  and  it  was
    speculation as to the claimed risk that  they  would  face,  and  their
    position seemed to be better  than  it  had  been  under  the  previous
    regime.  The majority lived in the Kurdish controlled  area  where  law
    and order was generally better then elsewhere in Iraq,  and  there  was
    little evidence of risk.  The poisoning of the well appeared  to  be  a
    case of contamination.

8.    We consider first the question of whether there is indeed an error of
    law to be found in the Adjudicator's  determination.   The  Adjudicator
    clearly considered the relevant objective evidence in the light of  her
    findings of fact and there is no  indication  that  she  did  not  give
    proper  consideration  to  the  relevant  expert  and  other  objective
    evidence concerning the Yazidis.  For  example,  at  paragraph  20  she
    noted that there are hundreds of thousands of  Yazidis  in  Iraq,  with
    many living near Mosul, and that the  community  faces  a  struggle  to
    maintain and develop its place in Iraq, and is the object  of  a  power
    struggle between the Arabs and the Kurds.  She went on to conclude that
    there was nothing to indicate that the Appellant is an  individual  who
    would be at risk on return to Iraq by reason of his religion or that he
    would be unable to practise his religion.

9.    In our view, the Adjudicator's conclusions  are  sustainable  and  we
    have come to the conclusion that there is  no  error  of  law  in  this
    determination.

10.   However, in case we are wrong and  in  any  event  for  the  sake  of
    completeness, we consider that it is proper in this case for us to give
    some consideration to the situation of the Yazidis in Iraq.  There is a
    specific section on the Yazidis at paragraphs 6.59 to 6.64 of the  Iraq
    Country Report of October 2004.  They are described as  a  syncretistic
    religious group or a set of  several  groups,  many  of  whom  consider
    themselves  to  be  ethnically  Kurdish,  although  some  would  define
    themselves as both religiously  and  ethnically  distinct  from  Muslim
    Kurds.  The Yazidis predominantly reside in the north of  Iraq.   There
    is a reference to an article in The Times of 5 June 2003  referring  to
    the Yazidis' religion being one of the more  secretive  and  persecuted
    religions.  We have considered the article in the St. Petersburg  Times
    headed "In Iraq, ancient sect quietly lives on faith",  which  provides
    some useful information on the Yazidis.  They are described as  one  of
    the world's oldest and most unusual religions.   Estimated  numbers  of
    the Yazidis range from less than 100,000 to 600,000.  We see from  this
    report that the Yazidis have won a seat on the town  council  in  Mosul
    though, as Mr French pointed out, it is not known how many seats  there
    are and therefore how representative that in fact is.  It is said to be
    the case that even in the north they are  so  worried  about  extremist
    attacks that  they  cancelled  most  of  their  traditional  springtime
    celebrations this year.   They  are  clearly  concerned  about  Islamic
    parties and the  fact  that  they  have  experienced  a  good  deal  of
    religious persecution throughout their history.  Though they have  been
    referred to as "devil worshippers", it seems that they have no devil in
    their religion and it is unclear why they have been so  described.   It
    is claimed that as part of his Arabisation  programme,  Saddam  Hussein
    drove Yazidis and other Kurds from their  villages  and  replaced  them
    with Arabs.  Most Yazidis remained in Iraq, where they were forced from
    their  villages  into  crowded,  squalid  compounds,  denied   national
    identity cards, forbidden to write about their religion and barred from
    holding government jobs.  Many Yazidi men  were  conscripted  into  the
    army and sent to the front line during the Iran-Iraq  war.   It  seems,
    however, that after 1991 hundreds of Yazidis got jobs in the  Kurdistan
    government.

11.   The article at page 31 of the bundle headed  "Yazidi  Hell's  Angels"
    contains further information on the Yazidis.  It is said that after the
    downfall of Saddam Hussein, Kurdish guerrillas poured into  their  area
    from further north and tried to take over the town.  It  is  said  that
    they have been the victims of an ugly  ethnic  tug-of-war  between  the
    Kurds and Saddam Hussein's regime for years.  It appears that they have
    managed to keep their  religion  and  culture  alive  in  the  face  of
    oppression.  They are said to be at risk in the precarious situation in
    Iraq and, given their lack  of  any  stake  in  power,  their  problems
    remain.  It seems that the Kurds announced that the Yazidis were  Kurds
    and  should  be  represented  by  them  and  hence  they  do  not  have
    representation on the governing council.

12.   It is the case however, as Mr  French  accepted,  that  there  is  no
    evidence of specific problems for Yazidis in recent times, but rather a
    generalised fear, relating in part to the problems that other religious
    minorities in Iraq, such as the Christians (examples at paragraph  6.54
    of the Country Report) and Mandaeans/Sabians (example at paragraph 6.58
    of the Country Report) face.  It is  the  case  however,  as  Mr  Avery
    pointed out, the majority of the Yazidis live in the Kurdish controlled
    areas where law and order is generally better than elsewhere  in  Iraq.
    In essence, we have concluded that the inference that Mr French invited
    us to draw from the historical problems of the  Yazidis  and  the  more
    recent problems of other  minorities  is  not  an  inference  that  can
    properly be drawn from the evidence.  No doubt, as a  relatively  small
    minority in Iraq and one which has  historically  experienced  problems
    from others, the Yazidis are vulnerable, but in our view that does  not
    equate to a real risk of persecution or breach of the human  rights  of
    the Appellant before us as of today.  The evidence does not in our view
    show that there is a risk of anything more than the  generalised  risks
    that exist at present to almost anyone in Iraq, and that in our view is
    not such as to give rise to a real risk of persecution or breach of the
    Appellant's human rights.  Accordingly, even if we  are  wrong  in  our
    view that there is no error of law in the Adjudicator's  determination,
    we consider that the evidence does  not  show  a  real  risk  for  this
    Appellant.

13.   This appeal is dismissed.






                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
