
BO (ECO's_Duties per D S Abdi) Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00026


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing: 2nd February 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                 Date Determination Notified
      16 February 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Miss B Mensah
                               Mr P R Moulden

Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer Lagos.  He  appeals,  with
    permission, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Ms  C  Jarvis,
    allowing the appeal of the Respondent, a citizen  of  Nigeria,  against
    his decision on 20th February 2003  refusing  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor.   Before  us  today  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer has been represented by Mr  Deller.   The  Respondent  did  not
    appear and was not represented.  We exercised our discretion to proceed
    in his absence.

 2. The procedure adopted by the Entry Clearance Officer in  this  case  is
    one which gives all of us, and indeed we are right to say,  Mr  Deller,
    some cause for concern.  It appears that the applicant, having made his
    application, was invited for interview at the Entry Clearance Officer's
    premises in Lagos, and was invited to bring with him documents relating
    to his application.  The invitation was fixed for 27th  February  2003.
    However, the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  was  made  on  20th
    February 2003 apparently  ignoring  much  of  the  material  which  the
    applicant had already forwarded and, of course, dealing with the matter
    without an interview.

 3. It is a matter of some wider concern because it is within our  personal
    knowledge that there have been a number of recent applications  to  the
    Tribunal for permission to appeal which  have  raised  similar  issues.
    There is no doubt in the present case that the decision was indeed made
    on 20th February before the date fixed  for  the  interview.   All  the
    relevant documents emanating from the Entry Clearance Officer bear  his
    date stamp of the 20th February 2003.

 4. The Adjudicator allowed the appeal under schedule 4, paragraph 21(1)(a)
    of the 1999 Act  on  the  basis  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  She referred to the  well
    known decision of the Court of Appeal in Abdi [1996] Imm  AR  148,  and
    she  concluded  her  determination  by  remitting  the  appeal  to  the
    Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  enable  a  full  and  proper
    consideration of all the documentary evidence and to allow an interview
    to take place in the light of all the documentary evidence  so  that  a
    fresh decision can be reached.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal  broadly  speaking  are
    that the Adjudicator was not entitled to behave in that  way.   He  has
    argued that Abdi applies only to matters outside the immigration Rules.
     That may well be so, but the Entry Clearance Officer has an obligation
    to act in accordance with the law, meaning, as Abdi  makes  clear,  the
    genera law, not merely the law  relating  to  British  nationality  and
    passports and so on.  It is quite clear in this  case  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer behaved in breach of the most basic rules of  natural
    justice in making his decision on the applicant's case.

 6. In our view, for that reason, the Adjudicator was entirely  correct  to
    decide to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision against which
    the Respondent appealed was a decision which was not in accordance with
    the law.  The effect of that was not, we think, that the matter  needed
    to be formally remitted to the Entry Clearance Officer.  It  was  that,
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision having been set aside, he had an
    outstanding application before him which awaited lawful decision.

 7. We would emphasise that we do not intend that this decision or Abdi  or
    any other decision in which there has been found to be a defect of  law
    be treated as an encouragement to Adjudicators  to  trawl  through  the
    process of a decision-maker in order to find some minor breach  of  the
    law.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  normal  task  of  the  Appellate
    Authorities is to examine or re-examine an application or  decision  in
    the light of the relevant immigration Rules and the  Conventions.   But
    where, as in the present case, there has been a gross failure to follow
    ordinary legal principle, we  think  it  is  right  for  the  Appellate
    Authorities to set aside the decision so  that  the  Government  has  a
    proper opportunity to make the decision properly and anew.

 8. For the reasons we have given, the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal  is
    dismissed.  The Respondents application remains outstanding before him.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
