
Heard at Field House

SH (Return - Gedo - Burden of proof) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                10 June 2004


                                   Before:

                         Mr Andrew Jordan (Chairman)
                               Mr N. Kumar JP


Between


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr B. Cox, counsel
For the respondent:    Mr M. Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Somalia  who  appeals  against  the
      determination of an adjudicator, Mr P.S. Aujla, dismissing her  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  her  asylum
      claim but allowing her appeal on  human  rights  grounds.   Since  the
      claimant had already been given leave to remain, allowing  her  appeal
      under the ECHR added nothing to her status.


   2. The appellant was born on 5 June  1975  and  is  28  years  old.   She
      entered the United Kingdom on 7 November 2002 and claimed asylum on 19
      November 2002.  She was accompanied by her  son,  Abdillahi,  born  12
      September 2000 who was joined as a dependent to her application.


   3. The Secretary of State refused her claim for asylum  and  granted  her
      exceptional leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  until  17  January
      2004. The decision was made on 17 January 2003  and  gave  rise  to  a
      right of appeal under section 69(3) of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
      1999.  This is the so-called "upgrade appeal"  envisaged in  the  case
      of Saad, Diriye and Osorio [2001] UWCA Civ 2008, [2002] INLR  34.  The
      appellant duly appealed.

   4. The appellant belongs to the Darod clan, sub-clan Marehan and lived in
      Mogadishu with her parents, three brothers  and  three  sisters.   Her
      father was a businessman and is now dead.  Her mother,  three  sisters
      and two of the three brothers have been granted the right to remain in
      the United Kingdom under the Somali Family Reunion concession.

   5. The Marehan is not a minority clan in Somalia.  Members of  the  clan,
      by reason of clan membership alone, do not face persecution by  reason
      of  being  an  unprotected  minority.   In   paragraph   37   of   the
      determination, the adjudicator decided:

      "Mr Cox [counsel for the appellant before the adjudicator  and  before
      us] has claimed that the appellant is a member of a particular  social
      group in that she will be returning as a single woman from the Marehan
      clan.  However, there is no evidence before me to indicate that single
      women from majority clans are at risk  of  persecution  by  virtue  of
      being single women or because of being single women they are not  able
      to access protection from their clan.  I remind  myself  of  the  fact
      that the appellant does belong to a  majority  clan.   I  also  remind
      myself of the House of Lords decision in Adan that those status  civil
      war does not itself give rise to  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
      The fact that the appellant would be returning as a single woman  does
      not, in my view, established the level of risk which is over and above
      that to which other members of her majority clan, both men and  women,
      would be exposed.  I therefore do not accept Mr Cox's suggestion  that
      the appellant, as a single woman, is a member of a  particular  social
      group  within  the  context  of  Somalia  who  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution simply because of her membership of that group."


   6. In line  with  that  thinking,  the  adjudicator  concluded  that  the
      appellant would be able to access protection from members of  her  own
      majority clan and that there was no evidence she would be at risk from
      members of her own clan just because she is a single woman.


   7. The appellant has appealed against that decision.  The fact  that  she
      has been granted exceptional leave to remain (albeit now expired) does
      not act as a bar to her pursuing the additional status afforded by the
      grant of asylum.

   8. In support of her claim, the appellant provided the adjudicator with a
      report from Dr Cedric Barnes.  An attempt was made to  introduce  some
      form of  political  stability  into  Somalia  by  the  creation  of  a
      Transitional National Government (TNG).  At first, conditions appeared
      to improve following the results  of  the  peace  conference  held  in
      Djibouti in August 2000.  Unfortunately, the situation deteriorated in
      2002.   The  TNG  became  little  more  than  a   factional   regional
      administration, often unacknowledged in many other parts  of  Somalia,
      if not actively opposed by them.  The authority of the  TNG  does  not
      extend further than Mogadishu and, even there,  its  authority  is  at
      best weak.  Those identified as being most vulnerable by UNHCR include
      internally displaced persons and returning refugees.  Dr  Barnes  also
      added to that category, single or unsupported women.  On  page  20  of
      the  adjudicator's  bundle,  it  is  said  that  women  have  suffered
      disproportionately since the  break-up  of  Somalia  and  that  sexual
      assault is said to be commonplace.  It is suggested that of all women,
      those  internally  displaced  are  likely  to  be   most   vulnerable,
      particularly those without husbands or extended families.  The  source
      for Dr Barnes, it is clearly found in paragraph 5.29  of  the  Country
      Report for October 2002.


   9. In Dr Barnes first report, consideration was given to the appellant as
      a refugee.  It was recorded that  the  former  president  of  Somalia,
      Siyad Barre belonged to the Marehan clan and this  was  sufficient  to
      excite the antipathy of  USC/Hawiye  militias  who  were  said  to  be
      especially brutal towards members of the Marehan clan.

  10. In an updated report prepared for the  benefit  of  the  Tribunal  and
      dated 8 May 2004, Dr Barnes gave  thought  to  the  situation  of  the
      Marehan in Mogadishu.  The Hawiye clan militia drove out most  of  the
      Marehan from Mogadishu.  The TNG's grasp on authority is slim and  the
      police  forces  ineffective.   Neither  the  police  nor  the   courts
      apparently provide  protection  against  widespread  lawlessness.   Dr
      Barnes stated that of the three international  fact-finding  mission's
      undertaken since 2000, none has visited  Mogadishu,  almost  certainly
      because it remains insecure.

  11. The Marehan are associated with the Gedo  region.   The  Marehan  clan
      control the Gedo region and many Marehan who fled Mogadishu after  the
      collapse of Siyad Barre's regime  fled  there.   Unfortunately,  there
      appears to have been inter-clan fighting in this part of  the  country
      between rival factions of the Marehan  clan.   Although  there  was  a
      ceasefire negotiate in 2002, in a single factional controls the region
      and there is  a  suggestion  at  least  that  the  security  situation
      deteriorated during 2003.

  12. We were also referred to the Country report prepared by CIPU in  April
      2004.


      Return to Mogadishu


      5.10 The TNG have control over  some  areas  of  Mogadishu  where  its
      official ministries are located and also has  some  authority  outside
      the capital including the coastal area to the south  of  the  capital.
      Other areas of the capital continue to be  controlled  by  leaders  of
      factions opposed to the TNG. As noted in the JFFMR July 2002, the  TNG
      leaders are all highly dependent on the  pro-TNG  business  cartel  in
      Mogadishu comprising Habr Gedir and Abgal businessmen.  The  TNG  have
      reportedly paid some warlords to ensure the continued support of their
      militias. On 2 October 2003, HornAfrik reported that the TNG opened an
      office to  deal  with  land  disputes  in  Mogadishu.  Muhammad  Siyad
      Barqadle, the deputy mayor of Mogadishu said  that  the  office  would
      work with the courts in the Benadir region


      5.11 ... The JFFMR March 2004 noted that the  threat  to  security  in
      Mogadishu remained constant and that it was not possible  to  identify
      stable areas in the city. It was emphasised that no improvement of the
      situation took place during 2003. UN sources stated that the Mogadishu
      area is split between the SRRC and  Muse  Sude,  there  is  no  single
      authority and the TNG hardly controls any part of the city.  In  spite
      of this Mogadishu is an expanding town.



      Current security situation



      6.151 As reflected in the JFFMR March 2004, "...UN  sources  suggested
      that the fluid security situation and general trend in  extra-judicial
      killings in the southern and central regions remained unchanged during
      2003, a trend that has been constant since 1999. It was indicated that
      the security situation in Somalia generally  had  deteriorated  during
      2003. The source explained that this situation was caused by the  time
      that had elapsed and because the culture of violence and weapons,  and
      disrespect for life have become more  prevalent  in  Somalia.  It  was
      added that the security situation in  Somalia  is  being  continuously
      monitored and that the overall level of violence  in  2003  was  high.
      Incidents of kidnappings and looting had  increased,  as  many  people
      looked to increase their resource  base.  The  weaker  clans  and  the
      minority groups were now worse off. This increase in violence and  the
      deterioration of security in Somalia  has  affected  not  only  Somali
      civilians, but also local UN staff. "


      6.85 As reflected in the JFFMR March 2004, "...the delegation met with
      Abdiaziz  Omar  Daad,  formerly  minister  of   reconciliation   under
      President Siad Barre from 1986 to 1990. He is a  Marehan  himself  and
      explained that it is too difficult for Marehan to live in Mogadishu as
      they are conceived to be wealthy because many of them used to work for
      the Siad Barre regime. He stated that all Marehan clan  members  would
      be blamed for the suffering caused by the Siad Barre regime  and  they
      risk being killed. Omad Daad estimated that approximately 200  persons
      of the Marehan clan live in Mogadishu today who are able to stay  only
      there because they have intermarried with strong clans. An independent
      Marehan could not live in Mogadishu safely and run  a  business.  Omar
      Daad stated that a Marehan who had worked for the  Siad  Barre  regime
      could not return to Mogadishu. Any other clan  (e.g.  Hawiye  or  Habr
      Gedir) who had worked in the administration (including the police)  of
      Siad Barre would not have any problems returning to  Mogadishu  today.
      Even family members of a Marehan who had worked for Siad  Barre  would
      have problems today."


      Pausing there, Mr Blundell properly stated that he did not  feel  able
      to speak against the clear words of the CIPU report to the effect that
      the appellant could not return to Mogadishu.   Having  considered  the
      entirety of the evidence on this issue,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
      concession is correct.   It  follows  that  the  adjudicator's  global
      finding that the appellant is not at risk does  not  properly  address
      the specific protection needs of this appellant.  The general security
      situation is described in paragraph 6.13:


      6.13 As noted in AI 2003 and UNSCRs October 2002  and  February  2003,
      fighting between rival clans and factions continued in many  parts  of
      the country. As reflected in USSDR 2003 and  AI  reoports  from  2003,
      there are continued reports of killings and reprisal killings of  clan
      opponents, expulsions of members of other clans, cases  of  kidnapping
      as well as detention, and  torture  or  ill  treatment  of  prisoners.
      Women and minorities are particularly vulnerable to abuses.  As  noted
      by IRIN, the DIJHRC  chief  investigator  stated  in  July  2003  that
      civilians are often  killed  during  factional  fighting  due  to  the
      indiscriminate shelling of residential areas,  he  asserted  that  the
      combatants did not care what happened to civilians. As noted by AI  in
      reports from 2002 and 2003, none of the factions  responsible  respect
      the  principles  of  international  humanitarian  law  regulating  the
      conduct of armed conflict and protection of civilians and  members  of
      faction militias generally act with impunity. According to  AI  report
      of February 2003, faction leaders  have  done  little  or  nothing  to
      suppress the arbitrary abuses of gunmen in the  areas  they  claim  to
      control. According to UN sources, there are about 10,000 militiamen in
      Mogadishu alone. However, as noted by IRIN, in a positive  development
      the JVA were, as of  September  2003,  in  the  process  of  disarming
      militias in Kismayo and surrounding areas that it controls.


      Internal Flight


      It is apparent from an examination of  the  background  material  that
      internal flight, seen in the context of the position in  Somalia,  has
      to be viewed with particular care.  The stance adopted by UNHCR in its
      January 2004 position paper on return is that there can be no internal
      relocation except in very specific circumstances:


      6.70 According to UNHCR's  position  paper  on  return,  January  2004
      "...The general pattern of human settlements prevailing in many  parts
      of Africa, including Somalia, is often characterised by common ethnic,
      tribal religious and/or cultural factors, which enable access to land,
      resources and protection from members of the community.  Consequently,
      this commonality appears to be the  necessary  condition  to  live  in
      safety. In such situations  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect
      someone to take up residence in an area  or  community  where  persons
      with a different ethnic, tribal, religious and/or cultural  background
      are settled, or where  they  would  otherwise  be  considered  aliens.
      ...Therefore, it would be unreasonable to expect a person to  move  to
      an area in his or her own country other than one where he or  she  has
      ethnic, tribal, religious and or/cultural ties.  ...This  is  true  in
      Somaliland and Puntland.  ...Specifically  in  Somaliland...those  not
      originating from this area (non-Somalilanders) would be considered  as
      foreigners, and face significant acceptance and integration  problems,
      particularly  taking  into  account  the  extremely  difficult  socio-
      economic situation of those native to the territory...In  this  regard
      it should be noted that 'place of origin' should  not  necessarily  be
      equated with 'place of birth'...Therefore, the determining  factor  in
      defining where a person  originates  from  is  where  the  person  has
      effective clan and family ties, and  where  clan  protection  is  thus
      available. In light of the above, especially given the prevailing clan
      system, UNHCR is of the view that the internal flight  alternative  is
      not applicable in the context of Somalia".

      Our understanding of this passage is  that  it  is  not  'place'  that
      defines whether relocation is possible but the presence  of  effective
      clan and family ties.  Whilst there  remained  a  significant  Marehan
      community in Mogadishu, it would have been possible for the  appellant
      to return  there.   That  community  no  longer  exists  there  as  an
      effective network of support.  Many fled to  Gedo  where  the  Marehan
      clans now dominate.  Were it safe for the appellant to relocate there,
      this would conventionally be seen as internal flight.  In the  context
      of Somalia, however, it might more easily be seen  as  re-joining  her
      community.

      Return to Gedo



      Having excluded  Mogadishu  as  a  place  of  safety,  the  Tribunal's
      attention was inevitably drawn to a  consideration  of  whether  other
      parts of Somalia, controlled by Marehan, provide an alternative viable
      option to which the appellant might return.  First of these was Gedo.


      Gedo
      5.21 As reflected in the JFFMR July 2002, the Marehan  clans  dominate
      Gedo region. The SNF, led by Colonel Abdirazzaq Isaq  Bihi,  has  been
      the main Marehan faction operating in the region, which has also  been
      strongly influenced in the past by the Islamist  Al-Itihaad  movement.
      As stated in the US State Department's International Religious Freedom
      Report 2003 (IRFR 2003),  the  El  Wak  district  of  Gedo  reportedly
      remained under the control of radical Islamists as  of  mid  2002.  As
      reflected in the JFFMR July 2002, during heavy fighting  in  mid  2002
      Bihi reportedly switched his allegiance form the SRRC to the  JVA  but
      was subsequently captured by Ethiopian forces that frequently  operate
      in Gedo. He  was  however  released  in  June  2002  and  subsequently
      participated in peace talks in Kenya as a representative of  the  SNF.
      The JFFMR March 2004 notes Gedo remains a very difficult region  since
      no single group or clan is in charge and  the  region  is  very  poor.
      Furthermore it receives hardly any support from the  outside.  It  was
      stated that the region is still split between rival factions.  It  was
      suggested that the situation was  more  or  less  quiet  although  the
      emphasis was that fighting could resume any time.


      6.169 There were reports of intra-Marehan clan fighting  in  Luuq,  in
      the northern Gedo region.  The UNSCR  February  2003  stated  that  40
      people were killed as on 29 October 2002 as a result of this. In  June
      2003 the UN reported that fighting  between  the  Marehan  was  making
      access to Gedo difficult for humanitarian staff.


      Pausing there, the situation in Gedo is not so serious that  a  member
      of the Marehan clan, even  an  unaccompanied  woman,  could  not  find
      adequate safety there.   The  Tribunal  next  considered  whether  the
      appellant might return to Mogadishu in order to travel  to  Gedo.   Mr
      Cox submitted that, having found that  Mogadishu  was  not  safe,  the
      Tribunal could not safely return the  appellant  there  even  for  the
      purpose of transit.  We do not agree.  There is no  credible  evidence
      that the appellant would be at risk for the few hours during which she
      would be in Mogadishu.  No material  has  been  provided  to  us  that
      airport checks would reveal her clan identity or otherwise  place  her
      at risk.  Nevertheless, arrival at Mogadishu airport is only the first
      stage.  The Tribunal must be satisfied that the appellant can make the
      journey from Mogadishu to Gedo.   In  approaching  this  part  of  the
      claim, Mr Cox reminded us that it was in an attempt to reach Gedo that
      the appellant was last assaulted.  Internal travel is referred  to  in
      the CIPU report.  Furthermore, specific attention has to be  given  to
      the position of IDP's and women:


      6.170 As noted in the UNSCR  October  2003,  "...the  almost  complete
      absence of any established authority resulted in armed groups  setting
      up checkpoints at will to extort money from travellers.  The  lack  of
      local authority has significantly reduced the frequency of  visits  by
      aid workers to places such as Belet Hawa, Luuq and Bardera." According
      to the UNSCR February 2004,  "...although  the  region  was  generally
      quiet during the reporting period, no clear authority has emerged  and
      many of the clans are embroiled in disputes, resulting  in  occasional
      killings. El-Wak has been under the joint administration of the  Garre
      and Marehan clans. In December 2003, Garre militia wrested control  of
      El-Wak from the Marehan."
      6.79 As noted in CAP 2004, "...in  both  the  CAP  Workshop  for  2003
      (August 2002) and 2004 (August 2003), as well  as  in  numerous  other
      UNDP/OCHA reports, aid actors in Somalia have  re-affirmed  the  three
      most  vulnerable  groups  in  Somalia  to  be  IDPs,   returnees   and
      minorities. While many other categories  of  vulnerability  have  been
      identified, these groups, which include women and children, qualify as
      the "most vulnerable of  the  vulnerable,"  primarily  due  to  having
      suffered from: 1) the loss of  assets  through  exposure  to  a  major
      shock, whether it be economic, climatic or conflict-related; 2) having
      little to no access to protection from clan affiliations, and 3) being
      exposed to multiple vulnerabilities or risks."

      Women

      6.110 According in to the USSD 2004, "...women and  children  suffered
      disproportionately heavily in  the  fighting  following  the  fall  of
      Barre's  administration."  According  to  the  JFFMR  December   2000,
      "...there were large numbers of rapes, abductions and forced marriages
      of women by the warring militia,  especially  in  1991-92,  which  has
      stigmatised the victims."

      Violence against women

      6.117 Violence against women in Somalia  is  widespread;  robbery  and
      rape are particularly common. The UNDP  Human  Development  Report  of
      2001 noted that sexual violence against women during the civil war did
      not end with the war. According to the report there is  some  evidence
      that sexual violence is a persistent crime even in areas of stability.
      The USSDR  2003  indicated  "...that  rape  is  common  in  inter-clan
      disputes...there were also reports of numerous rapes of  Somali  women
      and girls in refugee camps in Kenya  during  2003.  Although  laws  do
      exist prohibiting rape they are not enforced". As stated in the  JFFMR
      July 2002, "...many  women  consider  the  traditional  punishment  of
      forcing the offender to marry their victim and to pay compensation  to
      the family of the victim for  'their'  loss  to  represent  a  further
      degradation for the victim herself".

  13. During the course of the hearing,  Mr  Blundell  volunteered  to  seek
      information from the country expert within the Home Office as  to  the
      viability  of  travel  from  Mogadishu  to  Gedo.   Having  made  such
      enquiries as he could, he informed us that there have been returns  to
      Mogadishu.  The journey from Mogadishu to Gedo  is  approximately  150
      miles but there is no public transport system and, as the CIPU  notes,
      the journey is likely to be  interrupted  by  militia  checkpoints  at
      which extortion demands will be made.   Realistically,  the  appellant
      will have to be provided with money in order to enable her to complete
      the journey and is likely to be  subjected,  at  least,  to  extortion
      demands by militiamen.  As Mr Cox pointed out, the very fact that  the
      appellant will have money will render her liable to extortion.  Whilst
      we accept that this may not be in quite the same category as a  person
      being required to flee across battle-lines in order to seek the safety
      of his or her own community, it appears to  us  that  the  journey  is
      likely to be perilous.  She will be accompanied by a young child.   Mr
      Blundell accepted that it would not be particularly easy.


  14. The conclusion that we have reached is  that,  whilst  the  background
      material establishes that the area around Gedo will  provide  adequate
      safety for this appellant, even as a single woman, there is at present
      no practical means enabling her  to  complete  her  journey  there  in
      adequate  safety.   In  our  judgment,  under  both  Conventions,  the
      provision of adequate security is essentially a practical affair.   In
      reaching this conclusion we have avoided deciding  the  issue  on  the
      basis of who has the burden of establishing it.  It is, of course, for
      the appellant to establish her claim.  If the evidence suggests  there
      are areas within the country where a particular appellant is  able  to
      find adequate protection, the assumption will be that there are  means
      of travel to enable her to reach that destination.  If, as in the case
      of Somalia, there is evidence that there are significant  difficulties
      in completing the journey,  that  information  may  be  sufficient  to
      enable  the  appellant  to  discharge  the  burden  placed  upon  her.
      Nevertheless, it will sometimes be the  case  that  the  Secretary  of
      State has access to information that is not available to an  appellant
      and, in such cases, it may be reasonable for the Secretary of State to
      provide it.  In so doing, we are not suggesting that that  the  burden
      shifts to the Secretary of State although this issue was not  explored
      before us.


  15. The consequences of this decision are that the appellant has succeeded
      in establishing that there is an insufficiency of protection  for  her
      were she to return to Somalia and that her  claim  under  the  Refugee
      Convention is made out.  Her up-grade appeal is allowed.


    Decision:  The appellant's asylum appeal is allowed.






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
1 June 2004
