
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |MP (Risk - MCDDI - Lari     |
|                           |        |Ethnicity) Congo- Republic  |
|                           |        |Of Brazzaville CG [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00002                 |
|On  20 October 2003        |        |                            |
|Dictated 21 October 2003                                          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|13 January 2004                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Richard Chalkley (Chairman)                                    |
|Mrs M L Roe                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Ms J Gasparro, of Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co,  Solicitors,  appeared
on behalf  of  the  appellant  and   Mr  A  Hutton,  a  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Congo,  Brazzaville,
      appeals with  leave  of  the  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  an
      Adjudicator, Ms A Swaniker, who in a determination promulgated  on  24
      March 2003, following a hearing at Taylor House on 11  February  2003,
      dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent, taken  on
      12 January 2001, to direct his removal after refusing asylum.

2.    The determination itself refers to a hearing  before  the  Adjudicator
      having taken place on 11 February 2002.  The Tribunal are satisfied by
      reference to the record of proceedings that the hearing actually  took
      place on 11 February 2003.

3.     The  grounds  of  appeal  were  lengthy.   They  asserted  that   the
      Adjudicator failed to assess the future risk  of  persecution  on  the
      appellant's  return  to  the  Republic  of  Congo.   The   Adjudicator
      indicated that internal flight was an option  for  the  appellant  and
      that having failed to assess the issue of returnability,  the  grounds
      asserted that the Adjudicator could not have rationally  reached  this
      conclusion.  They assert that the Adjudicator failed to  consider  the
      appellant's initial claim in full and to  understand  the  appellant's
      role in political activities.  His role had always been a very  public
      one and would, therefore, have brought him to  the  attention  of  the
      opposition.  She also erred in failing to assess the importance of the
      appellant's relationship with his uncle, Mr Maboussou.

4.    In the bundle of objective  material  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  on
      behalf of the appellant was a copy of a report by Mr Paul Melly  dated
      15 July 2002 which had been before the Adjudicator, and a copy  of  an
      updated report from Mr Paul Melly of 25 August  2003,  which  had  not
      been before the Adjudicator.  In relation to the  report  of  15  July
      2002, Counsel confirmed that there was no evidence that Mr  Melly  had
      given his consent to this report, which had been prepared specifically
      in relation to another asylum applicant, being used in connection with
      this appeal.

5.     Counsel asked the Tribunal to bear in mind that in  relation  to  the
      more recent report of Mr Melly it was not disputed that the  appellant
      was a member of MCDDI.  The Adjudicator appears to have accepted  this
      at paragraph 21 of the determination.  This appellant will be at  risk
      on return because he is of military age, he is a  Lerir  tribal  group
      member, also known as the Lari and he is a member of the  MCDDI.   She
      referred us to Mr Melly's report of 25 August last which  showed  that
      fighting between Ninja guerrillas and  the  government  flared  up  in
      March and April 2002 and continued until March 2003  and  that  during
      2002 there was a particularly  dramatic  deterioration  in  the  human
      rights situation in the country.  It was too early to  say,  according
      to Mr Melly, whether a new and lasting improvement in human rights was
      yet underway.  The Adjudicator erred by failing to consider Mr Melly's
      report of July 2002. This showed that a former MCDDI Party  opposition
      activist of Lari ethnic origin is at high risk from the moment of  his
      arrival in Brazzaville.  Instead, this Adjudicator relied on the  2002
      US State  Department  Report  which  was  a  report  on  human  rights
      practises during 2001  and  was  out  of  date  by  the  time  it  was
      considered by the  Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator erred  as  a  result.
      On his return, this appellant will be regarded with deep suspicion and
      his MCDDI membership  will  place  him  at  serious  risk.   There  is
      evidence as it appears members have been tracked down and  persecuted.
      Ninja guerrillas have targeted young men of this appellant's age.   He
      will be known as an MCDDI supporter for two  reasons.   First  because
      his activities on behalf of the MCDDI were  of  a  public  nature  and
      secondly because the MCDDI headquarters was captured by the guerrillas
      and they will have had access  to  the  MCDDI  membership  lists.   In
      addition to his MCDDI involvement, the appellant's ethnicity  and  his
      age will place him at additional risk.

6.    Responding on behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Hutton  drew  our
      attention to the final paragraph on page 64 of the appellant's  bundle
      which said:

           "In this  situation,  a  known  former  MCDDI  Party  opposition
           activist of Lari ethnic origin is at high risk from  the  moment
           of his arrival in Brazzaville.  This is  particularly  the  case
           for individuals, such as [name deleted] who  have  already  been
           the target of security force raids and investigations in earlier
           years."

7.    Mr Hutton pointed out that the appellant had not been of any  interest
      in the past, despite his activities.  The situation  now  has  clearly
      improved.  This is evident from Mr Melly's most  recent  report  which
      referred to  several  hundred  Ninja  fighters  and  possibly  several
      thousands, having abandoned the war since March 2002 and  referred  to
      significant fighting having stopped, although the Ninja leader has yet
      to come into Brazzaville from the forest.  Mr  Hutton  submitted  that
      there would be no suspicion of the appellant having  been  a  fighter.
      In any event, Mr Melly makes it clear that not all individuals with  a
      background of opposition or some connections have been persecuted.  In
      referring to the peace accord, Mr Melly said  that  it  may  gradually
      defuse tensions  and  improve  the  treatment  of  ethnic  groups  and
      individuals regarded as sympathetic to the opposition.

8.    The Country Information and  Policy  Unit  Report  at  paragraph  6.27
      refers to the fact that Amnesty International said in their April 2003
      report that they have received  few  reports  of  political  prisoners
      although they believe that arbitrary arrest,  unlawful  detention  and
      mistreatment in custody did occur, when such incidents  happened,  the
      victims were ordinary  criminals  with  no  political  connections  in
      "virtually all cases".

9.    The Country Information and Policy Unit Report at paragraph  6.99  and
      6.100 indicate an improved situation.  The guerrillas  who  agreed  to
      end hostilities, disarmed fighters and enabled the  state  to  restore
      authority in  Pool  and,  in  turn,  the  government  have  agreed  to
      guarantee an amnesty to rebels, including provisions  for  integrating
      ex-combatants into the army.  The International Committee of  the  Red
      Cross facilitated an exchange of prisoners as part of the agreement to
      restore peace for the country.  Earlier in the Country Information and
      Policy Unit Report (paragraphs 6.24, 6.25, 6.26 and 6.27) it was clear
      that  many  former  opposition  political  figures  have  returned  to
      Brazzaville and resumed their political  activities.   Civil  servants
      who served under the previous  regime  and  supported  the  opposition
      groups, were allowed to return to their previous employer.

10.   Bearing in mind the Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility  findings  and
      the improved situation in the country,  and  given  the  lack  of  any
      evidence that the authorities actually do have  access  to  the  MCDDI
      membership list, the  Adjudicator's  findings  are  sustainable.   The
      Adjudicator found that he would not be at any risk in the Republic  of
      Congo and could relocate almost anywhere, should he choose to  do  so.
      The Adjudicator's findings in respect of  the  appellant's  low  level
      activities were ones which she was entitled to make.  He had  actually
      claimed that he was in charge of communication  and  propaganda  among
      the youth of the party and that his work had been at a national level.
       His uncle had claimed that the  appellant  had  been  interviewed  on
      television but the appellant had never made this  claim  himself.   Mr
      Hutton invited the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

11.   In her concluding remarks, Counsel emphasised that she relied  on  the
      expert report of Mr Melly and in particular  invited  us  to  consider
      pages 104 to 109.  She asked us to  note  also  that  the  appellant's
      uncle had met Mr Melly.  It was not the appellant's claim that he  had
      been a high level activist but his activities had all been public and,
      to that extent, he had a high public  profile.   There  will  also  of
      course be the association with his uncle who is a bodyguard to  former
      President Lissouba.

12.   We reserved our determination.

13.   We believe it is unfortunate that the appellant's  solicitors  sought,
      at the hearing before the Adjudicator, to rely on an  expert's  report
      which had been prepared in  relation  to  another  asylum  applicant's
      appeal.  There was no evidence before this Adjudicator that  Mr  Melly
      had given his consent to his earlier report being used  in  connection
      with this appellant or, indeed, that he had been approached.   Had  he
      been asked for his consent  he  would  have  had  the  opportunity  of
      updating his report.  We are grateful  to  him  for  his  August  2003
      report which we found of great assistance.

14.   When giving evidence before the Adjudicator, the  appellant  explained
      that he was a member of the MCDDI and that his role was  to  speak  to
      people and to transmit the feelings of the party  to  them.   He  said
      that his work was on a national  level  and  that  he  was  under  the
      national command.  He claims to have ceased his activities  on  behalf
      of the party at the end of the war in October 1997.  At the hearing he
      relied on a statement made by his uncle, Mr Maboussou who had been one
      of the guards to President Lissouba's wife in Congo  and  was  now  an
      adviser to the President.  He had been unable to  attend  the  hearing
      because he had to accompany the President to one of his appointments.

15.   During his asylum interview in answer to  question  4,  the  appellant
      said that his role in the MCDDI was that he was,

           "... in charge  of  communication  and  propaganda  amongst  the
           youth.  My country  has  got  big  proportion  of  young  people
           between 15-30 and all in schools and the role I played was  that
           of communication with the youth."

      When asked how he carried out the role he said:

           "Once I became a member of the party I had to go and talk to  my
           colleagues in schools, talk about the situation, the social  and
           political situation in the country  and  about  what  the  party
           advocated in relation to the society"


      He agreed that he gave talks and that he ceased to have any  political
      involvement after April 1998.  He had joined the MCDDI in June 1996.

16.   In a statement submitted with the appellant's  statement  of  evidence
      form, he confirmed that he became involved  with  the  MCDDI  in  June
      1996.  He was involved in campaigning for the Presidential  elections.
      He described his role as follows:

           "I would distribute leaflets, put up posters, would  speak  with
           other young people about the election.  I would do this both  in
           the local area where I lived and also, I along  with  others  in
           the party, would go out into the countryside to attempt to  drum
           up support.  The elections were due to take place in  July  1997
           but they were cancelled as the result of a civil war which broke
           out on 5 June 1997.


           In August 1997 I joined I'ERDDUN as this was a kind of  umbrella
           organisation for the forces of democracy.  I joined  along  with
           others from MCDDI and from  other  parties  who  wished  to  see
           democracy returned to our country.


           I was not personally involved in the fighting which took  place.
           I was a singer and was involved in singing  in  support  of  our
           cause, which was to defend democracy."


17.   Later in his statement he describes the  fighting  as  having  stopped
      and he said that the victors were looking  for  people  who  had  been
      involved in the MCDDI and if the rebel soldiers found such people they
      were violent towards them.  He said:
           "I believe as I have previously only had a low level involvement
           and because I was no longer involved  in  politics,  I  did  not
           initially have any difficulties with the new regime.  I  had  no
           trouble from the time the rebels took power until April 1998."

18.   The appellant then described an arrest by Angolan  soldiers  who  were
      mercenaries.  In paragraph 22 of her  determination,  the  Adjudicator
      did not accept this arrest.  She believed that the appellant's account
      of this incident was untrue and sets out her reasons for this finding.

19.   In paragraph 20 of her determination, Ms Swaniker said:

           "I would say from the outset that I do not overall consider  the
           appellant to be a credible witness.   I  consider  that  he  has
           significantly exaggerated and embellished  his  account  of  his
           circumstances  in  his  country  and   his   alleged   political
           involvement.   I  consider  his  evidence  to  be  in  fear   of
           persecution in Congo to be  undermined  by  inconsistencies  and
           implausibilities ..."

20.   She refers in paragraph 21 of her determination to the fact  that  the
      appellant had claimed in his statement that he previously had only low
      level involvement and was no longer involved in politics, which is why
      he did not initially  have  any  difficulties  with  the  new  regime.
      However, when interviewed, the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  in
      charge of communication  and  propaganda  amongst  the  youth  of  his
      country.  In his oral evidence he claimed  that  his  work  was  at  a
      national level and that  he  was  under  the  National  Command.   The
      Adjudicator found that  the  appellant  had  sought  to  significantly
      elevate his level of political involvement.  She found him not to be a
      credible witness and while she found that he may have been a member of
      MCDDI, did not believe that his involvement was, put at  its  highest,
      anything other than at a very low level.  She did not believe that his
      activities brought him to the adverse attention of the authorities  or
      their agents.

21.   In paragraph 23 of her determination,  the  Adjudicator  records  that
      when asked how the appellant had obtained news from  neighbours  about
      the mercenaries going to his home, he said he obtained  this  news  by
      visiting his neighbours.  When asked how often  he  returned  he  said
      "not very often" and when pressed he said it could have been once  but
      he was not sure.  She thought it wholly implausible that the appellant
      would have risked going to his neighbours, if indeed it was  the  case
      that Angolan mercenary soldiers were repeatedly returning to his house
      in an attempt to arrest him.  In any event, she rejected the claim  to
      have been arrested and found that his account was untrue.

22.   Paragraph 4 of the grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  Adjudicator
      failed to consider the appellant's initial claim in full (as contained
      in his SEF statement) and as a result erroneously concluded  that  the
      appellant was later attempting to elevate his  political  involvement,
      both at interview and at the hearing.  It is  asserted  that  had  the
      Adjudicator totally considered closely considered all the  appellant's
      evidence in the round she could not have come to the  conclusion  that
      the appellant sought to embellish his case in the manner which she has
      relied upon in deciding his credibility.  We find  no  merit  in  this
      ground.  The Adjudicator clearly did consider what the  appellant  had
      said in the statement which accompanied his SEF and  she  compared  it
      with what he said at interview and what he said in giving evidence  to
      her.  She was entitled to  conclude  that  having  given  inconsistent
      accounts, this appellant was not telling the truth and had  sought  to
      significantly elevate his  level  of  political  involvement  on  that
      originally claimed.  The appellant himself had said in  the  statement
      that  accompanying  his  statement  of  evidence  form  that  he   had
      previously only had a low level of involvement and yet, whilst  giving
      evidence, claimed that his work was on a national level  and  that  he
      was under the National Command.

23.   In paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal it is asserted that given  the
      role the appellant has stated that he performed from the start, it has
      always been very public and would therefore have brought  him  to  the
      attention of the opposition.  It is claimed that  the  appellant  "has
      never pitched his case so as to say that he  was  such  a  high  level
      member as the Adjudicator had implied".  We  find  no  merit  in  this
      ground either.  The appellant's involvement was between June 1996 when
      he joined the MCDDI and October 1997.  In  June  1996  this  appellant
      would have been 16 years of age. Even on the appellant's  own  account
      his activities on behalf of the MCDDI caused him no difficulties until
      April 1999.  We do not believe that the  low  level  activities  which
      this appellant was involved in would have caused him  to  have  had  a
      high public profile.  We do not believe that, given the  Adjudicator's
      findings, this appellant's activities would have caused  him  to  have
      been noticed by either the authorities or opposition groups.

24.   In relation to the appellant's uncle, the Adjudicator noted  that  the
      last contact this appellant had with his uncle prior to coming to  the
      United Kingdom was in 1997, before  the  outbreak  of  the  war.   The
      Adjudicator placed no  reliance  on  his  uncle's  witness  statement,
      because he claimed that the appellant was a prominent  member  of  the
      MCDDI and went on to claim that he saw the appellant being  filmed  by
      television cameras  during  an  interview  with  the  appellant.   The
      Adjudicator did not find it credible that the appellant would fail  to
      mention this interview if indeed it were true,  given  that  it  would
      have been a matter of  some  significance.   The  Tribunal  finds  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to place little reliance on a statement  made
      by someone claiming to be the appellant's uncle when they  had  chosen
      not to attend the appellant's asylum appeal hearing.  There  had  been
      no application on behalf of the appellant for the appeal hearing to be
      adjourned in order that his uncle could attend on a later occasion. No
      application  had  been  made  by  the  appellant's  experienced  legal
      advisers for a witness summons to be  issued.   Mr  Mabousou's  letter
      contradicted what the  appellant  himself  had  claimed.   We  do  not
      believe that this appellant will be linked  to  Jean-Bruce  Maboussou,
      even if this man is the appellant's uncle.

25.   Mr Melly refers to the peace accord between the Ninja leaders and  the
      government and says that several hundred and possibly several thousand
      Ninja fighters  have  abandoned  the  war.   Since  the  fighting  has
      stopped.  Whilst  members  of  ethnic  groups  regarded  as  affording
      opposition parties are said to remain highly  vulnerable,  along  with
      individuals who have a history of grass roots political  activity,  we
      do not believe that this appellant is likely  to  be  regarded  as  an
      individual with a history of grass roots political activity, given his
      very limited involvement with the MCDDI.  Many numbers  of  the  group
      are said to have been targeted with  discrimination  or  human  rights
      abuse.  However, given that the government have agreed to guarantee an
      amnesty offered to rebels, including  agreement  for  integrating  ex-
      combatants into the army, and given the Minister for the  coordination
      of Government activities actually welcomed a delegation of  100  major
      militia in Brazzaville in March  2003,  (see  CIPU  6.94)  we  do  not
      believe that any serious likelihood of simply being a  member  of  the
      Lari ethnic group will cause the appellant to  suffer  persecution  or
      ill-treatment.  Mr Melly believes  that  the  appellant's  history  of
      activity within the MCDDI and his family connection with  someone  who
      was a bodyguard of President Lissouba will increase the risk for  him.
      However, the Tribunal notes that prior to coming to the United Kingdom
      the appellant had not had contact with Mr Mabousou since 1997,  before
      the outbreak of the war.  The Tribunal do not  believe  there  is  any
      serious likelihood that the  appellant  will  be  associated  with  Mr
      Mabousou.

26.   Understandably, Mr Melly has  accepted  the  appellant's  credibility.
      However, he did not have the opportunity of hearing the appellant give
      evidence and be cross-examined.  The Adjudicator did.  Mr  Melly  said
      the appellant will not be able to conceal his political background:
           "he made no secret he had previously appeared at public  events.
           He may well have been shown on  television  -  which  frequently
           reported on such meetings."

      Mr  Melly's  comments  are  not  supported  by  the   evidence.    The
      Adjudicator never claimed to be on television;  indeed he claimed  his
      activities were low level.  Mr Melly  reports  that  the  MCDDI  Party
      headquarters were captured by the Sassou-Nguesso forces  in  the  1997
      war and this means that membership records  are  almost  certainly  in
      government hands.  However, the Tribunal find that this is speculation
      on his part.   No  credible  evidence  has  been  adduced  before  the
      Tribunal to show that if there were membership records,  and  assuming
      that the appellant's name was on such a record, no evidence that  this
      actually fell into the hands of those forces.  On the other  hand,  we
      note that the MCDDI is free to participate in the political arena  and
      won some four seats in local elections in 2002.

27.   Our consideration of the objective evidence,  including  both  reports
      of Mr Melly, leads us to conclude that there is no real risk  that  on
      return to the Republic of Congo, the appellant will  face  persecution
      for a Convention reason or that his rights on the European  Convention
      for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms  will  be
      breached.

28.   We dismiss this appeal.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President
