
      AM (Risk-Warlord-Perceived Taliban) Afghanistan [2004] CG UKIAT 00004



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing: 27  November 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                            15 January 2004..............

                                   Before:


                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                                Mr R Hamilton
                               Dr A U Chaudhry






                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This case is reported in order to clarify the position arising when an
      Adjudicator relies on a case not cited by the parties nor referred  to
      in the hearing.

   2. The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appeals with  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against a determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T.  Somerville,
      dismissing his appeal against a decision giving directions for removal
      following  refusal  to  grant  asylum.  Mr  J.  Keating  of   Counsel,
      instructed by S. Osman Solicitors, appeared for the appellant.  Mr  J.
      McGirr appeared for the respondent.

3.    The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  was  at  risk  of
      persecution in his home area of Ghazni at the hands of the  father  of
      warlord (Commander Nazif) who wanted revenge for  the   death  of  his
      son. The appellant also considered that he would  be  perceived  as  a
      supporter of the Taliban.

4.    The Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant's  story  as  "substantially
      true". He found that the appellant:

             '...  has  a  subjective  fear  that  if  he  is  returned  to
             Afghanistan then he may be subjected to persecution   in  that
             the father of Nazif may use his power as a  senior  member  of
             Hezbi-I-Whadat to extract revenge against  the  appellant  for
             the death of his son.'

5.    It is not entirely clear from the wording of paragraph 27 whether  the
      Adjudicator  also accepted that the appellant had been detained by the
       Hezbi-I-Whadat for a period of one month whilst they investigated and
      interrogated the appellant and others regarding the  death  of  Nazif,
      but, in view of the  Adjudicator's  acceptance  that  the  appellant's
      account was  'substantially true', we will proceed on the  basis  that
      this detention was accepted. We also note he accepted that the Hezbi-I-
      Whadat 'has a particularly violent reputation'.

6.    However, it  is  clear  the  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  that  this
      detention demonstrated that the appellant  faced retribution from  his
      captors, since they could have killed  him at any time they wished  to
      during the month they held him in detention.

7.     The  grounds  of  appeal  did  not  challenge  this  finding  of  the
      Adjudicator  as  such.  They   concentrated   on   the   Adjudicator's
      alternative finding at paragraphs 28 and  29.   At  paragraph  28  the
      Adjudicator stated:

             "Even if I am wrong in rejecting the appellant's human  rights
             claim for the reasons I have, I find the  option  of  internal
             flight is available to the appellant without undue hardship.'

8.    At paragraph 29 he went  on  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  could
      return safely to Kabul.

9.    We asked Mr Keating whether he wished to challenge  the  Adjudicator's
      primary findings and on what basis. He contended that the  appellant's
      subjective fear was based on objective difficulties he had experienced
      in his home area, in the form of detention and a desire for revenge on
      the  part  of  Commander  Nazif's  father   and   the   Hezbi-I-Whadat
      organisation.

10.   However, we do not see anything  unsustainable  in  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment that, if his captors had the intention to wreak revenge  on
      the appellant, they would have done so during his one-month period  of
      detention. The appellant's subjective fear had not been shown to  have
      any objective basis.

11.   Mr Keating urged us  to  conclude  that,  even  if  we  concluded  the
      appellant had failed to show a real risk of serious harm  in his  home
      area, he would still be at risk upon return to Kabul. We cannot agree.
      If his captors had not taken the opportunity  to  harm  the  appellant
      whilst they had him detained in his home area, we do not consider they
      would seek to harm the appellant elsewhere.  Particularly  given  that
      the appellant's detention had occurred as long ago as 1995 or 1996, we
      consider it was entirely sustainable for the Adjudicator  to  conclude
      that there was no current risk upon return.

12.   Mr Keating  also  sought  to  argue  that  the  circumstances  of  the
      appellant's release from detention in Kabul would place  him  at  real
      risk of being perceived by the authorities in Kabul as pro-Taliban. In
      this regard he reminded us of the appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
      been released by the  Taliban when they took control of the  area.  We
      fail to see, however, that there would be such a  real  risk.  In  the
      first place, we do not see how the authorities would know or  come  to
      learn that the appellant had been released by the Taliban.  It was not
      reasonably likely the appellant would volunteer  that  information  to
      the authorities in Kabul or that any records of a  1996  detention  by
      the  Hezbi-I-Whadat in the appellant's home area would exist  anywhere
      (certainly not outside his home region) several years later.   In  the
      second place, even if this incident did become known, the appellant on
      his own account was never more than a Taliban  supporter.  Despite  Mr
      Keating's efforts to persuade us to the contrary, we do not think that
      the objective  country  materials  establish  that  low-level  Taliban
      supporters face a real risk from any  quarter in Afghanistan.

13.   Given the failure of the appellant to show that he would be  targeted,
      that is effectively the end of his appeal.

14.   Even had we accepted, however, that the appellant faced  a  real  risk
      upon return to his home area from Nazif's father  and  Hezbi-I-Whadat,
      we would still not have  allowed  the  appeal.   That  is  because  we
      consider  the  evidence   in  this  case  still  fell  well  short  of
      demonstrating that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
      relocate in Kabul. The appellant  failed  to  identify  any  objective
      evidence indicating that Hezbi-I-Whadat had  any significant  presence
      in Kabul or that, even if it were assumed to have some presence there,
      it had the ability to target the appellant. Furthermore, even if  this
      organisation were somehow to identify the appellant as  a  target  for
      serious harm in Kabul, the objective evidence does not establish  that
      the authorities with protection  responsibilities  in  Kabul  -  which
      include ISAF - would be unwilling or unable to protect him.

15.   As regards other difficulties the appellant might face in   Kabul,  we
      do not consider these would cross  the  threshold  to  become  serious
      harm.  In this regard we do not  consider  that  any  of  the   latest
      materials  adduced  by  Mr  Keating  establish  that  difficulties  in
      obtaining employment and housing would be acute.

16.   Mr Keating took issue with the Adjudicator's approach to the issue  of
      sufficiency of protection in general in  Kabul.  The  Adjudicator  had
      erroneously relied, he said, on the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the
      Tribunal in the case of No. 14 [2002] S UKIAT  05345, despite the fact
      that this addressed the situation as set out in the CIPU  Report  2002
      and not more recent materials. That offended, argued Mr  Keating,  the
      Ravinchandran principle of assessment  of  risk  as  at  the  date  of
      hearing.

17.   We see no merit in Mr Keating's submissions on  this  point.  For  one
      thing it is clear that the Adjudicator did  not  merely  rely  on  the
      findings in No. 14.  At paragraph 29 he referred to the  Human  Rights
      Watch report and at paragraph 30 he referred to the  CIPU  Report  for
      October 2002.  For another, it is clear   from  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in S [2002] INLR 416 paragraphs 29 and 30 that an Adjudicator
      is quite entitled to  base  his  or  her  findings  regarding  general
      country conditions on comprehensive  Tribunal assessments, so long  as
      he satisfies himself that there is  no  compelling  evidence  of  more
      recent origin indicating a significant change in circumstances.

18.   Plainly  the  Adjudicator  did  not  consider  that  the  more  recent
      materials placed before him warranted a different conclusion.

19.    Mr  Keating  sought  to  persuade  us  that  materials   before   the
      Adjudicator other than the  CIPU October 2002 report  and  the   Human
      Rights Watch did compel a different conclusion. We fail to see this.

20.    One  further  aspect  of  Mr  Keating's  arguments  relating  to  the
      Adjudicator's  reliance  on  No.  14  needs  specific  attention.   It
      concerned procedure. The Adjudicator fell  into procedural  error,  he
      said, in failing  to  inform  the  parties  at  the  hearing  that  he
      considered the  No. 14 case as one which  was  to  be  followed.  Both
      parties  should be given an opportunity to deal with   any  case  that
      they have not referred to which appears to  have  determinative  value
      in the case: he cited R v IAT ex parte Sui Rong  Sven  [1997]  Imm  AR
      355.   We would agree that the Adjudicator  should  have  invited  the
      parties to address him on the relevance to the issues to be decided of
      the No. 14 case, if necessary  by  reconvening  the  hearing.  It  was
      incumbent on him to do so, because he  saw  this  case  as  containing
      important guidance on the issues he had to decide.

21.   However, we would stress two things here.

22.   Firstly, in relation to citation of cases it is primarily the duty  of
      representatives to apprise themselves of relevant case law and  indeed
      to put all cases or authorities  they  consider  relevant  before  the
      appellate authorities.

23.   Secondly, Adjudicators are entitled to  follow well-known cases,  even
      if representatives fail to cite them. No representative is entitled to
      claim to be unaware of cases that  are  or  should  be  well-known.  A
      representative must be taken to be aware of a well-known case and,  if
      he makes no reference to it at the hearing, an Adjudicator is entitled
      to assume that this is because he has nothing to say about it  or  has
      decided he need  not  say  anything  about  it.  In  either  case  the
      Adjudicator is entitled to follow it.

24.   However, we accept that the position with  cases  that  are  not  well
      known is different. It would be wrong for an Adjudicator to rely on  a
      point from pre-Practice Direction No. 10 (PD10)  cases  that  are  not
      well-  known  without  warning  the  parties.  The  position  with  an
      unfamiliar case is akin to that in relation to  a  piece  of  evidence
      that has not  been  adduced  at  the  hearing  but  relied  on  by  an
      Adjudicator nonetheless as a result of his research afterwards.

25.   What  constitutes  a  well  known  case?   A  representative  must  be
      expected to keep up with relevant reported cases and  cannot  properly
      claim ignorance of relevant ones.  This  certainly  includes  Tribunal
      reported case under the  new [2003]  reporting  system.  However,  the
      position is less clear with older cases, although as in  any  area  of
      law, ongoing  Tribunal and court decisions  and  leading  publications
      and websites on immigration law identify older (if not always  recent)
      key cases.

26.   We do  not consider that the  2002  case  of  No.  14  fell  into  the
      category of a well-known case, certainly not one so  well  known  that
      any immigration judge was entitled to  make  the  assumption  we  have
      referred to in paragraph 23 above.  We are fortified in that  view  by
      the fact that  the  Adjudicator  relied  on  this  case  not  for  any
      proposition of law but as a source of general country guidance.  While
      the Court of Appeal in S has properly identified a  role  for  country
      guideline cases which are to  be  followed  as  far  as  possible,  it
      remains that recourse to such pre-PD10 cases,  especially  ones  (like
      No. 14) which were not set down as country  guideline  cases,  without
      warning the parties, is quite close to using evidence not  adduced  at
      the  hearing.   There  may  or  may  not  be   specific   things   the
      representatives in this case  would  have  wanted  to  say  about  the
      situation  since  then,  and  would  have  said  had  the  Adjudicator
      clarified that he considered the situation as at the date  of  hearing
      was on all fours with the one assessed in No. 14.

27.   Accordingly we agree with Mr Keating that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      relying in the way he did and to the extent that he did on No. 14.

28.   If the validity of the determination depended solely on the  issue  of
      the Adjudicator's reliance on No.  14,  we   would  have  allowed  the
      appeal by way of a remittal.  However, as  previously  explained,  the
      Adjudicator did not  merely  rely  on  the  findings  in  No.  14  and
      considered other sources of evidence. In our view in the light of  the
      evidence as a  whole that was before him, he was entitled to reach the
      conclusions that he did.

29.   Mr Keating further sought to persuade us that in any  event,  whatever
      was available to the Adjudicator,  the  evidence  adduced  before  the
      Tribunal did disclose that  the  protection  situation  in  Kabul  and
      Afghanistan had deteriorated seriously. We are not persuaded that this
      is so.  Particularly in the light of the latest evidence as set out in
      the CIPU Assessment for 2003, we consider that, whilst there remains a
      certain level of insecurity in Kabul and whilst certain parts of  that
      city continue to experience lawlessness, it is equally clear that ISAF
      and the current government is  generally  able  to  maintain  law  and
      order.

30.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT





-----------------------
      1


