
ar

 SY (Israel/Jewish and  Muslim  marriage/risk  /protection)  Israel  [2004]
UKIAT 00132



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                               Date of hearing: 4 March 2004
                                                 Date Determination notified
      27 May 2004


                                   Before:

                       Mr C P Mather  (Vice President)
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP
                               Mr C P O'Brian



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Ms U. Miszkiel, counsel, instructed by J  R  Immigration
                 Consultancy
For the respondent : Mr D.W. Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant is a citizen of Israel.  She appeals  the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Mr J.K. Stanford) promulgated on 7 July  2003.   In
      that determination the Adjudicator dismissed, on both asylum and human
      rights grounds, the  appellant's  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the
      respondent, made on  4  December  2002,  to  refuse   leave  to  enter
      following the  refusal  of  her  asylum  application.  The  respondent
      indicated that he proposed to give, or had given, directions  for  the
      appellant's removal to Israel.

   2. The appellant's permission to appeal was on Article 3 grounds only, on
      the basis of a possible inadequacy in the Adjudicator's  determination
      when he came to consider risks on return.  Those  risks  are  said  to
      arise from the particular nature of  the  appellant  and  her  family.
      Miss Miszkiel did not seek to argue that  the  risk  would  amount  to
      persecution.

3.    The appellant is Jewish and was born  in  Azerbaijan  on  23  December
      1949.  She is married to a Muslim, also from Azerbaijan. They had  met
      and lived together in Azerbaijan. They married in 1990. There are  two
      children of the family. The appellant's husband is  their  father  and
      their mother was his first wife, now deceased. The appellant refers to
      them as her son and daughter. In Azerbaijan they  suffered  harassment
      because of their mixed marriage. There was a serious incident in  July
      1993 when their, then three year old, daughter was  kidnapped.   As  a
      result of all that, they left Azerbaijan and moved to live in  Israel.
      They settled in Haifa.

4.    Although all four are now in the United  Kingdom,  they  did  not  all
      come here together.  The  appellant's  husband  and  daughter  arrived
      first in 1999. Their son had been involved in a serious  road  traffic
      accident  and  the  appellant  remained  behind  whilst  he   received
      treatment in hospital. The appellant's husband made an application for
      asylum which was refused.   That refusal was before 2nd October  2000.
      He therefore has an outstanding right to make an  application  to  the
      respondent on the basis that the decision to return him was  taken  in
      breach of his human rights.  We do not know where  removal  directions
      in respect of the appellant's  husband were, or would be, to.

5.    When the appellant arrived,  on  23  March  2001,  she  also  made  an
      application for asylum  which was refused. The Adjudicator dealt  with
      her appeal on the basis of both asylum and human rights.

6.     The  appellant's  husband  has  made   an   application   under   the
      respondent's recent concession. On the face of it he may  be  entitled
      to benefit from that concession. Mr Saville was not able  to  indicate
      whether he would, because he was not  aware  of  whether  any  of  the
      excluding factors were present.

7.    Miss Miszkiel started by making two  applications.  First,  she  asked
      for this appeal to be adjourned on the basis that the  respondent  had
      not yet considered the application under the concession.  She  had  to
      concede that the application was only made about one week before.  She
      suggested that it would be a waste of resources to go ahead and decide
      this appeal now when it seemed likely  that  the  appellant's  husband
      (and therefore the family) would benefit under the concession.
8.    Her other, alternative, application was to renew  an  application  for
      permission to appeal the Article 8 findings.  This was  because  of  a
      new factor, i.e. the application under the concession. She argued that
      if  we  were  to  consider  Article  8,  and  whether  it   would   be
      proportionate to remove the appellant, one of the matters to be  taken
      into account in the assessment of proportionality would be the serious
      possibility  that  her  husband  was  going  to  succeed   under   the
      concession.   Mr  Saville  was  neutral  about  the  question  of   an
      adjournment but opposed the amendment to allow us to consider  Article
      8.  He said that by so  doing  we  would  effectively  be  making  the
      decision as to  whether  the  appellant's  husband  was  going  to  be
      successful in his application. That is a matter which  the  respondent
      was entitled to deal with.

9.    We discussed both the applications in the absence of the  parties  and
      refused them.  In doing  so  we  bore  several  things  in  mind.  The
      appellant, her husband and the two children are a family unit, and  Mr
      Saville undertook that the appellant would not  be  removed  from  the
      United Kingdom before the application under the concession  was  dealt
      with.  Second, because the appellant, her husband and two children are
      a family unit there is no realistic possibility  that  they  would  be
      separated on removal by the respondent.  Whatever the outcome of  this
      appeal, their position is safeguarded because the appellant's husband,
      who appears to be a dependant in her appeal as  well,  still  has  the
      outstanding right to make a human rights application. If Miss Miszkiel
      was right, and the respondent's concession can in some way be a factor
      in an Article 8 claim, that is something which has  arisen  since  the
      decision. The appellant would be entitled to make a fresh  application
      to the respondent on that basis.  Also,  the  question  of  safety  on
      return  is  a  discreet  issue  quite  separate  from  any  Article  8
      considerations and the concession. If we  were  to  find  against  the
      appellant on the appeal under Article 3, that does not impact  on  the
      issues raised by Miss Miszkiel. Finally, the concession is outside the
      rules and is not a matter for us.  We are by no means  persuaded  that
      it would be an appropriate factor to consider in an Article 8 claim.

10.   We went on to consider the Article 3  claim.  The  appellant  and  her
      husband are in a mixed marriage. Neither party has been able  to  find
      anything in objective evidence about Israel concerning mixed marriages
      of this nature.  We had the US State Department Report,  published  on
      31 March 2003, and a separate US State Department Report on  religious
      persecution, published on 18  December 2003.  The  only  reference  to
      mixed marriages is contained in the first paragraph of  Section  1  of
      the latter report where it says: 'Non-Jews  (usually  Christians)  who
      immigrated to the  country   of  their  Jewish  relatives,  often  are
      counted as Jews for statistical purposes.'  Although that  is  not  on
      point, it is the only reference there is.
11.   The appellant's application for asylum was as  a  result  of  previous
      events which had occurred in Israel. The  appellant  and  her  husband
      seem to have arrived there in 1993 and had no difficulties  at  first.
      Her husband says he lost his job for no apparent work related  reason.
      He believes it was because he is a Muslim.   He  was  unable  to  find
      another. He found that he was turned away when he  showed  a  passport
      which showed he was both Azerbaijani and a Muslim.   He  was  told  he
      should not work with Jews.  Sometime  thereafter  the  family  started
      receiving telephone calls telling them that they had no right to  live
      in Jewish society. The appellant said that on  one  occasion  she  was
      threatened with  death  if  she  did  not  divorce  her  husband.  The
      frequency of the calls increased until they were coming daily and  the
      appellant began  to  recognise  three  or  four  different  men.  This
      continued until 1999.

12.   The appellant said that they also received letters. There were  twelve
      but she was frightened to keep them and has burned them. The  children
      found that their neighbours mocked them and called  them  Arabs.   The
      neighbours' children were discouraged from playing  with  them.  As  a
      result of all this they decided to move to an Arab village.

13.   Thereafter, in April or May 1999, the appellant was assaulted  by  two
      men in a supermarket. They asked her why she was not covering  herself
      up if she was a Muslim. They took her money, her bag and hit her.  The
      police  were  called  but,  because  she  could   not   identify   the
      perpetrators or prove anything, they did  not  take  any  action.  The
      appellant claims to be scared of the police because she is married  to
      a Muslim. She feared that they would start to investigate him  if  she
      reported anything. Thereafter the appellant's family received calls at
      the door, three or four  times  a  week,  at  night,  but  they  never
      answered.
14.   There was an incident in  June  1999  when  the  appellant's  son  was
      injured in a car accident outside his school. He  was  hit  by  a  car
      which did not stop.  The appellant believes, but the  Adjudicator  did
      not accept, that there was  a  link  between  that  accident  and  the
      previous threats.  She had received  a  telephone  call  earlier  that
      morning from a man whose voice she recognised, saying that  'something
      will happen if you do not do what we say'.   Apart  from  the  claimed
      link  between  the   car  accident,  and   previous   incidents,   the
      Adjudicator accepted the appellant's evidence.

15.   The question of whether there is such risk on return  as  to  put  the
      United Kingdom in breach of the appellant's human rights if  she  were
      to  be  returned,  poses  a  number  of  questions.  First,  was   the
      Adjudicator correct to conclude that the threshold to  engage  Article
      3, had not been reached by the incidents arising before the  appellant
      left.  Second, if yes, can that be an indication of  a  real  risk  of
      similar problems in the future, if she were to  return.  Third,  would
      there be any other reason for the appellant to be ill-treated in  that
      way? Fourth, whether, the perpetrators of any  such  acts  being  non-
      state actors, there is sufficient protection  within  the  meaning  of
      Horvath [2000] ImmAR  205  and  Bagdanvicius  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605.
      Finally, if not, are there any internal flight options  or,  strictly,
      this being an  Article  3  assessment,   is  the  situation  the  same
      throughout Israel.

16.   There is very little by way of objective evidence  to  assist  us.  We
      have already referred to the very short reference to  mixed  marriages
      contained in one  sentence  of  the  US  State  Department  Report  on
      religious persecution.  That report also says:

             'Relations among religious groups - between Jews and non-Jews,
             between  Muslims  and  Christians,  and  among  the  different
             streams of Judaism - often are strained. These  tensions  have
             increased significantly since the start of  the   Intifada  in
             October 2000 and again  during  the  period  covered  by  this
             report, due primarily to Palestinian terrorist attacks, mostly
             in the form of suicide bombings and Israel Defence Force (IDF)
             actions in the Occupied Territories, all of which resulted  in
             some impediments to religious practice.'

17.   Later on in the report, it says:

              'The  government states that it is committed to  grant  equal
             and fair conditions to non-Jewish citizens - which  constitute
             approximately 20% of the population and who are  predominantly
             Israeli Arabs  -  particularly  in  the  areas  of  education,
             housing and  employment.  However,  the  government  does  not
             provide non-Jews  with  the  same  quality  of      education,
             housing, employment and social services  as  Jews.  On  a  per
             capita basis the  government spends two-thirds as much on non-
             Jews as Jews.  Although such policies are based on  a  variety
             of factors, they reflect a de facto discrimination against the
             country's non-Jewish citizens.'

18.   Later in the  report,  under  the  heading  'Societal  Attitudes'  the
      report says:

             'Tensions  between  Jews  and  non-Jews  are  the  result   of
             historical grievances, cultural and religious differences, and
             are compounded by  governmental  and  societal  discrimination
             against Israeli Arabs.  They have been heightened by the  Arab
             Israeli conflict and it  increased  significantly  during  the
             period covered by this report, due  primarily  to  Palestinian
             terrorist attacks, mostly in the form of suicide bombings  and
             IDF actions in the Occupied Territories ...'

19.   No other material was produced to us  to  assist  in  considering  the
      situation for those in  a  Jewish/Muslim  mixed  marriage.   We  asked
      whether the fact that the appellant's husband is a Muslim, but not  an
      Arab, might  make  any  difference  to  the  situation.  There  is  no
      objective evidence about that but Miss Miszkiel suggested he could  be
      worse off because he is less likely to be accepted  in  Muslim  areas,
      which are predominantly Arab, than if he were an Arab.

20.   She also asked us to accept that the  treatment  which  the  appellant
      received whilst in Israel was  sufficient  to  amount  to  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment. In any event, she argued that since the appellant
      left Israel there has been the attack on the World Trade  Centre,  the
      Intifada and now the erection of the wall, all of which will have made
      matters more tense rather than less.

21.   We do not find that the Adjudicator has  made  any  error  of  law  in
      finding that the conduct to which the appellant was subject whilst  in
      Israel does not, taken cumulatively, amount to treatment which reaches
      the threshold of Article 3.  We are aware of the authorities  referred
      to by Miss Miszkiel and in particular the East  African  Asians  (1981
      EARR 76) where it was decided that degrading  treatment  is  treatment
      'that lowers a person in  rank,  position,  reputation  or  character,
      whether in his own eyes or in the eyes of other people'. We  are  also
      aware of decisions which have found that in some  contexts  one  punch
      can be sufficient to amount to persecution.  However,  there  are  any
      number of authorities  which serve to illustrate  that  the  threshold
      required to engage Article 3 is very high. On  the  accepted  evidence
      (which excludes the appellant's view that  her  son  was  deliberately
      injured) we are not satisfied that the experiences of the appellant in
      Israel would reach such a threshold. This conclusion was open  to  the
      Adjudicator.

22.   From such objective material as we have, it  seems  to  us  reasonably
      likely that if the appellant were to return to Israel she would suffer
      treatment at least as bad as that which was directed at her before she
      left.  We note Miss Miszkiel's submission that the  general  situation
      is now a great deal more tense.  She argued that now there is  a  real
      risk that she could be subject to the treatment  which  would   engage
      Article 3 were she to be returned.    She  has  been  subject  to  one
      direct incident of violence and a number of threats.   It  is  not  an
      indication that the problems in the future could not  be more serious.
      We bear in mind that the situation in Israel is  now  tense  and  that
      there is a considerable antipathy between many Jews and  Muslims.  The
      appellant is in a mixed  marriage  and   it  is  not  unreasonable  to
      consider that there are Muslims or Jews who would  consider parties to
      such mixed  marriages  to  be  legitimate  targets  for  ill-treatment
      because of their marriage.  It is for the appellant to establish  that
      she is at real risk.  She has not produced evidence  of  that,  merely
      argued that it is likely  - her appeal is based on speculation.

23.   Even if she had been able to establish a real risk,  the  question  of
      adequacy of protection needs to be addressed. Mr Saville  argued  that
      the  police  did  attend  when  the  appellant  was  assaulted  in   a
      supermarket but could not do anything because she could  not  identify
      her attackers. The same would apply had she suffered a similar  attack
      here. We are conscious of the sufficiency of protection considerations
      in Horvath, which were quoted by the Adjudicator as follows:

             'There must be in force in the country in question a  criminal
             law which makes the violent attacks by persecutors  punishable
             by sentences commensurate with  the  gravity  of  the  crimes.
             There must be a  reasonable  willingness  by  the  enforcement
             agencies, that is to say the police and the courts, to detect,
              prosecute and punish offenders.  It must be  remembered  that
             inefficiency   and   incompetence   is   not   the   same   as
             unwillingness, unless it is extreme and widespread. There  may
             be many reasons why  criminals  are  not  brought  to  justice
             including lack of admissible evidence even when  the  best  of
             endeavours are made;  they are not always convicted because of
             the high standard of proof required, and the desire to protect
             the rights of accused people.'

24.   Horvath, as is well known, speaks not  only  of  the  availability  of
      protection but the willingness to apply it. Mr Saville referred us  to
      Bagdanvicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 which confirms  that  the  tests  in
      Horvath apply in an Article 3 case as they do in refugee  case.  There
      are a number of comments to be found in the section  of  the  judgment
      entitled  'Summary  of  Conclusions  on  Real   Risks/Sufficiency   of
      protection'. Dealing with this, Auld LJ said  at  paragraph  55(5)  of
      Bagdanvicius:

             'The effectiveness of the system  provided  is  to  be  judged
             normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or  prevent  the
             form of persecution  of  which  there  is  a  risk,  not  just
             punishment of it after the offence.'
25.   And at paragraph 55(6):

             'Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection  in
             the receiving state, a claimant may still have a  well-founded
             fear of persecution if he can show that its  authorities  know
             or ought to know  of  circumstances  particular  to  his  case
             giving rise to his fear,  but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the
             additional protection his particular circumstances  reasonably
             require.'

26.   And at paragraph 55(7)

             '12. An assessment of the threshold of risk    appropriate  in
                 the circumstances to engage Article 3 necessarily  involves
                 an assessment of the sufficiency  of  state  protection  to
                 meet the threat of which there is such a risk - one  cannot
                 be considered without the other whether or not the exercise
                 is regarded as "holistic" or to be conducted in two stages.


             13. Sufficiency of state protection  is  not  a  guarantee  of
                 protection from Article 3 ill-treatment anymore than it  is
                 a guarantee of protection from  an  otherwise  well-founded
                 fear of persecution in asylum cases - nor, if  and  to  the
                 extent that there is any difference, is it  an  eradication
                 or removal of risk to exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment.


             14. Where the risk falls to be judged by  the  sufficiency  of
                 state protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according
                 to whether it would eradicate the real risk of the relevant
                 harm, but according to whether it is a reasonable provision
                 in  the circumstances.


             15.  Notwithstanding  such  systemic  sufficiency   of   state
                 protection the receiving state, the claimant may  still  be
                 able to establish an Article 3 claim if he  can  show  that
                 the authorities there know or ought to know  of  particular
                 circumstances likely to expose him to a risk of  Article  3
                 ill-treatment.


             16. The approach is the same whether the receiving country  is
                 or is not a party to the ECHR but, in  determining  whether
                 it would be contrary to Article 3 to  remove  a  person  to
                 that country, our courts should decide the factual issue as
                 to risk as if the ECHR's standards apply there ...'

27.   The appellant said that she was unwilling to ask for state  protection
      because she was frightened that the authorities would  then  start  to
      investigate her husband, because he is a Muslim. We do not accept that
      as a good reason for having not sought state protection in  the  past.
      The appellant has not demonstrated a failure  by  the  authorities  to
      offer her adequate protection in the past.  She has  not  offered  any
      objective evidence to suggest that the authorities  are  unwilling  or
      unable to offer her protection. There is a competent police force  and
      other  protection  agencies.   There  is  no   evidence   of   serious
      discrimination or unwillingness to help anybody such as the appellant,
      a Jewish Israeli citizen.  Twenty percent of  the  population  is  not
      Jewish and the appellant has produced no objective evidence  that  the
      authorities are unable to unwilling to adequately protect them.

28.   In coming to  this  conclusion,  we  recognise  that  mixed  marriages
      between Muslims and Jews in  Israel  must  be  relatively  rare,  even
      though we have not been provided with any statistics.

29.   From all that we have set out, we have  concluded  the  appellant  has
      not established  there is a real risk that if returned to  Israel  she
      would  be  subjected  to  treatment  sufficiently  serious  to  engage
      Article 3 ECHR. In any event,   we are  not  satisfied,  having  taken
      into account Horvath and Bagdanvicius,  that  there  is  not  adequate
      protection available from  the  non-state  actors  who  the  appellant
      fears. For the reasons which  we  have  set  out,   the  Adjudicator's
      finding that there is no real risk on return is sustainable.  There is
      no need for us to go on and look at internal relocation.

30.   The appeal is dismissed.



                                                                 C.P. MATHER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      1


