
AD (Recent developments - Terrorist threat - Ex-Policeman) Algeria CG
[2004] UKIAT 00137

Heard at Field House
On       3 June 2004
Written   3 June 2004


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             10 June 2004

                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                                Mrs R M Bray
                                Mr T A Jones



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Messrs White Ryland
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Presenting Officer



                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Algeria, appeals, with permission,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Miss A M Cheales,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 29 April 2003 to issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum.

  2. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. He lived in Algiers
     and  joined  the  police  in  1998.  He  was  first  appointed  to   an
     administrative section, but in July  1999  was  promoted  to  a  mobile
     brigade. His work involved the protection of civilian property and  the
     maintenance of safety in an area.  Sometimes he  transported  prisoners
     to the police station and prepared their statements and  took  them  to
     court.  In July 2000 he was moved to Dergana, a suburb of Algiers.  His
     work was still with the mobile brigade  and  he  remained  there  until
     February 2001. However this area was  infested  by  terrorists  and  on
     occasions he and the rest of his troop were involved  in  clashes  with
     them. He received emergency calls from civilians  and  informers  about
     the terrorists.  He found the situation very risky  and  his  life  was
     often in danger.  He never knew from day-to-day whether he would return
     home in the evening. In February 2001 he was transferred to Hussein-Dey
     and worked at  the  police  station  in  an  administrative  role.   He
     attended  to  those  who  were  arrested,  opening  files  and   taking
     statements.  He took those charged with criminal offences to court.  He
     worked there for six months and  was  then  transferred  to  the  anti-
     terrorist section.  There he dealt with terrorists who had been granted
     amnesty in 1999 and kept an eye on them. He worked with the gendarmerie
     and the military secret police.  The military  secret  police  arrested
     some of the Appellant's colleagues for assisting these terrorists.  The
     Appellant himself was under a lot of pressure in this work environment.
      He and his colleagues were forced  into  compromising  situations  and
     were often insulted.  He became disillusioned with the system  and  his
     superiors.  He considered that his efforts were not appreciated. He was
     under too much pressure to work too hard.

  3. He had always been on the terrorists' hit list as a  policeman  but  in
     both October 2001 and February 2002 he received a threatening letter at
     his home from the GIA. They said he was  a  tyrant  and  was  harassing
     ordinary civilians for which the punishment was death. In October  2001
     he wanted to get away on the pretext of having a holiday.  However  his
     superiors refused leave at that time and he  had  to  wait.  After  the
     second letter he decided to leave Algeria and applied  for  a  visa  to
     visit France in February 2002, which was granted  in  April  2002.  The
     letter in February 2002 from the GIA was from someone known  personally
     by the Appellant as an informer, a Mr Badry.  He reported this  to  his
     superior and gave him the letter. He was not told to  do  anything  but
     should remain in barracks until things cooled  down.  He  was  informed
     that the military secret service would be contacted.   He  remained  in
     barracks where he was safe, but nothing was done.

  4. We break off the narrative at this point because there was some dispute
     between the representatives as to what was meant by "nothing was done".
     The  Adjudicator  did  not  reach  any  specific  finding  about   this
     expression.  The  words  appear  in  the  determination  only  in   the
     description of the claim as recorded in paragraph 11. In  paragraph  37
     the Adjudicator's finding of fact was that "he was told to stay in  the
     barracks and to wait for some time for the matter  to  die  down."  The
     Appellant could legitimately give evidence that he  was  not  aware  of
     anything else being done.  He  was  not  interviewed  by  the  military
     secret service for example.  He was  not  aware  of  any  action  taken
     against Mr Badry. We  cannot  speculate  beyond  the  findings  in  the
     determination. The Adjudicator accepted the  credibility  of  what  the
     Appellant said to her. He could only speak to what was in his direct or
     indirect knowledge - that he was not  aware  that  anything  was  done.
     That does not mean either that in reality nothing was done as Mr Jacobs
     has urged upon us, or that we can speculate about the  kind  of  action
     that might have been taken behind  the  scenes  by  the  secret  police
     dealing with their informant, as Mr  Sheikh  has  urged  upon  us.  The
     Appellant's claim is that he was told to remain in  barracks  where  he
     would be safe for the time being  and  was  informed  that  the  secret
     police would be informed of the letter  from  Mr  Badry.  That  is  the
     extent of the claim and the finding of fact.

  5. We returned to a narrative of  the  claim.  At  this  time  there  were
     elections and clashes with the Berbers, so leave was again refused.  On
     26 June 2002 a member of the terrorist group approached the Appellant's
     home and frightened his mother.  She  became  ill  as  a  result.   The
     Appellant decided he  could  no  longer  remain  in  Algeria.   He  was
     depressed and could not function.  He realised he was unfit  for  work.
     He was asked to remain in the barracks and take time off.   He  finally
     left Algeria on 2 August 2002 and went to  France.   He  did  not  stay
     there long because he heard rumours that Algerians without  status  who
     had applied for asylum were being removed back to Algeria.
  6. The Adjudicator concluded the Appellant was credible. He was a  serving
     policeman who had worked with the anti-terrorist section and  his  name
     was on a terrorist hit list, which included all the police officers  in
     his home area.  He and other policemen had  also  received  threatening
     letters. Some had left the country. One  had  relocated.   Another  was
     killed whilst he was off duty, though we have not been told when or  in
     what circumstances. However the Adjudicator dismissed the appeal on the
     basis that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
     Appellant on return to Algeria.

  7. The grounds of appeal, as argued before us by Mr Jacobs, challenge  the
     sustainability  of  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of  sufficiency  of
     protection. Inherent within that assessment is the extent of  any  risk
     to the Appellant and the viability of internal relocation, on the facts
     as established. Mr Jacobs gave us the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
     in Noune but did not press it, rightly in our view, as it is  now  well
     out of date given the improvements in the situation in Algeria to which
     we shall refer.

  8. The Appellant does not claim persecution by the state,  but  rather  by
     individuals within it, namely the GIA terrorists. His ability to obtain
     surrogate international protection either in respect of asylum or under
     Article 3 depends upon whether his home state has  in  place  a  system
     that offers to him a  "sufficiency  of  protection"  in  terms  of  the
     guidance given by the House  of  Lords  in  Horvath.  They  essentially
     approved the test described by the Court of  Appeal,  also  in  Horvath
     [2000] Imm AR 205, for identifying  what  "sufficiency  of  protection"
     actually entails. Stuart-Smith LJ put it in these terms;
           "There must be in force in the country in  question  a  criminal
           law  which  makes  the  violent  attacks  by   the   persecutors
           punishable by sentences commensurate with  the  gravity  of  the
           crimes. The victims as a class  must  not  be  exempt  from  the
           protection of the law. There must be a reasonable willingness by
           the enforcement agencies, that is to say the police and  courts,
           to detect, prosecute and punish offenders. It must be remembered
           that  inefficiency  and  incompetence  is  not   the   same   as
           unwillingness, unless it is extreme and widespread. There may be
           many reasons why criminals are not brought to justice  including
           lack of admissible evidence even when the best of endeavours are
           made; they are not always convicted because of the high standard
           of proof required, and the  desire  to  protect  the  rights  of
           accused people. Moreover, the existence of  some  policemen  who
           are corrupt or sympathetic to the criminals, or some judges  who
           are weak in the control of the court or in sentencing, does  not
           mean the state  is  unwilling  to  afford  protection.  It  will
           require cogent evidence that the state which is able  to  afford
           protection is unwilling to do so, especially in the  case  of  a
           democracy."

  9. Sadly, whatever measures may be taken by a state, it does not mean that
     serious crimes will not nevertheless occur. But the occurrence of  such
     crimes is not the test  for  sufficiency  of  protection  described  in
     Horvath. We have therefore assessed the situation  in  Algeria  in  the
     light of the objective evidence before  us  -  and  in  particular  the
     evolving risk profile for the Appellant there and  the  sufficiency  of
     protection available.

 10. To understand the situation in Algeria and the way it has  changed  one
     needs to go back a little in history. Following  the  end  of  colonial
     rule in 1962, the principal Algerian nationalist movement, FLN,  formed
     a government. Arising from economic problems due to the collapse of oil
     prices in the mid-1980s, a wave of strikes and riots culminated in 1988
     in considerable bloodshed  and  street  demonstrations.   The  FIS  was
     established in 1989 in the aftermath of these problems and  emerged  as
     the largest and most  influential  opposition  movement,  developing  a
     nationwide organisation based on  mosques  and  Islamic  organisations.
     Its promise of social justice and grass roots welfare services appealed
     to the urban poor and unemployed. In the local elections in  June  1990
     it gained control of 32 of Algeria's 48 provinces, and 853 of the  1539
     municipalities, winning landslide victories in  all  major  cities.  By
     early 1992 it was poised to win the general elections to  the  National
     People's Assembly. However the government declared a state of siege and
     suspended the elections indefinitely. In  the  widespread  unrest  that
     followed, the leaders of FIS were arrested and a  pattern  of  violence
     began.  The government declared  a  state  of  emergency  and  FIS  was
     banned.  Many regional and local  authorities  controlled  by  it  were
     dissolved. After this, the Islamic opposition to the government  became
     fragmented and radicalised.   The  main  armed  groups  were  AIS  (the
     military wing of FIS), GIA, and GSPC, a splinter  from  GIA.   Violence
     throughout the  country  escalated  to  a  very  serious  degree,  with
     targeted attacks upon government officials and those deemed to  support
     the regime, as well as random terrorist attacks on civilians.  By  1997
     this became particularly severe. GIA was widely held responsible for  a
     number of very serious massacres of civilians. The  objective  evidence
     suggests that they believe anyone who  does  not  support  them  is  an
     enemy, even if they are neutral. In part as a response to this  extreme
     violence,  from  October  1997  AIS  began  to  observe  a   unilateral
     ceasefire.

 11. President, Abdulaziz Bouteflika came to power in April  1999  with  the
     declared aims of promoting civil concord, the reform  of  the  economy,
     and the eradication of corruption. It is a  measure  of  the  perceived
     progress that has been made since then,  that  he  has  just  been  re-
     elected in April 2004 in a landslide election victory with 84.9% of the
     votes cast in an election accepted by international observers as  being
     broadly fair.

 12. That progress has been substantial. Back in June 1999, AIS extended its
     unilateral ceasefire by declaring an  end  to  its  guerrilla  struggle
     against the  government.  In  July  1999  the  President  responded  by
     pardoning over 5000 Islamic sympathisers  and  shortly  afterwards  put
     forward a new Law on Civil  Concord,  which  was  then  approved  in  a
     national referendum.  He offered  amnesty  for  Islamic  militants  not
     implicated in mass killings, rapes, or bomb attacks on  public  places,
     and reduced sentences  for  such  crimes,  provided  those  responsible
     surrendered to the authorities within six months  i.e.  by  13  January
     2000. Just before this deadline expired, the leader  of  AIS  announced
     the disbandment of the movement.  Members of  the  GIA  and  GSPC  also
     surrendered under the terms of the Civil  Concord  amnesty  and  others
     continued to take advantage of the amnesty, both before and  after  the
     expiry of the deadline. In return, on 11 January  2000,  the  President
     announced an immediate, full and  unconditional  amnesty  for  all  AIS
     members, as well as financial compensation for their families,  housing
     for those whose homes had been destroyed by the  security  forces,  and
     assistance in securing employment.

 13. Thus AIS discontinued violence altogether and disbanded, and members of
     other terrorist groups also took advantage of the amnesty. The  numbers
     of people who have sought  and  been  granted  amnesty  have  been  put
     variously at between 5000-7000. Of these,  about  1000  are  from  AIS,
     which was always the smaller of the main guerrilla  organisations,  and
     the balance has come mainly from the GIA. Involvement with  FIS  is  no
     longer a ground for criminal or extra judicial prosecution.  Former FIS
     members are now in Parliament.  Some 600 former militants  are  now  in
     public service, working as Imams in mosques.

 14. Against these positive  developments,  has  to  be  set  the  continued
     terrorist activity by the remnant of the GIA,  who  have  not  accepted
     amnesty, and other like-minded groups.  The state of emergency  remains
     in place.  However this has to be seen  in  proportion.  The  level  of
     violence has reduced progressively  and  substantially  from  the  peak
     years of the conflict, when for example in the month of Ramadan in 1997
     alone, over 13,000 civilians  were  killed.  Against  this,  some  1980
     people in all died in terrorist incidents in whole of 2001. The  latest
     information contained in the CIPU report of  April  2004  is  that  the
     level of violence blamed on armed Islamic groups again declined sharply
     in 2003. According to official Algerian  statistics  about  900  people
     were  reportedly  killed  in  the  year,  which  included  420  Islamic
     extremists.   The  US  State  Department  Report  cites  press  reports
     offering somewhat different figures - that  1162  civilians,  terrorist
     and security members died during the year,  this  being  a  61  percent
     decrease in violent deaths from 2002. A  further  substantial  decrease
     has occurred in the first two  months  of  2004  with  a  total  of  74
     reported deaths in terrorist incidents, which equates to an annual rate
     of 444. This is a huge advance by the Government, which goes  some  way
     to explaining President Bouteflika's recent election landslide.

 15. Also of particular relevance to risk and sufficiency of  protection  is
     the evidence that the violence has become more localised, with the  big
     cities mainly being secured by the government forces. A report  by  the
     Swedish immigration authorities of March 2003 reported
           "It should normally be possible  to  avoid  threats  from  armed
           groups by the person concerned  going  to  any  of  the  largest
           cities which are to be  considered  as  safe.   In  the  present
           situation, terrorism is not a great problem in the major cities.
            City such as Algiers, Oran and Constantine  are  surrounded  by
           police forces."

 16. Other reports quoted by CIPU state
           "The GIA is reported active in large sections  of  the  northern
           part of the country, notably in the central and Western parts of
           the country and in the Algiers region especially Mitidja,  Medea
           and Blida.

 17. Also of significance are current estimates of the strength and  support
     of the GIA following the amnesty. Different sources  place  it  at  60,
     fewer than 100, 200 and several hundred. Whilst this  is  still  not  a
     negligible force, the major weakness of the group is that  its  members
     have lost the trust of the local  population,  following  the  terrible
     massacres attributed to them.  These  two  factors,  coupled  with  the
     continuing actions against them  by  the  government,  must  materially
     limit their capacity to operate at will.

 18. It is in the context of  this  assessment  of  the  objective  evidence
     concerning the situation in Algeria today that we assess  the  specific
     risk to the Appellant, the availability of a sufficiency of protection,
     and the viability if needed of internal relocation.

 19. Mr Jacobs submitted that when the Appellant complain  to  his  superior
     about the threat from Mr Badry, nothing was done.  That is not what the
     evidence shows.  The Appellant was told to remain in barracks where  he
     was safe until things died down and was informed that the threat  would
     be communicated to the military secret police.  That is not  "nothing".
     As we have said we cannot speculate  about  what  the  military  secret
     police did in response to the information or even  if  the  information
     was passed onto them as promised.  We have no evidence on that  and  in
     fairness the Appellant does not know either.  What we do know  is  that
     no attempts were made on the Appellant's life.

 20. That does not mean at the time he left Algeria he was not at  any  risk
     from the terrorists.  The objective evidence shows that between 1 and 2
     policemen die every month as a consequence of the continuing  conflict.
     A report of March 2003  explains  why.   It  states  that  "the  police
     constituted a potential target for armed groups as  they  are  in  part
     representatives of the state, and in part have  desirable  weapons  and
     identification papers which can be used  for  various  purposes."   The
     Appellant himself was on a terrorist hit list along with all the  other
     policemen in his area and received threatening letters as many of  them
     did as well.  That is entirely consistent with the  objective  evidence
     and demonstrates the risk involved with the job. He said that  some  of
     his colleagues had gone to live abroad, another  had  relocated  within
     the country, and another had been killed whilst  off-duty.   Given  the
     risks and  the  pressures  that  is  plausible.  It  is  notable  that,
     according to the Appellant, one of his  colleagues  chose  to  relocate
     within Algeria.

 21. At all events, the Appellant also had enough  with  the  pressures  and
     risks of  his  job  and  wanted  to  leave.  Whilst  he  was  receiving
     protection at the time by being told to remain in  the  army  barracks,
     plainly he did not want to live there indefinitely. The  recent  report
     from the Swedish authorities states  that  the  police  can  leave  the
     service without a problem, and policemen  who  leave  the  job  without
     having formally given notice do not risk  a  penalty  or  imprisonment.
     There is  therefore  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  should  have  any
     difficulties with the authorities on his return.  The issue is  whether
     he will be at any real risk from the GIA.

 22. Mr Jacobs suggested that the Appellant as an ex-policeman will be  just
     as much  risk  as  he  was  whilst  he  was  in  service,  because  the
     threatening letters described him as a traitor and  tyrant.  Mr  Sheikh
     has argued  that  his  risk  profile  has  reduced  dramatically  as  a
     consequence of his leaving the police service. We agree with Mr Sheikh.
     The main risk to a policeman comes from being involved in  his  day-to-
     day duties in potentially dangerous conflict situations.   Beyond  that
     the  objective  evidence  described  above  shows  that  policemen  are
     targeted for attack as symbols of the state  and  in  order  to  obtain
     possession of their valuable weapons and police  identification  cards.
     By leaving the police service, these risks  no  longer  attach  to  the
     Appellant.

 23. The issue is whether he will be at any real risk because  of  his  past
     police service. No other reason has been advanced beyond his activities
     as a policeman as to why he was targeted  in  the  past  or  should  be
     targeted in the future. We asked Mr Jacobs if  he  could  show  us  any
     specific examples in the objective evidence to demonstrate that the GIA
     were currently targeting ex policeman.  He was unable to do  so.   This
     is in marked  contrast  with  the  evidence  of  the  risk  to  serving
     policeman, which is well recorded. Mr Jacobs maintained that the nature
     of the threats to the Appellant in the past would not diminish.  We  do
     not agree.  The objective  evidence  is  that  GIA  membership  is  now
     relatively small and this must impact on their  ability  to  carry  out
     targeted attacks.  The objective evidence shows that they have lost the
     confidence and support of the local population  and  this  must  impact
     upon their ability to gather intelligence.  The objective evidence also
     shows that they draw no distinction between their opponents and neutral
     bystanders when planning attacks.  Plainly attacks on soft  targets  in
     areas that are not heavily policed are much easier, for an organisation
     that is losing its membership and strength.

 24. Putting this together, we conclude  that  whilst  there  will  be  some
     continuing risk to the Appellant from the GIA if for example he were he
     to have the misfortune to fall into the hands of those  who  know  him,
     that is a remote possibility today given the GIA's  limited  range  and
     scope. It does not constitute a "real  risk",  provided  the  Appellant
     lives within one of the big cities of Algeria, such as Algiers  itself,
     or Oran or Constantine. Mr Jacobs has suggested that the GIA is  active
     in Algiers, where the Appellant used to live and to where  he  will  be
     returned.   The  objective  evidence  does  not  suggest  that  GIA  is
     particularly active in the city of Algiers itself, but rather  in  some
     of the suburbs of the Algiers region.  In any event  if  the  Appellant
     were concerned about Algiers and the fact that as a policeman for  some
     years there will be a number of people who might recognise his face, we
     conclude that he has a viable internal relocation option to  either  of
     the other cities mentioned above. There is no evidence that this  would
     be unduly harsh. We do  not  accept  Mr  Jacobs'  submission  that  the
     Appellant would be at any real risk upon arrival  at  Algiers  airport.
     There is no real risk that the GIA have now in  place  an  intelligence
     network that would be able to identify him on return, even if they were
     interested in pursuing him.

 25. This leaves sufficiency of protection.  On the basis of  the  objective
     evidence, we consider that there is in general terms a  sufficiency  of
     protection against terrorists available from the authorities in Algeria
     in the terms defined in Horvath.  There is  a  criminal  law  in  place
     making terrorism illegal, with sentences commensurate with  the  crimes
     committed. There is  no  class  of  victim  that  is  exempt  from  the
     protection of the law.  There is a manifest willingness and ability  by
     the authorities to tackle the problem of terrorism as evidenced by  the
     success that they have achieved thus far.

 26. The final question is whether that general sufficiency of protection is
     available to the Appellant on the facts of this  appeal.   We  consider
     that it is.  He was protected when he sought help  from  his  superior.
     He was told to remain in barracks until things cooled down. That was an
     appropriate and effective response in  the  context  of  the  declining
     impact of the GIA in 2002 and subsequently.   We  cannot  speculate  on
     what action was or was not taken against Mr Badri.  We  simply  do  not
     know and nor does the Appellant.  We agree with Mr Sheikh that  if  the
     Appellant returns to Algeria now and settles down in  one  of  the  big
     cities, possibly other than Algiers itself, his risk  profile  is  such
     that he will not require special protection over and above  that  being
     provided by the authorities to the population  at  large.  We  have  no
     reason to doubt that should any specific threat emerge, the authorities
     would respond appropriately. They are as keen as he is to bear down  on
     the remaining terrorists.

 27. For all the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.





                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
