
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |PH (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection- Mafia) Moldova  |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00011          |
|On 13 November 2003        |        |                            |
|Prepared 19 November 2003                                         |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10 February 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr J Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr I Ali, Counsel instructed by Welfare Rights
                       Advice Service

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr B Lloyd) who allowed the respondent's appeal  on  both
      asylum and human rights grounds against the decision made on 23  March
      2003 giving directions for his removal as an illegal entrant.  In this
      determination the Tribunal will refer to the respondent to this appeal
      as the applicant.

2.    The applicant claims to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  12
      March 2003 by sea.  He left Moldova on  28  or  29  January  2003  and
      travelled through Ukraine, Poland, Germany, Belgium  and  France.   He
      was a holder of a Moldovan passport issued  in  around  May  2001  but
      disposed of it when he arrived in Ukraine.  He did not claim asylum on
      arrival but was apprehended by  the  police  on  16  March  2003.   He
      claimed asylum the following day.   His  claim  was  refused  for  the
      reasons set out in the decision  letter  dated  23  March  2003.   The
      Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 1 May 2003.

3.    The applicant was born in 1960 in Kalfa Village, Novo  Anenski  Region
      in Moldova.  He is a Moldovan national and an orthodox Christian.   By
      profession he is a mechanic  but  in  1989  he  trained  to  become  a
      policeman.  He did not join the police immediately as he wanted to  do
      something else but he returned to the police force in spring 2000 as a
      commissioned Lieutenant.  After a  year  he  was  promoted  to  Senior
      Lieutenant and worked at the Benderi police station as  Lieutenant  in
      charge of prison security.  There were no  particular  problems  until
      August 2002 when he was called into the office of his superior,  Major
      Viktor Popov, for a private conversation.  The appellant was told that
      he had to change his citizenship from Moldovan to that of the  Dnestra
      Moldavian Republic (DMR).  The appellant refused as he was a  Moldovan
      citizen but in effect he was told he had no option  if  he  wished  to
      retain his job.  In consequence he was dismissed.

4.    The applicant was then unemployed.  He said  that  after  leaving  the
      police there were three separate occasions when he  was  subjected  to
      beatings and harassment by the Mafia and the police in  Moldova.   The
      first occasion was in September 2002 when he was at home with his wife
      and two children.  Men who said they had been sent by Major Popov took
      the applicant away and asked him if he  had  changed  his  mind  about
      switching citizenship. When he said he had not,  he  was  beaten  with
      truncheons.  Two or three days later the same people returned  to  his
      home saying that Major Popov wished to see him.  He was taken  to  the
      outskirts of the town by car.  He was stood next to a  tree  and  they
      began to humiliate him by pointing a machine gun at him.   A  magazine
      was put in the gun and fired but it was empty.  The applicant was then
      beaten.  He was left and had to make his own way home.

5.    In November 2002 the same people came to his home  again,  taking  him
      to the outskirts of the town, beating him and cutting him on the chest
      with a sharp knife.  Again the applicant had to make his own way home.
       He was taken to hospital where his wounds were stitched.  He did  not
      return home but went into hiding staying with friends and his  mother.
      His wife told him that people continued to come looking for  him.   He
      realised that he could  not  stay  in  Moldova  any  longer  and  made
      arrangements to leave.  He did not report the incidents to the  police
      as he was being persecuted by one of the top policemen in  the  force.
      Any complaint would not have been followed up.

6.    The Adjudicator found  that  the  applicant  was  overall  a  credible
      witness and that his account of events was true.  He had established a
      likelihood of persecution on the grounds of  his  nationality,  as  an
      ethnic Moldovan who had refused to succumb to pressure to take up  the
      nationality of the region in the eastern part of Moldova now known  as
      Transnistria or the DMR.  He had come into contact with senior figures
      in the police who had been able to further  their  duress  because  of
      associations with elements of organised crime, both  within  the   DMR
      and wider through the whole Republic of Moldova.

7.    The Adjudicator commented that he  found  it  difficult  to  make  any
      precise assessment of the level of actual violence which the applicant
      had suffered but he did accept that he was  subjected  to  harassment,
      persecution and general  threats  and  ill-treatment  because  of  his
      refusal to take up DMR nationality.  It was for this  reason  that  he
      had been dismissed from  the  police  force  and,  during  the  period
      September to November 2002, he was the victim of a number of attempts,
      placing him under violent duress with a  view  to  persuading  him  to
      change his nationality or  taking  revenge  and  retribution  for  his
      confrontation with his senior officer.

8.    The Adjudicator has set out his conclusions on  the  asylum  claim  in
      paragraphs 19-22.  He found that the applicant had a well-founded fear
      of persecution on the ground of nationality if  returned  to  Moldova.
      There is clearly a typing error in  paragraph  20  where  there  is  a
      reference to Ukraine.  The state authorities  would  not  be  able  to
      provide a sufficiency of protection to him in  the  face  of  criminal
      actions perpetrated by  elements  that  were  in  collusion  with  the
      authorities as part of a web of corruption  and organised  crime.   He
      did not believe that the applicant would be able to seek a safe refuge
      in other parts of  Moldova  outside  the  so-called  DMR  because  the
      influence and  association  of  the  law  enforcement  mechanism  with
      agencies of organised crime was extensive and pervasive.   The  appeal
      was also allowed on human rights grounds for the reasons  set  out  in
      paragraph 23:  there would be a breach of the applicant's rights under
      both Articles 2 and 3.

9.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator  failed  to
      deal adequately with the background evidence, in  particular  relating
      to whether the applicant would be able to relocate.   The  Adjudicator
      was wrong to find that the applicant was a credible witness  as  there
      were various  discrepancies  he  had  been  unable  to  resolve.   The
      Adjudicator had commented on the general vagueness  of  parts  of  the
      evidence.    The  Adjudicator  appeared  to  have  accepted  that  the
      applicant had been intent on reaching the United Kingdom  rather  than
      claiming asylum in any other western country.  He was wrong to find  a
      breach of Articles 2 and 3 in the light of his difficulty in assessing
      the precise level of danger the applicant was likely to  face.   There
      was  no  corroborative  evidence  as  to  the  degree  of  harm.   The
      Adjudicator had been wrong to place considerable weight on the general
      demeanour of the applicant.

10.   At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr Jones  focused  his  submissions
      primarily on the issue of internal flight and  the  finding  that  the
      applicant could not relocate in other parts of  Moldova.   This  issue
      had not been adequately dealt with.  On the  applicant's  own  account
      his fears arose because of his failure to take  DMR  citizenship.   In
      fact there was no such internationally recognised citizenship.  In the
      light of the background evidence the Adjudicator had failed to explain
      why the applicant could not  seek  safety  outside  Transnistria.  The
      reason given  in  paragraph  20,  the  pervasive  influence  of  those
      involved in corruption and crime, failed to address the issue  of  the
      adequacy of protection outside the DMR.  There was no  bar  on  travel
      between Moldova and the DMR.  There was no reason to believe, even  if
      the Mafia continued to have an interest in the  applicant,  that  they
      would seek him out and take reprisals in Moldova.

11.   Mr Ali submitted that the Adjudicator's findings  were  properly  open
      to him. The  DMR  had  sought  to  declare  itself  independent.   The
      Adjudicator had accepted the applicant's account of events.   Once  he
      had fallen foul of Major Popov and the Mafia he would have nowhere  to
      hide  in  Moldova.  The  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to   reach   this
      conclusion.

12.   The background to the dispute between Moldova and the DMR is  set  out
      in paragraphs 4.8-32 of the CIPU report April 2003.  Following Moldova
      declaring its independence from the USSR in 1991, armed conflict broke
      out in the Transnistria region between the Slavic  Dniestr  guard  and
      government troops.  A peace agreement in July 1992  gave  Transnistria
      special status within Moldova.   However,  there  has  been  continued
      dispute as to how this autonomy will work out in practice.   According
      to  paragraph  4.32  of  the  CIPU  report,   despite   the   Moldovan
      government's agreement to give Transnistria broad autonomy in exchange
      for re-unification, negotiations broke down towards the end  of  2002.
      In February 2003 the  Moldovan  President  invited  the  Transnistrian
      authorities to join in writing a new constitution which would create a
      common state in which Transnistria would be a federal unit.  Relations
      between the two regions  worsened  in  March  2003,  apparently  after
      several EU countries and the USA acted on  the  Moldovan  authorities'
      request not to grant  visas  to  17  Transnistrian  politicians.   The
      position  is  complicated  by  the  presence  of  Russian  troops   in
      Transnistria but it  has  been  agreed  that  there  will  be  a  full
      withdrawal by 31 December 2003.

13.    The  position  is  considered  further  in  the  Moldova  Operational
      Guidance Note April  2003.   Moldova  has  promised  to  relax  border
      controls at the Transnistria border and to recognise  identity  papers
      issued  by  the   Transnistrian   authorities   internally   but   not
      internationally.  Ethnic Moldovans constitute 40% of the population in
      Transnistria.  There are credible reports that ethnic  Moldovans  have
      experienced  some  discrimination  in  that  area  but  the  level  of
      harassment  and  discrimination  would  be  unlikely  to   amount   to
      persecution within the terms of the 1951 Convention.  There is no  bar
      to travel between  Transnistria  and  the  rest  of  Moldova.   It  is
      considered that if an ethnic Moldovan  experienced  discrimination  in
      Transnistria he would and  could  relocate  to  the  part  of  Moldova
      administered by the central government in Chifinau where the  majority
      are Moldovan speakers.  It is against this background that  the  claim
      made by the applicant must be assessed.

14.   The Adjudicator found the applicant  to  be  a  credible  witness  and
      although the grounds of appeal seek to challenge these findings,  that
      challenge was not pursued to any great extent at  the  hearing  before
      the Tribunal.  It is clear that the Adjudicator did feel  considerable
      doubts about  some  aspects  of  the  evidence.   The  fact  that  the
      applicant travelled through a number  of  countries  without  claiming
      asylum and then only claimed asylum in the United Kingdom after he was
      arrested  casts  considerable  doubt  on  the   credibility   of   the
      applicant's account.  However, the  Adjudicator  heard  the  applicant
      give evidence and in our view it cannot be said that his  findings  on
      credibility were not properly open to him.

15.    The  issue  for  the  Tribunal  is  whether  on  the  basis  of   the
      Adjudicator's findings of fact, it was properly open to  him  to  find
      that the applicant had a well founded fear of persecution in  Moldova.
      He had such a fear in his home area arising from his refusal  to  take
      up DMR citizenship. This led to  him  losing  his  employment  and  to
      reprisals being taken against him, on his own  account  instigated  by
      Major Popov.  It was the applicant's evidence that  a  consequence  of
      taking up DMR citizenship would be  that  he  would  have  to  involve
      himself with the Mafia and that was not  what  he  wanted.   When  the
      applicant was asked about this in his oral evidence, he said that  the
      widespread involvement of Mafia activity within  the  DMR  meant  that
      citizenship of the Republic almost always carried with it  a  link  to
      the Mafia. When asked who was involved in Mafia activity,  he  replied
      that a lot of people were involved, many  of  them  important  people.
      The Adjudicator noted that the  applicant  seemed  to  stop  short  of
      saying that the whole of the police force were involved,  but  he  did
      point to the fact that Major Popov was  the  Director  of  the  police
      within the Transnistria region.  There was no one above him and he had
      considerable influence.

16.   The Adjudicator found that the convention reason giving  rise  to  the
      risk of persecution was the fact that  the  applicant  was  an  ethnic
      Moldovan who refused to take up the  nationality  of  the  DMR.   This
      highlights the significance of the issue of internal  relocation.   It
      is hardly likely that the applicant would have a fear  of  persecution
      because of his Moldovan nationality in the main part of Moldova.   The
      applicant's fears are limited to the  DMR.   There  is  no  reason  to
      believe that he would be at any risk in Moldova because of his refusal
      to take DMR citizenship. If the applicant  faced  persecution  in  the
      DMR, the obvious course in  the  light  of  his  refusal  to  give  up
      Moldovan citizenship would be for him to relocate in  Moldova.   There
      is no practical reason why he is unable to do so. There is freedom  of
      movement between Moldova and the DMR and in our judgment no reason why
      the applicant should not  look  to  the  authorities  in  Moldova  for
      protection against any action taken by the DMR authorities.

17.   In essence it is argued  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  in
      Moldova from the Mafia or those involved in organised crime  and  that
      the  Moldovan  authorities  would  be  unable  to   provide   adequate
      protection within the principles set out in Horvath.

18.   Two issues arise.  The first is whether on return  to  Moldova  either
      Major Popov or the Mafia will now have any continued interest  in  the
      applicant. The Tribunal are not satisfied that there is any such  real
      risk. Their interest in the applicant arose  from  the  fact  that  he
      refused to take DMR citizenship. This has led him to leave the DMR and
      indeed Moldova.  If he now returns to Moldova there is no  reason  why
      Major Popov would seek further reprisals against him, still  less  why
      he  would  be  of  any  interest  to  the  Mafia  or  other   criminal
      organisations.

19.   The Tribunal accept, and it is confirmed by the  background  evidence,
      that corruption is common amongst state  officials  in  Moldova:   see
      paragraph 6.111 of the CIPU report.  Nonetheless the  authorities  are
      attempting to take action against corruption.  In July 1999  the  then
      Interior Minister announced that 15 criminal  cases  had  been  opened
      against Interior Ministry officers and in March 2000 an officer within
      the  Department  of  Combating  Organised  Crime  and  Corruption  was
      arrested in connection with a number of crimes.  The  Adjudicator  was
      referred to the determination in Ursu [2002] UKIAT 02495 where on  the
      facts of that case it was held that there was no  adequate  protection
      against those involved in organised crime.  In our judgment that  case
      turned on its own particular facts.  The Tribunal  are  not  satisfied
      that the applicant would be at risk as he has described  but,  in  any
      event, as a former policeman from the DMR the Tribunal do  not  accept
      that the applicant would be unable  to  look  to  the  authorities  in
      Moldova for protection.   In  these  circumstances  the  Tribunal  are
      satisfied that the Adjudicator's assessment of the risk on  return  to
      Moldova was not properly open to him.

20.   It follows that the appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

