
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On  11 November 2004       |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|       DC (Non-traditional evangelical Group) Geogia [2004] UKIAT|
|00320                                                            |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|15/12/2004                                                       |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                       |
|Mr G F Sandall                                                   |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                  |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                       |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms M English, Home Office Presenting Officer
For  the  respondent:     Mr  S  Canter,  Counsel  instructed  by  O'Keeffe
                   Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr R  Pullan)  who  allowed  the  appeal  of  a  citizen  of  Georgia
      (hereinafter referred to as the claimant) from  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to refuse his application for asylum.  This  is  an
      upgrade appeal, the claimant having been granted leave  to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom until 14 August 2006.

2.    The history to this matter is as follows.   On  15  October  2001  the
      claimant's mother arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  applied  for
      asylum.  On 18 March 2002 the claimant's father brought  the  claimant
      to the United Kingdom armed with a valid entry clearance.   On 5 April
      2002 the claimant applied for asylum.   This application  was  refused
      on 3 October 2002.

3.    The mother's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
      successful.  She was granted indefinite leave to remain on 30 December
      2002.   The claimant's asylum appeal was brought  to  an  end  by  the
      grant of leave to  remain  to  him  and  accordingly  a  fresh  asylum
      application was made resulting in the decision under appeal  taken  on
      17 November 2003.

4.    The claimant's mother's appeal was allowed on  the  basis  that  there
      was a real risk of persecution in Azerbaijan because of her  Christian
      faith  and  lack  of  protection  by  the   government   from   Muslim
      fundamentalists.   The claimant is, however,  not  to  be  removed  to
      Azerbaijan - the proposal is to remove him to Georgia.  Of  course  he
      will not in fact be removed, if at all, until August 2006.    However,
      the Adjudicator correctly focused on the need to  identify  a  current
      risk to the claimant in Georgia.

5.    The claimant gave evidence to the Adjudicator which is  summarised  in
      paragraphs 12 to 18 of  the  determination.    He  had  been  born  in
      Azerbaijan but was taken to Georgia when only a few days old.  After a
      few months in 1988 the claimant's father abandoned the family and  the
      claimant's mother took the claimant and his sister back to  Azerbaijan
      where they  remained.    In  1992  when  the  claimant  was  four  the
      claimant's mother joined the Greater Grace Church in Baku, Azerbaijan.
       As the claimant grew older he too became a member.   He describes the
      problems that he had in Azerbaijan including three attacks on him.  He
      had been beaten by a teacher at his school and by three Muslim  youths
      while on his way to a bible study class.  In March 2001  he  had  been
      repeatedly slapped and kicked by men when he was returning home from a
      church prayer meeting carrying a bible.  He deeply feared the prospect
      of being forced to  return  to  Azerbaijan  and  feared  he  would  be
      attacked again.  The claimant's mother did not give  evidence  at  the
      hearing before the Adjudicator because  she  was  taken  unwell.   The
      Adjudicator also heard from a Catholic Diocesan worker  called  Sister
      Coudurier.

6.    The claimant's sister is married to a UK national and currently  lives
      with him in the UK.  She had lived in Georgia in a rented property for
      some two years in Tibilisi.   The Adjudicator records  as  follows  in
      paragraph 26 of the determination:

           "... She followed the same  Evangelical  faith  as  he  and  his
           mother.  During the three weeks the appellant was in Georgia his
           sister had no trouble from Fundamentalists and he did not assert
           that he had been told about any trouble at any other time.   His
           sister and brother-in-law have now returned to the UK where they
           have two young children.  The  appellant  said  his  mother  had
           other  distant  relatives  in  Georgia.   It  was  unlikely  her
           daughter (       )  would  return  to  Georgia  with  two  young
           children. His sister (      ) now attends a  Baptist  church  in
           the UK which he said was similar to the  Greater  Grace  Church.
           She had been married in the Greater Grace Church.  The appellant
           expressed grave concern about return to Georgia  as  he  has  no
           relatives there (other than his father with whom he does not get
           on well), does not speak the language and could not practise his
           religion because he would be separated from his mother..."


7.    The Adjudicator accepted the credibility of the oral evidence  he  had
      heard.  His determination concludes as follows.

      "40.  The appellant has  not  so  far  encountered  ill  treatment  in
           Georgia.  He spent three weeks there staying with his brother-in-
           law who is also involved with the Evangelical  Church.  He  said
           his sister had no trouble during  that  time  (I  am  not  clear
           whether she was actually there) and I note he  did  not  suggest
           she had told him she had trouble at any other  time  during  the
           two years she was there with her  husband,  though  it  must  be
           extremely likely that she  would  have  told  him  if  she  had,
           bearing in mind the trouble he had gone through  in  Azerbaijan.
           Mr Sampson suggested she might have been  protected  because  of
           her British husband but I have no way of assessing that.


      41.   I have studied the USSD Report on Georgia dated 21 March  2003.
           It emerges that  in  spite  of  constitutional  prohibition  the
           security forces torture, beat and otherwise abuse prisoners  and
           detainees, though during 2002 there were no  reports  that  they
           beat members of religious minorities as in past years.  However,
           there  is  widespread  concern   about   instances   where   law
           enforcement  officials  have  appeared  unwilling   to   protect
           individuals or religious minority groups when under attack  from
           religious extremists, in  particular  the  extremists  known  as
           Basilists,  who  are  followers  of  an  excommunicated  Russian
           Orthodox  priest.   Those  extremists  have  made  many  violent
           attacks on non-traditional religious  minority  groups,  causing
           damage to buildings and property and injury to persons. Most  of
           these attacks have been on  Jehovah's  Witnesses  and  the  USSD
           Report notes a number of cases in which police not  only  failed
           to intervene to protect such minorities from attacks by orthodox
           extremists  but  also  participated  in,  or  facilitated,   the
           attacks.  Furthermore, in  general  the  police  and  Prosecutor
           General's office  generally  failed  to  pursue  criminal  cases
           against orthodox  extremists  for  their  attacks  on  religious
           minorities;  even  when  they  did  they   went   very   slowly.
           Parliament has condemned religious violence and taken  steps  to
           prevent it but the UNHCR has been deeply concerned about  rising
           intolerance and  escalating  attacks  on  religious  minorities,
           facilitated by government inaction.  The background is that  any
           challenge to the traditional authority of the  Russian  Orthodox
           Church,  particularly  from  active  proselytising   evangelical
           groups, often with American or other foreign  support,  is  very
           threatening. Though the Patriarchate of  the  Georgian  Orthodox
           Church has strongly criticised these attacks, others have not; a
           senior  Bishop  said  on  television  that  all  non-traditional
           religious minorities should be killed  (though  this  was  later
           said to be "out of context").


      42.   Leaving aside the theoretical  issues  of  where  the  appellant
           would live in Georgia and what support he would have, my view in
           the light of the evidence including his own  live  testimony  is
           that he would continue his involvement  with  a  non-traditional
           evangelical group.  There is no mention of Greater Grace  Church
           in Georgia, but as that  group  is  also  referred  to  in  some
           reports as Greater Grace Baptist  Church,  and  his  sister  had
           found a home with Baptists in the UK, it is likely he would join
           a Baptist group.  He would no doubt continue his Bible study and
           support of church activities, which  would  include  propagating
           his faith as he has opportunity to do so.


      43.   Noting from the USSD Report the number of violent attacks on non-
           traditional religious minorities, including Baptists,  and  such
           events as the violent attack on a television studio,  which  had
           broadcast an Evangelical religious programme, I  consider  there
           is a real risk that sooner or later  the  appellant  would  find
           himself in a group targeted with such an attack. In past attacks
           parishioners have been beaten, in some cases with  nail  studded
           sticks and clubs.  It is clear that whilst police have  in  some
           cases attended, they have not actively made efforts to prosecute
           offenders. I therefore conclude that there is  a  real  risk  of
           persecution, and at present there is insufficiency of protection
           from the state authorities."


8.    The Secretary of State appealed on the  ground  that  the  Adjudicator
      had failed to take into account the fact that  neither  the  claimant,
      his sister nor his brother-in-law had had problems  in  Georgia.   The
      Adjudicator had speculated in paragraph 42 when he had  found  it  was
      likely that the claimant would join a Baptist  group  and  this  would
      include propagating his faith.   It was  also  speculative  to  assume
      that the claimant would sooner or later find himself in a group  which
      was subject to an attack.

9.    Before us the Secretary of State had lodged the  US  State  Department
      Report covering events in 2003 published on  25 February  2004.   The
      claimant's solicitors had lodged  an  indexed  bundle  containing  the
      following documents;

      1.     US  Commission  on  International  Religious  Freedom,  Georgia
           Country Report, 12 May 2004.


      2.    Amnesty International Report 2004.


      3.    International Religious Freedom Report 2004  (US  Department  of
           State) dated 15 September 2004.


      4.    Report by the UNHCR Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or
           Belief in Georgia dated 16 December 2003.


      5.    UN office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs Briefing
           Note January 2004.


      Ms English submitted that the Adjudicator had  speculated  in  finding
      that the claimant was likely to join a Baptist  group.  There  was  no
      evidence that he had done so in the past in  Georgia  or  in  the  UK.
      The family had resided in Georgia without problems.


10.   Mr Canter submitted there had been no error of law.  The claimant  was
      involved with a non-traditional Evangelical group.  This was likely to
      continue were the claimant to be returned to  Georgia.   It  would  be
      unreasonable for him to give up his religion.  Reference was  made  to
      the US State Department Report in the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle.
      The government failed to control the activities of ultra  conservative
      extremists and at times local police and security  officials  harassed
      several non-orthodox religious groups, particularly local and  foreign
      missionaries, including  members  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses,  Baptists,
      Evangelicals, Pentecostals and Hare Krishnas.  According to page 27 of
      the claimant's bundle no  one  had  been  found  guilty  of  religious
      violence by the Georgian courts.

11.   The  determination  was  well  reasoned.   It  was  not  an  error  to
      speculate in appeals such as this.

12.   Ms English submitted that the incidents referred to in the  US  report
      are  localised  and  that  the  government  generally  respected   the
      constitutional right to freedom of religion - see page 11  of  the  US
      State Department Report.

13.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We have  carefully  considered  all  the  material  before  us.    The
      Tribunal can only interfere with  an  Adjudicator's  determination  if
      there has been an error of law in the Adjudicator's  reasoning  or  in
      his decision.

14.   We recognise that it was not an easy appeal  to  hear  since  a  large
      part of the evidence was focused on Azerbaijan where  the  Adjudicator
      accepted that the claimant had had problems.   It is notable  that  in
      the summary of the claimant's account at paragraphs 12 to  17  of  the
      determination  the  Adjudicator  records  no  fear  expressed  by  the
      claimant of returning to Georgia.   He states that he deeply fears the
      prospect of being forced to return to Azerbaijan and feared  he  would
      be attacked again.  The only reference of concerns about returning  to
      Georgia are contained in paragraph 26 of the  determination  which  we
      have referred to above and which we set out again here:

           "... The appellant  expressed  grave  concern  about  return  to
           Georgia as he has no relatives there (other than his father with
           whom he does not get on well), does not speak the  language  and
           could not practice his religion because he  would  be  separated
           from his mother."


      The  Adjudicator  asked  the  claimant's  representatives   what   the
      claimant's mother's  position  was  regarding  a  possible  return  to
      Georgia with the claimant and he was told that the representative  had
      no instructions on this aspect.


15.   The claimant does not say that he  could  not  practice  his  religion
      because of persecution.  Moreover, the family  had  not  suffered  any
      persecution in Georgia - this is also clear from paragraph  26.    The
      Adjudicator acknowledges as much in paragraph 40 of the determination.

16.   Of  course  there  is  an  element  of  speculation  involved  in  any
      adjudication as to future events but this is no excuse  for  resorting
      to  guesswork.   The  real  risk  must  be   established.    This   is
      particularly the case where no problems have occurred in the past  and
      where concerns about the future are expressed as we have indicated  in
      the extract from the determination which we have quoted.

17.   The Adjudicator had before him the US  State  Department  Report.  The
      Government generally respects the right to practice religion freely  -
      see page 11 of the report.  The Georgian Orthodox Church has a special
      role in the country's history.  The report states as follows:

           "While   most   citizens   practice   their   religion   without
           restriction, threats, intimidation, and  the  use  of  force  by
           ultra conservative extremists, whom  the  government  failed  to
           control, restricted the worship of some, particularly members of
           non-traditional faiths.   At times, local  police  and  security
           officials  harassed  several  non-orthodox   religious   groups,
           particularly local and foreign missionaries,  including  members
           of Jehovah's Witnesses,  Baptists,  Evangelicals,  Pentecostals,
           and Hari Krishnas.


           On occasion, local police and  security  officials  continue  to
           harass or deny protection to non-traditional religious  minority
           groups,  particularly  members  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses.    The
           police only sporadically intervened to protect  such  minorities
           from attacks by orthodox extremists.   Police  participation  or
           facilitation of attacks diminished during  the  year;   however,
           the MIA (including the police) and Prosecutor  General's  Office
           generally failed  to  pursue  criminal  cases  against  orthodox
           extremists for their attacks against religious  minorities.   On
           the few occasions on which there were investigations  into  such
           attacks, they proceeded very slowly."


18.   Counsel drew our attention to  paragraph  93  of  the  report  of  the
      Special  Rapporteur  on  his  visit  to  Georgia  between  August  and
      September 2003.   It would appear that no one had been found guilty of
      religious violence by the Georgian courts.    He  was  told  that  the
      authorities were at pains to point  out  that  the  police  and  other
      services were also supposed  to  try  to  ease  tensions  between  the
      majority of the population and  religious minorities.  It was the view
      of the authorities that the Jehovah's  Witnesses  in  particular  were
      provocative citing for example "The insistent way in  which  Jehovah's
      witnesses try to  enter  people's  homes  in  order  to  spread  their
      message, or to their alleged habit of deliberately choosing to  gather
      in places where there are nothing but members of the Orthodox  Church,
      knowing that they risk being  attacked."   The  authorities  told  the
      Special Rapporteur "that in cases where the police have not  acted  in
      accordance  with  the  rules  or  have  deliberately  refrained   from
      intervening, those  at  fault  of  being  individually  punished.   In
      particular, the Minister of the Interior dismissed two police officers
      and reprimanded two other senior officials for failing to take  timely
      action during the events of January 2003 (see above) when  the  police
      had been notified two days beforehand that the  service  was  to  take
      place and that the church would need protecting".

19.   The attitude of the executive and the authorities to  the  problem  is
      set out at paragraph 81 of the report.  The  problem  is  acknowledged
      and it is acknowledged that steps must be taken to  protect  religious
      minorities and prosecute those who persecute them.  Of course  a  will
      to act is not the same as taking effective action  -  the  authorities
      cite general inefficiency in enforcing Georgian law - see paragraph 82
      of the report.  On 4 March 2003 the President of the Republic who had
      openly condemned acts of violence  and  religious  intolerance  issued
      Decree No. 68 approving a plan of action on strengthening human rights
      protection of minorities permanently residing  in  Georgia  for  2003-
      2005.  The main objectives of the plan were to restore the  historical
      traditions of tolerance and peaceful  co-existence  among  members  of
      different ethnic and religious  groups  in  Georgia,  to  promote  and
      protect human rights and the  freedoms  of  minorities,  to  encourage
      civil integration  within  Georgian  society,  and  to  forestall  all
      displays of  intolerance.   The  Orthodox  Church's  attitude  to  co-
      existence is referred to in paragraph 34 of the  report.   The  church
      stressed that  because  of  its  history  Georgia  was  a  country  of
      religious tolerance in which a number  of  religious  communities  had
      evolved without friction side-by-side for centuries.  There is however
      a distinction between  traditional  religious  communities  and  other
      newer expressions of religious belief.  It is recorded that the manner
      in which the Orthodox Church's attitude to the practices of  religious
      minorities varies depending on whether it is expressed by  parish  and
      particularly rural clergy or the top of the ecclesiastical  hierarchy.
      The Orthodox Church deplored all violence and  pointed  out  that  the
      chief instigator of the acts of religious violence was  excommunicated
      in 1997.

20.   There is plainly a problem in Georgia affecting  religious  minorities
      and it is recorded  in  paragraph  61  of  the  report  that  acts  of
      intolerance from religious violence really began in  1999,  "and  have
      grown more serious and diverse since".   It is no doubt in response to
      this that the government has tabled the measures that it has.

21.   The Adjudicator in our view erred in concluding as  he  did  that  the
      claimant faced a real risk of persecution on return.   Firstly,  there
      was no evidence that either he or his family had suffered  in  Georgia
      in the past.  The Adjudicator was not justified in assuming  that  the
      claimant would be persecuted in the future for the reasons he gives in
      his determination.  His approach went  well  over  the  boundaries  of
      drawing permissible inferences from the material before him.  Even  if
      an  element  of  speculation  is  appropriate  in  determining  asylum
      appeals, the speculation must have a sound basis and must not be  mere
      guesswork or conjured up out of  thin  air.   The  Adjudicator  failed
      properly to analyse the evidence before him or to  establish  why  the
      claimant would face a real risk of persecution as opposed  to  a  mere
      possibility.

22.   For the reasons we have given, the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State
      is allowed and the decision of the Adjudicator is reversed.





                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President
                                                            17 November 2004

                    Approved for electronic distribution

