
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |MS (Article 8 - Family Life |
|                           |        |- Dependency -              |
|                           |        |Proportionality) Uganda     |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00064          |
|On:  18 March 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|06 April 2004                                                     |
|Given orally in court                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes                                      |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant was represented before us today  by  Ms  C  Simpson  of
      Counsel instructed by Tayo Arowojolu; and the Secretary of State  was
      represented by Mr Underwood, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

2.    This appeal first came before the Tribunal for hearing on  2 October
      2003 when it was adjourned (not part heard)  so  that  oral  evidence
      might be adduced because the issue had arisen as to whether there was
      any evidence of a special dependency over  and  above  normal  family
      ties which  existed  between  this  appellant  and  his  parents  and
      siblings lawfully resident here for the purposes of his appeal  under
      Article 8 of the European  Convention,  the  only  issue  before  the
      Tribunal.  In the event the directions then issued were not  complied
      with but there was a late submission of a witness  statement  by  his
      father to which no objection has been taken by Mr Underwood  for  the
      respondent save in relation to such parts as  will  seek  to  suggest
      that there is any basis under the Refugee Convention or Article 3  of
      the  European  Convention  affecting  the   returnability   of   this
      appellant.

3.    The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 1 July  1984.   He  left
      Uganda on 10 September 2002 and arrived in the United Kingdom  on  11
      September 2002 when he attempted to  enter  with  a  forged  identity
      card.  When that was  discovered  he  then  sought  asylum.   He  was
      subsequently interviewed after submitting  a  statement  of  evidence
      form and his application for asylum was refused for the  reasons  set
      out in a letter of 25 October 2002.  On 31 October 2002 the Secretary
      of State issued  directions  for  his  removal  to  Uganda  following
      refusal of leave to enter after refusal of  his  asylum  application.
      He appealed against that decision on both  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds but it is to be noted that the decision was made within  some
      six weeks of his illegal arrival here.  It is accepted that since his
      arrival he has lived with his parents and siblings lawfully here.  At
      the time of his  arrival  he  had  of  course  attained  the  age  of
      eighteen.

4.    The appeal was heard by Mr R G Walters, an Adjudicator, on  19 March
      2003 and he dismissed his claims made under the  Refugee  Convention,
      Article 3 of the European Convention and Article 8  of  the  European
      Convention.  There is no appeal before us in relation to  either  the
      asylum or Article 3 claims and we are, as we have already  mentioned,
      concerned only with Article 8 issues.   The  Adjudicator  dealt  with
      this aspect as follows at paragraphs 30 to 32 of his determination:

      "30.  The appellant's father left Uganda in 1989 and came to the  UK.
           He  was  granted  refugee  status.   He  was  followed  by   the
           appellant's mother in 1990 and  she  also  was  granted  refugee
           status.  The appellant said that his parents left five  children
           behind in Uganda to  be  brought  up  by  other  relatives.   He
           himself was brought up by an uncle, but  did  not  have  contact
           with his other siblings.  Nor  did  he  have  contact  with  his
           parents after they had left for the UK.  The appellant said that
           at present he is living with his parents in the UK, pending this
           hearing.


      31.   On  this  evidence  I  do  not  find  that  the  appellant  has
           established family  life  with  his  parents  in  the  UK.  They
           apparently made no  effort  between  1990  and  the  appellant's
           arrival to bring him to the UK as a dependant.  I did not accept
           the appellant's evidence that his parents could not get in touch
           with him whilst he was in Uganda.  The appellant arrived in  the
           UK carrying his parents' telephone number.


      32.   If I were to be held in error  on  this,  I  have  gone  on  to
           consider whether it would amount to  an  interference  with  the
           appellant's family life to return him.  I do not  find  that  it
           would be.  If it were to be held to be an interference, I  would
           have  found  that  such  interference  was  in  accordance  with
           immigration law  and  had  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
           control and was proportionate."


5.    It is common ground before us that there are certain  factual  errors
      in what the Adjudicator records at paragraphs 30  and  31  which  are
      demonstrated by the uncontested statement given  by  the  appellant's
      father.  First it would appear that the parents,  although  they  had
      claimed political asylum and in the case of the father as early as  4
      December  1989,  were  not  successful  in  those  applications   but
      eventually were granted indefinite leave to remain on 20 October 1999
      by which time the father had been in the United Kingdom for over  ten
      years and his wife since 30 April 1990 with two of  their  children.
      Two further daughters arrived in 1995 and 1997 respectively as minors
      and were treated as forming part of the family  who  had  been  given
      periodic exceptional  leave  to  remain  until  the  final  grant  of
      indefinite leave to remain in 1999.  Mr Underwood suggested that this
      would have been on the basis of their  long  residence  here  and  it
      seems to us that this is probably correct.  There is nothing  in  the
      history to suggest that they have  ever  formally  been  accepted  as
      refugees.

6.    The second way  in  which  the  Adjudicator's  factual  findings  are
      inaccurate is that it is now accepted on the basis  of  the  father's
      statement that he had instructed solicitors in or about 1999 - and we
      suspect shortly after his stay had been finally regularised - to make
      an application for settlement of the  appellant  by  issue  of  entry
      clearance by the British Embassy in Nairobi.  That application, which
      would have been under the relevant Immigration Rules, was refused and
      the father says that there was an appeal against that decision  which
      was subsequently  dismissed.   No  further  information  about  those
      proceedings is available because the solicitors who then acted are no
      longer in  practice  but  it  is  at  all  events  quite  clear  that
      legitimate attempts to secure the appellant's entry were made in 1999
      and were unsuccessful.   It  is  against  that  background  that  the
      appellant arrived here illegally in October 2002.

7.    It was Ms Simpson's submission to  us  that  the  appellant  had  not
      earlier been able to enjoy his family life with his parents  and  his
      siblings by reason of their long separation and that  his  uncle  who
      had brought him up was, as is again common ground, now dead  so  that
      he was not available to continue to look after  him  in  Uganda.   On
      that basis it was her submission that there was family  life  created
      here by reason of what had taken place since his arrival although she
      had to accept that there was no satisfactory evidence of  any  direct
      contact prior to his arrival in the period since his parents had left
      Uganda.  It is against that factual background that we are  asked  to
      consider issues of family life and proportionality under Article 8 of
      the European Convention which provides as follows:

      1.    Everyone has the right to respect for his  private  and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.


      2.    There should be no interference by a public authority with  the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interest  of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country. for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for the protection of  rights
           and freedoms of others."


8.    In our judgment the factual errors which we have recited above do not
      in this case undermine the conclusions  which  the  Adjudicator  drew
      that there was not any family life established with the  parents  and
      siblings in the United Kingdom by reason of the very short period  of
      reunion  following  illegal  entry.   It  is  accepted  law  that  in
      circumstances where family life is put forward as existing between an
      adult child and his  parents  or  an  adult  sibling  and  his  other
      siblings there needs to be further elements of  dependency  involving
      more than normal emotional ties.  This was reaffirmed by the Tribunal
      recently in the decision in Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698 relying  on  the
      earlier case of Advic v United Kingdom, a Strasbourg case decided  in
      September 1995.  The relevant quotation from Advic  is  contained  at
      paragraph 13 of the decision in Salad. Each case is  fact  dependent.
      In Salad adult brothers had been living apart for a  long  period  of
      time  and  were  not  dependent  on   each   other.   Equally   where
      relationships between parents and an adult child  are  concerned  the
      protection of Article 8 would  not  necessarily  be  engaged  without
      evidence of further elements of dependency.  In the present appeal no
      evidence of such further dependency has  been  adduced  although  the
      appellant was offered the opportunity to bring oral  evidence  before
      us had he wished to do so.

9.    We are therefore satisfied that  on  the  facts  as  they  exist  the
      Adjudicator's decision in relation to the lack of existence of family
      life within the meaning of Article 8 of the European Convention is  a
      sustainable decision.  That of itself is  sufficient  to  dispose  of
      this appeal but, like the Adjudicator, in case we are wrong in saying
      this we go on to consider the question of proportionality of  removal
      under Article 8(2).

10.   It seems to us  highly  relevant  in  those  circumstances  that  the
      appellant is an illegal entrant who came here only  after  legitimate
      attempts to enter the United Kingdom had failed.  We note that in the
      case  of  Kaya  [2002]  UKIAT  08312  the  Tribunal  said  that   the
      Adjudicator  correctly  stated  the  principle  that   the   European
      Convention on Human  Rights  must  not  be  used  to  circumvent  the
      immigration rules "but we feel that is exactly  what  her  ruling  on
      proportionality would accomplish".  That is the guiding principle  in
      our view and it must be taken seriously into account in  relation  to
      issues of proportionality.

11.   The Secretary of State had not himself  dealt  with  whether  removal
      under Article 8 would  be  proportionate  but  the  Tribunal  in  its
      starred decision in [2004] UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia) has clearly stated
      the approach which should be adopted by the Tribunal and Adjudicators
      in approaching proportionality issues. It sets this out at  paragraph
      28 as follows:

           "The starting point should be that if in the  circumstances  the
           removal could reasonably be regarded as  proportionate,  whether
           or not the Secretary of State has actually said  so  or  applied
           his  mind  to  the  issue,  it  is  lawful.   The  Tribunal  and
           Adjudicators should regard Shala, Edore and Djali  as  providing
           clear exemplification of  the  limits  of  what  is  lawful  and
           proportionate.  They should normally hold  that  a  decision  to
           remove is unlawful only when the disproportion is so great  that
           no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could  remove   in   those
           circumstances. ...  It  would  otherwise  have  to  be  a  truly
           exceptional case, identified and reasoned, which  would  justify
           the  conclusion  that  the  removal  decision  was  unlawful  by
           reference to an assessment that removal was within the range  of
           reasonable assessments of proportionality.  We cannot  think  of
           one at present; it is simply that we cannot rule it out."


11.   That approach is of course binding on  this  Tribunal  and  there  is
      nothing in the submissions made  by  Ms  Simpson  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant which would persuade us that  no  reasonable  Secretary  of
      State could properly have reached the decision on the facts  in  this
      appeal that removal in the public interest in the regular enforcement
      of immigration control was not a proportionate response.

12.   We are therefore satisfied that the  Adjudicator  was  right  in  his
      secondary  alternative  conclusion  that   removal   would   not   be
      disproportionate and that part of his decision also is sustainable.

13.   For the above reasons we agree with Mr  Underwood's  submissions  and
      this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
