
ar
           JO  (internal  relocation  -  no  risk  of  re-trafficking)
           Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00251

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                               Date of Hearing: 18 June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                      ....10th Sept 2004....

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                              Mr J G Macdonald
                               Dr T Okitikipi



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives:  Miss N Finch of Counsel  instructed  by  Brighton  Housing
Trust for the appellant; Mr J Gulvin, Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  for
the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, born on 22 August 1986,  appeals
      against a determination of Adjudicator, Mrs  R.J.  Morris,  dismissing
      her appeal against a  decision  refusing  to  grant  asylum,  although
      granting limited leave until 21 August 2004.

2.    The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that  having  endured  ill-
      treatment for many  years from her stepmother she sought assistance in
      achieving a better life  from  a  woman  who  lived  in  her  village.
      Unfortunately this woman deceived her, promising her work abroad as  a
      hairdresser but  arranging  instead  for  her  to  be  trafficked  for
      prostitution. The  woman in question  had taken her and   three  other
      young girls first to Morocco, then Spain and then to Italy.  In  2002,
      when aged fifteen, she was forced to work in Torino, Italy, for  seven
      months as a prostitute. The  woman concerned told  her  that  she  was
      expected to pay her back US$ 40,000, this being the cost of taking her
      to Torino.  When the appellant managed  to  escape  and  live  with  a
      friend, working as a hairstylist,  the  woman  concerned  tracked  her
      down, beat her up and demanded her money. The appellant with help from
      friends managed to obtain a false British  passport  with  a  view  to
      travelling via the UK to Canada.

3.    Although considering the appellant's account vague,  inconsistent  and
      "probably not truthful in  every  particular  area",  the  Adjudicator
      accepted that she had indeed been the victim of child trafficking  and
      had been forced to work as a child prostitute. She  then  reached  two
      separate conclusions, one under  the   1951  Refugee  Convention,  one
      under the 1950 Human Rights Convention. Under the  Refugee  Convention
      she decided that even taking the appellant's claim at  its  strongest,
      she could not qualify, since "the alleged particular social  group  of
      young Nigerian women is not sufficiently set apart from other Nigerian
      woman  (sic).   Additionally  I  do  not   find   the   group   exists
      independently of the persecution claimed".   Under  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, the Adjudicator held that since the appellant had  limited
      leave to remain, there was no existing threat to any of her Convention
      rights.

4.    No challenge has been made  to  the  Adjudicator's  dismissal  of  the
      human rights grounds of appeal.  Whether simply by virtue of the  fact
      that this was a s.69(3) appeal or because  a person with limited leave
      cannot be said to be under imminent threat of  removal,  dismissal  of
      the human rights grounds of appeal was plainly correct.

5.    As regards the asylum grounds  of  appeal,  Miss  Finch's  submissions
      were essentially threefold. The first was  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      erred in  not  accepting  that  the  appellant  had  experienced  past
      persecution; the second was that she had failed  to  consider  whether
      the appellant faced a real risk of future persecution in the  form  of
      being re-trafficked; and the third was that she  had  wrongly  decided
      the appellant was not a member of a particular social group. This  was
      not the order in which Miss Finch put her submissions, but it seems to
      us both convenient and logical to deal with them in this order.

6.    In relation  to  the  first  submission,  we  would  accept  that  the
      Adjudicator's treatment of the issue of past persecution  was  flawed.
      At paragraph 26(vi) she appeared to  avoid  making  any  finding.  Her
      reason for doing so was that there was insufficient  evidence   as  to
      how the appellant's injuries were sustained or by whom (stepmother  or
      the woman who forced her into prostitution).  However, since  she  did
      accept that child traffickers did ill-treat their victims and  did  go
      on to accept the  "core " of the appellant's account as  credible,  it
      seems to us sufficiently clear that she fully  accepted  the  fact  of
      past persecution.

7.    In relation to the second submission, however, we  think  the  grounds
      accurately identify a  more  serious  flaw.  The  Adjudicator  nowhere
      addressed the issue of risk on return. Arguably, by virtue  of  saying
      she was prepared to accept the appellant's case at  its  highest,  the
      Adjudicator can logically be taken to have accepted  a  real  risk  of
      persecution on return. In line with this argument, the Adjudicator  at
      paragraphs  28-30 could be seen as finding that the  only  reason  why
      the appellant did not succeed under the Refugee  Convention  was  that
      she had not shown that she was  a  member  of  any  particular  social
      group.

8.    However, if one assumes that  this  was  the  Adjudicator's  position,
      then it was one which was not supported by any  identifiable  reasons.
      It is necessary, therefore, for the Tribunal to assess  for  ourselves
      whether, even fully accepting the appellant as credible, she had shown
      she faced a real risk of persecution.

9.    Basing ourselves on the Adjudicator's  positive  credibility  findings
      we see no difficulty in accepting  that she would face a real risk  of
      serious harm on return to her home area.  For one thing, although  she
      is  now  nearly  eighteen,  it  was  reasonable  to  assume  that  her
      stepmother, who had frequently ill-treated  her  in  the  past,  would
      continue to ill-treat her. For another, even though the woman who  had
      forced her into prostitution appeared to travel  frequently  to  other
      countries, her home village was the same as  the  appellant's.  Either
      she would be there when the appellant returned or  it  was  reasonably
      likely she would come to learn of the appellant's return.  Then  there
      would be the matter of  the   US$40,000  debt  which  this  woman  had
      already used physical violence  against  the  appellant  in  order  to
      extort.  Given the apparent ease with which this  woman  was  able  to
      take the appellant  when still  a  minor  abroad,  it  was  reasonably
      likely she would be able to harm or misuse her again. Although, as the
      Adjudicator noted, the Nigerian authorities in recent times had  taken
      some  specific  measures  to  protect   young  women  against   forced
      trafficking, we see  no error in the Adjudicator's apparent acceptance
      that in the particular circumstances  of  this  case  she  would  face
      further serious difficulties in her home area.

10.   However, that leaves the issue of whether the appellant would be  able
      to avoid persecution by means of internal relocation.   Although  this
      issue was not raised discretely either in  the   Reasons  for  Refusal
      letter or in the Adjudicator's determination, it has always  been  the
      appellant's contention that wherever she went  in  Nigeria  the  woman
      from her village who had originally trafficked her would find her  and
      inflict further harm on her.  At the outset of the hearing we informed
      the parties that we considered the issue  of  internal  relocation  in
      this case to be an "obvious" point in the sense outlined by the  Court
      of Appeal in Robinson [1997] ImmAR 568.

11.   Miss Finch sought to  submit  that  wherever  the  appellant  went  in
      Nigeria she would be at risk since she was a  vulnerable  young  woman
      scarred  by  her  past  experience  when  still  a  child  of   forced
      prostitution. Although nearly eighteen,  she was still a minor and  as
      such should not be  returned  unless  there  were  adequate  reception
      arrangements. She highlighted parts of the objective country materials
      which described the extent of discrimination faced by women in Nigeria
      and young women in particular. Alienated from her home village by  the
      twin threat posed by her stepmother and the women who  trafficked  her
      originally, the appellant would be socially isolated and  economically
      pressured to become once again  a  prostitute  and  therefore  someone
      likely to be re-trafficked or otherwise exploited by  criminal  gangs.
      It was likely that the woman who trafficked the  appellant  and  three
      other young girls  in  her  home  village  had  national  as  well  as
      international connections with criminal gangs involved in  trafficking
      rings. The appellant had never been to school albeit she had had  some
      education in the UK.

12.   Mr Gulvin contended that the appellant would have  a  viable  internal
      relocation alternative. It was not plausible  to  suggest  the  family
      members or the woman who trafficked her in her home village  would  be
      able or would have the motivation to locate her elsewhere in  Nigeria.
      Even if they did, the evidence  indicates  that  the  authorities   in
      Nigeria  would   be  able  to   afford   her   effective   protection.
      Furthermore, she was now nearly eighteen.

13.   We consider that Mr  Gulvin's  main  submissions  on  this  issue  are
      valid. There is no proper evidential basis  for  concluding  that   it
      would be unduly harsh for this appellant  to be expected to avoid harm
      in  Nigeria by relocating. There was no evidence  to suggest that  her
      father and stepmother would seek her out. Nor was there  any  evidence
      that  the woman who trafficked her had the wherewithal to  pursue  her
      or to get connections of hers to look out for  the  appellant  in  the
      major cities or elsewhere in Nigeria.  Although  background   evidence
      shows that trafficking of women is a very serious problem in  Nigeria,
      with over 40,000 women said to have been trafficked, it  remains  that
      relative to the number of young women in Nigeria it is  only  a  small
      percentage who are trafficked. Even if the Nigerian  authorities  have
      much more to do before they can  say  that   various  anti-trafficking
      measures they  have introduced or promised are having a  real  effect,
      there was simply no proper basis for finding that this appellant would
      be subject once again to abuse by traffickers. It is true that she had
      been trafficked once before  and  we  are  also  prepared  to  accept,
      despite lack  of  full  medical  evidence,  that  her  experiences  of
      trafficking and  forced  prostitution  have  scarred  her  physically,
      emotionally and  psychologically.  However,  on  the  appellant's  own
      account she was very clear  that she had no  intention  whatsoever  of
      returning to prostitution;  when she had first escaped the clutches of
      the woman who had trafficked her in Italy, she had then begun work  as
      a hairdresser.

14.   Her experiences of work as a hairdresser  both  in  her  home  village
      before  she  left  and  in  Italy  also  meant  that  she   had   some
      occupational skill or experience to assist  her  in  obtaining  future
      employment. Although still under  eighteen  and  still,  therefore,  a
      minor, the fact that she was now seventeen would  mean  she  would  be
      able to join the employment market as an adult.  Although she had  not
      been to school in Nigeria, she  had  made  some  educational  progress
      during her time in the UK. Whilst the objective materials do  identity
      significant areas of life in  which  women,  especially  young  women,
      experience discrimination, they do not demonstrate  that  young  women
      per se face a real risk of serious harm or undue hardship in Nigeria.

15.   Thus there was no proper  basis  for  a  finding  that  the  appellant
      would face a real risk of serious harm outside her home area.

16.   Accordingly, even if the Adjudicator is taken to have accepted a  real
      risk of persecution on return,  (by  virtue  of  having  accepted  the
      appellant's case "at its highest"), such a finding was wrong in law by
      reason of having no proper evidential foundation.

17.   In the light of our finding that the appellant  does not face  a  real
      risk of serious harm, there  is  no  need  for  us  to  give  discrete
      consideration to the issue of whether the authorities  (outside of the
      appellant's home  area)  in  Nigeria  could  effectively  protect  her
      against such harm.

18.   Nor is it necessary for us to make a finding  on the issue of  whether
      for  Refugee  Convention  purposes  the  appellant  forms  part  of  a
      particular social group. It  may  be  apposite,  however,  for  us  to
      indicate our provisional view of this issue.  Whilst we do  not  think
      that  Miss  Finch  correctly  identified  any  error  of  law  in  the
      Adjudicator's formulation of the law relevant to identification  of  a
      particular social group - in particular  we  do  not  agree  that  the
      Adjudicator anywhere assumed that a particular social group (PSG)  had
      to be cohesive -  we   do  think  there  was  arguable  merit  in  her
      submission developed before us at the hearing that  women  in  Nigeria
      form a particular social group. We agree with her and Mr  Gulvin  that
      trafficked women do not qualify as a PSG, since what defines  them  is
      essentially the fact of persecution. However, we do think it  arguable
      that Miss Finch successfully identified the existence in Nigeria of  a
      combination of legal and social measures of discrimination  sufficient
      to demarcate women as a particular social group. We accept that  these
      may not be as comprehensive as those identified by  the House of Lords
      when they reached their judgment in Shah and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629  as
      obtaining for women in Pakistan. However, in our view their  lordships
      made clear in that judgment that  the  PSG  category  should  not   be
      interpreted narrowly. The fact that since Shah and  Islam  women  have
      not been found by the  IAT or the courts to be a PSG in more than  one
      or two countries suggests to us that too little regard has  been  paid
      to the fact that all that was required in Shah  and  Islam  (per  Lord
      Hoffman) was the existence of legal and social conditions  which  were
      discriminatory against women.  Possibly  also there has been too  much
      focus on rejecting  PSG arguments by reference to sub-categories (e.g.
      women at risk of  FGM or, as, at one point in  this  case,  trafficked
      women). The more delimited the  proposed  category,  the  greater  the
      prospect there is of circularity in definition.

19.    Ms Finch submitted that in current-day  women  in  Nigeria,  although
      guaranteed equal rights under the Constitution, face legal impediments
      in obtaining a passport (without  the authorisation of a  male  family
      member) and in acquiring  property and obtaining employment  on  equal
      terms with men.   Depending on whether they live in Nigeria  and  what
      religion they are born into,  they  face  a  range  of  customary  and
      religious laws which deny them  full  legal  capacity  to  enter  into
      contracts they also face social and economic discrimination.  We think
      her analysis was arguable and identifies the existence  of  legal  and
      social conditions which are discriminatory  against  women  and  which
      exist  independently  of  any  persecution  some  women  may  face  in
      Nigeria.

20.   However, even if we had accepted that the appellant is a member  of  a
      particular social  group  and  had  thus  rejected  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions that she was not a member of a  particular  social  group,
      this does not avail the appellant  in her appeal, because there was no
      proper evidential basis for concluding that she faced or faces a  real
      risk of serious harm.

21.   Insofar as it remains the case that the appellant is  a  minor,  there
      is no challenge raised in this case to  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion
      that the appellant's human rights  were  not  at  risk  currently.  By
      virtue of the fact that she has limited leave at least until she turns
      eighteen,  she  is  not  at   real  risk  of  being  returned  as   an
      unaccompanied minor. Although following  the  principles  set  out  in
      Saad, Diriye, Osorio [2002] INLR 34 we have to assess the  appellant's
      s.69(3) hypothetically, as if she would  be returned  immediately,  we
      have not considered that as she is now seventeen years old, her  young
      age would place her  at  any  real  risk  of  serious  harm  or  undue
      hardship.

22.   For completeness we should also record that we  took  careful  account
      of the reports produced by social worker  Miss  L.  Chitty.  We  would
      express our gratitude to her for the care she has taken  in  producing
      those reports, the second at very short notice.  We  are  prepared  to
      accept on the basis of her own experience of cases of young  girls  in
      the UK who have been trafficked that there is  for  such  persons,  an
      increased risk  of  re-trafficking.  However,  Miss  Chitty  does  not
      purport to have any expertise  in relation to risk  of  re-trafficking
      of young women upon return to Nigeria away from the areas  from  where
      they were originally trafficked, and in our view her evidence does not
      assist us in deciding the central issue we have had to address in this
      case.

23.   For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT




-----------------------
      1


