
KK IH HE (Palestinians -camps) Lebanon CG [2004] UKIAT OO293
ar

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of hearing: 24 May 2004
                                                Date determination notified:
                                                 ...29th October 2004.......

                                   Before

                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                       Mr C P Mather (Vice President)


                                   Between

                                     'K'
                                     'H'
                                          'E'
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the first and second
appellants:      Mr H Southey, Counsel, instructed by Wilson & Co.
For the third appellant:     Mr S Cantor, Counsel, instructed by  Simmonds,
                       solicitors.
For the  respondent:           Ms  E  Laing,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
                       Treasury Solicitor.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The three appellants are all  stateless  Palestinians.   Their  cases
      have been linked in order that the Tribunal can consider the question
      of conditions in the Palestinian camps in  Lebanon,  in  addition  to
      considering the individual appeals.
Immigration History

      The First Appellant
2.    'K' was born on 22 March 1978.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 5
      August 1997 having travelled via Cuba.  He claimed asylum on arrival.
       He had no valid passport or travel document and said his papers were
      lost as he boarded a plane in  Cuba.   He  has  no  dependants.   The
      respondent, in a decision dated 16  August  2000,  refused  leave  to
      enter following the decision to refuse his asylum claim and indicated
      that he intended to give directions for his removal to Lebanon.

3.    'K' appealed that decision by virtue of Section 8(1)  of  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Appeals Act 1993.  The appeal was first heard  by  an
      Adjudicator who  treated  it  as  abandoned.   Following  a  judicial
      review, the appeal was remitted back  to  the  Immigration  Appellate
      Authority for a fresh hearing.  Subsequently, his appeal was heard by
      an Adjudicator (Mr J P Pullig), who in a determination dated  21  May
      2002, dismissed it on asylum grounds.   By virtue of the date of  the
      respondent's decision, 'K's appeal was limited to refugee issues.

4.    'K' was granted permission to appeal to the Tribunal.   Following  an
      earlier hearing, the  Tribunal,  chaired  by  the  Deputy  President,
      dismissed his appeal in a determination notified on 3 October 2002.

5.    The Tribunal later refused permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal but permission was granted by the Court on 22  November  2002.
      Following a hearing on 4 April 2003, the Court of Appeal quashed  the
      decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal and remitted  the  appeal
      back  to  the  Tribunal  for  it  to  be  reheard  by  a  differently
      constituted Tribunal.

      The Second Appellant
6.    'H' was born on 20 December 1975.   He left Lebanon on  11  September
      1999 and went to Abu Dhabi.  He remained there for fourteen days  and
      then flew to the United Kingdom, arriving on 25 September  1999.   He
      claimed asylum at   the  port.   He  travelled  on  his  own,  valid,
      passport.   On 18  February  2001  he  was  refused  leave  to  enter
      following the refusal of  his  asylum  claim.    He  appealed  to  an
      Adjudicator (Mr D M Wynn-Simpson) who, in a determination promulgated
      on 10 July 2002, dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human rights
      grounds.   'K' applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.
      That was refused on 8 August 2002.   He  then  applied  for  judicial
      review of that decision.  On 11 October 2002, by  consent,  the  High
      Court quashed the decision to  refuse  permission  and  remitted  the
      appeal  back  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  for   a   fresh
      consideration of the application for  permission  to  appeal.   On  4
      November 2002 permission to appeal was granted.

      The Third Appellant
7.     'E' was born on 1 July 1971.  He arrived at Heathrow  Airport  on  5
      December 1997.  At the time he  held  a  genuine  Palestinian  travel
      document which had been  issued  by  the  Lebanese  authorities.   He
      claimed asylum on arrival.  On 20 January 2003 the respondent refused
      leave to enter, following refusal of his  asylum  claim  and  issuing
      directions for 'E's removal to Lebanon.  'E' appealed  that  decision
      to  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  M  Shrimpton)  who,  in   a   determination
      promulgated on 25 November 2003, dismissed the appeal on both  asylum
      and human rights grounds.  The Tribunal  granted  him  permission  to
      appeal on 4 February 2004.

The Bases of the claims, the facts as found and the issues at large

      The First Appellant
8.    'K' was born in Kuwait but does not have  Kuwaiti  nationality.    He
      was educated there and in 1997 the family left  Kuwait  and  went  to
      Lebanon.   His  family  moved  into  the  Ain-Alihiwa  Camp.   He  is
      registered with UNWRA.   He accepts that when  he  subsequently  left
      Lebanon for Cuba he used his own passport.  'K'  described  the  Ain-
      Alihiwa Camp, run by UNWRA, as being  very  badly  organised  with  a
      number of political parties operating inside it.   Whilst there,  the
      'K' enrolled on a two year Business and Administration Course at  the
      Sibleen Training Centre near Saida, which had been set up  by  UNWRA.
      All the students were Palestinians.

9.    Whilst studying on that course he met two friends who were members of
      an organisation, El-Kifah El-Musalaah (the Armed Struggle  Movement).
       It was a group that had split away from Fatah. They  told  'K'  that
      the  aim  of  the  organisation  was  to  liberate  Palestine.   They
      collected donations for the cause.  He was persuaded to join and  was
      given an identity card.  He understands that  there  were  about  150
      other members of the group.   He  helped  to  collect  donations  and
      undertook military training.  When the group expressed its  intention
      to become involved in military operations outside the  camp,  on  the
      South Lebanese/Israeli border he did not wish to  be  involved.    It
      was made clear to him that having joined, he was there for life.   He
      was told he had information about the organisation and  that,  if  he
      deserted, he would be tortured, detained and  beaten.    One  of  his
      neighbours was also a member of the organisation and had run away two
      months before.  He had never returned.  He said that he knew he would
      have to leave Lebanon because he would not be able  to  work  legally
      outside the camp and had no other means of financial  support.    His
      parents agreed to pay for him to leave the country.  He claimed  that
      he would have to go back to that camp if he were returned to  Lebanon
      and would be put in prison there.  If he were  outside  the  camp  he
      would not be able to study or work and would be humiliated.  He  said
      that he would be tortured in prison and there was nobody to  turn  to
      in the camp for protection.

10.   When cross examined he confirmed that he had never been  arrested  or
      detained in Lebanon and had never suffered  any  physical  harm.   He
      said that, as a Palestinian, he was humiliated.

11.   The Adjudicator, in dismissing  the  appeal,  found  'K'  was  not  a
      credible witness.  Although that credibility finding  was  originally
      challenged in the appeal to the Tribunal it was not a feature of  the
      appeal in the Court  of  Appeal.   The  court  dealt  only  with  the
      question of whether or not 'K' would be persecuted for  a  Convention
      reason if he were returned to Lebanon and to the camp.  As a  result,
      the only issue before the Tribunal was the question as to whether the
      conditions in his camp are such that to return him, as a  young  male
      failed asylum seeker would amount to persecution.

      Second Appellant
12.   'H' was born in Libya where  his  father  was  working.   The  family
      returned to Lebanon when 'H' was  about  five  years  old  (in  about
      1980). He lived in the Borj el Shimali Camp.   He describes the  camp
      as containing a lot of  political  opposition  supported  by  Islamic
      organisations headed by Hezbollah.   'H' left school at  the  age  of
      fifteen and studied for a further two years in the  Siphine  Training
      Centre sponsored by UNWRA.   Following  that,  he  worked  as  a  car
      mechanic until he left for Abu Dhabi  in  July  1998.    He  remained
      there for a year with a work permit.  His stay was then extended  for
      a few weeks by his manager.  He returned to Lebanon in late July 1999
      and remained there for about one and a half months before going  back
      to Abu Dhabi on 11 September 1999.  He stayed there until he left for
      the United Kingdom after about fourteen days.

13.   He was asked at interview why he left Lebanon.  He said that he was a
      member of Fatah and part of his  role  was  to  distribute  leaflets.
      There came a day, in 1997 when there was a celebration. Islamists had
      invited a singing group from Jordan.   Out  of  respect,  members  of
      Fatah, including 'H', went to the celebration during which  a  Sheikh
      made a speech and cursed Fatah.   He criticised Yassar Arafat.   This
      caused 'H's group to increase  the  distribution  of  their  leaflets
      criticising Hamas.   As a result, a leader of Hamas in another  camp,
      issued a statement which 'H' described as a fatwa to the effect  that
      anyone who had participated in writing and distributing the  leaflets
      would be considered an atheist, against Islam and should  be  killed.
      'H' claims that as a result, one of  his  colleagues  was  killed  in
      about June 1997.  He said there were five of them who  were  involved
      in distributing the leaflets.  Of the others, one went to  Cuba,  one
      to Holland and one, possibly, to  Germany.    As  a  result  of  this
      fatwa, 'H' went to stay with his sister in Beirut.  Her husband  knew
      of a project in Abu Dhabi and was able to get him a job  there  as  a
      car mechanic.

14.   The Adjudicator found 'H' was not a credible witness.   Referring  to
      the move to Abu Dhabi, which he accepted, he said,


             "It is an entirely understandable decision on his part for  it
             is clear that the Palestinian  refugees  living  in  camps  in
             Lebanon do so in conditions in which there is an almost  total
             disregard for human rights".


      Notwithstanding that, as a result of the adverse credibility  finding,
      the Adjudicator decided that 'H' was not a refugee.  On  the  subject
      of human rights, he also rejected the claim that it would be a breach
      of 'H's rights under Article 3 ECHR to return him.  He  rejected  the
      submissions made on his behalf on the basis that, if  correct,  every
      Palestinian from the camps in Lebanon would be entitled to claim  the
      protection of the European Convention in any state  in  the  European
      Union.  The Adjudicator said he could find no evidence that had  been
      established to be the position.

15.   Following the quashing of the refusal of permission to  appeal,  'H's
      appeal has come before us.  The issue of credibility is an issue  for
      us to decide, in addition to considering the  general  conditions  in
      his camp.

      The Third Appellant
16.   'E' was born in Al-Rashidieah Camp in Lebanon.   He went to Cyprus in
      1993 with a one week visa.   He  overstayed  and  was  deported  from
      Cyprus to Lebanon in 1996.   He subsequently  left  Lebanon  for  the
      United Kingdom, arriving here on 5 December 1997.   He claims to have
      joined the Abu Nidal Organisation in the  early  1990s.  He  says  he
      became involved in fighting between Abu Nidal and Al Fateh  in  1993.
      The Adjudicator found he had not given  any  consistent  or  credible
      account of what then happened to him.  The Adjudicator accepted  that
      'E' had been a very low  level  member  of  Abu  Nidal,  a  terrorist
      organisation.  He accepted that 'E' had never been  involved  in  any
      terrorist activity.  He  concluded  that,  as  a  result  of  general
      fighting, 'E' simply formed the desire to leave Lebanon.   He did  so
      first, when he went to Cyprus. 'E' has  not  challenged  the  adverse
      credibility finding made by the Adjudicator.  He relies  entirely  on
      conditions in the camps as the basis for his appeal.  There is little
      in the papers (and nothing in the determination) about the  level  of
      education achieved, or the work history, of 'E' when in Lebanon.

General preliminary observation
17.   During the course of this appeal, although each appellant came from a
      different camp, none of  counsel  made  any  attempt  to  distinguish
      between the different camps when considering the conditions in  them.
      We noted that none of the appellants made any complaint  in  evidence
      about the general  living  conditions  which  they  had  experienced,
      whether in terms of unsanitary  conditions,  poor  housing,  lack  of
      opportunity to work, or lack of healthcare.

Evidence of Dr George
18.   We heard evidence from Dr Alan George. He had  provided  a  report  on
      'H' dated 18 March 2003.  He confirmed his qualifications as  set  out
      at the start of that report.  He had been working for the last  twenty
      years as a freelance  journalist,  consultant  and  researcher  during
      which period, between 1984 and 1992, he had been in  the  Lebanon  for
      the Economist Intelligence Unit, the consultancy arm of the  Economist
      organisation.  Previously, among other things, he  had  been  head  of
      research at the Arab/British Chamber of  Commerce  and  worked  for  a
      public relations company whose clients included the governments of the
      United Arab Emirates and Libya and the London office of the  Palestine
      Liberation Organisation.  He had recently reread his report on 'H' and
      was  satisfied  that  it  remained  an  accurate  description  of  the
      situation in Lebanon where there had been no significant changes.

19.   Asked to  describe  the  economic  position  of  Palestinians  in  the
      Lebanon, he said that  it  was  dire.  They  had  never  been  granted
      nationality or the right to work.   Work  permits  had  recently  been
      issued but only to very few people. There was  discrimination  in  all
      areas especially work. For example, it was impossible  to  work  as  a
      doctor as it would be necessary to be made a  member  of  the  Lebanon
      Medical Association, which  required  Lebanese  nationality.   He  had
      recently had the situation  described to him by a senior  official  as
      being akin to apartheid.    Effectively,  therefore,  Palestinians  in
      Lebanon could not work outside the camps  and  they  had  unemployment
      rates  of  about  60%  in  comparison  to  the  national  average   of
      approximately 25%.   The deputy director for UNRWA had told  him  that
      Palestinian  refugees  in  Lebanon  were  far  worse  off  than  their
      equivalents in other countries such as Jordan and Syria.

20.   Dr George said that there are appalling conditions in the  camps.  The
      accommodation had begun as tented settlements and gradually these  had
      been converted by individual families into ramshackle structures built
      generally of breeze blocks which suffered from damp in the winter  and
      were unsanitary. There had been a  lot  of  destruction,  particularly
      during the camps wars in the 1980s and a lot had not been repaired.

21.   Outside the camps there were Lebanese checkpoints.  As regards  health
      conditions, the UNRWA provided  very  basic  health  services,  mainly
      perinatal, but little beyond that, and the Palestinians were not  able
      to use the Lebanese State Public Health  System.   There  was  private
      health care but that was expensive and in effect there was  no  access
      to effective medical care.  The UNRWA care did not compare  with  that
      provided by the state.  The state system was not well  funded  but  it
      contained a wide range of services, while  the  UNRWA  services  other
      than the perinatal services were pretty basic.

22.   He was asked  whether  it  was  realistic  for  Palestinians  to  move
      elsewhere in Lebanon and replied 'no'.  During  the  1980s  there  had
      been  a  degree  of  overspill  from  the  camps  into  nearby  areas.
      Officially one could move  from  camp  to  camp  and  outside  but  in
      practice the camps were overcrowded and also the family  was  the  key
      social unit and people would live with their family  in  their  ethnic
      group. Communities stuck together.

23.   There  were  restrictions  on  freedom  of  movement.   Lebanese  army
      checkpoints controlled entry to and exit from the camps and there  was
      a lot of harassment. Also there were Lebanese and Syrian  authorities'
      checkpoints throughout the country, the  purpose  of  these  being  to
      contain and control armed militia, so searches were  carried  out  and
      there was harassment. People would be allowed to  go  on,  but  bribes
      generally had to be paid and the same problem existed  at  the  Syrian
      checkpoints.  There was the risk of  being  attacked  and  they  would
      probably have to pay bribes.  This was true for Lebanese  as  well  as
      Palestinians at the Syrian checkpoints.  The concern  was  to  contain
      the Palestinians within  Lebanon.   Especially  the  pro-Arafat  group
      members were particularly  targeted  at  Syrian  checkpoints  and  the
      situation  was  unpredictable.  Palestinians  were  more  likely  than
      Lebanese to suffer such treatment. There would  also  be  bureaucratic
      delays at checkpoints and  the  risk  of  detention  which  was  quite
      arbitrary and a further risk of ill-treatment including torture was  a
      possibility in detention.

24.   Camp residents had in short no protection in the camps.  The  Lebanese
      authorities  were  not  present.  There  was  no  physical  protection
      provided by UNRWA which provided only basic relief services.  A  range
      of armed guards was active within the  camps  and  there  were  street
      battles. There was no guarantee of protection if you were a member  of
      a group and they could decide that it was  not  worthwhile  protecting
      you.

25.   He was asked how it was that he described conditions in the  camps  as
      life threatening,  and  said  that  there  were  environmental  health
      problems and illness and clashes between groups and the Islamic groups
      were rapidly gaining strength.

26.   When cross-examined by Ms Laing, Dr George confirmed  with  regard  to
      paragraphs 3 and 5 of his report concerning aspects  of  his  personal
      history, that he had not been in Lebanon at these times. It was put to
      him that he had been monitoring events at second hand and he said that
      this was true to a great extent, but that he could better monitor  the
      Middle East from London and not on the ground  as  people  spoke  more
      freely here.  He had met and spoken to Lebanese people  and  he  would
      say that his knowledge was first-hand. As regards paragraph 35 of  the
      report, he was asked whether he had visited camps in the  Lebanon  and
      he said yes, he had visited several in Beirut in  1996.  He  said  the
      camps in the Lebanon were the worst in the region but they all  looked
      similar.

27.   He was asked whether he could relate his  general  comments  to  'H's'
      case since he did not refer to any particular  suffering  due  to  his
      experiences in the camps. He said that he had read 'H's statement  and
      he had no reason to doubt what he  said  but  it  did  not  alter  the
      objective reality.  He was referred specifically to the  statement  at
      page 28 of the bundle at paragraph 10 when 'H' said  that  his  father
      had been allowed to build a house in the camp they went  to  live  in.
      This had been in 1981. Dr George said that at time the Lebanese  civil
      war was under way and the  state  had  collapsed  and  there  were  no
      Lebanese government controls.  He was not aware of technical  problems
      of permission to build a house in a camp and  it  was  a  question  of
      room.

28.    He  was  referred  also  to  paragraphs  11  to  13  concerning  'H's
      educational and employment experiences and that he was able  to  leave
      Lebanon to work in Abu Dhabi.  He said at paragraph  16  that  he  had
      never thought to leave Lebanon and the suggestion was put to him  that
      'H' had no particular problems from general conditions in  the  camps.
      Mr George responded that in  his view this stretched what 'H' said and
      it was unclear whether he had a work permit or whether  he  needed  to
      pay a bribe.

29.   He was referred back to paragraph 28  of  his  report  and  was  asked
      whether he accepted that the state controlled  education  system  that
      was available to the Lebanese was not of a  very  high  standard.   He
      said that they were better than for Palestinians but not  as  good  as
      western countries such as France or Switzerland.  He accepted that the
      medical facilities had been badly  affected  by  the  civil  war,  but
      contended that they had been reconstituted since the end of the  civil
      war. There was a much wider range of facilities available in the state
      hospitals than those available  in  the  camps.    As  in  the  United
      Kingdom, the lower end of society would not be able to pay for private
      health care.

30.   As regards education, he was asked whether he accepted what  was  said
      in the 2004 Country Assessment that generally the state  schools  were
      inadequate in Lebanon. Dr George said that again  it  was  comparative
      and they were inadequate in comparison to European schools but  better
      than for the Palestinians.   The primary education  was  not  bad  but
      beyond that it got worse.

31.   As regards the economic situation generally  in  Lebanon  he  accepted
      that there was a high level of debt, in particular  foreign  debt.  It
      was a state funded on debt, in his view.  He was referred to the point
      made in the Country Assessment concerning a seven year pay freeze  and
      he said that there had been a lot of  means taken to combat debt  over
      the years but none had been effective and Lebanon had  simply  carried
      on borrowing and spending. There was a risk of  instability  if  there
      were pay freezes and they had not really resolved the civil war issues
      and the government had to be careful.  It was true  that  the  minimum
      wage was enforced in the private sector. He also agreed  that  it  was
      true that the minimum wage was inadequate to provide a decent standard
      of living. Dr George said that there was a 68% chance of  Palestinians
      living in the camps being unemployed. He referred to paragraph  32  of
      his report.  It was unclear what the  absolute  figures  were  and  it
      depended upon how you defined a camp and the boundaries of  the  camps
      were blurred.  He agreed  that  it  was  unclear  how  many  lived  in
      unofficial  camps  and  it  was  a  complex   picture.    As   regards
      accommodation, he said that generally conditions  in  the  camps  were
      poor. It was put to him  that  'H'  had  not  complained  about  these
      conditions and he  said that 'H' had made no comment on those matters.
       He accepted that the ban on bringing construction material  into  the
      camps was not total, on the basis that one could bribe with some  ease
      and there was a degree of smuggling but it did not alter the  official
      picture. As regards the final sentence of the last  paragraph  of  his
      report to the effect that a Palestinian who was returned  forcibly  to
      Lebanon would face conditions that amounted to persecution, this was a
      question for the Tribunal, but he considered that he was  entitled  to
      express a view on it as an expert.

32.   There was no  re-examination  of  Dr  George.   We  referred   him  to
      photographs at page 127 and page 133 of, in  the  latter  instance,  a
      classroom and in the former instance buildings which were not built of
      breeze block and corrugated iron but were within the camps. As regards
      the  school  photographs,  he  stated  that  there  were  rooms   with
      blackboards and desks.  As regards the photograph at page 127, he said
      that the camps developed and became districts of cities and there were
      shops and other buildings but generally built  of  breeze  blocks.  It
      could be that the buildings were offices not to do with the  camp  but
      at the edge of the camp.  There were buildings including office  units
      also.

Evidence of Mr Joffe
33.   The next witness was Mr E.G.H. Joffe, who had  provided  a  report  on
      'K', dated 12 August 2002, and also provided a report on 'H'  dated  1
      June 2002 and had also provided further information in a letter to the
      Deputy President dated 27 March 2003.  He confirmed his qualifications
      as set out in particular at pages 13 to  14  of  the  bundle.  He  was
      currently Visiting Professor in Geography  at  Kings  College  London,
      concentrating on the geopolitics of the Middle East and  also  held  a
      lectureship at Cambridge University. He had  previously,  among  other
      things, been a Deputy Director and Director of Studies  at  the  Royal
      Institute of  International  Affairs  and  had  written  a  number  of
      publications which are listed at the  start  of  his  report.  He  had
      reread his report and the letter recently and  there  was  nothing  he
      wished to change and nothing inaccurate except that at the end he  had
      said that 'K' would have to return to  the  Ain-Al-Helwa  camp  as  he
      would not be allowed by the Lebanese authorities  to  settle  anywhere
      else, but he accepted that it  was  in  fact  the  case  that  it  was
      possible to move to other camps.

34.   The position of Palestinians in Lebanon had not changed  significantly
      since he wrote the reports.

35.   With regard to the overview of the economic position, he  agreed  with
      Dr  George.  There  was  discrimination  with  regard  to  access   to
      employment and Palestinians in Lebanon were excluded from  seventy-two
      professions.  It was theory not reality with regard to obtaining  work
      permits. They were confined to residence and work within the camps and
      this was sometimes illegal.  He was asked whether it was not realistic
      to move outside the camps and he said certainly one could go from camp
      to camp if they were UNRWA camps, but it was very difficult otherwise;
      they needed a Lebanese government permit, they could not buy land, and
      it was very hard to get work. It might be possible if   a  Palestinian
      had married a Lebanese citizen or if  they  were  a  professional  and
      registered, but it was very difficult.

36.   As regards living conditions in the camps, Mr Joffe  had  no  personal
      experience of these but the situation was very poor.  He had  been  to
      the Gaza Strip and the West Bank in Israel and Jordan and they  tended
      to be very similar.  The camps had the reputation of  being  worse  in
      Lebanon. They were very small dwellings, often built in breeze  blocks
      with tin roofs, no  sewage  and  no  water  provision  and  were  very
      unsanitary, so it was very unlikely that the life style was  adequate.
      There would be adverse public health problems with health consequences
      for residents.  He referred to a Medical Aid for  Palestinians  report
      concerning the situation being very poor in Lebanon but did  not  have
      the report with him.

37.   Gastro-intestinal diseases were common, especially for  children.  The
      medical services via UNRWA in the registered camps could hardly  cope.
      That organisation's budget had reduced over the last five to ten years
      and it could not deal with  the  conditions.   The  Shias  had  rather
      better medical provision because  of  the  influence  of  groups  like
      Hezbollah. It was generally worse than for the Lebanese population.

38.   It was worse for Palestinians in  Lebanon  than  for  Palestinians  in
      Jordan. He had no doubts about that and believed it was worse than  in
      Syria but also as it existed in the West Bank and the Gaza  Strip,  at
      least until recently. The Lebanese state could provide no security and
      did not directly control the camps  and  the  Lebanese  army  and  the
      police did not penetrate inside the camps which were under the control
      of the militias which led to a lot of insecurity.  Outside  the  camps
      there were checkpoints manned by the Lebanese army and  also  controls
      and  checkpoints  manned  by  the  Lebanese  and  the   Syrians.   The
      Palestinians were likely to face greater harassment and  inconvenience
      than the usual Lebanese citizens.  It depended upon where you were  in
      Lebanon.  Palestinians could not generally expect the normal  security
      of a proper well run state. There was the risk of arbitrary arrest  on
      account of being Palestinian. The Lebanese government  did  not  allow
      Palestinians to acquire a sense of permanence in Lebanon and there was
      a greater degree of discrimination  than  that  experienced  by  other
      groups.

39.   When cross-examined by Ms Laing, it was put to Mr Joffe  that  on  the
      whole the publications set out at  pages  40  and  41  of  the  bundle
      appeared not to have any obvious relevance to  the  issue  before  the
      Tribunal. Mr Joffe said that this was generally true but it came  into
      virtually all of them.  It was suggested to him that in his report  he
      analysed 'H's claim to be persecuted  by  reference  to  two  factors,
      firstly his subjective account concerning the  fatwah  and,  secondly,
      conditions experienced by Palestinians generally. Mr Joffe agreed  and
      said that he emphasised the latter. It was put to  him that at page 48
      in the last paragraph following on from the  previous  paragraphs  and
      going over the page, that the effect of his view was that cumulatively
      there were two matters which in his view amounted to persecution.   He
      agreed that this was the case.  He had based it on the assumption that
      'H' was found to be credible, otherwise there would be  no  point.  It
      was put to him that if he removed the person's situation would he  say
      that there was a claim for persecution in the general conditions,  and
      he said that it was not within the Convention as far as he  understood
      it, but 'H' would not receive protection from the Lebanese state  from
      whatever threats he might face. It was not for him to judge matters of
      the Refugee Convention.  In common parlance, he had reason to fear  as
      there  was  no  protection  by  the  Lebanese  state  and  there   was
      discrimination.  The potential for persecution lay there.  He did  not
      accept that it depended upon the circumstances;  it was not for him to
      make that judgment but it would be less so if  personal  circumstances
      were removed.

40.   It was put to him that, as Ms Laing had put it to Dr George,  'H'  did
      not really rely on particular matters.  Mr Joffe replied that  it  was
      probably true but it could be that he did not choose to say so.

41.   He was referred to his report on 'K' and 'K's statement at pages 8  to
      12. He was asked whether, if he separated out the  main  strand,  that
      being the fear from the armed group, there was anything there  showing
      that the conditions of Palestinians generally in the Lebanon  amounted
      to persecution.  Mr Joffe said he was  not  sure  what  Ms  Laing  was
      inferring.  It could not be persecution by the Lebanese as they had no
      authority in camps. It would  be  dangerous  to  generalise  from  his
      family's experiences, having been relocated from Kuwait and they would
      have had a lot more resources available to them so  he  could  have  a
      different situation from that of many Palestinians. It was put to  him
      that it was hard to generalise from all to a particular  case  and  he
      replied that there were complicated  patterns  of  survival  but   the
      circumstances were a form of persecution and discrimination and  being
      able to cope did not avoid the general situation.  Finally, he  agreed
      that what he had said in his statement as regards relocation  was  not
      quite correct.

42.   There was no re-examination.

43.   We asked Mr Joffe what he understood by persecution and he  said  that
      in the case of individuals it was treatment  not  only  discriminatory
      but  damaging  personally.  As  regards  groups,  it   would   involve
      deliberate  conditions  designed   to   worsen   their   circumstances
      especially with regard to the Palestinians, so as  to  deny  them  the
      normal pattern of life and their rights. It went beyond discrimination
      to   persecution.   Discrimination   and    persecution    were    not
      interchangeable and persecution would  involve  deliberate  action  to
      worsen the circumstances of a group which was discriminated against.

Submissions for 'H' and 'K'
44.   We then heard submissions from Mr Southey.  He reminded us  that  'K's
      case involved issues arising under the Refugee Convention  only, given
      the date of decision in that case, but that 'H's case involved  issues
      arising both  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.

45.   The Tribunal should recognise the expertise of the experts and  attach
      a reasonable degree of weight to what they said.  Their  evidence  was
      in any event generally consistent with what was said  in  the  Country
      Assessment  and  the  US  State  Department  Report  and  the  Amnesty
      International  documentation. Both the experts and the various reports
      had  gleaned their information from a range of sources, having studied
      the material at length.

46.   It was clear from the  evidence  that  Palestinians  in  Lebanon  were
      denied social and civil rights enjoyed  by  the  Lebanese  population.
      There was an absence of protection which was critical  in  many  ways.
      UNRWA's role was not to provide protection, as could  be seen from the
      extract from their website at page 93 of the bundle.  The  camps  were
      unsafe. There  was  a  risk  of  crossfire  if  not  from  a  person's
      individual circumstances.  If Palestinians sought to leave  the  camps
      and turn to  the  Lebanese  authorities  then  they  would  experience
      hostility and a risk of arbitrary arrest. He referred  us  to  the  US
      State Department and the Amnesty International  report in this  regard
      and also the evidence of the experts. The Amnesty report also made  it
      clear that there were restrictions on freedom  of  movement,  however,
      save that it was now possible to move from one camp  to  another,  but
      there were very similar circumstances in  each.   There  was   a  huge
      impact of the discrimination on daily activities. Job  prospects  were
      very poor and their situation was a lot worse than that of the general
      Lebanese population.  Few work permits  were  issued  and  there  were
      restrictions on their ability to enter a lot of vocations and  trades.
      He referred us also to  the  Amnesty  International   report  produced
      today which made it clear that whilst there  was  discrimination  also
      vis-�-vis some non-nationals,  Palestinians  were  stateless  so  they
      could not have those rights and no recognised  state  would  negotiate
      for them.  He referred us to the US State Department  Report  at  page
      134.

47.   There was a lot of poverty in the camps as could  be  seen  from  page
      91 which formed part of the UNRWA website information, and  the  State
      Department Report at page 86 in  the  bundle.   Palestinians'  incomes
      were declining. Also accommodation was generally  poor.  They  had  no
      ability to own  land  or  inherit  as  was  accepted  in  the  Country
      Assessment, and again that situation  was less favourable than that of
      other non-Lebanese in the Lebanon.   It  was  clear  from  the  latest
      Amnesty International  Report and the US State Department Report  that
      foreigners  could  own  small  plots  of  land,   in   comparison   to
      Palestinians. The camps themselves lacked  proper  infrastructure  and
      this was confirmed by UNRWA.  The accommodation was  cramped  and  the
      sewers were inadequate.  As regards the point  made  by  the  Tribunal
      concerning the photographs, this should be viewed  with  a  degree  of
      caution.  There was a lot of damage in the  camps  and  problems  with
      getting building material though clearly some did  get  in,  but  this
      seemed to be a consequence of bribes  and  smuggling,  and  rebuilding
      could  be  very  difficult.   There  were  significant  public  health
      problems according to the experts and today's Amnesty Report and these
      were not adequately addressed by UNRWA.   They  were  worse  than  the
      Lebanese health services which were not a model themselves but  better
      than those offered by UNRWA.

48.   There was a denial of access to education and the situation was  again
      worse than that available  to  Lebanese  generally.  The  age  of  the
      appellants should  be  borne  in  mind,  and  this  was  not  directly
      significant  to them, but it would be argued that the  law  needed  to
      consider discrimination which diminished the dignity of the  community
      and if the state denied educational  facilities  in  a  discriminatory
      manner to Palestinians it could be an  aspect  of  ill-treatment.   It
      raised issues of third level rights.  Mr Southey thought  that  rather
      than this referring to primary education, it was  a  matter  of  basic
      education. He thought there was a recent Court of Appeal  decision  on
      age discrimination for further  education funding though it  had  been
      found there was no violation but that within EC systems there  was  no
      basis to distinguish between primary and secondary education.

49.   Mr Southey referred to Article 22 of the Convention on   Statelessness
      as being relevant to these  cases.  This  required  giving  access  to
      stateless persons within a state on  the  same  terms  essentially  as
      their own nationals and to other forms of education so they should  be
      treated as favourably as possible and not less than aliens  generally.
      That was however, he accepted, perhaps the  least  significant  aspect
      given the ages of the appellants.  Issues concerning  work and  health
      were more important in this case as  they  could  give  rise  to  life
      threatening circumstances.

50.   Mr Southey then took us to the relevant legal  issues.   At  page  109
      was an  extract from Professor Hathaway's book,  The  Law  of  Refugee
      Status, concerning second category rights and such matters as  freedom
      from arbitrary arrest and detention, the right to equal protection for
      all, and limited  derogation  rights  which  were  not  applicable  to
      Lebanon today. There  was  a  higher  risk  of  arbitrary  arrest  for
      Palestinians in Lebanon. The proper approach was to look  at  all  the
      aspects of discrimination on the totality of the evidence.   He  could
      not break it down, not least because if one  looked  at  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights case law it was the overall package of ill-
      treatment that determined the case. He submitted that it was the  same
      approach for the Refugee Convention.

51.   Page 110  of  the  extract  from  Hathaway  concerned  third  category
      rights. These were discriminatory matters  not  binding  on  a  state.
      Reliance was placed on  the  discriminatory  aspect  and  the  overall
      effect.  It was accepted that there was  a  degree  of  discrimination
      against  non-nationals  in  Lebanon  which  could  be  acceptable   in
      international  law  but  not  necessarily  so.  The  appellants   were
      stateless.   The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  Mr  Southey's  skeleton
      argument. They should  be  treated  no  less  favourably  than  aliens
      generally.  Article  17  of  the  Refugee  Convention  concerned  wage
      earning employment and Article 21 housing. Public relief at Article 23
      included health care provision and this needed  to  be  equivalent  to
      that provided  for  nationals.  Also  there  was  Article  32  of  the
      Statelessness Convention, which was concerned with the requirement  to
      facilitate as far as possible the assimilation and  naturalisation  of
      stateless persons.  The situation of Palestinians in the Lebanon   had
      been the same for over fifty years now; this involved a  violation  of
      their rights by the  Lebanese  state  and  they  should  not  be  non-
      nationals by now.  It was true that Lebanon was not a signatory to the
      Convention but  it did not alter the situation as to whether or not it
      was persecution and the point should be considered  objectively.    Mr
      Southey also placed reliance on  Article  2(3)  of  the  International
      Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights which,  he  contended,
      had to be  compatible  with  a  person's  human  rights.  The  Article
      contained guidance on this.  Denial of  rights  to  non-nationals  had
      been considered by  the  United  Nations  Human  Rights  Committee  in
      Karakurt  v  Austria,  Communication  No.  965/2000,  U.N.   Document.
      CCPR/C/741 D/965/2000 [2002] to be found at  tab  3  of  Mr  Southey's
      bundle.  It had to be  proportionate.  There  was  no  reasonable  and
      objective justification for  discrimination  against  Palestinians  as
      there was no such discrimination against foreign nationals. There  was
      no merit to the purported justification that Lebanon did not  want  to
      risk  jeopardising  the  Palestinians'  ability  to  return  to  their
      Palestinian homeland.  There was no reason why this could not be  left
      to the individual Palestinian.

52.   He argued that initially their  admission  to  the  Lebanon  had  been
      intended to be temporary with the UNRWA looking after  their  welfare,
      but contended that they should be treated as other  foreign  nationals
      were treated and also as Lebanese  citizens  were  treated,  as  fifty
      years  was  too  long  to  leave  them  in  this   situation   without
      citizenship, and was itself in violation  of  their  human  rights  in
      accordance with international norms of human rights law.  It was  also
      relevant to the issue of reasonable and objective justification  which
      could have been so in the 1940s but was  not  so  now.   International
      support remained to be provided and it was grossly inadequate, and  it
      seemed that UNRWA would agree. Aspects of their situation came outside
      UNRWA's terms of reference, for example, protection.   Proper  funding
      would give rise to better living  conditions,  the  economic  position
      being improved and it could reduce the need for protection. There  was
      however little prospect of improvement, if  anything  UNRWA  had  come
      under greater financial pressure.

53.   Palestinians were able to travel, but the international community  was
      dealing with the issue via  the  back  door.   It  might  need  to  be
      addressed directly by providing protection and it was a shared  burden
      to an  extent.  It  could  not  be  acceptable  to  provide  the  same
      considerations now as in 1949.  Also, Palestinians  in  Lebanon  today
      were probably worse off than in  any  other  country  except  possibly
      Israel.  There  was  therefore  unjustified  discrimination  as  their
      situation might be better elsewhere. A fair comparison  could  perhaps
      be  made  with  Jordan  which  was  similar   economically,  but   the
      conditions for the Palestinians there were better.   Mr  Southey  also
      referred us to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child,  set  out
      at pages 10 and 11 of his skeleton, and argued that  the  child  of  a
      stateless person should get the nationality of the state.  He  adopted
      the submissions which would be made by Mr  Cantor  which  were  to  be
      found in his skeleton argument concerning whether  discrimination  was
      legitimate with regard to non-nationals under the Convention  for  the
      Elimination of Discrimination.

54.    Mr  Southey  contended,  therefore,  that  it  could  be  seen   that
      discrimination could be acceptable to an extent with  regard  to  non-
      nationals but there were very clear limits and in this  case  it  went
      beyond what was acceptable and  compatible  with  international  human
      rights  standards.  He  argued   that   the   discrimination   against
      Palestinians in the Lebanon was persecution.  Inevitably, there was  a
      feeling of hopelessness and worthlessness for Palestinians  who  could
      not see an improvement but in fact deterioration in  their  situation.
      The restrictions on work and  movement  meant  that  they  would  feel
      there were no or very  limited  individual  prospects  of  betterment.
      Also there would be a greater feeling of hopelessness because  it  was
      discriminatory ill-treatment.  Also with regard to poverty, when  this
      arose from discrimination it was more likely to lead to a  feeling  of
      being degraded and worthless.  As regards the East African Asians case
      [1973] 3 EHRR 76 which could be found at tab 7 of Ms  Laing's  bundle,
      reliance was placed on paragraphs 207 and  208.  It  was  relevant  in
      showing   that    circumstances    might    exist    where    economic
      discrimination/ill-treatment of itself did not give rise to an Article
      3 breach but if based on race could do so as being an affront to human
      dignity.

55.   Palestinians in Lebanon had been  denied  basic  rights  and  adequate
      accommodation on account of their race. This had been  for  a  lengthy
      duration and was a special form of affront as  so  described  in  that
      case. It was unsurprising that race was a  feature  as  it  diminished
      dignity.

56.   We asked Mr Southey whether there was any record  of  Palestinians  in
      the  Lebanon  making  representations  to  international  bodies.   Mr
      Southey thought it was fragmented as nobody  represented  Palestinians
      in Lebanon. UNRWA was the nearest thing and he referred us to page  91
      of his bundle.  The size of the group  did  not  really  mitigate  the
      points concerning human dignity as it  could  increase  the  sense  of
      helplessness if it were a larger group.

57.   As regards the subjective position of  the  appellants,  the  position
      was that the Tribunal had not heard their oral  evidence.   They  said
      that the Secretary of State did not engage with the issue and hence if
      it was found that there was a realistic basis to the claim then  there
      probably needed to be specific fact finding.  There  was   a  lack  of
      findings by the Adjudicator  both  as  regards  general  and  specific
      matters and no findings on the discrimination point. If  the  Tribunal
      agreed that the treatment experienced generally by Palestinians in the
      Lebanon  crossed  the  threshold  then  the  personal  histories  were
      irrelevant.

58.   As regards the credibility findings  in  'H's  case,  the  Adjudicator
      should say what the inconsistencies and vagueness were  and  it  could
      not inevitably mean that there was  a lack of credibility.  The points
      made by the Vice President when refusing permission were ex post facto
      and it was an Adjudicator's duty to give sufficient  reasons  as  this
      would help the appellant to understand why there had been a refusal of
      his appeal and also it was good discipline for Adjudicators.

59.   In 'K' the issue that arose was whether  the  discrimination  amounted
      to persecution.  The Tribunal that had first  heard   his  appeal  had
      upheld  the  Adjudicator's  credibility  findings   and   the   matter
      thereafter had been taken to the Court of Appeal on other issues.   As
      regards 'H's case, it was only possible to live in the camps but there
      was no protection essentially within the camps from the various groups
      and therefore taking his evidence  at its highest he  was  clearly  at
      risk.  He could not say that in any particular camp there  was  proper
      protection.

Submissions for 'E'
60.   Mr Cantor adopted Mr Southey's submissions concerning his lay  client,
      'E'.   He also adopted his own skeleton argument. His case, like 'K's,
      depended essentially upon the objective evidence. He  referred  us  to
      the decision of the Tribunal in Gashi [1997] INLR  96  concerning  the
      situation where an objective fear was enough.    He also  referred  us
      to pages 24 to 26 of his supplementary bundle.

61.   Mr  Cantor  referred  us  to  aspects  of  Ms  Laing's  skeleton.   At
      paragraph  8(2)(c)(i)    she  referred  to   Article   2(3)   of   the
      International Covenant on Economic  Social  and  Cultural  rights.  Mr
      Cantor referred us to his skeleton on this at paragraph 9, making  the
      point that this exception should  be  narrowly  construed.   Also,  as
      regards subparagraph (iii) further on in Ms Laing's skeleton, this was
      qualified by the recommendation of the  UN  Committee  and  again  the
      Tribunal was referred  to  Mr  Cantor's  skeleton,  in  particular  at
      paragraph 10(i) and also (iii).

62.   As regards  UNRWA's  mandate,  he  referred  us  to  page  49  of  his
      supplementary bundle with regard to  housing.  It  was  accepted  that
      UNRWA had a mandate to assist, but  the  discrimination  pervaded.  He
      also referred us to the CERD (Committee on the  Elimination of  Racial
      Discrimination) report and the points on social security at page 48.

63.   As regards Article 3, he referred us to the decision of the  Court  of
      Human Rights in Pretty v UK [2000] FCR 97 as aspects of the  reasoning
      in that case were  relevant to Palestinians in Lebanon.  The  Tribunal
      was referred to the supplementary bundle at page 47.  This was exactly
      the kind of effect of humiliating and debasing treatment involved  and
      it was necessary to decide whether there was a real risk of that,  and
      Mr Cantor contended that there was.

64.   He also referred us to Tesema [2004] EWCA Civ 540, which had been  put
      in today by Ms Laing, and in particular paragraphs 43,44,  87  and  89
      were referred to as relevant and the situation was  tolerated  by  the
      Lebanese authorities.  The duration of the period of  destitution  and
      uncertainty was a relevant factor with regard to Article 3.  There was
      no end to this in sight, and he referred us to the Country  Assessment
      in this regard.

65.    Finally,  with  regard  to  photographs,  he  referred  us   to   the
      supplementary bundle which contained photographs of each of the  camps
      and showed their dilapidated nature.

Submissions for the Secretary of State
66.   In her submissions Ms Laing  dealt  first  of  all  with  the  Refugee
      Convention.  It was necessary, in her view, not only to  consider  the
      risk of treatment on the objective evidence but whether it would  have
      a personal impact on these particular individuals.

67.   The core of the objective evidence was not in dispute but  there  were
      some differences of emphasis, and the real issue was  the  conclusions
      to be drawn from it.

68.   For example, she contrasted  what  was  said  by  Mr  Southey  in  his
      skeleton  at  paragraph  2.2    concerning   arrest,   detention   and
      harassment, with the general position as  shown  at  page  77  of  his
      bundle  which  indicated  that  this  applied  to  Lebanese   citizens
      generally. As regards Mr Southey's paragraph 2.3,  concerning  freedom
      of movement, again the Country Assessment showed that it was the  case
      that Palestinians could move around and the Syrian checkpoints applied
      equally to Lebanese citizens.  With regard to Mr  Southey's  paragraph
      2.7 concerning living outside the camps,  this  was  again  perhaps  a
      difference of emphasis. There was a lack of certainty  concerning  the
      numbers of Palestinians living in and outside the  camps  but  it  was
      accepted that they could not buy or inherit the land.  As regards 2.11
      of Mr Southey's skeleton which dealt with   access  to  education,  Mr
      Joffe had suggested that this came  from  agreement  by  the  Lebanese
      government.  Palestinians were to control the camps and it  seemed  to
      be left to them to control the camps rather  than  the  Lebanese.   As
      regards paragraph 2.13 of  Mr  Southey's  skeleton  which  dealt  with
      access to education, it seemed that the  primary  level  of  education
      made available by UNRWA was on the whole adequate.  In any event, none
      of the three appellants complained particularly about their education.



69.   As regards the experts, Mr Joffe accepted that he had never been to  a
      Lebanese camp but said it made no difference, and Dr George had  been,
      in 1996. It was of some significance that Mr Joffe was unaware when he
      wrote his reports about changes concerning freedom of movement and  he
      had accepted that he was wrong about that. Generally Mr Joffe had come
      very close to conceding that when one took away  'H's  credibility  he
      did not have any cogent claim. It was clearly  not  for  Mr  Joffe  to
      decide  this  but  it  was  nevertheless  of  some  significance.  She
      contended that both experts were prone to sweeping generalisations not
      based on their own experience and came to unjustified conclusions. For
      example, Dr George's contention that the conditions in the camps  were
      life threatening generally could not be true for every Palestinian  in
      Lebanon  and  could  only  be  so  if  there  were  specific  evidence
      concerning an individual.

70.   Concerning the issue of discrimination which was  said  to  amount  to
      persecution, Ms Laing contended that it was not racial because it  was
      far from clear that Palestinians were a race,  but  it  arose  because
      they were stateless and Lebanon had  not  ratified  the  Statelessness
      Convention. The reason was because it had a very difficult problem  to
      deal with, having accepted a lot of stateless people in 1948 and 1949,
      whom it was  very  difficult  for  Lebanon  to  assimilate.  Lebanon's
      economic situation was precarious: the country had  a  great  deal  of
      debt and had endured a very harsh civil war. A very delicate political
      balance  had  been  inherited  from  the  French   mandate.   If   the
      Palestinians were given citizenship, it could be  up  to  10%  of  the
      population  and  would  involve  a  dramatic  shift  in  the  delicate
      political balance. The refugees had been accepted on the basis of  the
      contribution of UNRWA.  The material needs of the refugees had  to  be
      looked after by that organisation and not by the state of Lebanon.  If
      there were discrimination it could be a question of whether there  was
      a justification of reasonable and objective grounds, as referred to in
      Karakurt, cited by Mr Southey. It was  not  suggested  that  this  was
      laudable or acceptable in moral terms, and it placed great strains  on
      the Palestinians,  but  the  historical  basis  and  UNRWA's  support,
      together with Lebanon's precarious  economic  and  political  balance,
      arguably gave rise to such a justification.

71.   As regards the risk  of  arbitrary  detention,  Lebanese  citizens  in
      general were equally at risk.  If that were not so, on the basis of Dr
      George's evidence it was entirely understandable why in the camps  the
      risk was enhanced given the background of armed militias and fear of a
      build up of military presence and the need for weapons searches.

72.   As regards the point concerning  personal  impact  on  the  appellants
      themselves, it seemed that none of the three claimed to have  suffered
      specifically in any particular way from the  general  conditions.   In
      the cases of 'H' and 'K' there was a claim to fear persecution arising
      from fear of particular factions in  the  camps,  but  on  appeal  the
      complaint was that the Adjudicator had not  dealt  properly  with  the
      objective expert reports as respects their particular situation. There
      was no complaint that the Adjudicator had  failed  to  deal  with  the
      argument that the  general   conditions  would  impact  on  them.  For
      example, neither of these appellants said that when they lived in  the
      Lebanon they were subject to arrest or poor living conditions. In  the
      absence of such evidence it was  dangerous  to  generalise  from   the
      objective evidence to say that all these things  would  apply  to  any
      particular appellant. In this regard  the  Tribunal  was  referred  to
      Gashi.  Ill treatment which might be persecutory  would be persecutory
      if it rendered life intolerable for the person  concerned.  It  was  a
      question of real risk, of course, but it was necessary to look at  the
      person's history to assess present risk and not enough to say that one
      should look at what happened generally in the camps, and  particularly
      what happened to this person. It raised a  subjective  fear.   UNHCR's
      position was based on the impact  on  an  individual.   There  was  no
      deliberate policy of ethnic cleansing here and a much lower  level  of
      impact than was the case in Gashi. It was complicated by the fact that
      the Lebanese government's approach to Palestinians was one side of the
      coin but the other was support from  the  UNRWA.    It  was  generally
      argued, therefore, that the appellants had not been able to  show  any
      specific general impact on them and not enough to say  generally  that
      as ethnic Palestinians they were at risk. 'H's  history  was  relevant
      in this regard. Their treatment did not cross the threshold of  asylum
      claims as a group.

73.   Concerning Article 3, the  Tribunal  was  referred  to  the  skeleton.
      Tesema did not help with regard to the Article 3  test.  The  Tribunal
      was referred to parts of the judgment of Laws LJ,  who  had  dissented
      but with whose judgment the majority had agreed  on  this  point,   in
      particular, at page  25  paragraph  38,  concerning  the  spectrum  of
      Article 3 interference.  The Tribunal was also referred to its earlier
      decision, a copy of which was found in Ms Laing's bundle at tab  3  in
      El Deaibes,  which  had  found  against  an  appellant  in  a  similar
      situation. As regards discrimination on grounds of race, the  Tribunal
      was referred to the skeleton with regard to the  East  African  Asians
      case.  The circumstances in that case had been exceptional. Article 14
      of  the  European  Convention  dealt  with  discrimination  and   most
      discrimination cases arose there rather than under Article 3.

74.   As regards the credibility points, submissions were  to  be  found  on
      this in the skeleton  argument.   Mr  Southey's  submissions  in  this
      regard came close to requiring reasons for reasons.  The findings were
      sound. If the Tribunal disagreed then the  appeal  would  need  to  be
      remitted to the Adjudicator especially in 'H's appeal if it turned  on
      specific factual inconsistencies in his evidence.

Response by Mr Southey
75.   By way of reply, Mr Southey accepted  that  there  were  problems  for
      Lebanese in Lebanon with regard to such matters as  arbitrary  arrest,
      but  the  evidence  showed  that  it  was  significantly   worse   for
      Palestinians.   The  use  of  the  word   'arbitrary'   indicated   no
      justification rather than it being justified as  Ms  Laing  contended.
      As regards Ms Laing's criticisms of Mr Joffe, the  question  was  when
      the report was written. Concerning the claimed inability to move to  a
      different camp, Mr Joffe said it was relatively soon before his report
      was produced so it did not undermine his evidence.  Mr Joffe had  been
      quite careful to say that there could be a significant  risk  of  ill-
      treatment for anyone in  the  camps  but  left  the  question  to  the
      Tribunal.  It was quite proper to say that the conditions  were  'life
      threatening' as Dr George had, given the public  health  problems  and
      the reduced life expectancy.

76.   As regards the point that it was not racial discrimination,  this  was
      true of some treatment but it was mainly aimed  at  Palestinians.   Ms
      Laing then considered the justification, so it was contended  that  it
      was racial discrimination.    There  was  clearly  a  distinct  racial
      group. As regards whether it was not necessarily unlawful, the various
      Conventions cited came into  play  at  that  point.  It  was  relevant
      because the United Kingdom was determining asylum standards and had to
      assess the behaviour of other states against   accepted  human  rights
      standards. It was  not just a matter of  what  treaties  a  state  had
      signed, as it would be possible to avoid human rights responsibilities
      by not signing all            treaties if  that  were  the  case.  The
      Statelessness  Convention  was  therefore  relevant  as  evidence   of
      accepted standards of behaviour in the  international  community.   In
      any event, the other  international  material  limited  discrimination
      even if the Statelessness Convention fell away.

77.   As regards Ms Laing's point concerning personal impact, it  should  be
      questioned whether it was necessary to show that it was so intolerable
      that they felt  obliged  to  leave.   The  Tribunal  was  referred  to
      paragraph 12 in the Adjudicator's determination in  'H's  case,  which
      came very close to an acceptance of why he had left  Lebanon  and  the
      reference to intolerable conditions in the camps.   The  Tribunal  was
      referred again to Gashi, at page 110B.  If the objective case was made
      out then it would be odd for an individual not to  fear,  and  it  was
      necessary to look to  the  future.   Clear  evidence   of  a  systemic
      failure to provide for the human rights  of  a  group  was  enough  to
      enable  a person to fall within the group.

78.   As regards Limbuela, it was necessary to be cautious  with  regard  to
      the context but it was not a racial discrimination case.  It could  be
      seen that where it affected most of the key aspects of  everyday  life
      it was sufficient.  There was specific targeting of some  people  with
      regard to the facilities  offered  to  others.   El  Deaibes  did  not
      necessarily involve  the  same  volume  of  evidence  of  experts  and
      detailed submissions so it was of limited assistance only. As  regards
      the credibility point, the Tribunal was urged  if  it  did  decide  to
      remit, to remit to a different Adjudicator.

Response by Mr Cantor
79.   By way of reply, with regard to discrimination  and  non-citizens,  Mr
      Cantor reminded the Tribunal of the UN reports he  had  put  in  which
      took that into account but still said that the discrimination  against
      Palestinians was unlawful.

Findings of the Tribunal
80.   We consider first the objective evidence concerning the situation  for
      Palestinians living in the Lebanon and then we shall go on to consider
      in the light of that evidence whether there is a real  risk  that  the
      return of any, some or all of these appellants to  the  Lebanon  would
      breach their rights under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  Human  Rights
      Convention.


The general position for Palestinians in Lebanon
81.   In the UNRWA website, at page 91 of Mr Southey's  bundle,  the  number
      of Palestinian refugees registered with UNRWA in Lebanon is stated  as
      at 1 May 2003 as being 382,973.  The UNRWA was set up as a Special  UN
      Agency in 1949 with a remit to assist Palestinian refugees in the host
      countries,  which   of   course   includes   Lebanon.    The   UNRWA's
      responsibility to the refugees in the camps  is  described  by  it  as
      being  limited   to   providing   services   and   administering   its
      installations.  The UNRWA does not own, administer or police the camps
      as this is the responsibility of the host authorities.   The camps are
      on plots of land placed at the disposal of the UNRWA  by  the  various
      host  governments  for  accommodating  Palestinian  refugees  and  for
      setting up facilities to cater for their needs. We note from  page  93
      of Mr Southey's bundle that the  UNRWA  describe  themselves  as  also
      maintaining schools, health centres and distribution centres in  areas
      outside some camps where Palestinian refugees are  concentrated.   All
      of the agency's services are  available  to  both  camp  and  non-camp
      (Palestinian)  residents.   It  seems  that  about  one-third  of  the
      registered Palestinian refugees live in the various recognised refugee
      camps in the Lebanon and Jordan, Syria, the West  Bank  and  the  Gaza
      Strip, and the other two-thirds live in  and  around  the  cities  and
      towns of the host countries, often in the environs of official  camps.
      Paragraph 6.21 of the Home  Office  Country  Information  Bulletin  on
      Lebanon of February 2004, taking information from the Lebanon  Refugee
      Camp Profiles of November 2003 which seems to  be  a  UNRWA  document,
      states  that  the  UNRWA   runs   some   seventy-nine   schools   with
      approximately 42,259 enrolled pupils in the 2001-2002 academic year in
      Lebanon. It also  says  that  the  agency  also  operates  twenty-five
      primary health care facilities in Lebanon and  it  provides  emergency
      aid to families unable to support themselves.

82.   UNRWA describes the situation of Palestinian refugees  in  Lebanon  as
      involving them facing specific problems. They do not have  social  and
      civil rights and have a very limited access to the government's public
      health or educational facilities, and no access to  public  or  social
      services.  The majority rely entirely on UNRWA as the sole provider of
      education, health and relief and social services.  They are considered
      as foreigners and prohibited by law from working in  some  seventy-two
      trades and professions which has led to high  levels  of  unemployment
      among the refugee population.  It seems that popular committees in the
      camps representing the refugees regularly discuss these problems  with
      the Lebanese government or with the UNRWA officials.  As we say, UNRWA
      provides services and administers its own installations and has a camp
      services office in each camp  which  residents  can  visit  to  update
      records or raise issues about services with the camp services  officer
      who will refer petitions etc. to the UNRWA administration in  relevant
      areas. It is said that socio-economic  conditions  in  the  camps  are
      generally poor. There is a  high  population  density  and  there  are
      cramped living conditions and an inadequate  basic  infrastructure  as
      regards matters such as roads and sewers.   As we  have  noted  above,
      some two-thirds of registered refugees live in and around  cities  and
      towns.

83.   As Ms Laing pointed out  in  her  submissions  to  us,  the  objective
      evidence is generally  not  in  dispute.  There  were,  however,  some
      specific matters in relation to which she drew our  attention  and  in
      relation to which Mr Southey responded, and it is appropriate that  we
      dealt with those matters now. Some of these related to  matters  which
      Mr  Southey  argued  involved  significant  distinctions  between  how
      Palestinian refugees in Lebanon were treated in contrast  to  Lebanese
      citizens.  For example, he made the point  at  paragraph  2.2  of  his
      skeleton that Palestinian refugees are subject  to  arrest,  detention
      and harassment by state security forces.   Ms  Laing  made  the  point
      that, according to page 76 of Mr Southey's bundle, the security forces
      continued the practice of arbitrary detention and arrest generally  in
      Lebanon and therefore  there  was  no  real  distinction  between  the
      situation of the Palestinians and the Lebanese citizens.

84.   We see force in  Ms  Laing's  point  here.   Arbitrary  detention  and
      arrest appear to be a general problem and we  see  no  distinction  in
      effect between the situation of the refugees  and  nationals  in  that
      regard, on the basis of the evidence in the State  Department  Report.
      As regards restrictions on freedom of movement, Mr Southey  points  to
      paragraph 2.3 of his skeleton, where it would appear that at least the
      Syrian checkpoints apply equally to Lebanese citizens and Palestinians
      and the same level of risk of harassment and ill-treatment appears  to
      exist.  It may ultimately be a matter of no more than degree, although
      we do see force in Ms Laing's point that   the country  assessment  on
      which Mr Southey relied refers to freedom of movement for Palestinians
      as being restricted whereas he described it as  being  profoundly  and
      arbitrarily inhibited  in  his  skeleton.  The  Amnesty  International
      report at pages 104 to  106  in  the  bundle  describes  Palestinians'
      freedom of movement as being restricted.  The phrase  employed  by  Mr
      Southey appears to be taken from page 16 of  his  bundle  which  forms
      part of Mr Joffe's report on 'K'.  Given the contrast between that and
      the Amnesty and the Home Office evidence we consider that  Mr  Joffe's
      evidence in this regard is somewhat overstated. Again, though,  we  do
      not consider that a great deal turns on this.

85.   As regards Mr  Southey's  paragraph  2.7  concerning  the  ability  of
      Palestinians to live outside the camps, as Ms Laing pointed out, there
      is a lack of certainty concerning the numbers of  Palestinians  living
      inside and outside the camps.  The evidence  of  Dr  George  was  that
      there was a degree of blurring in this regard as to whether people are
      living inside or outside  the  camps,  given  the  apparent  extension
      unofficially of the boundaries beyond the camps.  We note the point at
      page 3 of the Amnesty Report headed 'Economic  and  Social  Rights  of
      Palestinian Refugees' handed in to us by Mr Southey on the day of  the
      hearing, which refers among other things to  a  number  of  unofficial
      Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon.  The conditions in  those  camps
      appear from the evidence of that report to be  particularly  bad,  and
      therefore it would appear that there is an ability to live outside the
      camps, but the quality of that life must of course be a factor  to  be
      borne in mind.

86.   As regards the experts, Mr Joffe, as we  have  noted  above,  accepted
      that he was wrong in his report to doubt the ability  of  Palestinians
      to move to different camps.   He seems first to have  stated  this  in
      his report on 'H' which is dated 1 June 2002.  At  paragraph  6.25  of
      the Country Assessment to which we have referred, it  is  stated  that
      Palestinian refugees in Lebanon are free to relocate from one camp  to
      another although their freedom of  movement  can  be  restricted.   Mr
      Southey argued that Mr Joffe said that the information was to be found
      in a Country Assessment  shortly before his report was produced so  it
      did not undermine his evidence.   However,  we  note  that  the  first
      source cited in the Country Information Bulletin for   this  statement
      is a  letter  from  the  British  Embassy,  Beirut  regarding  Lebanon
      Palestinian Refugees dated 23 August 2000.  We also note that the same
      statement was made in paragraph 6.26 of the Lebanon Country Assessment
      of October 2001.  It appears that   Mr  Joffe   was  unaware  of  this
      evidence.   We consider also that the fact that he has never visited a
      Palestinian camp in the Lebanon and Dr George  did  so  only  once  in
      1996, is a matter that is not without relevance to  the  authority  of
      their evidence. We find surprising Mr George's statement that  he  can
      better monitor the Middle East from  London  than  on  the  ground  as
      people speak more freely in London.  Although we accept that there may
      be a  diminished  degree  of  inhibition  in  such  circumstances,  we
      consider that a person would be far more likely to be able  to  get  a
      realistic feel for the conditions  in  the  camps  had  they  actually
      visited them at all, in Mr Joffe's case, and more recently  than  1996
      in Dr George's case. We also find ourselves in agreement with Ms Laing
      concerning the occasional sweeping generalisation to be found  in  the
      evidence of Mr Joffe and Dr George.  We do not consider  that  it  can
      properly be said, as was contended by Dr George,  that  conditions  in
      the camps are life threatening generally.  We return to this point  in
      some detail below, but our view is that although there is evidence  as
      we have described briefly above - for example from the UNRWA  at  page
      91 of Mr Southey's bundle - concerning the  serious  problems  in  the
      camps, to regard the circumstances in the camps as life-threatening is
      excessive and objectively unfounded, having regard to the  information
      in the international reports provided to us.
87.   Otherwise, and in general, the evidence of Mr Joffe and Dr George  was
      essentially consonant with the various country reports  of  specialist
      bodies, and, to return to Ms Laing's point which we indicated earlier,
      the core of the objective  evidence  is  essentially  agreed.  It  is,
      however, appropriate in our view that we make  the  comments  that  we
      have above about the points of difference.

88.   We turn to the specific conditions of Palestinians  within  the  camps
      and outside. As we have noted above, the majority of the  Palestinians
      rely entirely on UNRWA as the sole provider of education, health,  and
      relief and social  services.   The  USCR  report  referred  to  in  Dr
      George's report  confirms  that  Palestinians  are  denied  access  to
      Lebanese health care and other social services, and most are unable to
      attend Lebanese schools  and  universities.   It  seems  that  primary
      education is regarded as satisfactory  but  less  so  as  regards  the
      secondary level. We note in passing, however, from 'H's statement that
      he went to primary school from the age of six to twelve  and  then  to
      the camp secondary school from the age of twelve to fifteen, and  then
      went on to a training college where he studied car mechanics  for  two
      years.  'K' had his school education in Kuwait but enrolled on  a  two
      year course in business administration at the same training centre  as
      did 'H'. 'E' appears not to have given any details of any education or
      training that he had.  Nevertheless the experiences of 'K' and 'H' are
      not without relevance with regard to the general  issue  of  education
      provision. Although, as Mr Southey  pointed  out,  the  issue  is  not
      central before us, given the ages of the appellants, it is relevant to
      the impact of discrimination upon the community generally, a matter to
      which we shall return below.

89.   The evidence is clear that Palestinians have only a limited access  to
      the government's public health service. Essentially, they are  reliant
      upon  UNRWA  as  the  provider  of  health  services  in  the  absence
      (generally) of ability to  pay  for  private  health  care  and  their
      exclusion  from  the  facilities  of  the  Lebanon  state.  Dr  George
      described the facilities provided by UNRWA as being very basic,  apart
      from perinatal facilities.  He contrasted  them  with  the  facilities
      provided by the  state  which  were  far  from  being  up  to  western
      standards  but  were  clearly  better.  It  is  said  in  the  Amnesty
      International  Report, 'Economic and  Social  Rights  for  Palestinian
      Refugees', to which we have referred above, that there  appeared,  due
      to budget limitations, to be a reduction in the provision  of  medical
      services and a denial of specialist medical services for the over-60s.
       We remind ourselves of the point to which we have referred above that
      the UNRWA operates twenty-five primary health care facilities and also
      provides emergency aid to families unable to support  themselves.   We
      note from the US Committee for Refugees Report of 1999 in Mr Southey's
      bundle, that the UNRWA were said, at least at that time,  to  contract
      for thirteen Lebanese general, mental and  tuberculosis  hospitals  to
      provide hospital care. It is said that the  UNRWA  cannot  respond  to
      many refugee health care needs due to a  growing  refugee  population,
      rising health care costs and insufficient funding.   It is  said  also
      that  the  Palestinian  Red  Crescent  Society  provides  health  care
      services to Palestinians refugees but again it is described as acutely
      underfunded.

90.   It is clear that construction in the refugee camps is prohibited.   As
      a consequence it is said that most Palestinians  live  in  poverty  in
      breeze block shelters.

91.   The UNRWA website states that all the camps  suffer  from  a  lack  of
      proper infrastructure  and  overcrowding,  poverty  and  unemployment.
      Living  conditions  are  cramped   and   specific   aspects   of   the
      infrastructure  such  as  road  and  sewers  are  described  as  being
      inadequate.  The Amnesty International  team which visited four  camps
      between 27 May and 14 June 2003 noted that the sewage systems in  most
      of the camps appeared to be damaged and  posed  health  risks  to  the
      community and that living conditions were aggravated  by  crowding  in
      the camps.

92.   The previous policy of the  government  of  denying  work  permits  to
      Palestinians was brought to an end in 1991.   In practice, however, it
      seems that few Palestinians receive work permits and these are  mainly
      for unskilled occupations. As we have noted  above,  Palestinians  are
      banned from working in seventy-two skilled professions, and  obtaining
      work is an ongoing problem.   It  seems  that  foreigners  (i.e.  non-
      Lebanese nationals) may be able to work within the list of trades  and
      vocations restricted ostensibly to Lebanese nationals,  based  on  the
      exercise  of  discretion  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  founded   on
      requirements of 'public interest' and 'reciprocity of treatment'.  The
      latter is understood, according to the  Amnesty document at page 6, to
      refer to reciprocal treatment  granted  to  Lebanese  nationals  by  a
      recognised state. This clearly is not open to Palestinians since  they
      are stateless.   It is however unclear from the evidence  whether  the
      Syrians and other non-Lebanese who  work  in  significant  numbers  in
      Lebanon are able to fulfil this requirement, as we have not been  told
      that there are reciprocal arrangements in place in Syria or the  other
      countries available to Lebanese nationals. This same point can be made
      with regard to rights to social security.  Again, Palestinians  cannot
      qualify, given their inability to provide  reciprocity  of  treatment,
      but again we are unclear as to the situation with regard to  nationals
      of other states working in Lebanon. As regards the purchase  of  land,
      as we have noted above, it is clear that Palestinians do  not  have  a
      right to do so in Lebanon or  indeed  to  inherit  land.  It  appears,
      however, that all nationals  of  recognised  states  can   acquire  or
      inherit property in Lebanon,  according  to  page  5  of  the  Amnesty
      document, and there is clear discrimination in that regard. It is said
      in the State Department report at page 86 of Mr Southey's bundle  that
      the Lebanese Parliament has justified this law on the grounds that  it
      is protecting the rights of Palestinian  refugees  to  return  to  the
      homes from which they fled after the creation of the State  of  Israel
      in 1948.  It is also said in this regard that other foreigners may own
      a limited size plot of land but only after obtaining the  approval  of
      five different district officers, and that  the  law  applies  to  all
      foreigners but it is applied  in  a  manner   disadvantageous  to  the
      25,000 Kurds in the country.

The general position for Palestinians in Lebanon under the RC and ECHR
93.   We turn to the legal arguments. In essence it is argued on  behalf  of
      the appellants in these three cases that  the  conditions  endured  by
      Palestinians in the Lebanon, to which these three appellants would  be
      exposed on return, are such by their nature  and  in  particular  with
      regard to their discriminatory nature to give rise to a real  risk  of
      persecution or breach of their human rights and specifically  in  this
      regard Article 3 is pleaded. At paragraph 16 of Mr Southey's  skeleton
      it is  contended  that  the  discrimination  against  Palestinians  in
      Lebanon is sufficiently serious as to entitle them to  refugee  status
      and/or protection under the Human Rights Convention.

94.   The first point made is that the  discrimination in  part  relates  to
      matters coming within the second category of rights as  identified  by
      Professor Hathaway in his book 'The  Law  of  Refugee  Status',  which
      includes  the  right  to  freedom  from  arbitrary  arrest  and  equal
      protection for all.  In this regard we do not  consider,  as  we  have
      stated above, that the evidence shows that Palestinians in  particular
      are exposed to risk of arbitrary arrest. Certainly that is not  likely
      to happen within the camps, given the abdication of any responsibility
      for protection  within  those  camps  on  the  part  of  the  Lebanese
      authorities.   Outside  the  camps  it  appears  that  a   Palestinian
      proposing to move around Lebanon would be at no greater  risk  than  a
      Lebanese citizen from Syrian checkpoints, although it appears that  he
      might be at greater risk at a Lebanese checkpoint.  In this regard  we
      see force in Ms Laing's point that given the  historical problems,  in
      particular with the camps wars involving armed militia, and the  civil
      war, that such detention and  questioning  of  Palestinians  as  takes
      place  at  Lebanese  checkpoints   has   a   significant   degree   of
      justification to it in light of the understandable concerns  that  the
      authorities  might  have.  As  regards  the  point  concerning   equal
      protection for all, it is the case, as Mr Southey contends,  that  the
      Lebanese authorities do not attempt to assert their authority  in  the
      camps, and it  is  the  case  that  violence  is  a  problem  of  some
      significance in the camps.  Ms Laing made the point that the situation
      is not a normal situation given the extent to which  there  are  armed
      factions to be found on Lebanese territory, but that does not  in  our
      view amount to the existence of a  public  emergency  threatening  the
      life of a nation whose existence has been officially proclaimed, which
      is the only basis upon which it is said that  second  category  rights
      can be denied.

95.   The next point made by Mr Southey in his skeleton  is  that  there  is
      significant  discrimination  in  relation  to  matters  coming  within
      Professor Hathaway's third category, this being  rights  contained  in
      the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  and  in  the  International
      Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights,  and  including  such
      matters  as  the  right  to  employment,  housing  and  medical  care.
      Professor Hathaway  concluded  that  discriminatory  denial  of  these
      rights or denial of these rights, despite fiscal ability  to  respond,
      may amount to persecution. It is also said to be the case  that denial
      of the right to employment, housing and medical care can in an extreme
      case, amount to  cruel  and  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  which
      crosses the threshold of persecution.  The limitations on relief under
      the  Refugee  Convention,  and  by  analogy  under  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, are  clearly  expounded  in   Professor  Hathaway's  book,
      including the limitations  on  education  provision  and  health  care
      before the relevant Conventions are engaged at all,  and  the   severe
      limitations on the right  to  work  including  the  provision  of  the
      support available in the present case  from UNRWA.

96.   In this regard it is clear that it can in practice  be  difficult  for
      Palestinians to live outside the camps, which in effect requires  them
      for the most part to live in the very substandard accommodation in the
      camps, and restrictions on employment deny them the funds necessary to
      purchase services on  a private basis.  The denial of these rights is,
      Mr Southey contended, not based  on  any  fiscal  considerations,  but
      rather on the basis as we have described above, of a political reason,
      this being the desire to protect the rights of Palestinians to  return
      to their homeland.  He further makes the point that the absence of any
       fiscal justification can be seen from the fact that foreign nationals
      are at least in some circumstances, given greater rights.

97.   In this regard Ms Laing argued that differential treatment as  between
      nationals and non-nationals in relation to access to economic,  social
      and cultural rights in  Professor  Hathaway's  third  category  cannot
      amount  to  discrimination  in   the  sense  necessary  to   establish
      persecution, and also contends that the same principle applies to  the
      treatment of stateless persons.   She argued that an individual cannot
      establish by such generalised evidence of differential treatment  that
      he is at risk of persecution in his country of habitual residence. Her
      alternative argument was  that  discriminatory  denial  of  access  to
      benefits can only amount to persecution if the measures  involved  are
      of a substantially prejudicial nature and affect a significant part of
      the individual's existence such as to make his life  intolerable  were
      he to return and he must be able  to  point  to  something  which  has
      exceptional impact on him personally.

98.   In this regard Ms Laing attached some  significance  to  the  personal
      histories of the appellants, and in particular those of 'K'  and  'H'.
      Indeed, she argued that none of the three  claimed  to  have  suffered
      specifically in any particular way from the general  conditions  about
      which  complaint  is  made.  We  have  already  noted  their  personal
      histories concerning such matters as education and training insofar as
      there was evidence in that regard. Whilst noting the point made by  Dr
      George that there is (to a degree) an absence of detailed  information
      in their statements about those issues, equally it can  be  said  that
      they have had the opportunity to state what it was that caused them to
      fear return to Lebanon and in none of the three cases did they  advert
      to the general conditions  for  Palestinians  in  Lebanon  as  factors
      relevant to their claims.  We are conscious that it was  said  by  the
      Tribunal in Gashi  that  if  an  Adjudicator  accepts  that  there  is
      objective fear, to hold nonetheless that fear (in  any  sense  of  the
      word) is absent is hard to contemplate.   That, however, is a view  in
      which the factual histories of the particular claimants  can  properly
      be taken to inform the general position. Certainly in the case of 'H',
      he received both an education and training in the Lebanon, and in  the
      case of 'K',  who  received  his  education  in  Kuwait,  he  received
      subsequent training in the Lebanon. In both of their cases, therefore,
      it must be of some significance to their futures in  Lebanon  that  at
      least they have experienced a degree of training which  should  assist
      their employment prospects.  In  any  case,  therefore,  the  specific
      history of the particular claimant  must  be  taken  into  account  in
      assessing the general situation and the degree of likelihood that what
      he or she will experience on return to Lebanon would be persecutory or
      in breach of his or her human rights.

99.   Ms Laing went on to argue that  differential  treatment  of  nationals
      and non-nationals in  relation  to  access  to  economic,  social  and
      cultural benefits does not amount to persecution, firstly on the basis
      that as a matter of international law it is for the  host  country  to
      regulate  access  and  residence  of  aliens,  including   rights   to
      employment, education, housing  and  welfare,  and  that  restrictions
      placed on aliens in exercise of this power  cannot  be  classified  as
      discrimination  because  the  comparators  are  not  in  an  analogous
      position;  secondly, that access to social and  cultural  benefits  is
      dependent on the available resources and the state  must  be  free  to
      provide first for its own citizens before aliens and it  is  important
      to bear in mind the low standard of living in  Lebanon;  and  thirdly,
      that this principle is recognised in international and  domestic  law.
      Mr Southey referred us to the  Statelessness  Convention  which  among
      other things includes a right to employment, a  right  to  housing,  a
      right to public relief and assistance, a right to  enter  the  liberal
      professions and a right to freedom of movement.   Such rights  as  the
      right to employment and the right to housing  prohibit  discrimination
      insofar as they require the stateless to be treated in the same manner
      as aliens and the right to public relief requires the stateless to  be
      treated in the same manner as nationals.   Article  32  of  the   same
      Convention requires contracting states (Lebanon is not  a  contracting
      state)  as  far  as  possible  to  facilitate  the  assimilation   and
      naturalisation of stateless persons. The point  is  also  made  by  Mr
      Southey that Article 7 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
      provides among other things that the child has a right  to  acquire  a
      nationality, and it is contended that the appellants should have  been
      granted Lebanese nationality.

100.  In response to these arguments Ms  Laing  pointed  to  the  particular
      circumstances of Lebanon. Lebanon accepted a large number of stateless
      people in 1948 and 1949,  and  this  assimilation  has  proved  to  be
      extremely difficult,  particularly  bearing  in  mind  the  precarious
      Lebanese economic situation and the very delicate political balance, a
      matter which can be seen in 'H's case with  regard  to  the  political
      organisation  of  Lebanon.  Ms  Laing  argued  that  suddenly   giving
      citizenship  to  the  Palestinians  who  comprise  some  10%  of   the
      population would have a significant effect on the  delicate  political
      balance. Lebanon has accepted the presence  of  the  refugees  on  the
      basis of the  support  that  would  be  provided  and  the  facilities
      provided by UNRWA who in effect take care  of  their  material  needs.
      She argued that it was relevant to consider the  case  of  Karakurt  v
      Austria,  a  decision  of  the  Human   Rights   Committee,   enabling
      justification on  reasonable  and  objective  grounds  for   Lebanon's
      treatment of Palestinians. Mr Southey in  his  skeleton  contended  at
      paragraphs 22.1 to 22.4 that there  is  no  reasonable  and  objective
      justification for the discrimination on the basis firstly  that  other
      foreign nationals  are  not  discriminated  against  by  the  Lebanese
      authorities in the same manner as  Palestinians,  secondly,  that  the
      purported justification is a concern that Palestinians should be  able
      to return to their home areas and there is no reason why the  Lebanese
      state should decide whether assimilation would harm  the  prospect  of
      Palestinians who wish to return; thirdly, that the  Palestinians  have
      been  in Lebanon for over fifty years and it is  disproportionate  now
      to deny them rights on the basis that they  might  return;   fourthly,
      that the genuine justification is a concern  regarding  the  religious
      mix in Lebanon.

101.  As regards these points, as we have noted above, although there is  an
      extent to which under Lebanese law other  foreign  nationals  are  not
      discriminated  against  to  the  same  extent  in   Lebanon   as   the
      Palestinians are, there is a lack of evidence in regard to  particular
      matters as to whether or not they are in fact in  the  same  position,
      especially as  regards  employment  and  access  to  social  services.
      Moreover, other foreign nationals in Lebanon will have been  regularly
      admitted under Lebanese immigration laws which may  well  give  status
      restricted  either in point of time or of the rights  which  they  may
      pursue whilst lawfully  there.  That  is  a  situation  which  is  not
      apparently comparable  to  that  of  Palestinian  refugees  and  their
      descendants, whose needs are  to  be  provided  for  primarily  by  an
      international agency, UNRWA. If Mr  Southey  is  relying  on  what  he
      considers to be the genuine justification rather  than  the  purported
      justification, then we find ourselves in agreement with Ms Laing that,
      bearing in  mind  the  delicate  political  balance  in  Lebanon,  the
      Lebanese authorities are entitled to take  account  of  the  potential
      impact upon their society of a tenth of the population suddenly  being
      granted  citizenship  and   thereby   enfranchised.    The   purported
      justification is not in any event in our  view  an  illegitimate  one.
      The period of time factor is also in  our  view,  though  not  without
      relevance, in no sense determinative.  All the  indications  are  that
      the Palestinians would prefer on the whole to return to their homeland
      rather than continue the existence that they have in the camps in  the
      various countries in which they find themselves, and in our view it is
      a factor that the Lebanese state is entitled to take into account.  We
      remind ourselves that this arises in the context of Article 26 of  the
      International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights upon  which  both
      Mr Southey and Mr Cantor relied, but we  consider  that  it  has  some
      relevance to the other provisions concerning discrimination  to  which
      we turn.

102.  Article 2(3) of the International Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and
      Cultural Rights,  which is again cited by Mr Cantor  and  Mr  Southey,
      states as follows:

             'Developing countries with due  regard  to  human  rights  and
             their national economy, may  determine  to  what  extent  they
             would guarantee the economic rights recognised in the  present
             Covenant to non-nationals.'

103.  Ms Laing also relied on this provision in  arguing  that  differential
      treatment of nationals and non-nationals  in  relation  to  access  to
      economic, social and cultural benefits not amounting to persecution is
      recognised in international and domestic law.  Mr  Southey  emphasised
      the clause 'with due  regard  to  human  rights'  as  indicating  that
      discrimination is not lawful if it is outlawed by a Convention such as
      the Statelessness Convention. Mr Cantor makes the point  that,  as  is
      said by the UN Special Rapporteur at paragraph 19 of  the  UN  report,
      'Prevention of Discrimination - the rights of non-citizens' at page  8
      of his skeleton argument, that Article 2(3) must be narrowly construed
      and may be relied upon only by  developing  countries  and  only  with
      respect to economic rights.

104.  We are not sure to what extent a report of the UN  Special  Rapporteur
       can be said to qualify or give binding guidance on the meaning  of  a
      provision in an international agreement, and also we  have  not  heard
      argument on whether Lebanon can be described  as  being  a  developing
      country, although we consider that it  can  probably  properly  be  so
      described.  If that is right, then even with the Special  Rapporteur's
      restriction, the construction  would  cover  economic  rights  if  not
      social and cultural rights,  and  we  do  not  consider  that  it  can
      properly be said that the obligation to pay due regard to human rights
      in the context of Article 2(3) precludes any discrimination  which  is
      outlawed by a Convention such as the Statelessness Convention.      We
      note the point made by Ms Laing at paragraph 9 of  her  skeleton  that
      the Statelessness Convention provides that contracting parties  should
      accord a stateless person treatment as favourable as possible  and  in
      any event not less favourable than that accorded to  aliens  generally
      in the same circumstances, for example, in relation  to  wage  earning
      employment, self-employment and housing, and that in relation to  free
      movement, stateless  persons  are  also  subject  to  the  regulations
      applicable to  aliens generally. There is in our  view  force  in  the
      submission at paragraph 10 of  her  skeleton  that  the  treatment  of
      aliens or stateless persons different from and  less  favourable  than
      that accorded by the state to its own citizens,  does  not  of  itself
      amount to persecution, and  in  this  context  we  bear  in  mind  the
      distinctions that have been pointed out to us between the treatment of
      Palestinians in Lebanon on the one hand and citizens of  other  states
      in Lebanon on the other hand.

105.  We return to the point made by  Ms  Laing  concerning  the  particular
      context in which these appeals arise.  It  is  not  a  straightforward
      issue of a state carrying  out  a  range  of  discriminatory  measures
      against stateless persons and others within its  jurisdiction.  It  is
      clear from the UNRWA mandate that there are specific matters which are
      within the remit of UNRWA and other matters which are within the remit
      of the state of Lebanon.  UNRWA on its own account is under-funded and
      it is clearly labouring to do the best it can under  very  unpromising
      conditions.  That having been said, undoubtedly there are  aspects  of
      discrimination against Palestinians in Lebanon for which the  Lebanese
      state can be said to be accountable.  Various justifications are given
      for this including economic circumstances, fear of armed militias  and
      reserving the right of the Palestinians without restriction ultimately
      to return to their own homelands.

106.  Having considered these matters as a whole, as we have  done  in  some
      detail above, we have concluded that to the extent  that  there  is  a
      discriminatory denial of third category  rights  in  Lebanon  for  the
      Palestinians, this does not amount to persecution  under  the  Refugee
      Convention or breach of protected human rights under Article 3 of  the
      ECHR.  We  do  not  consider  that  it  has  been   shown   that   the
      discrimination is of such a degree that it can properly  be  described
      as degrading as set out in Ireland v United Kingdom L  [1978]  2  EHRR
      25. On this point we address  particularly  the  matters  set  out  at
      paragraph 16.5 of Mr Southey's skeleton. The contentions that he makes
      there and made before  us  in  submissions  concerning  the  perceived
      hopelessness of the situation of those in the  camps  and  bearing  in
      mind the points made in the  East African Asians case with  regard  to
      the nature of discrimination are not such that it can properly be said
      to breach Article 3.

107.  In many ways what we have to say about Article 3 follows from what  we
      have concluded concerning the Refugee Convention claim in  this  case.
      As Ms Laing argued in her skeleton, there  are  two  strands  to  this
      argument, one based on living conditions in the camp,  and  the  other
      on the discrimination practised by the Lebanese authorities.  We  have
      derived some assistance from Q and T, the decisions referred to in the
      skeleton, and also to a limited extent from Tesema.   We bear in  mind
      the limitations of those  cases  being  concerned  as  they  are  with
      matters essentially relating to the situation in the  United  Kingdom.
      We consider, however, that there is relevance in Ms Laing's summary at
      paragraph 19 of the skeleton, that though poor, the  appellants  would
      not be destitute in Lebanon. They would have somewhere to live, albeit
      not in ideal conditions, and they would have access to, albeit  fairly
      basic, medical facilities and in the case in particular of 'H', it  is
      likely that he would find work.  The threshold in Article 3 is a  high
      one, as the Court of Appeal has recently reminded us in N [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 1369.  We agree with Ms Laing that the East  African  Asians  case
      can properly be distinguished from this case,  in  particular  in  the
      absence of the three factors set out at paragraph 24 of her  skeleton,
      discrimination on grounds  of  race  between  nationals  of  the  same
      country, any element  of  subverted  legitimate  expectation  and  the
      degree of physical difficulty and  legal  impossibility  attaching  to
      continued residence in Palestine which the  applicants  in  that  case
      experienced in East Africa. Moreover, the international  covenants  to
      which we have referred  contain, in contrast to the   absolute  nature
      of Article 3 of the ECHR, clear derogations and areas of appreciation.
       They are in many instances  exhortatory and aspirant of an ideal, for
      that reason necessarily requiring modification in its application,  as
      recognised by the covenants. Before any breach of such covenants could
      properly be regarded as a breach of the  provisions  of  the  European
      Convention which bind the UK, there would require to be such  flagrant
      denials as would result in the high threshold  imposed  by  Article  3
      being breached.  In the circumstances, therefore, we consider that the
      Article 3 threshold would not be crossed in any of these cases on  the
      basis of general attitudes in Lebanon towards Palestinians.


Second Appellant - Credibility
108.  The Adjudicator made an adverse credibility  finding  in  'H's  appeal
      and the grounds of appeal at paragraphs 3.1 to 3.4 deal with that. The
      grounds asserted that the  Adjudicator  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
      finding 'H' was not a credible witness.  The  representatives  in  'H'
      appeal both agreed that was the  case  and  accordingly  there  is  no
      alternative but to remit that appeal for a  fresh  hearing  before  an
      Adjudicator other than Mr D.M. Wynn-Simpson. The new Adjudicator  will
      of course have the benefit of this decision in relation to  issues  of
      discrimination in the Palestinian camps generally.

DECISIONS

      First Appellant
      The appeal is dismissed

      Second Appellant
      The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  for  a  fresh
      hearing before an Adjudicator other than Mr D.M. Wynn-Simpson.

      Third Appellant
      The appeal is dismissed





                                 D.K. ALLEN
                               VICE PRESIDENT

                           -----------------------
      1


