
MG (Hearing _ Discretion) Turkey, South Africa & Colombia [2004] UKIAT
00028
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 13th January 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            18 February 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                 Mr A Jordan
                                Mr J Perkins

Between:

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BOGATA
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant in all  these  three  appeals  is  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer.  The Claimants are as  follows.   The  first  Claimant  is  a
     citizen of  Turkey.   She  appealed  to  an  Adjudicator  against  the
     decision of the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul, refusing
     her entry clearance as an au pair.  The date of the decision was  23rd
     May 2000.  The second Claimant is a  citizen  of  South  Africa.   She
     appeals against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria,
     refusing her entry clearance as a working holidaymaker.  The  date  of
     that decision was 5th November 2001.  The third Claimant is a  citizen
     of Colombia.  She appeals against the decision of the Entry  Clearance
     Officer, Bogota, refusing her entry clearance as a student.  The  date
     of that decision was 17th January 2001.

  2. In each case, after the appeal to the Adjudicator was  registered,  it
     was noted that the Claimant was outside the United Kingdom, as  indeed
     in each case the Claimant had to be in order to maintain an appeal  of
     this nature, and had not nominated a representative within the  United
     Kingdom.  The Appellate Authority thereupon sent a notice in form  ADJ
     11  to  the  Claimant   and   to   the   Entry   Clearance   Officer's
     representative, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer's  Unit,  in  the
     following form:

           "To the Appellant
           No representative in the United Kingdom has been nominated.
           The appeal may be determined by an Adjudicator on the  basis  of
           these documents, together with any further  written  submissions
           that you may wish to make.
           Any written submissions must be received in this  office  by  [a
           date which is specified, which is 12 weeks after the date of the
           notice].
           Any written submissions or further documents in a language other
           than  English  must  be  accompanied   by   a   certified   full
           translation.
           A copy of the Adjudicator's written determination will  be  sent
           to you in due course."


      In each of these three cases there was no response to that notice.


  3. The three appeals then came before the same  Adjudicator,  Mr  D  R  M
     Harmston, at Newport on 9th January 2003.  His determination indicates
     that it followed a hearing of the appeal but we apprehend that that is
     an error and that all these three appeals were  determined  without  a
     hearing.  He allowed all the appeals.

  4. The grounds of appeal in each case are the same.  They are as follows:

           "1.   The Adjudicator has erred in hearing  the  appeal  on  9th
                 January 2003 in the absence of a Presenting Officer.


           2.    The Appellate Authority had  failed  to  comply  with  the
                 Immigration Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000 in that  (a)  it
                 did not give the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                 the opportunity to indicate whether or not  a  hearing  was
                 requested (Rule 43);  and/or (b)  it  did  not  notify  the
                 Secretary of State for the Home  Department  of  the  date,
                 time and place of the hearing (Rule 13)."

  5. Before us today  there  has  again  been  no  representative  for  the
     Claimants.  Mr Blundell has appeared for the Entry Clearance Officers.
      As we indicated to Mr Blundell at the beginning of the hearing before
     us, the position in these appeals is that by a long-standing procedure
     dating back, in our knowledge, to Rule  12(1)(c)  of  the  Immigration
     Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1984, where  an  Appellant  is  outside  the
     United Kingdom and no person is  authorised  to  represent  him  at  a
     hearing, a notice in the form currently represented by ADJ 11 is  sent
     to both parties  in  order  to  give  the  Claimant  or  Appellant  an
     opportunity to present any  further  material  before  the  appeal  is
     determined, probably on the papers, by an Adjudicator.

  6. Rule 43, which is the successor of  Rule  12,  provides  a  number  of
     opportunities for an appeal to be determined without a  hearing.   One
     of them is:

           "(a)  The Appellate Authority has decided,  after  giving  every
                 other   party   an   opportunity   of   replying   to   any
                 representations submitted in writing by or on behalf of the
                 Appellant, to allow the appeal."

      That is the Rule which the Tribunal has used for a very long time what
      are sometimes called 'paper remittals'.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are
      submitted to the other party and if there is no  further  response  to
      them the appeal is allowed by way of remittal.  Another is:


           "(b)  The Appellate Authority is satisfied that  the  Appellant,
                 except where the Appellant is the Secretary of State or  an
                 officer, is outside  the  United  Kingdom  or  that  it  is
                 impractical to give notice of the  hearing  and  in  either
                 case that no person is authorised to  represent  him  at  a
                 hearing."


      A further possibility which we mention for the  sake  of  completeness
           is:


           "(e)  No party has requested a hearing."


  7. In each of these circumstances, and in others set out in Rule 43,  the
     provision is that an appeal may be determined without a  hearing.   It
     is clear that nothing is to be treated as routine.  An Adjudicator has
     power to determine an appeal without a hearing if these  circumstances
     apply.  There is no obligation:  and in deciding whether to  determine
     an appeal without a hearing he must exercise his judicial discretion.

  8. It thus follows that, for example, if further submissions were made by
     the Claimants in response to the notice  ADJ  11,  it  would  be  very
     unusual for an  Adjudicator  to  consider  it  proper  to  proceed  to
     determine the appeal forthwith without a hearing  without  giving  the
     other party, the Entry Clearance Officer in most cases, an opportunity
     to respond to those further submissions.   There  may  be  many  other
     reasons why an appeal should be or should not be determined without  a
     hearing where the provisions of the Rule  apply.   The  determinations
     before us are undoubtedly defective in that they fail to indicate that
     the Adjudicator was aware that he had a discretion,  or  that  he  had
     decided to exercise the discretion  in  the  sense  of  proceeding  to
     determine the appeals without a hearing.

  9. We have, however, considered the substance of  these  appeals  and  we
     note that, as we have already indicated, there were  no  responses  to
     the notices ADJ 11 in these  cases;   and  that,  although  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer had copies of those notices, he did  not  request  a
     hearing in any of the cases.  We therefore  take  the  view  that  the
     defect of the determinations which we have identified was not vicious.
      We should, however, like to make it clear that an Adjudicator who has
     a discretion to exercise should always indicate that he is aware  that
     he has a discretion.  He will usually do this  by  indicating  clearly
     both his decision on the  matter  in  question  and  the  reasons  for
     exercising his discretion in that way.

 10. Mr Blundell's submission was broadly to  the  effect  that  the  Entry
     Clearance  Officer  had,  in  these  cases,  been  prejudiced  by  the
     Adjudicator  determining  and  indeed  allowing  the  appeals  without
     further input from the Entry Clearance Officer.  In  our  view,  those
     submissions are without substance.  In the  procedure  which  we  have
     indicated, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  at  every  appropriate
     juncture in these cases the opportunity to make  whatever  submissions
     he chose.  Also, as we have  indicated,  if  there  had  been  further
     material coming from any of the Claimants, it would  have  been  right
     for the Adjudicator to think very hard before proceeding to  determine
     the appeals without a hearing and without giving the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer an opportunity  to  see  the  material  which  might  cause  a
     decision to be made against him.

 11. These appeals, as we have indicated, were determined at  a  time  when
     the 2000 Procedure Rules were in force.  Rule  43  is  no  more.   Its
     replacement is in Rule  45  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
     (Procedure) Rules 2003. That Rule is in the following terms:

           "45 (1)     An Adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  may,  subject  to
                 paragraphs (2) and (3) of this rule,  determine  an  appeal
                 without a hearing if -
                 (a)   all the parties to the appeal consent;
                 (b)   the party appealing against a relevant  decision  is
                       outside the United Kingdom or it is impracticable  to
                       give him notice of a hearing and, in either case,  he
                       is unrepresented;
                 (c)   a party has failed to comply  with  a  provision  of
                       these  rules  or  a  direction   of   the   Appellate
                       Authority,  and  the  Adjudicator  or   Tribunal   is
                       satisfied that in all  the  circumstances,  including
                       the extent of the failure and any reasons for it,  it
                       is appropriate to  determine  the  appeal  without  a
                       hearing;  or
                 (d)   the Adjudicator or  Tribunal  is  satisfied,  having
                       regard to the material  before  him  or  it  and  the
                       nature of the issues raised, that the appeal  can  be
                       justly determined without a hearing.
           (2)   Where paragraph (1)(c) applies and the  Appellant  is  the
                 party in default, the Adjudicator or Tribunal  may  dismiss
                 the appeal without substantive consideration, if  satisfied
                 that it is appropriate to do so.
           (3)    Where  paragraph  (1)(d)  applies,  the  Adjudicator   or
                 Tribunal must not determine the appeal  without  a  hearing
                 without first giving the  parties  notice  of  his  or  its
                 intention to do so, and  an  opportunity  to  make  written
                 representations as to whether there should be a hearing."


 12. The express successors to the parts of Rule 43 of the 2000 Rules which
     we cited above are sub-rules 1(a) and (b) of Rule 45.   We  note  that
     the decision to determine  an  appeal  without  a  hearing  remains  a
     discretionary decision for the Adjudicator.  It  is  no  doubt  to  be
     taken that if  there  is  an  indication  that  an  appeal  is  to  be
     determined without a hearing and there  is  no  expression  by  either
     party to the contrary, an Adjudicator may find that all the parties to
     the appeal consent to determination without a hearing.  The  provision
     for determination without a hearing if the Claimant is abroad  remains
     in the new Rule.  But, in any event, it continues to be the case  that
     an Adjudicator needs to decide in each individual case whether  it  is
     appropriate to determine the appeal without a hearing and  (under  the
     new Rule as under the old) he should indicate that he  has  made  that
     decision within his discretion and give his reasons for doing so.

 13. For the reasons we have given, the procedure adopted by the  Appellate
     Authority in  the  present  cases  was  within  the  Procedure  Rules.
     Although the Adjudicator failed to indicate the way in  which  he  was
     exercising his discretion and the reasons for it, we have  also  found
     that his procedure was sufficient to meet  the  circumstances  of  the
     present cases.  For those reasons, these appeals are dismissed and the
     Adjudicator's determination in all three cases must stand.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
