
H-NMB-V1
|                                                                   |
|JG (Al - Hagh - Fresh evidence at hearing) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00317 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing: 9 September 2004                                  |
|Date Signed:     27 September 2004                                 |
|Date Determination Notified:                                       |
|Given orally in court                                              |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                       |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                      |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |

For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed of Counsel, instructed by Southerns,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer


     1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  23  August  1965  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 July 2000 and claimed asylum on
        the  same  date.   He  submitted  a  Self  Evidence  Form  and  was
        subsequently interviewed on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  who
        refused his application for the reasons contained in a letter dated
        22 July 2003.  On 28  July  2003  the  Secretary  of  State  issued
        directions for his removal from the United Kingdom to  Iran  as  an
        illegal entrant  after  refusal  of  his  asylum  application.   He
        appealed against that decision on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
        grounds and his appeal was heard on 14  October  2003  by  Mr  G  A
        Irvine, an Adjudicator.


     2. Save in one respect, the Adjudicator found that the  Appellant  was
        credible in his account.  He summarised his account at paragraph 11
        of his Determination in the following terms:

      "(i)  In 1999 he was expelled from university when it  was  discovered
      that he used to follow the Al-Hagh religion and had  been  accused  of
      insulting the Islamic religion  during  a  discussion  at  university.
      After he was expelled the security forces raided his house in Iran  to
      arrest him but he was not there.  When he found out about this he went
      into hiding with a  nomadic  tribe  and  heard  that  his  father  was
      arrested and detained for two days.  He feared for his life and on  30
      June 2000 he left Iran.

      (ii)  There is a big difference between the religion  of  Al-Hagh  and
      Islam.  The holy book of Al-Hagh is called the  Pardivar  or  Saranjam
      and they believe in the five prophets and also believe that everything
      evolves from the soul and the soul will reappear  again  after  death.
      They believe that God is a creator of everything.


      (iii) The followers of Al-Hagh  are  a  minority  in  Iran  since  the
      majority of people are Muslims who follow  Islam.   Some  people  call
      followers of the Al-Hagh, Ali-Allahi and therefore  followers  of  the
      religion may be referred to as being part of either religion.  At  the
      age of 16 each individual has to confirm that they believe in Al-Hagh.
       If they do not want to be part of  the  religion  they  are  free  to
      practise any religion.  Some believers mark Friday  night  as  a  holy
      night but others mark  Saturday  night  as  a  holy  night.   Numerous
      obstacles have arisen as a result of their religious beliefs and  when
      applying  for  positions  within  the  government  in  Iran   in   the
      application form they would have to state their religion and to  avoid
      conflict and problems they would lie and state that they were  Muslims
      in order to obtain a job.  If it was discovered that they had lied and
      actually followed Al-Hagh they would be immediately sacked from  their
      job.


      (iv)  After his brother was executed in Iran he grew to hate Islam and
      at university there was a Muslim priest who always  talked  about  the
      twelfth Imam believing that he is still alive and could be anywhere in
      the world and when this discussion  was  taking  place  the  Appellant
      disagreed with those views and asked the priest whether  this  twelfth
      prophet could be the Appellant.   There  was  an  uproar  amongst  the
      people and this was regarded as an insult to Islam and he  was  thrown
      out of the university for this comment.  After he was  thrown  out  of
      university the head of the university informed the  Iranian  authority
      of his outspoken view and this is what led  to  his  problems  as  the
      authorities wanted to arrest him and question him about his behaviour.
       As he realised that there was a possibility that they would kill  him
      and that his house had been visited  by  members  of  an  intelligence
      service he realised his life was in danger and fled Iran".


3.    The Adjudicator considered the evidence in relation  to  the  religion
of Al-Hagh at some length at paragraph 16 of his Determination  but,  having
read the documents produced  by  the  Appellant's  then  representative,  he
commented that very little was revealed about that religious sect  or  other
sects associated with it and virtually nothing was  said  about  members  of
the religions being persecuted by reason of such membership.  He noted  that
CIPU made no reference at all to Al-Hagh but that it did contain  paragraphs
about religion at paragraphs 5.53 to 5.46 of the version before  him,  which
confirmed that religious freedom was provided for in the  1979  Constitution
and in particular that at paragraph 5.44, Article  13  of  the  Constitution
recognises the Zoroastrian, Jewish  and  Christian  minorities  specifically
described in the Constitution as "protected religious minorities".   Members
of those faiths were free to perform their religious rights  and  ceremonies
and to act according to their own canon in matters of personal  affairs  and
religious education.  Paragraph 5.46, he  noted,  confirmed  that  religious
minorities suffer discrimination in the legal system and at  paragraph  5.47
it showed that  the  government  was  suspicious  of  any  proselytising  of
Muslims by non-Muslims and could be harsh in  its  response,  in  particular
against Baha'is and Evangelical Christians.  He then continued to deal  with
the evidence before him in the following terms:

      "17.  It  is  not  contended  that  the  Appellant  has  himself  been
      persecuted for his religious beliefs or the alleged  insult  to  Islam
      when he spoke to a Muslim priest.  This resulted in him being expelled
      from university several months later at the end of 1998  and  in  June
      1999 the Etelaat went to his home  but  he  was  not  there  and  they
      detained his father for two days.


      18.   I find the Appellant to have given a consistent  account  and  I
      find that what he has said apart from the detention of his  father  to
      be credible.  It is credible that in order to get into  university  he
      did not disclose his true religion but he said he was Muslim and  that
      for five years he was able to keep his religion a secret but  that  in
      one discussion he made a statement which was treated as an  insult  to
      Islam.  He dropped out of university for a term of four  months  which
      was then followed by the three  months  summer  holiday  and  when  he
      returned to university he was told that he  was  being  expelled.   He
      went to work on his father's  farm  and  some  six  months  later  the
      Etelaat came to see him but he joined a nomadic tribe  and  eventually
      left Iran.


      19.   Although I find the majority of his account to be credible, I do
      not  find  there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  his
      involvement in Al-Hagh would have caused him to be persecuted.  It  is
      a personal religion and he had not been proselytising.  If he had made
      himself available to the Etelaat there was not a real risk  that  this
      would have resulted in persecution or torture.   He  had  not  in  his
      earlier Statement of Evidence Form said that his father was  detained.
      If his father had been detained it is  expected  that  he  would  have
      mentioned it in the Statement of Evidence Form.  He also said that his
      father was released after two days.  If I had accepted that his father
      had been detained his father would not have been released so  soon  if
      the authorities were holding his father in the place of the Appellant.
       The incident which caused him to  be  expelled  from  university  had
      taken place over a year earlier and if he had been of interest to  the
      authorities because of what he had said they would have sought him out
      much sooner.


      20.   The objective evidence  such  as  it  is  shows  that  religious
      minorities are tolerated  although  they  may  suffer  discrimination.
      Provided there is no proselytising of Muslims they will  not  come  to
      harm.  The fact that his brother was executed in 1981 is explained  by
      the fact that he was specifically writing religious books  on  Al-Hagh
      and distributing them to other people.  His brother  had  been  warned
      about this but continued his activities.  The  Appellant  was  not  in
      anything like that sort of situation".


4.    For those reasons the Adjudicator came to the view that the  Appellant
had not discharged the burden of proof upon him  of  having  a  well-founded
fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason  or  of  breach  of  his
protected rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European  Convention,  and  he
dismissed his appeal.

5.    The appellant then sought permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal.   In
his grounds of appeal he did not in any way seek to challenge  the  findings
which the Adjudicator had made on the basis of the evidence before  him  but
asserted that the appeal was dismissed because  the  Adjudicator  had  found
there was insufficient evidence on the treatment  of  Al-Hagh  believers  in
Iran to justify a finding of persecution.  This had  led  the  Appellant  to
make considerable efforts to obtain evidence as to the position  of  Al-Hagh
followers and it was his belief that Al-Hagh were  affected  by  restrictive
and persecutory attitudes compared to some non-Islamic religions in Iran.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that those grounds  were
arguable and it was noted that  the  appellant  sought  to  rely  on  expert
evidence that was not available before the Adjudicator  and  he  would  need
first to  comply  with  rule  21  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 2003.

7.    Notice of this hearing  was  sent  to  the  parties  on  6  May  2004.
Shortly before on 30 April 2004, in response to the grant of permission  the
Appellant's solicitors had submitted a  formal  application  under  rule  21
enclosing a copy of a report made by  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah  which  they  sought
leave to introduce  at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  together  with  other
information giving background detail about the Al-Hagh religion.   That  was
the position when this appeal opened before us today.  We  asked  Mr  Waheed
what on the basis of the grounds of appeal was the material error of law  on
the part of the Adjudicator upon which he placed reliance, but  he  accepted
that there were  difficulties  in  this  respect  because  of  the  lack  of
evidence before  the  Adjudicator  as  to  the  Al-Hagh  religion  and  what
occurred to its followers.  He sought leave to amend the grounds  of  appeal
by adding a challenge to the sustainability of  the  Adjudicator's  findings
in the following terms taken from his written skeleton argument.

      "The conclusion that surrender to the Iranian  security  policy  would
      not entail a  risk  of  persecution  is  contrary  to  the  background
      evidence  and  is  unreasonable  (see  Hathaways's  first  and  second
      categories of rights as set  out  in  Horvath  1999  INLR  7  at  25).
      Alternatively the combined  circumstances  of  the  illegal  exit,  an
      interest in return from abroad, Kurdish ethnicity, minority  religious
      belief,  continuing  security  police  attention,   widespread   legal
      impropriety and heresy".


8.    Those  extracts  from  the  skeleton  included  reference  to  various
passages in the evidence which had been before the Adjudicator to  which  Mr
Waheed directed our attention.  He could not otherwise,  however,  give  any
reason why this application, which fundamentally sought to change the  basis
on which permission to appeal had been granted, had  been  made  at  such  a
late stage.  For the Respondent Mr Sheikh objected to the application  being
allowed by  reason  partly  of  its  lateness  and  partly  because  in  his
submission it did not in any event show any real prospect of success  as  on
the evidence before  the  Adjudicator  his  findings  were  sustainable  and
disclosed no material error of  law.  In  particular,  the  Adjudicator  had
given clear reasons as to why he did not consider  that  there  was  a  real
risk from the Etelaat and those reasons were sustainable in his  submission.


9.    We gave due consideration to the application by Mr Waheed in which  he
had relied on background  evidence  pointing  to  the  arbitrary  nature  of
detention and risk of persecution in Iran  as  it  is  recorded  in  various
documents  in  the  public  domain  provided  to   the   Adjudicator.    His
application was made under the provisions of rule  20(1)  of  the  Procedure
Rules which provides that a party may vary his grounds of appeal  only  with
the permission of the Tribunal.  We are mindful of the  strict  time  limits
for making an application for permission to  appeal  which  are  imposed  by
rule 16 of the Procedure Rules and the requirement in rule  17(3)  that  the
grounds of appeal submitted within that time frame must:

      "(a)   identify  the  alleged  errors  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
      Determination and

      (b)   explain why such  errors  made  a  material  difference  to  the
      decision.

10.   The degree to which Mr Waheed has sought without any prior  notice  to
raise issues which are fundamentally distinct and different from  the  basis
on which permission was granted is in our view a  matter  of  importance  in
our consideration of his application to amend.   It  was  clearly  a  matter
which would take Mr Sheikh by surprise  because  he  could  not  conceivably
have prepared his appeal on that basis and we are  mindful  that  there  has
been ample time for such an application  to  have  been  submitted  earlier.
There is in our view really no excuse for such matters being raised for  the
first time only at the hearing.

11.   So far as the question of whether there would be any real prospect  of
success in relation to those amended grounds is concerned, we have  come  to
the view that on the evidence before him it  could  not  be  said  that  the
Adjudicator had erred in law in reaching the  decision  which  he  did.   He
made clear at paragraph 7 of his Determination  that  he  had  recorded  the
oral evidence and submissions from both representatives  in  his  Record  of
Proceedings and that he had also taken  into  account  all  the  documentary
evidence which had  been  produced  to  him,  which  he  then  proceeded  to
identify.  He had relied particularly in  his  approach  on  the  fact  that
there had been no earlier approach by the Etelaat to the Appellant  who  had
apparently indicated that they wished him to report to  them,  so  that  the
delay was an important element in his  reasoning.   He  had  also  noted  at
paragraph 20 of his Determination that the objective  evidence  showed  that
religious  minorities  were  tolerated  although  they  might  suffer   some
discrimination and that they would not come to harm absent proselytising  of
Muslims. It was  not  suggested  this  had  occurred  on  the  part  of  the
Appellant at any point in time.  It does not seem to us  that  even  had  we
granted this late application it would arguably have led to a  finding  that
there had been any material error of law on the part of the  Adjudicator  on
the basis of the totality of the evidence which was before him.  That  there
may be a possibility  of  arbitrary  arrest  and  persecutory  treatment  in
detention by the Iranian authorities does not seem to us  to  form  a  basis
for saying that it is a real risk in all cases and the  Adjudicator  clearly
explains why in this particular case he did not consider it to be so.   That
was a decision which was properly  open  to  him  on  the  totality  of  the
evidence before him, which included the  generality  of  objective  evidence
commonly relied on, namely the CIPU Report for April 2003  filed  on  behalf
of the  Secretary  of  State  and  an  objective  current  bundle  from  the
appellant, running to  49  pages  and  including  the  United  Stated  State
Department Report for 2002 and reports from Amnesty International and  Human
Rights Watch .

12.   For the above  reasons  we  refused  the  application  to  extend  the
grounds of appeal.  Mr Waheed very  properly  acknowledged  that  this  then
placed him in considerable difficulties, particularly having regard  to  the
recent decision of the Court of Appeal in CA v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  In that case the Tribunal had  sought
to reconsider a decision made by an Adjudicator to which the  provisions  of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  applied.   By  virtue  of
section 101 of that Act the jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal  is  confined  to
cases where there has been a material error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the
Adjudicator but, absent such material error of  law,  the  Tribunal  is  not
entitled to revisit the merits of  the  case  either  at  the  date  of  the
hearing before the Adjudicator or at the date of the  hearing  before  them.
The matter is put clearly at paragraph 30 of the Judgment of Laws LJ in  the
following terms:

      "... It may be that it is perfectly  possible  to  conclude  that  the
       Adjudicator was wrong on the merits.  Such a conclusion  might  have
       justified overturning his decision under the earlier wider appellate
       jurisdiction  (see  this  court's  judgment  in  Subesh)   but   the
       jurisdiction under Section 101 forbids in effect  the  IAT  deciding
       the merits itself unless  at  least  it  first  concludes  that  the
       Adjudicator's decision cannot stand because it is marred by error of
       law".

 The more limited jurisdiction of the Tribunal applies  not  only  to  those
decisions to remove made by the Secretary of State on or after 1 April  2003
but also to earlier removal decisions made by the Secretary of  State  where
the appeal against them is heard by an Adjudicator on or after 9 June  2003,
the date provided by Schedule 2, paragraphs 4A and 4B  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No. 4) Order  2003  (SI  2003,
No. 754) dealing with transitional provisions relating to the 2002 Act.

13.   For the reasons which we have explained,  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
they stand  before  us  disclose  no  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the
Adjudicator.  They rely entirely on  the  effect  of  later  evidence  which
could have been  produced  before  the  Adjudicator  had  the  Appellant  so
desired.  The fact is that he  did  not  seek  any  expert  opinion  on  the
position of those who are followers of the Al-Hagh religion in Iran and  the
Adjudicator quite rightly records  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  usual
public reports which were produced to him which gave him any  assistance  as
to the position  of  such  followers.  There  was  certainly  nothing  which
suggested that they were generally at risk of persecution.  It may  be  that
the evidence of the expert which was  sought  to  be  introduced  gives  far
greater information as to the situation of  followers  of  Al-Hagh  in  Iran
than  appears either in the CIPU Reports  or  any  other  documents  in  the
public domain.  Given the absence of any error of law it seems  to  us  that
we are precluded from considering that  evidence.   But  had  we  considered
that we should do so we find that there would be  a  further  difficulty  in
admitting it, applying the ratio in E  &  R  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  49,  because
taking into account what is said at paragraph  66  of  the  judgment,  there
must be no responsibility for the failure to produce  the  evidence  on  the
part of the appellant  or  his  advisers,  and  the  new  evidence  must  be
established  in  the  sense  that  it  is  uncontentious   and   objectively
verifiable.  Although we did not hear Mr Sheikh at length on  these  issues,
it was apparent from his submissions in  relation  to  the  application  for
leave to appeal that he did  not  concede  that  the  report  sought  to  be
introduced fell into that latter category. Indeed, given the absence of  any
similar evidence readily available  it  would  almost  certainly  have  been
necessary, had  we  been  able  to  consider  this  new  evidence,  to  have
adjourned the hearing so that the expert could himself attend  in  order  to
give oral evidence and to be cross-examined.

14.   Nevertheless we think it is appropriate  to  note  that  there  is  an
absence of evidence in the CIPU Report and other  documents  in  the  public
domain.  If the Appellant seeks to  make  a  fresh  application  for  asylum
based on this new evidence then it is a matter which the Secretary of  State
would no doubt wish very carefully to consider given the  absence  otherwise
of evidence as to the situation of the Al-Hagh religion  and  its  followers
in Iran.

15.   For the reasons which we have set  out  above,  however,   it  follows
that there is no material error of law in  the  Adjudicator's  determination
in our judgment and that, in consequence, we are not able  to  consider  the
matter further. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.






                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

