
Heard at Field House   MK (Risk-Political Opinion) Kyrgyzstan CG [2004]
UKIAT 00063
On      1  April  2004                                                (Risk-
Political Opinion)
Written  1 April 2004


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             06 April 2004

                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice-President)
                                 Mr A Smith



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Kyrgyzstan, appeals,  with  leave,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C Bart-Stewart, dismissing his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 16 May 2003 to  refuse
     leave to enter and refuse asylum.

  2. Ms S Osmond represented the Appellant. Mr C P Buckley,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims to fear the authorities of his country because  of
     his political opinions and activities.  The facts as  asserted  by  him
     may be summarised as follows.   He  became  an  active  member  of  the
     opposition party, Ar-Namys, in August 2000. He attended party  meetings
     and  demonstrations,   and   distributed   leaflets   advertising   the
     demonstrations, but did not hold any official  position.  On  13  March
     2001 he was arrested  at  a  demonstration  in  Bishkek  Park.  He  was
     detained for seven days and beaten during detention.  On 17 March  2002
     he attended a demonstration in the south of the  country  during  which
     the police opened fire on the demonstrators and the Appellant fled.  On
     19 March 2002 he was arrested, after the police searched his home.   He
     was detained for one month  and  again  beaten  in  detention.  He  was
     released after paying a bribe of $1000. On 16  September  2002  he  was
     arrested with seven other people at a protest meeting.   He  spent  two
     weeks in detention and was beaten so badly that  he  suffered  internal
     bleeding. The method of beating in all these detentions was such as not
     to leave any permanent scars.

  4. On 10 March 2003 the secret police raided his  home  and  searched  it.
     They told the Appellant that he was now blacklisted.  On 11 March  2003
     shots were fired by a policeman at the Appellant and a friend, as  they
     were walking in the park. His  friend  was  killed  but  the  Appellant
     managed to run away.  The Appellant recognised the policeman as one who
     had attended his house the previous day. The Appellant left the country
     on 22 March 2003 and arrived in the UK five days later, when he claimed
     asylum.

  5. The Adjudicator assessed the objective evidence and accepted  that  the
     government of Kyrgyzstan had a poor human rights record  and  continued
     to commit numerous abuses. She accepted  that  the  objective  evidence
     supported the Appellant's claim that even low-level members of Ar-Namys
     may be at risk. However,  even  given  this  context,  the  Adjudicator
     identified a number of  inconsistencies  and  implausibilities  in  the
     Appellant's various accounts and concluded that his claim to have  been
     detained and seriously ill treated on four occasions was a fabrication.
      She did not accept that he was an  opposition  political  activist  at
     all, because he was unable at  the  screening  interview  to  name  the
     ruling party. She concluded that his claim generally lacked credibility
     and that he had failed to discharge his burden of proof.

  6. The grounds of  appeal  are  not  entirely  clear.  Ms  Osborn  in  her
     submissions said that her understanding of the determination  was  that
     the Adjudicator had accepted that the Appellant was  a  member  of  Ar-
     Namys,  and  she  intended  to  argue  that  given  this  finding   the
     Adjudicator was wrong to dismiss the appeal notwithstanding her adverse
     credibility findings.  She acknowledged that she had not challenged the
     reasoning for the  adverse  credibility  findings  as  such.   When  we
     pointed out to her an alternative view of the Adjudicator's conclusions
     was that she had reached a comprehensive  adverse  credibility  finding
     concerning  all  core  aspects  of  the  claim,  Ms  Osborne  requested
     permission to challenge the adverse credibility findings.  We asked her
     to be specific about the challenge she wished to make.  She put  it  in
     the following terms
           "At paragraph 35 of the  determination,  the  Adjudicator  found
           that the Appellant was unable  to  name  the  ruling  party.  At
           document A1 it is clear that  interpretation  at  the  screening
           interview was a problem and this was reinforced by the Appellant
           during his asylum interview at C16.  In  the  circumstances  the
           Adjudicator's conclusion was not open to her."


  7. Mr Buckley indicated that he was content  for  the  Tribunal  to  grant
     permission to appeal on this ground and we so granted permission.

  8. In her submissions to us, Ms Osmond indicated  that  she  accepted  the
     Adjudicator's analysis of the objective  evidence.  She  explained  the
     grounds of appeal by arguing that the Adjudicator had accepted that the
     Appellant was a member of Ar-Namys and accordingly he would face a real
     risk of persecution or a breach of Article 3  on  return.  Her  adverse
     credibility finding in paragraph 29, based upon his inability  to  name
     the ruling party, was flawed by her refusal to accept  the  explanation
     given by the  Appellant  concerning  interpretation  at  the  screening
     interview. The findings in paragraphs 30 and 31  were  unsound  in  the
     light of the objective evidence.  She invited us to allow the appeal to
     the extent that it be remitted for rehearing afresh.

  9. Mr Buckley  pointed  out  in  relation  to  the  Adjudicator's  adverse
     credibility findings that the Appellant had indicated in his  screening
     interview that he was content to be interviewed in Russia  and  in  his
     appeal to the Adjudicator had requested  a  Russian  interpreter.   His
     history showed that he had been educated  in  Russian  at  the  Russian
     University in Kyrgyzstan. The objective evidence showed that Russian is
     an official language of Kyrgyzstan.  He submitted  that  there  was  no
     substance in  the  challenge  to  the  validity  of  the  Adjudicator's
     rejection  of  the  claim  by  the  Appellant  that  there   were   any
     difficulties relating to interpretation in his screening interview.  He
     also submitted that no genuine political activist could be  unaware  of
     the name of the ruling party of his own country,  especially  when  the
     President from that party had been in power for  many  years.  He  also
     observed that there was no extant challenge to the Adjudicator's  other
     adverse  credibility  findings  relating  to  the  Appellant's  alleged
     attendance at four  demonstrations  and  detentions  and  ill-treatment
     arising from  them.  Nor  is  there  any  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusion that the  alleged  targeted  assassination  attempt  on  the
     Appellant by the police was inconsistent with the  objective  evidence.
     Even if  the  Adjudicator's  determination  was  interpreted  to  imply
     acceptance that the Appellant was even a member of Ar-Namys, he had not
     been engaged in any credible activities for it and there was no  reason
     why the authorities should even be aware of his membership.  He  argued
     that the appeal should be dismissed.

 10. We considered these submissions first in the context of  the  objective
     evidence. There is  not  before  us  an  extensive  body  of  objective
     evidence about  Kyrgyzstan,  concerning  the  treatment  of  opposition
     political activists. We have not  been  offered  anything  beyond  that
     which was before the Adjudicator, save that  Mr  Buckley  gave  us  the
     latest version of the US State Department  report  which  covers  2003,
     though it  does  not  offer  anything  materially  different  from  the
     previous year's report that was considered by the Adjudicator.

 11. We were concerned that Ms Osmond was  unable  to  give  us  a  reliable
     providence for some of the materials included in her bundle, but in the
     event this has not been  the  cause  of  any  real  difficulty  because
     essentially everything of significance is contained or referred  to  in
     US State Department reports.

 12. We have been able  to  form  a  realistic  view  from  the  information
     provided to us and come to similar conclusions to those reached by  the
     Adjudicator. The US State Department Report reveals that, although  the
     1993 constitution defines  the  form  of  government  as  a  democratic
     republic, the President, Askar Akayev,  dominated  government.  He  was
     elected to a third term in 2000, even though the constitution specifies
     a 2 term limit, thanks to the intervention of the  Supreme  Court,  who
     ruled  that  his  first  term  did  not  count   against   the   limit.
     Nevertheless, despite constitutional limitations, Parliament has become
     more  independent  and  sometimes  modified  or  blocked   presidential
     initiatives.  Civil society is  relatively  strong.   In  October  2002
     parliamentary by-elections took place in four electoral districts.  The
     elections were generally orderly and  competitive  in  three  of  those
     districts but serious voting irregularities were observed one district,
     where the race was strongly contested.  In 2000, serious irregularities
     marred  parliamentary  and  presidential  elections.   Non-governmental
     organisations  and  parliamentary  deputies  sometimes   succeeded   in
     blocking presidential  initiatives  through  parliamentary  action  and
     grass root campaigns.

 13. The Government's human rights record remained poor and members  of  the
     security  forces  at  times  beat  and  otherwise  mistreated  persons,
     including  detained  human  rights  and  political  activists.   Prison
     conditions remain very poor, and there were  many  cases  of  arbitrary
     arrest or detention. The law and the  constitution  prohibit  arbitrary
     arrest and detention but police at times used  ill-defined  charges  to
     arrest persons and could be bribed to release them. There  was  however
     neither in  2002  nor  in  2003  any  evidence  of  targeted  political
     assassinations  by  the  government,  or   of   politically   motivated
     disappearances.  The  only  possible  qualifications  to  this  general
     assessment are an unexplained and suspicious death of a journalist  who
     was investigating corruption, and what appears to be the kidnapping  of
     several Moslem Uzbeks, which  were  attributed  to  the  Government  of
     Uzbekistan, not Kyrgyzstan.

 14. The constitution provides for an  independent  judiciary;  however  the
     executive branch dominated the judiciary, and government used  judicial
     proceedings against  prominent  political  opposition  and  independent
     media figures in a number of instances. A very high profile example  of
     this occurred on 5 January  2002,  when  the  government  detained  the
     opposition parliamentarian and  outspoken  critic  of  the  government,
     Azimbek Beknazarov, on charges  related  to  his  work  as  a  criminal
     investigator in 1995. He was held on pre-trial review. On 17 March, the
     day before he was due to be sentenced, 2000 of his  supporters  marched
     to the city of Kerben to  demand  his  release.   Police  attempted  to
     disperse the  crowd  by  shooting  into  the  air  and  at  least  five
     demonstrators were killed and others were beaten.  Several hours later,
     demonstrators  stormed  the  police  building  and  set  several  other
     buildings on fire. One more demonstrator was killed in  this  and  five
     were wounded. On 19 March, Beknazarov was summarily  released  and  was
     later given a one-year suspended  sentence.  In  April,  following  the
     release of a videotape showing police firing on unarmed  demonstrators,
     the President dismissed a number of local  officials  and  appointed  a
     state  commission  to  investigate  the  shootings.    The   commission
     criticised the state media  for  biased  reporting  of  the  Beknazarov
     arrest and suggested that high level officials shared the blame for the
     shootings.   The   US   State   Department   Report   also   identified
     demonstrations in May 2002 against the  sentencing  of  the  opposition
     leader, Feliks Kulov, to ten years imprisonment for corruption, as well
     as numerous other demonstrations  and  marches  relating  to  political
     opposition that were disrupted, and several other examples of the court
     system being used against opposition politicians.

 15. We have considered a paper dated 9 May  2003,  from  the  international
     secretariat of OMCT stating that on 30 April 2003 Tynshtykbek  Dulatov,
     a member of the Ar-Namys Party, disappeared on his  way  to  a  meeting
     with a state investigator to  which  he  had  been  summoned,  and  his
     whereabouts remained unknown at least at the time of the report,  which
     was a few days later. There is speculation that the  disappearance  was
     politically motivated and that the government was attempting to destroy
     this party, as it could pose a serious challenge to the President in an
     election. There was  reference  to  other  party  members  having  been
     threatened and bullied into leaving the party and to 80  party  members
     being detained during the demonstration in 2002 and only being released
     after international pressure, most notably from OSCE.  There is also  a
     press  release  from  the  Helsinki  Committee,  which  appears  to  be
     protesting against the same detentions at that demonstration.  A  press
     release from Ar-Namys of 2004 refers to continuing persecution  of  the
     party by  the  authorities  and  the  fabrication  of  criminal  cases,
     intimidation and constant  psychological  pressure  on  party  members.
     There are other documents that say much the same thing.

 16. It is therefore plain from the objective evidence that  the  government
     of Kyrgyzstan  does  undertake  repressive  actions  of  various  kinds
     against opposition politicians  and  activists  who  it  regards  as  a
     threat, and that includes the Ar-Namys  Party.   We  have  not  however
     found any evidence that the government promotes or permits the targeted
     extrajudicial execution of its opponents, though  excessive  force  has
     been used against  demonstrators that  has  resulted  in  extrajudicial
     killings. The conclusion reached by the Adjudicator in paragraph 29  of
     the determination that low level members of Ar-Namys, and indeed  other
     opposition parties, may be at risk is sound  and  sustainable.  However
     whether there is a real risk in any individual  case,  and  whether  it
     would be sufficiently serious to cross the high threshold  required  to
     engage persecution or a breach of Article 3, must depend upon the facts
     of that case and whether the individual has been involved in activities
     that might attract corresponding risk.

 17. We should add that the events  summarised  by  us  from  the  objective
     evidence are in the  public  domain.   It  is  against  this  objective
     background that we have to assess  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  and
     reasoning and her rejection of the Appellant's core credibility.

 18. The Court of Appeal in Subesh & Others [2004] EWCA Civ 56 has  recently
     summarised  the  relevant  jurisprudence  and  given  guidance  to  the
     Tribunal concerning the proper approach to be taken by it to challenges
     against an Adjudicator's findings. In paragraph 43, Laws LJ  stated  it
     as follows.
           "In every case the Appellant assumes the burden of showing  that
           the judgment appealed from is wrong. The burden  so  assumed  is
           not the burden of proof normally carried by a claimant in  first
           instance proceedings  where  there  are  factual  disputes.   An
           Appellant, if he is to succeed, must persuade the  appeal  court
           or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts  from
           that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there  are
           objective grounds upon which the court ought to conclude that  a
           different view is  the  right  one.  The  divide  between  these
           positions is not caught by the  supposed  difference  between  a
           perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case  the  appeal
           court disagrees with the court below,  and  indeed  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the court of appeal might prefer different  view  (perhaps
           on marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process
           of reasoning and the application of the relevant law, require it
           to adopt a  different  view.   The  burden  which  an  Appellant
           assumes is to show  that  the  case  falls  within  this  latter
           category."

 19. The Adjudicator concluded in paragraph 35 of the determination that  he
     was not an activist for the Ar-Namys party because at the time  of  his
     screening interview he was  unable  to  name  the  ruling  party.   She
     rejected his explanation that there was a problem  over  interpretation
     at interview.  Ms Osmond  has  repeated  this  explanation  to  us  and
     argued that the Adjudicator was wrong to reach that conclusion.  We  do
     not agree.  The objective evidence shows  that  university  courses  in
     Kyrgyzstan are taught in Russian and the Appellant attended  a  Russian
     university in Kyrgyzstan for  some  two  years.   He  accepted  at  the
     beginning of his screening interview that he  was  content  to  proceed
     with a Russian  interpreter  and  in  his  appeal  to  the  Adjudicator
     requested a Russian  interpreter.   The  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
     conclude  that  the  Appellant  at  his  screening  interview  properly
     understood questions put to him about the governing  party  (and  there
     were three of them, not one) but simply did not know  the  answer.   We
     also agree with her  that  it  is  wholly  implausible  that  political
     activist, as the Appellant claims to be, would not know the name of the
     ruling party in his country, against whom he worked.

 20. The other reasoning given by the Adjudicator for her remaining  adverse
     credibility findings have not been  challenged  by  Ms  Osmond  to  any
     specific or material extent. There is no objective  evidence  that  the
     police arrested people participating in the demonstrations of 17  March
     other than at the demonstrations  themselves.   The  Appellant  claimed
     that the police arrested him  at  his  own  home  2  days  later.   The
     objective evidence shows that the demonstrators who were arrested, were
     then released on 19 March, which is the date that the Appellant  claims
     he was arrested. The Appellant was even unable  to  identify  correctly
     the purpose of the demonstration on 17 March, even though this is  very
     clear in the objective evidence. Thus this aspect  of  the  Appellant's
     claim is inconsistent with the objective evidence.   Moreover,  as  the
     Adjudicator noted, the arrest of political activists is well  monitored
     by the political parties and by NGO's, and it is implausible  that  the
     Appellant would have been arrested in circumstances in which his arrest
     escaped attention or would  not  have  attracted  attention  after  his
     release.  His claim that he was the target of an assassination attempts
     by a policeman is contrary to the  objective  evidence.   There  is  an
     inconsistency between the Appellant's accounts as to the date of one of
     his alleged arrests.  All the Adjudicator's reasoning for  her  adverse
     credibility findings was properly open to her.

 21. There remains the question of the extent  of  her  adverse  credibility
     findings. The Adjudicator stated in terms in paragraph 35 that she  did
     not accept that the Appellant was arrested, detained and seriously  ill
     treated on four occasions and she said that  this  was  a  fabrication.
     She did not accept that he was an activist for the  party.   She  noted
     that he had previously attempted to enter the UK as a student  but  had
     been refused a visa.  The fact that he was a few months later  able  to
     obtain a false passport with a visa for the UK was  not  a  coincidence
     but reflected his desire to come to the UK for reasons unconnected with
     the need for international  protection.  All  these  findings  properly
     flowed from the reasoning for her adverse credibility findings and were
     fully open to her. It is true that she did not also specifically  state
     in terms that she did not accept that the Appellant was a member of the
     Ar-Namys Party. However in context it  is  plain  from  the  range  and
     extent of her adverse credibility findings and the conclusion she  drew
     from  them,   that  she  rejected  the  entire  account  of   political
     involvement as a fabrication, including the claim of  party  membership
     which was a integral  part  of  his  claimed  political  activism.  The
     Appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  any  material  error  in   the
     Adjudicator's thorough and properly reasoned determination.

 22. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
