
H-VB-V2

|                           |        |RW (Eritrean - Nationality -|
|                           |        |Citizenship - Residence)    |
|                           |        |Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00074 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at Field House                                        Date  |
|Determination notified:                                           |
|On 25 March 2004                                                  |
|Prepared 27 March 2004                                        22  |
|April 2004                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Beale of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr J P Cameron who allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on
      both asylum and human rights grounds against the decision made  on  27
      March 2003 giving directions for her removal.  In  this  determination
      the Tribunal will refer to  the  respondent  to  this  appeal  as  the
      applicant.

2.    The applicant left Ethiopia on 5 February 2003 arriving in the  United
      Kingdom on the same day.  She claimed asylum on 6 February 2003 on the
      basis that she had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Ethiopia
      because of her ethnic origin and political  opinion.   She  said  that
      both her parents were Eritrean although she was born and brought up in
      Ethiopia.  Both she and  her  parents  were  members  of  the  ELF-CC.
      Several attempts had been  made  on  her  father's  life  by  Eritrean
      government officials because of his membership.  She claimed that  she
      had not heard from her father since he went to Sudan. She feared  that
      he may have been killed.  On 28 January 2003 her mother  and  siblings
      were arrested by the Ethiopian authorities.   The  applicant  believed
      that this was because  of  their  Eritrean  ethnicity.   If  she  were
      returned  to  Ethiopia  she  would  be  deported  to   Eritrea.    Her
      application was refused for the reasons which the Secretary  of  State
      has set out in his Reasons for Refusal letter  dated  20  March  2003.
      The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 1 July 2003.



3.    The applicant gave oral evidence which can briefly  be  summarised  as
      follows.  She was born on 1 January 1985 in  Addis  Ababa.   Both  her
      parents were Eritrean.  He father was involved as  a  freedom  fighter
      with Ibdallah Idris of the ELF which was known to her as Jabbah.   Her
      father was summoned to go to Sudan from  time  to  time  to  join  his
      party.   The applicant and her mother were  involved  in  the  women's
      branch.  She had joined about two years previously but her mother  had
      been  involved  for  a  long  time.   They  had  attended   a   public
      demonstration in about October 2002 in support of the  ELF.   Although
      the meetings were secret and the party was generally tolerated by  the
      Ethiopian government,  they  faced  danger  from  Eritrean  government
      agents.  The applicant last saw her father  in  about  September  2002
      when he went to Sudan. They heard from other fighters  that  he  might
      have been killed.  Her mother made enquiries and was told  that  there
      were rumours about his death but no official confirmation.

4.    On 28 January 2003 when the applicant was making  her  way  home  from
      school she was told by a neighbour that the Ethiopian  government  had
      arrested her mother, four sisters and brother.  She went to  her  home
      and found that it had been ransacked.  She stayed with  a  friend  and
      the following day went to stay with her friend's family in Saris.  The
      applicant was able to find an auctioneer to  sell  the  furniture  and
      valuables from her home raising approximately  $2000.   An  agent  was
      found to bring her to the United Kingdom.  She feared return to either
      Ethiopia or Eritrea.   The  Ethiopian  authorities  had  arrested  her
      mother and siblings. She believed they had been deported.   She  could
      not go to Eritrea as the  ELF  was  illegal  there  and  the  Eritrean
      authorities had tried to kill her father on  a  number  of  occasions.
      She herself had never been to Eritrea.

5.    The applicant had become involved with the ELF when she was about  16.
       She had not been taught the specifics about  their  political  theory
      and philosophy but the party stood for freedom,  peace  and  democracy
      and wanted to achieve its aims peacefully.  Its main offices  were  in
      Khartoum although she did not know the address.  She also did not know
      whether her father had a position in  the  party  or  whether  he  had
      reported the incident on his life to the Ethiopian authorities.

6.     The  Adjudicator  has  set  out  his  analysis  of  the  evidence  in
      paragraphs 38-46 of his determination.  He accepted that the applicant
      was an 18 year old female who had lived in Ethiopia  until  coming  to
      the United Kingdom to claim asylum.  She had stated  that  her  father
      and mother were members of the ELF and she herself had joined when she
      was 16.  Her father had not returned from a trip to the Sudan in  2002
      and it was the applicant's belief that he had been killed.

  7.  The Adjudicator found the applicant to  be  a  credible  witness.   He
      commented that she had not sought to embellish her account before him.
       He found that she was a member of the ELF and involved with a  branch
      of the party.  Her parents were members of  the  same  party  and  her
      father used to travel to Sudan on a regular basis.  It  appeared  from
      the objective evidence that the deportation of Eritrean citizens  from
      Ethiopia had ceased but the Adjudicator referred to a letter from  the
      UNHCR dated 18 December 2002 confirming "UNHCR's general understanding
      that although the situation had improved, the  threat  of  deportation
      remains despite the signing  by  both  parties  of  the  Cessation  of
      Hostilities Agreement of 18 June  2000  and  the  comprehensive  Peace
      Agreement of 12 December 2000".   The Adjudicator said that he had  no
      reason to doubt the applicant's evidence in relation to the  detention
      of her mother and siblings.  There  was  no  evidence  before  him  to
      indicate that they had in fact been deported but clearly the applicant
      herself had had no contact with her family since leaving Ethiopia on 5
      February 2003.

8.    The Adjudicator noted that the removal directions  were  to  Ethiopia.
      It was his view that the  Ethiopian  authorities  would  consider  the
      applicant to be Eritrean bearing in mind that both  her  parents  were
      from Eritrea.  There was no evidence before him to indicate  that  any
      members of the family had been granted Ethiopian citizenship.  If that
      was the case, then Ethiopia was likely  to  deport  the  applicant  to
      Eritrea.  She had never been there although there  was  evidence  that
      she had family in Eritrea.  It was his view that she would not be able
      to prove that she was of Eritrean nationality as she could not produce
      three witnesses to confirm that her parents were  Eritrean.   Although
      the Eritrean government might grant her some status she was likely  to
      be issued with a yellow card which was the equivalent of  a  residence
      permit provided to foreigners lawfully staying in the country.

9.    The Adjudicator was referred to the Tribunal determination in [AA  and
      SA] [2002] UKIAT 08171.  In that case the Tribunal concluded that  the
      applicants were at risk of  ill-treatment  and  deportation  and  that
      removal to Ethiopia would lead to a risk  of  persecution  because  of
      their mixed ethnicity.

10.   In  the  light  of  the  evidence  before  him,  the  Adjudicator  was
      satisfied that if the Applicant were to be returned to Ethiopia, there
      was a reasonable degree of likelihood that she would be  detained  and
      deported to Eritrea.  There was no guarantee that Eritrea would accept
      her as she could not comply with its nationality requirements.  If the
      authorities did accept her, she  would  be  deemed  to  be  a  foreign
      national and given a yellow card.  It was  clear  from  the  objective
      evidence that the authorities did harass  and  ill-treat  yellow  card
      holders.  She was an 18 year old female who had lived all her life  in
      Ethiopia with the support of her family but she  no  longer  had  that
      support.   In summary, the  Adjudicator  accepted  that  if  she  were
      returned to Ethiopia there was a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
      she  would  be  detained  and  deported.   This  treatment  would   be
      persecutory for a Convention  reason.   The  Adjudicator  went  on  to
      consider the claim under Article 3 and accepted that there would be  a
      real risk of such ill-treatment if returned to Ethiopia.

11.   In the grounds of  appeal  the  Tribunal  was  invited  to  note  that
      paragraphs 33 to 40 of the Adjudicator's  determination  were  missing
      when issued. The Secretary of State had been unable to  make  specific
      reference to them.  It is argued that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  law
      when he found that it was not likely that the applicant would be  able
      to prove her Eritrean nationality.  He had failed to have reference to
      paragraph 5.6 of the Eritrea CIPU Report which had  been  before  him.
      This stated that paying tax or voting in the 1993 referendum were  not
      preconditions to establishing nationality.  He had failed to note that
      the applicant's mother had held an Eritrean identity card.

12.   It is further argued that the Adjudicator erred in law by  not  giving
      reasons for his findings that the Applicant would be deemed  to  be  a
      foreign national or for his findings in paragraph 30 that she would be
      ill-treated in Eritrea.  There was no indication who  would  ill-treat
      the Applicant or why they would do so.  He had not explained why there
      would be a real risk that her political connections  would  cause  her
      detention or how the authorities in Eritrea  would  be  aware  of  her
      political sympathies.  The Adjudicator had found that the  Applicant's
      father had a significant role in the party whereas it was her evidence
      in answer to question 18 of her interview that he  did  not  hold  any
      official post.  The Adjudicator was wrong to find that her father  had
      been killed when it was her evidence that she did not  know  for  sure
      what had happened to him.  He had misapplied  the  objective  evidence
      when  considering  her  father's  activities  wrongly  confusing   the
      Eritrean Islamic Salvation (EIS) with the ELF.

13.   At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr  Sheikh  applied  to  amend  his
      grounds to argue that the Adjudicator had erred by  finding  that  the
      Ethiopian authorities would consider the applicant to be  an  Eritrean
      and that she would be at risk on return  to  Ethiopia.   The  onus  of
      proof was on the Applicant to prove her case that she would be at risk
      if returned to Ethiopia with a real risk of  then  being  returned  to
      Eritrea.  If it was her case that she was stateless it was for her  to
      prove it.  The Secretary of State had not been able to  deal  properly
      with the Adjudicator's determination as paragraphs 33-40 were  missing
      from the copy served on him.

14.   Ms Beale resisted the application for an amendment.  She  argued  that
      the issues were clear and could  have  been  put  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal.  The President's Practice Direction  No.  4  directed  that  a
      variation of the grounds of appeal  should  be  made  either  21  days
      before the date fixed  for  the  hearing  or  as  soon  as  reasonably
      practicable.  The Secretary of State may not have been served with all
      the papers but it would have been open to him to  obtain  the  missing
      pages rather than wait until the day of the hearing.

15.   The Tribunal was not satisfied that it would  be  right  to  permit  a
      variation of the grounds at this late  stage.   It  is  accepted  that
      paragraphs 33-40 of the Adjudicator's determination were missing  when
      served on the parties.   When  granting  permission  the  Acting  Vice
      President noted that pages 8 and 9 of the determination  were  missing
      from the appeal file.  The grant  of  permission  and  the  notice  of
      hearing were issued on 8 October 2003 with a hearing date for 25 March
      2004.  No action appears to have been  taken  by  either  party  until
      February 2004 when the applicant's representatives made  enquiries  to
      obtain the missing pages.   As  this  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal, it is not unreasonable to expect the  Secretary  of  State  to
      make an application to obtain the missing paragraphs or to consider in
      the light of  the  terms  of  the  grant  of  permission  whether  any
      amendments should be made to the grounds rather then waiting until the
      day of the hearing.  The application to amend the grounds was refused.

16.   Mr Sheikh referred again to the  fact  that  pages  8  and  9  of  the
      determination had not been served  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   He
      submitted that in these circumstances the promulgation was  a  nullity
      as the full determination had not been issued.

17.   On the merits of the appeal he  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      been wrong to find that the applicant would be unable  to  prove  that
      she was Eritrean.  If she were returned to Ethiopia and  then  removed
      to Eritrea, there was nothing to indicate that she would be at risk of
      persecution there.  The Adjudicator had not made a  finding  that  she
      was stateless or that she was an Eritrean national.  Even if she would
      have no recourse to public services in Eritrea because she was  unable
      to prove her nationality,  that  did  not  amount  to  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to Article 3.

18.   Mr Sheikh referred the Tribunal to the determination in  L  (Ethiopia)
      [2003] UKIAT 0016.  The Adjudicator's findings were speculative.  Even
      if returned to Eritrea, she would be given a  yellow  card  and  could
      apply for citizenship.  It had not been open  to  the  Adjudicator  to
      find that she would be treated in effect as  a  second  class  citizen
      there.   There was no reason in any event why the applicant should not
      have made or now make an application for Eritrean citizenship.   There
      was no indication as to who would ill-treat her  there  or  why.   The
      Adjudicator had misunderstood the role of the applicant's father.   In
      her interview she had said that he did not have any official position.
       His findings that her father may have been killed  were  speculation.
      There would be no real risk of  deportation  to  Eritrea  or  of  ill-
      treatment if she was sent there.

19.   Ms Beale submitted that the fact that two pages were missing from  the
      determination as issued did not make all the subsequent proceedings  a
      nullity.  The Secretary of State had  applied  for  and  been  granted
      permission  to  appeal.   He  had  waived  any  rights  to  treat  the
      promulgation as a nullity.  He could have sought the missing pages  as
      the applicant's representatives had done.

20.   She submitted that the removal directions were to Ethiopia and not  to
      Eritrea.  Although  the  grounds  referred  to  paragraph  30  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination, that paragraph did  not  record  findings
      but was a summary of the submissions made on behalf of the  applicant.
      His findings were set out in paragraphs 38-46.  The  grounds  did  not
      deal with the risk in Ethiopia where the Adjudicator had made a  clear
      finding  that  the  applicant  would  be  at  risk  of  detention  and
      deportation.  It had not been put forward in evidence that she was  an
      Ethiopian citizen.  The letter from the  UNHCR  confirmed  that  there
      would be a risk on return.  The Adjudicator had been entitled to  find
      that the applicant's mother and siblings had been detained.  She faced
      a similar risk on return.   There  was  no  basis  to  contradict  the
      Adjudicator's findings that this applicant would be at a real risk  of
      persecution in Ethiopia.  The Adjudicator had  dealt  adequately  with
      any consequential risks in Eritrea.  There was  no  proper  basis  for
      interfering with the Adjudicator's findings.

21.   The Tribunal will deal firstly with the consequences of the  appellate
      authority serving the determination with pages 8 and 9 (paragraphs 33-
      40) missing.  To this extent the promulgation  was  defective  but  it
      does not render a nullity all that follows.  The  Secretary  of  State
      applied  for  permission  to  appeal  making  the  point  that   these
      paragraphs were missing.  Permission to appeal was granted. The Acting
      Vice President noted the omission of pages 8 and 9 and commented  that
      this may well have an effect upon the possibilities as to the  outcome
      of the appeal.  His determination was  issued  to  the  parties  on  8
      October 2003.  It was open to either party to contact  this  authority
      to obtain the missing pages.  In fact nothing happened until  February
      2004 when the  applicant's  representatives  made  enquiries  and  the
      missing pages were supplied.  In our judgment any right to  treat  the
      promulgation as a nullity  was  waived  by  the  application  for  and
      subsequent grant of permission.

22.   The grounds focus to a large extent on the contents  of  paragraph  30
      which in fact record submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  applicant
      rather  than  the  Adjudicator's  findings  but   insofar   as   these
      submissions are reflected in the findings it is properly open  to  the
      Secretary  of  State  to  challenge  them.   It  is  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator was wrong  to  find  that  it  was  not  likely  that  the
      applicant would be able to prove her Eritrean nationality and that  he
      had failed to have regard to the requirements for citizenship set  out
      in the  CIPU  Report  for  Eritrea.   This  report  records  that  the
      requirement imposed by the Eritrean authorities for three citizens  to
      confirm a claim to nationality  is  used  because  it  is  not  always
      possible to check a person's identity by use of a  birth  certificate.
      For these reasons an applicant for Eritrean nationality is required to
      call on any  three  witnesses  to  verify  that  she  is  an  Eritrean
      national: see paragraph 5.10 of the CIPU report.  It may  be  arguable
      that this should not provide an undue obstacle for the  applicant  but
      this was a question of fact for the  Adjudicator  to  resolve  on  the
      evidence before him.  He came to the view that, as the  applicant  did
      not know where her mother and siblings were and even if they had  been
      deported to Eritrea she would have no  way  of  contacting  them,  she
      would not be able to prove that she was of  Eritrean  nationality  and
      that she could not produce three witnesses to confirm that her parents
      were Eritrean.  In our judgment this finding of fact was properly open
      to the Adjudicator on the evidence.

23.   It is argued that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  find  that  if  the
      Applicant were returned to Eritrea, there was no  guarantee  that  the
      authorities would accept her.  He found that she would undoubtedly  be
      deemed to be a foreign national and given a yellow card.  She would be
      ill-treated  there.   In  paragraph  40  of  his   determination   the
      Adjudicator accepted that  there  were  instances  of  people  holding
      yellow cards who had been arrested and ill-treated.  The Applicant was
      an 18 year old female who had lived all her life in Ethiopia with  the
      support of her family.  The Adjudicator's  findings  on  these  issues
      were being made in the context of  whether  removal  to  Eritrea  from
      Ethiopia could properly be regarded as persecutory.   The  Adjudicator
      found that in the applicant's particular circumstances it would be.

24.   The grounds also take issue with the Adjudicator's findings about  the
      role  of  the  applicant's  father.   His  findings  are  set  out  in
      paragraphs 38 and 39 of the determination.  The  Adjudicator  accepted
      the applicant's evidence about her father's trips to  Sudan  and  that
      her belief about what had happened to  him  was  genuine.     In  this
      context whether he held an office in the ELF or not was  a  relatively
      insignificant factor. The Tribunal are also  not  satisfied  that  the
      Adjudicator confused the ELF and the EIS or, even if he did,  that  it
      has any material bearing on the outcome of this appeal.  At the  heart
      of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  was  an  acceptance  that   the
      Applicant was a credible witness.  He accepted her evidence  that  her
      mother and siblings had been detained because of their Eritrean ethnic
      origin.  He did comment that there  was  no  evidence  before  him  to
      indicate that they had in fact been deported but  he  also  took  into
      account the fact that the Applicant had had no contact with her family
      since leaving Ethiopia in February 2003.  It was for  the  Adjudicator
      to assess what inferences could properly drawn from this evidence.

25.   He accepted that if the applicant were returned to Ethiopia there  was
      a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  she  would  be  detained  and
      deported.  He found that this treatment would  be  persecutory  for  a
      Convention reason agreeing with the Tribunal's  findings  in  [AA  and
      SA].  The Adjudicator commented in paragraph 40 of  his  determination
      that there was  no  evidence  before  him  that  any  members  of  the
      applicant's family had been granted Ethiopian citizenship and if  that
      was the case then the Ethiopian Authorities were likely to deport  her
      to Eritrea.

  26.  Dealing  with  the  question  of  the  Applicant's  citizenship,  the
      Tribunal find it hard to accept that the Applicant was  not  at  least
      entitled to Ethiopian citizenship.  She was born in Addis Ababa  at  a
      time before the state of Eritrea existed.  Even though her parents may
      have been of Eritrean origin, there is no reason to believe that  they
      would not have been Ethiopian citizens.

27.    The  importance  of  citizenship  when  assessing  asylum  claims  is
      apparent from the wording of the Refugee Convention and is more  fully
      explored in the Tribunal Determination in L (Ethiopia).  A refugee  is
      defined as someone who is outside his country of  nationality  and  is
      unable or owing to such fear is unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
      protection  of  that  country.   If  an  applicant  does  not  have  a
      nationality, his claim is assessed  in  relation  to  his  country  of
      habitual residence.  If someone has more  then  one  nationality,  the
      county of his nationality shall mean each of the countries of which he
      is a national.   A person shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  lacking  the
      protection of the country of his  nationality  if  without  any  valid
      reason based on a well-founded fear he has not availed himself of  the
      protection of one of the countries of which he is a national.

28.   If the Applicant is a citizen of  Ethiopia  her  fear  of  persecution
      must be assessed in relation to Ethiopia.  If in fact she is stateless
      her claim must be assessed in relation  to  her  country  of  habitual
      residence which is  also  Ethiopia.    It  is  only  if  in  fact  the
      applicant is a citizen of Eritrea that she must look to  the  Eritrean
      authorities for protection before becoming entitled to refugee status.
       It is in this context that the issue  arises  of  whether  an  asylum
      claimant can reasonably be expected to  apply  for  citizenship  to  a
      country if he is or appears to be entitled  to  nationality.   As  the
      Tribunal properly commented in paragraph 44 of L (Ethiopia), to  leave
      this as an optional matter would make it possible for bogus  claimants
      to benefit from international protection simply by the device  of  not
      making an application even though in law they had or were entitled  to
      nationality  of  a  country  where  they  would  not  be  at  risk  of
      persecution.

29.   The Tribunal went on to comment that in asylum  cases  the  principles
      set out in Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR 359 had  to  be  qualified  to  take
      account of whether  there  were  valid  reasons  for  a  claimant  not
      approaching his Embassy or Consulate or the authorities of the country
      direct about an application for citizenship  or  residence.   In  some
      cases such an approach could place a claimant or his family  at  risk:
      it may alert the authorities to the fact that he had  escaped  pursuit
      by fleeing the country.  There could be  no  blanket  assumption  that
      such approaches would create an increased risk  for  claimants.   Each
      case must  be  looked  at  on  the  evidence  in  its  own  particular
      circumstances.  As the Tribunal rightly observed, paragraph 93 of  the
      UNHCR Handbook clearly contemplated a case by case approach.

30.   In our judgment this is just what the  Adjudicator  has  done  in  the
      present appeal.  He was not satisfied that the applicant would be able
      to establish that she was Eritrean.   This  was  a  decision  of  fact
      properly open to him on the evidence.   It follows that he  could  not
      be  satisfied  that  she  would  be  able  to  look  to  the  Eritrean
      authorities  for  protection.   Putting  it  at  its   simplest,   the
      Adjudicator had to consider what would  happen  to  the  applicant  if
      returned to Ethiopia.  Was there a real risk  that  she  would  suffer
      treatment of such severity that  it  amounted  to  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.  He was satisfied on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      before him that her mother and siblings had been detained  because  of
      their Eritrean ethnicity despite the fact  that  they  had  lived  all
      their lives in Ethiopia.  The Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude
      that there was a similar risk for this applicant, whether she  was  an
      Ethiopian citizen or not. There  is  evidence  to  confirm  that  mass
      deportations have ceased but nonetheless the Adjudicator was  entitled
      to rely on the UNHCR evidence which he has referred to in paragraph 39
      of his determination that a threat of deportation did  remain  despite
      the signing by both sides of the Cessation of  Hostilities  Agreement.
      It was for him to assess whether that risk applied  on  the  facts  as
      they related to this particular applicant.  Even though  the  Tribunal
      may not necessarily have come to the same conclusion, in our  judgment
      the Adjudicator's findings were properly open to him for  the  reasons
      he gave.

31.   In these circumstances, the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      dismissed.




                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President

