
ar    RB (Risk-Ethnicity-Gorani-Sanxhali) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00037



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing :  6 February  2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               04 March 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                               Mr M E A Innes




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Appearances
Mrs G. Ahmed, Solicitor of Ghazale Ahmed, Robertson & Ross, Solicitors for
the Appellant
Mr A. Scarcliffe, Home Office Presenting Officer for the Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a national of Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia,  appeals
      with permission against the  determination   of  an  Adjudicator,  Mrs
      I.A.M.  Murray,  against  the  decision  refusing  asylum  and  giving
      directions for removal.


2.    The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  was  of  mixed
      Gorani/Sanxhahli ethnicity. His home area was Prizren  in  Kosovo.  He
      and his family had experienced difficulties at the hands of both Serbs
      and Albanians. His father and brother were both killed by the  KLA  in
      June 1999 because there were seen as  Serb  collaborators.  Later  the
      same  month  the  KLA  set  fire  to  Gorani  houses,  including   the
      Appellant's. They attacked the Appellant, hospitalising him.  He  then
      travelled to Novi Pazar in Serbia, staying with his uncle  who  was  a
      Sanxhahli until  February 2002. When he was unable to produce  an   ID
      card, police detained him until his uncle explained  who  he  was  and
      they then released him without charge. His uncle told  him  he  should
      leave immediately. He went to Montenegro and in March 2001 got a lorry
      to the UK.  He believed that as a Gorani he could not   safely  return
      to any part of Yugoslavia, Kosovo or Serbia.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted the Appellant's account, noting that  it  was
      supported in part by the medical evidence.  However, he dismissed  the
      appeal because he considered he would be safe in his   home  area  and
      would receive effective protection there.

4.    Disregarding a  misplaced  complaint  that  the  Adjudicator  rejected
      credibility (he did not), the grounds contended that  the  Adjudicator
      failed to consider that persecution  is indicative of future risk  and
      overlooked that there had been no  material  change  of  circumstances
      since the Appellant left. They also maintained that in  the  light  of
      the Amnesty International Report for April 2003 the Adjudicator should
      have found that the  Gorani  continued  to  be  subjected  to  violent
      attacks. They further contended  that  he  should  not  have  rejected
      ethnicity or race as a Refugee Convention reason. Similar points  were
      raised in relation to  Article 3.

5.    We have decided to dismiss this  appeal.  As  too  often  happens  the
      Adjudicator did not carefully distinguish between the issue of serious
      harm and adequacy of protection against such  harm.  However,  as  the
      grounds themselves recognised, it is sufficiently clear  that  he  did
      not consider either that the  Appellant  continued  to  have  a  well-
      founded fear of serious harm or that he would  be  unable  to  receive
      effective protection  against such harm.

6.    We do not consider  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  take  adequate
      account  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had   experienced   past
      persecution. Whilst it is true  that  on  the  occasion  when  he  was
      attacked by  KLA members UNMIK and KFOR were already in  Kosovo,  they
      had  yet  to  establish  themselves.  As  the  Adjudicator   correctly
      observed,  since  June  1999  there  have  been  improvement  in   the
      protection situation in a number of respects.

7.    The question remains, was the Adjudicator entitled  to  conclude  that
      the improvement had made life  safer  for  Gorani?   The  grounds,  as
      already noted, considered that the  objective  evidence,  the  Amnesty
      International  Report for 2003 in particular, showed that the  Goranis
      still suffered violent  attacks.  However  the  Adjudicator  took  the
      Amnesty International  Report into account. He placed it side by  side
      with other materials, the CIPU sources in particular.  He  noted  that
      the CIPU Report for 2003 stated that the security situation for Gorani
      was stable during 2002 with no reported serious security incidents and
      no murders of Gorani since the year 2000 and improvements  in  freedom
      of movement and the ability to use their own language, particularly in
      the Prizren region which is where the Appellant comes from.  He  noted
      that according to the CIPU Report approximately half the  KPS officers
      in Dragash are Gorani. The Adjudicator also took account of the  UNHCR
      report of January 2003.

8.    Having considered all the materials placed before us, we see no  error
      in the Adjudicator assessment that they did  not  demonstrate  a  real
      risk of  serious  harm  (a  well-founded  fear)  for  Goranis  in  the
      Appellant's home area. Whilst the Amnesty International Report of 2003
      and  the January 2003 UNHCR Report indicate that  violent  attacks  do
      continue against Gorani in  some  areas  of  Kosovo  and  that  Gorani
      continue to  experience  discriminations,  they  fall  well  short  of
      demonstrating that there is a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or
      mass violations of the human rights of Gorani. Furthermore,  there  is
      some indication that  within  Kosovo  the  Appellant's  home  area  of
      Prizren is among the areas where Gorani are safest. The UNHCR   Report
      states that "A few  Gorani  live  in  Prizren  town,  and  enjoy  good
      relations with other communities there".  Furthermore, even though  in
      relation to the Dragash municipality this same Report refers to  there
      still being "an uncomfortable relationship between the  Albanians  and
      Gorani", it is  equally  clear  that:  "Within  Dragash,  inter-ethnic
      relations with  Albanians are slowly relaxing. At this time, Gorani do
      not face security threats."

9.    Given that the Adjudicator reached  entirely  sustainable  conclusions
      in relation to the safety of Gorani in the Appellant's home  area,  we
      do not need to give separate consideration to the issue of sufficiency
      of protection. However, for similar  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  his
      conclusions on this issue were sustainable.

10.   For completeness we would mention that we have seen fit to  frame  our
      assessment in terms of the Appellant's situation as a Gorani.   To  be
      more precise, the Appellant is of  mixed  Gorani/Sanxhahli  ethnicity.
      However, given that no evidence has been  produced  to  indicate  that
      persons of mixed Gorani/Sanxhahli ethnicity are at  any  greater  risk
      than Gorani per se, we saw no need to make any differentiation in  the
      main body of the determination.

11.   For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.


                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      2


