
H-AA-V3

|                           |        |NS (Human rights -          |
|                           |        |Withdrawal -Arguable        |
|                           |        |Thereafter) India [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00193                 |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 4 June 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......14th July 2004.......                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|MR D K Allen - Vice President                                     |
|Mr J Nicholson                                                    |
|Mr D C Walker                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant appeals to the Tribunal  with  permission  against  the
    determination of an Adjudicator, Mr G Dearden, who dismissed his appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 27  August  2003  refusing
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 4 June 2004.  Mr M S Gill QC  for
    Lyall Solicitors appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Ms  J  Sigley
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    There is an issue in this appeal as to when the Appellant came to the
    United Kingdom.  Previously the Appellant had said that he came in 1993
    but subsequently he has contended that he actually arrived in  1988  or
    1989.  An application for asylum was made on his behalf  on  16  August
    1993, and that application was refused by the Secretary of State.   The
    Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by the  Adjudicator,  Mr  C
    Bennett,  who  dismissed  the  appeal,  but  that   determination   was
    subsequently quashed by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal and the  matter
    was remitted for hearing by a different Adjudicator.  That hearing took
    place on 18 February 1997 and the Adjudicator was Mr L J Smith.   Again
    the appeal against refusal of asylum was dismissed, and leave to appeal
    that decision was refused by the Tribunal.

4.    Before Mr Smith the Appellant said that  he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in August 1993.  He produced an affidavit purportedly sworn  by
    his mother in which she deposed to the fact her younger  son  had  been
    killed by the police in a false encounter in 1991 and  her  son,  Mohan
    Singh (the name under which the Appellant went for a  period  of  time)
    was also said to be a member of the Khalistan Commando Force (KCF)  and
    to be required by the police.

5.    In evidence before Mr Smith the Appellant said that his  brother  was
    in fact killed in December 1989 and his mother  was  in  error  in  the
    affidavit.  He said that he had never been  a  member  of  a  political
    party either in the United Kingdom or in India and in fact it  was  his
    brother who belonged to the KCF.  He had had some dealings with the KCF
    because of his brother's membership  of  that  organisation,  and  when
    members of the KCF visited his home during his  brother's  lifetime  he
    would take them food and drinks, but he said that he did  not  see  any
    arms.

6.    Mr Smith concluded at page 10 of his determination that  he  believed
    very  little  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  which  he  found  to   be
    implausible, full of contradictions, and in the main untrue.   He  went
    on to say at page 12 that he did not believe the central matters in the
    Appellant's claim for asylum.  He noted  the  discrepancy  between  the
    dates given by the Appellant and his mother as to the year in which his
    brother was killed and commented that he could  not  imagine  a  mother
    getting the year wrong.  He also noted the conflict in  their  evidence
    as to whether or not the Appellant was a member of the KCF.   He  noted
    that the Appellant emphatically denied being a member  in  contrast  to
    what his mother said.  Mr Smith also concluded that a letter  from  the
    Gravesend Asian Community Service Agency of 16 August 1993 was a  gross
    exaggeration if the Appellant was telling the truth since it  spoke  in
    terms of the Appellant having links with the organisations fighting for
    the freedom of Khalistan especially the KCF and  that  he  faced  heavy
    torture and persecution by the police when he was in  India.   All  the
    Appellant had claimed was that he was beaten up and as  we  have  noted
    above denied having links with the KCF and other organisations fighting
    for the freedom of Khalistan.

7.    Mr Smith also noted a letter written from a person who  is  described
    as the Appellant's advocate who the Appellant said he did not know  and
    he was not his advocate.  Again  the  contents  of  that  document  was
    significantly at variance with what  the  Appellant  claimed  including
    stating that he was a member of the KCF and that criminal  false  cases
    were pending against him.  Mr Smith commented this letter  was  totally
    untrue.  Nor did Mr Smith believe  that  it  took  the  Appellant  some
    eighteen months before an agent was able to arrange for  him  to  leave
    India.  That and other matters considered in the first  main  paragraph
    at page 12 of the determination are perhaps not central  to  his  claim
    but nevertheless were indicative of further matters  which  caused  the
    Adjudicator to disbelieve the Appellant.

8.    At the appeal before Mr Dearden, he noted the refusal  letter  of  27
    August 2003 and another  supplementary  undated  refusal  letter.   The
    letter of 27 August 2003 dealt with the Appellant's wish to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of length of residence.  It noted  that
    the Appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely
    on 8 August 1993 and had therefore only lived in the United Kingdom for
    ten years, although when interviewed upon entering IS detention  on  14
    July 2003 he claimed that he had been in the United Kingdom since 1989,
    though it was said that no evidence had been provided to  support  this
    claim.  The letter went on to  refer  to  paragraphs  276  A-E  of  the
    Immigration Rules which were introduced on 1 April 2003 to reflect  the
    previous ministerial statement concerning the  question  of  "normally"
    regularising the immigration status of those who  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for ten years and also applied to people who had resided
    in the United Kingdom for fourteen years or  more  either  lawfully  or
    unlawfully.   The  point  was  made  that  the  Appellant   could   not
    demonstrate either ten years lawful residence or fourteen years  lawful
    and/or unlawful so  he  could  not  benefit  from  the  long  residence
    concession.  Consideration was given to whether it would be appropriate
    to allow him to remain outside  the  Rules  exceptionally  but  it  was
    concluded that there were insufficient circumstances to  justify  this.
    It was noted that he had deliberately sought  to  evade  or  circumvent
    immigration control by absconding from temporary admission.

9.    Consideration was also given to the Article 3 claim and the Article 8
    claim that he made, at paragraph 7 of the letter  onwards.   The  point
    was noted at paragraph 12 that when the Appellant was interviewed on 14
    July 2003 he stated that he had had a passport  issued  in  Birmingham,
    valid for one year, with the intention of returning to  India  but  did
    not go as he became unwell.  He further  stated  that  the  reason  for
    returning was to live in India but that he had changed his mind  as  he
    did not get on with his son who lived there.  It was considered that he
    had changed his date of arrival purely to  benefit  from  the  fourteen
    year policy of lawful and/or unlawful residence.

10.   Before Mr Dearden the Appellant's representative, Mr Lyall, indicated
    that Article 8 of the Human Rights Act was not being pursued at all and
    the only issues that the Adjudicator needed  to  trouble  himself  with
    were the fourteen  year  concession  and  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

11.   With regard to the fourteen year point, the Appellant maintained that
    from 1989 he had worked on the M40 road project.   He  had  been  given
    wage slips but said he had destroyed them six or seven years  ago.   He
    had produced a letter from a Mr Madigan who stated that  he  had  first
    met the Appellant in 1988 or 1989 at  the  time  when  they  were  both
    working for a company called Rehene Construction Limited.  He  recalled
    that Mr Singh worked for this company for about two months and the next
    time he saw him was in 1994 by which time Mr Madigan had set up his own
    business and Mr Singh approached him for employment and thereafter  had
    worked for him in his construction company.  This statement is dated 15
    October 2003.  It was said that Mr Madigan wished to give evidence  but
    was unavailable on the date of the hearing since he was  moving  house.
    An adjournment was sought to enable oral evidence to  be  given  by  Mr
    Madigan.  The Adjudicator considered the matter  and  decided  that  he
    would not adjourn and that he would attach such weight to Mr  Madigan's
    signed witness statement as he thought appropriate.

12.    Thereafter  the  Adjudicator  went  on  to   consider   Mr   Smith's
    determination,  taking  account  of  the  starred  Immigration   Appeal
    Tribunal determination in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  containing
    guidelines as  to  how  the  second  Adjudicator  should  approach  the
    determination of a first Adjudicator who has heard  an  appeal  by  the
    same  Appellant.   The  Adjudicator  found  the   Appellant   to   lack
    credibility, taking account of Mr Smith's determination and also on the
    basis of the Appellant's witness statement  and  oral  evidence  before
    him.  He concluded that the Appellant had lied about the date  when  he
    first entered the United Kingdom in an effort to bring his case  within
    the provisions of paragraph 276 of HC 395.  Having found  him  to  lack
    credibility he consequently decided not to place very much weight as he
    put it on the statement of Mr Madigan.

13.   Thereafter he went on to consider the Article 3 appeal and  concluded
    that the Appellant did not face a real risk of  his  Article  3  rights
    being violated on return, bearing in mind the  objective  evidence  and
    concluding that even if there were a real risk there  was  an  internal
    flight alternative.

14.   The Adjudicator's determination was challenged  essentially  on  five
    basis, as helpfully  summed  up  by  the  Vice  President  who  granted
    permission to appeal.  The first was that he was in error in  rejecting
    the Appellant's evidence, secondly that he  had  attached  insufficient
    weight to  Mr  Madigan's  statement,  thirdly  that  he  erred  in  his
    assessment of the Article 3 claim, fourthly that he had  erred  in  his
    conclusions regarding the issue of internal relocation, fifthly that he
    had attached undue weight to the findings of Mr Smith.

15.   At the start of the hearing we put a  point  to  Mr  Gill  concerning
    paragraph 276B(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules.  The relevant provisions
    of paragraph 276B(i)(b) state as follows.

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite  leave
         to remain on the ground of long residence in  the  United  Kingdom
         are that:


         (i)      (a)  he has had at  least  ten  years  continuous  lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom; or


            (b)   he has had at least fourteen years  continuous  residence
                  in the United Kingdom, excluding any periods spent in the
                  United Kingdom following  service of  removal  directions
                  under paragraphs 8,  9,  10,  10A,  12,  13,  and  14  of
                  Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act or Section 10 of the 1999 Act,
                  or of a notice of intention to deport him from the United
                  Kingdom."

16.   We put it to Mr Gill that since it appeared from the IS151B  form  in
    the papers before us that the Appellant was served on 21 May 1994  with
    a notice form IS151A informing him that he was an  illegal  entrant  as
    defined in  Section  33(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  and  that
    directions had now been given for his removal from the  United  Kingdom
    by a specified aircraft to India 2200 hours on 31 December 1994,  under
    paragraph 9 or 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, that accordingly  even
    if he had been in the United  Kingdom  since  1988,  since  any  period
    subsequent to 21 May 1994 had to be excluded from any  period  of  time
    purporting to make up the fourteen years continuous  residency  in  the
    United Kingdom, that his claim under this heading could not succeed.

17.   Mr Gill argued that the Secretary of State had a discretion as to how
    he dealt with long residence  applications  and  he  could  apply  them
    either strictly or in a more relaxed way.  The Rules stemmed  from  the
    Secretary of State's discretionary policy.  The Secretary of State  had
    not placed reliance on the Rule which came from the policy.  The  point
    had not been taken by the Secretary of State against the Appellant  and
    Mr Gill argued that the Tribunal should not apply it  and  it  was  too
    late for the Secretary of State to take the point.

18.   He argued that if the Tribunal were against him on this then it would
    need to remit the appeal to an Adjudicator if the  other  arguments  on
    remittal were correct and the Appellant had been denied the essence  of
    a fair hearing at trial.  A new Adjudicator would consider whether even
    if the Rule were in play the Secretary of State's failure  to  exercise
    his discretion to ignore the Rule was not in accordance  with  the  law
    and the Adjudicator would need to look at it in Article 8  terms.   The
    Secretary of State had to weigh up the factors in effecting the Article
    8 balance.  But in any event if the Secretary of  State  did  not  rely
    upon the Rule then he was precluded from doing so.

19.   Ms Sigley referred us to the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 27  August
    2003 which at  paragraph  3  referred  to  paragraph  276  A-E  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  contended  that  the   Appellant   could   not
    demonstrate either ten years lawful residence or fourteen years  lawful
    and/or unlawful residence.  She accepted that the  point  that  we  had
    raised was not specifically mentioned, but the Secretary of  State  had
    said that the Appellant did not come within the Rule and also the issue
    was there and he did not meet the resident's requirements of the  Rule.
    It was not the only reason for the refusal also as could be  seen  from
    paragraph 4 with reference to the  Appellant  deliberately  seeking  to
    evade  or  circumvent  immigration  control.   The  matter   had   been
    considered outside the Rules and that could not be reviewed.

20.   By way of reply Mr Gill argued that paragraph 3 of that  letter  said
    that the conditions were not met and this was in  very  general  terms.
    Also evidence had been produced that the  Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for fourteen years and the matter had been  reconsidered
    in the undated letter of 2003 at the back of  the  bundle.   This  took
    into account the evidence and implied that that was what concerned  the
    Secretary of State and there was no reference to  paragraph  276B(i)(b)
    at all.  Hence the discretion had been exercised on an  unlawful  basis
    and if it was going to be relied on this should be done properly and it
    would have to go back to the Secretary of State to  decide  whether  he
    relied on it and it was not for the Tribunal to do so.

21.   We put to Mr Gill that Ms Sigley  appeared  to  be  relying  on  this
    provision and he said that it was not the decision of a  decision-maker
    who was balancing all the relevant factors and coming  to  an  informed
    decision.

22.   We put it to Mr Gill that it was clear from paragraph  276  that  the
    application could not succeed if the requirements of the Rules were not
    met.  There was not a discretion contained within the  Rule.   Mr  Gill
    argued that that was not Article 8 compliant.  Mr Gill argued that  the
    Secretary of State needed to be specific  and  the  Rule  came  from  a
    policy and it was relevant to know  how  to  apply  the  Rule  and  the
    Secretary of State might note the Rule but not rely upon  it.   If  the
    Secretary of State chose not to rely on a part of a Rule it was not for
    the Tribunal to decide  to  apply  it  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision should be taken at face value.

23.   We adjourned for a few minutes to give consideration to the arguments
    on  this  point.   We  concluded  that  it  was  clear  that  paragraph
    276B(i)(b) was applicable to this case.  It is clear that from  21  May
    1994 at which time the Appellant was  served  with  removal  directions
    under paragraphs 9 or 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act that the  period
    thereafter has to be excluded from  the  period  of  residence  in  the
    United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  compliance  with   the   Rule.
    Accordingly even if the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 1988 he
    would not be able to satisfy the requirements of the  Rule.   The  fact
    that the Rule derives originally from a concession on the part  of  the
    Secretary of State does not appear to us to have relevance to what is a
    clear Rule which has clear application to this appeal.  We can  see  no
    possible benefit arising from remittal of this matter for consideration
    by an  Adjudicator.   An  Adjudicator  could  only  come  to  the  same
    conclusion as that to which we have come.  Ms Sigley is clearly relying
    on this Rule.  We accept that the matter was  not  specifically  relied
    upon in the previous documentation from the Secretary of State, but  it
    would  be  wholly  artificial  for  us  to  ignore  the  existence  and
    implications of this Rule either in the hearing before us or deem it to
    be a matter that could only properly  be  dealt  with  by  Adjudicator.
    Accordingly, we stated that we were against Mr Gill on this  point  and
    the matter would not be remitted to an Adjudicator  and  it  was  clear
    from the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  could  not  comply  with  the
    requirements of the fourteen years continuous residence Rule even if he
    came to the United Kingdom in 1988 or1989.

24.   The next point we raised with Mr Gill which indeed had  been  touched
    on in part of his submissions to us on the  fourteen  years  continuous
    residence point, was the  issue  of  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.   This  formed  part  of  the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the
    Adjudicator and was considered by the Secretary of State in the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter of 27 August 2003 to which we have  referred  above.
    We have noted above however, that Mr Lyall made it clear, and  this  is
    recorded at paragraph  25  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  that
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Act was not being pursued at all and that
    the only issues with which the Adjudicator needed  to  trouble  himself
    were the  fourteen year concession and Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  Accordingly the Adjudicator did not come to conclusions on
    Article 8 and nor has his decision been challenged on the basis of  his
    failure to do so.  We put it to Mr Gill that on  the  face  of  it,  it
    appeared that Article 8 was not before us.

25.   Mr Gill argued that the point that the Tribunal had just ruled on was
    not at issue before the Adjudicator, and as a  consequence  this  might
    well be why Mr Lyall had decided to concentrate his submissions on  the
    continuous residence point rather than on Article 8.  He argued that if
    the Tribunal took the approach the requirements of paragraph 276B  were
    not satisfied then that would be it to act  in  a  way  which  was  not
    compliant with Article 8.  In effect Mr Gill argued that the Rule  fell
    foul of Article 8 and suggested that  it  might  be  possible  for  the
    Tribunal to excise it.  He also made the point that the Adjudicator was
    a public authority and even though the matter was withdrawn from him he
    still had to satisfy himself that Article 8 was complied  with  and  it
    was an error of law not to consider it.

26.   Ms Sigley argued that the representative had chosen not to pursue the
    issue and it was not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  do  so  today.   The
    Secretary of State had considered all the relevant issues.

27.   Mr Gill asked formally to be allowed to vary his grounds of appeal to
    enable him to argue Article 8.

28.   Upon consideration we have concluded that we are against Mr  Gill  on
    this point.  The Tribunal is a creature of statute.  It is  clear  from
    Section 101(1) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  that
    a party to an appeal to an Adjudicator under Section 82 or  83  of  the
    Act may, with the permission of the Tribunal, appeal  to  the  Tribunal
    against the Adjudicator's determination on a  point  of  law.   Against
    that no doubt the point may be made that according to Section  6(1)  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998,

         "It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a  way  which  is
         incompatible with a Convention right."

29.   We do not consider that it can properly be contended  that  where  an
    issue  has  been   specifically   withdrawn   from   an   Adjudicator's
    consideration that it is nevertheless an error of law for  him  not  to
    consider it.  Mr Lyall for his own reasons did not rely upon Article  8
    before the Adjudicator, making it clear that it was not  being  pursued
    at all, and in our view it would have been  clearly  inappropriate  for
    the Adjudicator in the light of the withdrawal of this ground of appeal
    as  it  effectively  was  nevertheless  to  go  on  and  consider   it.
    Accordingly it cannot in our view be said to be an error of law for the
    Adjudicator not to have considered Article 8.  There was  no  challenge
    to his failure to do so in the grounds of appeal  and  we  can  see  no
    possible basis upon which permission would have been granted had such a
    contention been made.  Consequently, we can see no basis upon which the
    application by Mr Gill to vary  the  grounds  of  appeal  can  possibly
    succeed.  He cannot point to an  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the
    Adjudicator in not considering the Article 8 issue.  We do not consider
    that the fact that  the  point  we  have  considered  above  concerning
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules was not argued at that time can
    in any sense be said to be relevant to the decision by Mr Lyall not  to
    argue the Article 8 point.  None of us knows upon what  basis  he  made
    that decision.  In any event, paragraph 276B was clearly before all the
    parties at that stage and was a matter that could have been anticipated
    then as indeed it could have been before us.  With regard to Section  6
    of the Human Rights Act, we do not consider that that can  be  properly
    interpreted as in effect overriding Section 101(1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  There is in our  view  a  significant
    difference between the kind of case  where  a  human  rights  issue  is
    raised very late in the day perhaps as  late  as  the  hearing  in  the
    Tribunal and the Tribunal in the  exercise  of  its  obligations  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act has to consider the  issue,  and  the
    situation we  are  faced  with  here  where  Article  8  was  expressly
    withdrawn from the  consideration  of  the  Adjudicator  who  proceeded
    entirely  properly  thereafter  not  to  consider  Article  8  in   his
    determination.  We do not read Section 6 of the Human Rights Act as  in
    effect expanding the Tribunal's jurisdiction so as to deal with matters
    arising from an Adjudicator's determination which  cannot  properly  be
    described as errors of law.  Accordingly, we  concluded  that  Mr  Gill
    could not be permitted to vary the grounds of appeal and the Article  8
    issue was not before us.

30.    The  remaining  issue  concerns  Article  3  of  the  Human   Rights
    Convention.  Mr Gill mentioned a case of Djebbar which might cause  the
    Devaseelan reasoning to be reconsidered, but accepted that the Tribunal
    was bound by Devaseelan which is a starred determination.  Mr Smith had
    approached the matter on the basis that the Appellant's mother was more
    likely to be correct than the Appellant.  He had seemed to  prefer  her
    evidence as recorded at paragraph 10 of his determination.  He did  not
    seek to address the current risk to a man whose mother said  he  was  a
    member of the KCF.

31.   Mr Dearden had started with Mr Smith's  determination,  but  Mr  Gill
    argued that Mr Dearden  should  not  have  adopted  so  subservient  an
    approach to Mr Smith's determination but should have been  prepared  to
    query it and then look at the matter in a fresh way.  He argued that Mr
    Dearden's reasoning  on  the  Article  3  point  was  affected  by  his
    credibility findings and his assessment of the background evidence  and
    those findings were flawed.  In particular he took us to  paragraph  41
    of the determination of Mr Dearden and the various sub-paragraphs.   As
    regards paragraph 41(i), in 1988 and 1989 there was no right of  appeal
    in an asylum claim and the  only  possible  challenge  was  by  way  of
    judicial review and it was perhaps the case that people had kept  their
    heads down and when the right of appeal came in in 1993  the  Appellant
    might have been advised that he had a better chance of success  because
    he would have a right of appeal to  an  Adjudicator  against  the  Home
    Office decision.  As regards paragraph 41(2)  the  final  sentence  was
    unfair.  There had been no cross-examination and no indication that  he
    had been asked whether he had heard of the concession then.  There  was
    no suggestion in the Home Office documentation that  the  Appellant  at
    that time was aware of the fourteen year concession.

32.   As regards paragraph 41(3) there would not be Inland Revenue evidence
    as he had worked without any tax record.  There was then  the  question
    of the  weight  to  be  attached  to  Mr  Madigan's  statement.   These
    credibility findings were flawed.   The  Adjudicator  had  gone  on  to
    conclude at paragraph 54 that the Appellant was untruthful.  He  should
    have noted that Mr Smith appeared to have accepted that  the  Appellant
    was involved with the KCF.  His finding that he was of interest  to  no
    one  could  not  be  substantiated  if  one  looked   at   Mr   Smith's
    determination.  Mr Smith had not rejected what the  Appellant's  mother
    said about his membership of the KCF.

33.   We asked Mr Gill whether the Appellant having said that he was not  a
    member of the KCF was now saying that he was.  Mr Gill said  his  point
    was that his case all along was that he had not been a KCF  member  and
    he had not been instructed to depart from that.   Mr  Smith's  findings
    however were something else as they suggested the mother  was  accurate
    and the Appellant was not and there could be a lack of clarity,  so  Mr
    Dearden should have looked at the matter more  carefully.   If  he  had
    done so he could have found that at least the Appellant was the brother
    of an ex-KCF member who seemed to have been killed by  the  authorities
    and also Mr Smith's determination left open the  possibility  that  the
    Appellant was in fact a KCF member.

34.   We asked Mr Gill whether he was saying that  the  Adjudicator  should
    have found that the Appellant was a KCF member even though he  said  he
    was not and  Mr  Gill  replied,  yes,  if  he  was  taking  Mr  Smith's
    determination as unquestioned.

35.   We put to Mr Gill that Mr Smith did not say that the Appellant was  a
    KCF member or that he believed the mother.  Mr Gill said, no, but  what
    he did not say was equally instructive and it suggested that the mother
    was more likely to be truthful.  In noting at page 12 the  evidence  he
    accepted and rejected, he did not mention the KCF point and  he  should
    have made a finding and he seemed to  have  accepted  what  the  mother
    said.  Mr Dearden should have applied the care that was lacking.  Being
    a member of the KCF was an extra risk since 11 September.  There was  a
    cycle of violence largely because  of  extrajudicial  killings  of  KCF
    members.  The appeal needed to be remitted.

36.   In her submissions Ms Sigley argued that Mr Dearden was  not  hearing
    the appeal against Mr Smith's determination.  He had  properly  applied
    the Devaseelan principles and had considered risk on  return.   He  had
    properly adopted Mr Smith's findings.  Mr  Smith  had  disbelieved  the
    killing of the  brother  and  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    arrested three times and it was now said that  he  had  not  even  been
    arrested in India.  The credibility assessment was irrelevant  to  risk
    on return but only to whether he was in the  United  Kingdom  in  1989.
    The case now became weak since  he  no  longer  claimed  to  have  been
    detained by the Indian authorities.

37.   The objective evidence was clear.  The situation in  the  Punjab  was
    very much better  than  before  and  the  position  of  the  Sikhs  was
    significantly improved.  Even if he was a person who had  a  low  level
    connection with Sikh separatists he would not be at  risk  today.   She
    reminded  us  of  the  point  in  the  refusal  letter  concerning  the
    application for an Indian passport in July 2002.  She also referred  us
    to paragraph 6.124  and  paragraph  6.136  of  the  Country  Assessment
    concerning  family   connections   with   suspected   separatists   and
    relocation.

38.   By way of reply,  Mr  Gill  argued  that  it  was  the  Adjudicator's
    determination with which we were concerned and he had  not  dealt  with
    the point about the passport  and  so  it  was  not  really  an  issue.
    Credibility was relevant as it was a divisible concept and the case had
    to be seen as a whole and one area concerning credibility affected  the
    entire determination.

39.   With regard to the background evidence, some concerns  remained.   He
    referred us  to  paragraphs  6.90,  6.95,  and  6.109  of  the  Country
    Assessment concerning such matters  as  problems  for  people  actively
    involved in proscribed organisations  and  a  lack  of  action  against
    police who had carried out human rights abuses.  Paragraphs  6.112  and
    6.132 were also of relevance.  On a proper scrutiny of  the  background
    evidence on the basis of Mr Smith's determination the adequate  primary
    findings had not been made.  The appeal required to  be  remitted.   He
    also  argued  that  as  concerns  internal  relocation,  this  was  not
    available for KCF members who would be unsafe anywhere in India.

40.   We have noted above Mr Smith's findings  on  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return in the context of the credibility of the Appellant's claim.  The
    Appellant has maintained the claim that he  is  not  a  KCF  member  or
    terrorist and the only evidence against that is in the affidavit of his
    mother.  The Adjudicator noted the discrepancies as to the date of  the
    killing of the Appellant's brother as between  the  mother's  affidavit
    and the Appellant's evidence.  He commented that he could not imagine a
    mother getting the year wrong in an affidavit which she knew was  going
    to be very important.  He noted the contrast between their evidence  as
    to whether or not the Appellant was a member of the KCF.  This was  one
    of a number of factors, as we have set out above, which caused Mr Smith
    to disbelieve the Appellant.  That determination was challenged but the
    Tribunal refused permission.   We  do  not  consider  that  Mr  Smith's
    determination can properly be interpreted as containing a finding  that
    he preferred the Appellant's mother's evidence as to whether or not  he
    was a member of the KCF.  That is hardly a matter in relation to  which
    the Appellant would tell untruths and clearly his claim  would  be  one
    that would stand a much greater chance of success if he were  a  member
    of that organisation than if he were not.  Equally, we consider that Mr
    Smith was entitled to prefer the mother's evidence concerning the  date
    in which the Appellant's brother died given that as he stated he  would
    not imagine a mother getting the year of her child's killing wrong.  He
    was entitled to find  aspects  of  her  affidavit  more  credible  than
    others.  He viewed the evidence in the round and concluded  as  he  was
    entitled  to  that   the   Appellant's   claim   significantly   lacked
    credibility.

41.   When the matter came before  Mr  Dearden  he  properly  set  out  the
    Devaseelan guidelines at paragraph 36 of  his  determination  and  also
    gave careful consideration to Mr  Smith's  credibility  findings.   The
    Appellant had clearly disowned the letter from the advocate and claimed
    that he was not a member and had never been a member of  the  KCF.   Mr
    Dearden noted the point made by Mr Smith concerning the date  of  death
    of the brother.  He noted that Mr Smith found that  the  Appellant  had
    been arrested on three occasions,  in  January  1990,  June  1990,  and
    February 1992.  On the  Appellant's  claim  as  it  now  stands,  those
    matters cannot be right since it is now the case, as we have seen, that
    he claims to have come to the  United  Kingdom  in  1988  or  1989  and
    therefore his evidence before Mr Smith in this regard on  his  evidence
    as it now   is clearly false.

42.   Mr Dearden went on to consider the Appellant's evidence  before  him.
    He concluded that the Appellant had lied to him.  He found  it  lacking
    in credibility that the Appellant having originally and for a long time
    said that he entered the United Kingdom in August 1993  now  said  that
    that statement was wrong and the reason for  this  was  that  a  fellow
    asylum seeker said that if he gave the true date as being 1988 or  1989
    he feared that he would be deported straight away.  Mr Dearden found it
    inherently lacking in credibility that he would be immediately deported
    because he had been in the country for four years but would not  if  he
    had been only in the country for a week.  The Tribunal  considers  that
    that is a perfectly sound finding.  The suggestion by Mr Gill that  the
    Appellant might not have applied for asylum until 1993 because up until
    that time the only challenge to the Secretary of State's decision would
    have been by way of judicial review whereas thereafter  he  would  have
    been able to challenge  that  decision  by  way  of  an  appeal  to  an
    Adjudicator strikes us as  being  pure  supposition  and  there  is  no
    evidence to substantiate that contention.  We  also  see  force  in  Mr
    Dearden's conclusion that although the  Appellant  is  uneducated,  the
    reason given for not claiming asylum in 1988 or 1989 because  an  agent
    advised him that it would harm his case if he claimed  asylum  straight
    away clearly lacked sense.

43.   As regards paragraph 41(2) of Mr Dearden's  determination,  he  noted
    the maintenance of the Appellant's deception up to  and  including  the
    time when he appeared before Mr Smith in  1997.   Possibly  Mr  Dearden
    went too far when indulging in the  speculation  at  the  end  of  sub-
    paragraph 2 that the Appellant had altered the date when he arrived  in
    order to take advantage of the fourteen year concession, though one can
    understand why he might have felt tempted to express that view, but  it
    is hardly a matter that materially flaws his determination.

44.   He was clearly entitled to note the lack of evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's ability to support the claim that he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1988 or 1989.  The lack of documentation or  any  supporting
    evidence other than the statement of Mr Madigan was  clearly  a  matter
    that the Adjudicator was entitled to take into account.  These  are  in
    any event matters that relate to the Adjudicator's views concerning the
    Appellant's ability to satisfy the requirements of the  fourteen  years
    continuous  residence  point.   It   is   clearly   separate   in   his
    determination from his consideration of the human rights  issues  which
    he thereafter went on  to  consider.   We  do  not  consider  that  his
    findings on the human rights issues are in any sense  affected  by  his
    findings on the  credibility  of  the  claim  in  connection  with  the
    fourteen years continuous  residence  application.   In  any  event  we
    consider that taken as a whole his findings in that  regard  are  sound
    but it is not anyway in any sense determinative of the Article 3 point.

45.   Mr Dearden went on to consider the human rights issues in  particular
    from the Amnesty International Report and a  Country  Report  of  April
    2003 and concluded that the Appellant was not at risk.  He  based  this
    on the Appellant's case that his brother had been  killed  in  1989  or
    1991 and that he himself had been arrested on three occasions  and  was
    at risk on account of his brother's involvement with the group.  We  do
    not consider that it can properly be argued that in effect  Mr  Dearden
    had to operate on the basis that Mr Smith had believed the  Appellant's
    mother's contention that the Appellant was a member of the KCF.  As  we
    have noted above, he found him to lack credibility and cannot  properly
    be taken to have believed the mother's evidence on this point.   As  Ms
    Sigley pointed out, the Appellant's case is weakened by the  fact  that
    he continues to insist that he came to the United Kingdom prior to  the
    time when he has claimed to have been arrested on  three  occasions  in
    India which on his own account of events diminishes  any  interest  the
    authorities would have in  him.   It  is  his  own  case  that  he  has
    maintained throughout that he has never been a member  of  or  involved
    except in a very peripheral way  with  the  KCF,  and  Mr  Dearden  was
    entitled, as indeed we consider we are, to take his case as  being  put
    on that basis.  There is also some  marginal  relevance  to  the  point
    concerning the passport application but that  is  not  a  determinative
    factor in our view.

46.   Both representatives referred us to the India Country Report of April
    2004.  It seems from a Canadian report of 1997 that people who are  not
    high profile militant suspects are not at risk in  Punjab  and  it  was
    also said by one panel member that Sikhs  with  some  slight  perceived
    connection to the militancy - through a family  member  for  example  -
    would not now be targets of the Punjab police.  Earlier in that  report
    at paragraph 6.114 we see from the Amnesty International Report January
    2003 that the majority of the armed  opposition  groups  are  currently
    inactive in Punjab and Amnesty International have received  no  reports
    of acts of torture perpetrated [sic] by their members after the end  of
    the militancy period of the mid-1990s.   We  note  also  the  point  at
    paragraph 6.112 that no more extrajudicial  executions  take  place  in
    Punjab not because of a change of attitude in the  police  but  because
    there is no terrorism left in the Punjab.  Mr Gill commented that  this
    was because all the terrorists had  been  extrajudicially  killed.   We
    note some support for that in paragraph 6.116 where it is said that the
    hardcore militants have either been physically  wiped  out  or  are  no
    longer in India.  It is said that there is no obvious support  for  the
    militants.

47.   Mr Gill accepted that the climate has changed, but  argued  that  for
    example at paragraph 6.90 it is said that in  September  2003  Pakistan
    handed over 16 Sikh prisoners to the Indian  officials  as  a  goodwill
    gesture and the context of this was not explained.  He also referred us
    to paragraph 6.95 of the same report  with  reference  to  torture  and
    custodial violence  continuing  to  be  regularly  reported  in  Punjab
    despite the end of the militancy period, and  the  point  at  paragraph
    6.109 concerning  a  lack  of  any  action  taken  against  100  police
    officials under investigation for abuses committed  whilst  suppressing
    the violent insurgency in Punjab.  We also bear in mind  the  point  to
    which Ms Sigley drew our attention concerning internal  relocation  for
    Sikhs who are said at paragraph 6.136 to be able to relocate  elsewhere
    in India and as Sikhs are a mobile community there are Sikh communities
    all over India.

48.   The Appellant's claim has to be seen in the context of this evidence.
     On his own claim which there is no reason to disbelieve he  has  never
    been a member of the KCF.  The only possible risk he would face on that
    account is by association with his brother who was killed a  number  of
    years ago at a time when militancy was a significant problem in  Punjab
    and it is clear from the evidence that it no longer is.  In the current
    climate we see no real risk to the Appellant on return to  Punjab.   In
    the light of his history as properly found we consider that if he  felt
    any concern about returning to Punjab then it is clear from the Country
    Report that he could relocate elsewhere.  He is not a  KCF  member  and
    there is no reason to suppose that he would be of interest  to  anybody
    anywhere in India whether in Punjab or elsewhere.

49.   This appeal is dismissed.



                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
