

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |MS (Risk on Return -        |
|                           |        |Relocation) Congo           |
|                           |        |-Democratic Republic of     |
|                           |        |[2004] 00010                |
|Date:  15 January 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.....10th February 2004.....                                      |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Chairman)                                                        |
|Mr A A  Lloyd JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us Mr J Dutton, a solicitor with  O'Keefe  Solicitors,  appeared  for
the appellant and Mr A Hutton, a Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared
for the respondent.

The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo.   She  was
born on 15 September 1962.  She appeals the decision of an  Adjudicator,  Mr
D S Corke, who in a determination promulgated on 25 February 2003  dismissed
the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  that
she was not entitled to refugee status and that returning  her  to  the  DRC
was not contrary to her  rights  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.

The Adjudicator summarised the appellant's evidence at paragraph  8  of  his
determination.  He said that the appellant comes from Bukavu  which  is  the
provincial capital of south Kivu in the east of the country  and  she  is  a
member of the Bashi tribe.  Her husband was involved with the FEC which  the
Adjudicator described as a  legal  organisation  similar  to  a  Chamber  of
Commerce.  The rebel group RCD controlled  the  area  and  banned  meetings.
After  a  meeting  on  4  August  2002,  when  the  appellant   had   served
refreshments but was not otherwise involved, rebels came to  the  house  and
arrested her husband and eldest son.  They returned  and  two  rebels  raped
the appellant.  She was then arrested and held for several  days.   She  was
raped daily in detention before being released by a corrupt officer who  was
bribed by her brother-in-law.  She was interrogated during  detention  about
the meeting, firearms, and FEC links with the anti-RCD  Maimai  group.   She
left the country after she had been released.  She could not  return  to  an
RCD area as she would be killed.  The appellant  could  not  get  protection
from the government as the government viewed everyone from  the  east  as  a
rebel.

The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's account of  what  had  happened  to
her in  the  past.   Nevertheless  he  concluded  from  the  fact  that  the
appellant was released from custody on payment of a  bribe  that  the  rebel
forces had no lasting interest in her.

The Adjudicator saw no risk in the event of the appellant being returned  to
Kinshasa.  He found no reliable evidence to support a contrary conclusion.

With respect to the  Adjudicator,  we  cannot  agree  that  he  gave  proper
reasons at paragraph 20 for concluding that the appellant would be  safe  in
the event of her return to her home area.   In  accepting  her  account  the
Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was  detained  by  the  rebels  even
though she had done  little  or  nothing  to  oppose  them.   She  was  then
subjected to the most  appalling  brutal  treatment.   She  had  been  raped
daily.  That is a truly terrible way to treat a person.  Whilst  it  may  be
the case that she was only released on the payment of a  bribe  because  the
rebels had no immediate interest in her we find that it was not open to  the
Adjudicator to conclude that the appellant would be safe in  the  future  if
she returned to that part of the DRC.  The rebels had shown  their  ruthless
nature and if she were available they could return  and  ill-treat  her  any
time they were so minded.

We considered if it was  open  to  the  Adjudicator  to  conclude  that  the
appellant could be returned safely to Kinshasa.  Mr Dutton  argued  that  it
was not.  He submitted that the appellant was at  risk  for  three  reasons.
She is a woman, she came from a notorious "rebel area" and she is  a  member
of the Bashi ethnic group.  This is associated with Rwanda  and  members  of
that group were implicated in the murder of the  late  President  Kabila  in
January 2001.  Some support for this proposition  comes  from  a  translated
newspaper article that appears at page 11 of the appellant's bundle.

Mr Dutton showed us a copy of a letter from the UNHCR dated 9 October 2003.
 This shows that people returned to  the  DRC  "may  face  serious  problems
following  possible  interrogation  conducted  by  security  services   upon
arrival in Kinshasa."  People  with  a  political  or  military  profile  or
people who had sought asylum because of a political or  military  background
may risk arbitrary  detention  and  ill-treatment.   There  have  also  been
reports that Immigration Officers in Kinshasa abuse their powers and  extort
money from returnees.  The UNHCR identified problems arising in the case  of
people who were not Congolese nationals but  had  acquired  a  DRC  passport
properly.  In such cases there had  been  reports  of  people  suspected  of
being nationals of countries considered as unfriendly,  such  as  Uganda  or
Rwanda, being arbitrarily detained and  ill-treated.   It  has  always  been
this appellant's case that she is a national of the DRC.

We were also shown a letter from Mr T  Baster  of  the  organisation  called
Bail for Immigration Detainees dated 25 November 2003.  This letter set  out
the story of "AB" who was returned  from  Heathrow  in  October  2003.   The
returned person's partner received a message on a Saturday  morning  to  say
that he had arrived  at  Kinshasa  Airport  but  was  being  detained.   For
reasons that are not clear his escort provided him with  a  phone.   It  was
reported that AB was beaten by the police when "the English Police were  not
there."  AB was later seen by a person described as  "a  reputable  witness,
known to a number of international human rights organisations" who  reported
that AB was interrogated  by  airport  security  and  then  brought  to  the
Penitentiary Centre at Makala  where  he  was  held  in  inhuman  conditions
without family visits or assistance.  He  had  been  persecuted  during  his
detention for  having  pursued  subversive  activities  abroad  against  the
regime of President Kabila.  Mr Baster very honestly added that  there  had
been an uncorroborated report that AB had now  been  released.   The  letter
also detailed a report from "DE"  who  was  detained  when  he  returned  to
Kinshasa.

In a reply dated 5 December 2003 the Director  General  of  the  Immigration
and  Nationality  Directorate  said  that  there  had  been  a   clear   and
significant improvement in the human rights and political  situation  during
the year.  There was no objective evidence to support allegations of  either
systematic or arbitrary detention or  ill-treatment  of  returnees  and  the
British Ambassador in Kinshasa  had  not  seen  evidence  that  local  human
rights organisations have concerns about  the  safety  of  people  returned.
Belgium and the Netherlands have found no evidence that returnees face  ill-
treatment.  He did not accept that there was a general problem.

We have to say that we do not find either of these documents to  be  of  any
great assistance.  Whilst we are confident that the  letter  from  the  Home
Office sets out honestly the information received  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose that the British Ambassador in  Kinshasa  has  made  any  particular
effort to look for evidence of ill-treatment of returnees or concerns  about
their safety from human rights organisations.   We  do  conclude  from  this
letter that there is not a  general  problem.   It  is  not  the  case  that
everyone who is returned to Kinshasa  is  routinely  ill-treated.   If  that
were the case it would have come to the attention of the British  Ambassador
either directly or through his  contacts,  particularly  those  representing
the interests of Belgium and the Netherlands.

Similarly, Mr Baster is well known to Adjudicators and the Tribunal  and  we
are confident that he will have set out honestly  the  information  reported
to him.  However, the  fact  that  he  knows  of  cases  where  people  have
complained that they have been ill-treated does not help us on its own.   We
do not know what sort of case those people had presented and  so  we  cannot
use their experiences as an indication of the kind of categories  of  people
who may be at risk.  It is worrying to  know  that  anybody  has  been  ill-
treated on return to the DRC but it does not take matters any further.

We have been referred to several cases.  In Sinanduku v Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 05060 promulgated on  31  October  2002
Mr Latter's Tribunal considered the risks of a  woman  being  raped  in  the
event of her being returned to the Congo.  He  said  at  paragraph  9,  "The
background evidence certainly shows there  is  a  possibility  and  to  that
extent a risk of rape in the Congo but because the general risk  exists  for
all, it does not follow that there is a  real  risk  for  each  individual."
With respect we adopt that analysis of  the  background  material  and  that
reasoning.  We do not do this lightly.   We  accept  that  serious  violence
against women is a frequent event in the DRC but that does not  establish  a
real risk for this particular appellant.  We conclude that the appellant  is
not at risk simply because she is a woman.

An appellant's appeal was allowed in the case  of  Diavova  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 01474  decided  by  the  Tribunal
chaired by His Honour Judge P M Lakin.  It was a particular feature of  that
case  that  the  appellant  there  was  a  Hutu  and  is  thus  specifically
identifiable as a Rwandan.  It was an  important  element  in  a  series  of
cumulative factors that led to her  appeal  being  allowed.   We  have  been
shown the case known as [2003] UKIAT 00012 B (DR Congo).   The  Tribunal  in
that case accepted that the appellant would be detained in the event of  his
return.  We see no reason to make such a finding in this case.

We were then shown Kabua v Secretary of State [2002]  UKIAT  07457  notified
on 28 March 2003.  This case turns on its  own  particular  facts  including
the fact that the appellant was going to be interrogated on his return  when
incriminating aspects of his background could be expected to  emerge.   That
is very far from the case here.  It is this  appellant's  account  that  she
was in trouble in the east of the country because her husband  was  involved
with a pro-government group, the Maimai.  We were then shown the case  known
as [2003] UKIAT 00071 M (DR Congo) where  the  Tribunal  said  at  paragraph
43(b), "In order  to  run  a  real  risk  of  being  taken  into  detention,
following the screening of the detainee at Kinshasa Airport, there  must  be
something further in the returnees background, such  as  past  political  or
military activities or nationality that the state regarded  hostile  to  the
DRC".  With great respect we adopt that position.  Nothing  has  been  shown
to cause us to take a different view.

We have also been shown the case known as [2003] UKIAT 00058  L  (DR  Congo)
which emphasised that some people can be returned safely to Congo.

We have given careful consideration to the  unidentified  newspaper  article
that claims that people from south Kibu are associated with  the  attack  on
General Major Joseph Kabila.  According to that article, "Latest  from  Kibu
said that most people accused are from  Dashi  ethnic  group  associated  to
Rwandan not only because they share the same border but they are also  often
to get married each others and vice versa".  Clearly the document  has  been
imperfectly translated.   Its  provenance  is  not  clear.   However,  there
really is no reason to find this appellant  would  be  associated  with  the
Rwandans.

We accept that the summary  given  in  00071  M  is  not  intended  to  have
statutory force.  Neither does it purport to  set  out  an  exclusive  list.
However we cannot see any reason for concluding that a  person  who  is  not
linked with Rwanda or any kind  of  rebel  activity  and  who  has  been  in
trouble in the east because she was related to someone  who  took  a  modest
stand against rebel activity would be at risk  in  the  DRC.   As  indicated
above it  is  not  the  case  that  everyone  detained  there  is  routinely
tortured.  We  cannot  see  why  the  authorities  would  have  any  adverse
interest in this appellant.

It follows that we see  no  material  error  in  the  determination  and  we
dismiss this appeal.
                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
                                                             27 January 2004
