

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |GM (Risk on Return -        |
|                           |        |Internal Flight - Test)     |
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00035                       |
|Date:  20 February 2004    |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|02 March 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)                                          |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Dr T Okitikpi                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                           |        |(CLAIMANT)                  |


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent: Ms R Akther  of  Counsel  representing  Malik  &  Malik,
                   solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  with   permission   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs V Woolf, promulgated 4 July 2003
      wherein she allowed an appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
      who had refused entry and asylum and human rights claims.

      The Adjudicator's Decision

2.    The Adjudicator found that the applicant had arrived in  this  country
      on 19 September 2001 (that is a few months before the removal  of  the
      Taliban regime from the administration of Afghanistan) and had claimed
      asylum on the basis of his fear of the Taliban because he had  been  a
      victim of torture and detention at the hands of the  Taliban  in  July
      2001, along with several of his brothers.  He came from  the  area  of
      Paktia and was of Pashtun ethnicity. He claimed he had been  arrested,
      tortured and beaten for refusing to fight for  the  Taliban.   In  the
      appeal before the Adjudicator the claimant expressed his case  on  the
      basis of residual fears of those members of the Taliban that remain in
      Afghanistan and also the Northern Alliance who were  targeting  ethnic
      Pashtuns.

3.    The Adjudicator found the claimant to  be  credible  and  went  on  to
      consider the objective background set out in the CIPU Report that  was
      before  her  (April  2003).  She  considered  on  the  basis  of  that
      information, and UNHCR reports referred to, that continuing  risks  to
      security at the hands of the Taliban were indicated in  the  provinces
      of Paktia, Zabul and Khost. She then stated that having  accepted  the
      core of the claimant's case that "I find his subjective  fear  of  the
      Taliban in Paktia to be supported by the background materials."

4.    She went on to consider the  possibility  of  internal  relocation  to
      Kabul and closely considered the provisions set out in paragraph 6.106
      of the CIPU Report in relation to Kabul and particularly the situation
      for a young single man, estranged from his family  who  did  not  come
      from Kabul.  She concluded that it was unlikely that he would be given
      any priority by the aid  agencies  or  other  organisations  providing
      services to those flocking to Kabul, "In these circumstances, I do not
      find it reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul."

5.    She went on to consider the human rights  claim  and  also  considered
      there would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR were he to be sent to
      either Paktia or Kabul "where conditions  are  such  that  he  may  be
      forced to live in inhuman and degrading circumstances with  no  access
      to proper housing or means of supporting himself.  He  has  no  family
      connections there upon which he could rely."

6.    The appeal was therefore allowed under both grounds.

      The Appellant's Submissions

7.    Mr Gulvin submitted to us  that  the  grounds  fell  into  two  areas;
      firstly the risk on  return  to  his  home  district  of  Paktia,  and
      secondly the internal flight or relocation alternative.  He  submitted
      to us, in support of the internal relocation alternative to Kabul, the
      Court of Appeal determination in AE and FE [2003] EWCA  Civ  1032  and
      the decision of this Tribunal [2003] UKIAT 00075 AL  (Afghanistan),  a
      decision of Vice President Mr Batiste.

8.    In relation to the first ground he submitted that the Adjudicator  had
      made an error of law in her assessment of the  objective  information,
      that was before her, to the extent that the determination was perverse
      and thus there was an error of law.  He submitted that a consideration
      of the CIPU Report, both that of April  2003,  which  was  before  the
      Adjudicator,  and  the  more  recent  October  2003  Report(   6.208),
      indicated that UNHCR Kabul reported, while the Taliban did  not  exist
      as a powerful movement, but there are groups closely  associated  with
      the movement who constitute a security problem engaging in  activities
      in the provinces of Paktia  Zabul and Khost.  He submitted  that  this
      did not indicate the real risk of this appellant suffering persecution
      or serious ill-treatment at the hands of such remnants of the  Taliban
      and the Adjudicator had failed to correctly assess the reality of risk
      to this claimant.  On the issue of  internal  flight  he  agreed  that
      problems would be encountered by all  returnees  to  Kabul.   However,
      contrary to the conclusion of the Adjudicator,  as  a  single  man  of
      Pashtun ethnicity, it would not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  for
      him to relocate.  He asked us to adopt the  findings  in  AE  and  FE(
      paragraph 59), and in particular the approval of the unduly harsh test
      set out in Karanakaran [2003] 3 All ER  449  by  Brooke  LJ  where  he
      stated:

           "Although this is not the  language  of  'inability',  with  its
           connotation of impossibility, it is still a very vigorous  test.
           It is not sufficient for the applicant to show that it would  be
           unpleasant for him to live there, or indeed harsh to expect  him
           to live there.  He must show that it would be unduly harsh."


9.    In this situation, based  on  the  objective  situation  in  the  CIPU
      Reports that were before the Adjudicator there was, in his submission,
      nothing to indicate that the situation  for  the  applicant  in  Kabul
      would be unduly harsh.  This situation of a required test was not  met
      and  the  determination  of  the  Adjudicator  was  flawed.   He  also
      submitted that on the comparative test between Paktia  and  Kabul,  as
      outlined on AE and FE, that indeed the situation  in  Kabul  would  be
      better than that the claimant would face in his home district.

10.   On the issue of Article 3 risks he  submitted  that  firstly,  on  the
      same basis as  the  asylum  assessment,  there  were  not  substantial
      grounds for concluding there would be a  real  risk  of  a  breach  of
      Article 3 if he was returned to his home district.  In relation to his
      possible relocation to Kabul, he submitted that, we should follow  the
      determination of AL UKIAT 00076 (Afghanistan) which concluded that the
      issue which had to be decided on such relocation was whether there was
      a real risk of Article 3 in the form of torture, inhuman or  degrading
      treatment in the place of suggested relocation.

11.   He submitted that this was clearly  not  indicated  by  the  objective
      information and that the conclusions of  the  Adjudicator  were  again
      flawed in this regard.

      The Claimant's Submissions

12.    Ms Akther submitted to us that the determination of  the  Adjudicator
      was a well  reasoned  and  detailed  examination  of  all  the  issues
      involved.  The Adjudicator had correctly relied on the CIPU Reports as
      to the security problems still existing in the province of Paktia from
      Taliban supporters and that the conclusions reached by the Adjudicator
      were thus validly open to her.

13.   She submitted that the later CIPU Reports indicated that  the  Taliban
      were continuing to  regroup,  particularly  in  the  south  where  the
      claimant  came  from,  and  that  the  volatile  situation  should  be
      recognised as putting this claimant more at risk.

14.   In relation to the internal  flight  issues  she  submitted  that  the
      transitional government in Kabul was well known only to  exercise  any
      form of jurisdiction in that city and little  beyond.   She  submitted
      that following the determination in AE and FE it  could  be  concluded
      that the relocation of this claimant to Kabul would  be  unduly  harsh
      when cumulatively assessed against the ability  of  this  claimant  to
      find housing and basic survival support.  In addition she asked us  to
      note that the claimant did not have family connections  in  Kabul  and
      that this would make his ability to reintegrate more  difficult.   She
      noted that this had been highlighted in the  CIPU  Report  (paragraphs
      6.61, 6.62 and 6.201-203.

15.   She submitted also that the ability  of  this  claimant  to  have  the
      basic needs for  survival  had  been  recognised  by  the  Adjudicator
      correctly and that accordingly her assessment that there  would  be  a
      breach of Article 3  was  also  correct  and  sustainable.  We  should
      therefore dismiss the appeal.

      The Issues

16.   We found the issues before us to be whether  the  conclusions  of  the
      Adjudicator were validly open to her, or  were  there  errors  in  the
      assessment to the extent that the  determination  is  an  unsafe  one;
      either on the issue of return to the claimant's home district,  or  on
      the  internal  relocation  alternative.    Secondly,   if   there   is
      substantive error in the determination, on the objective evidence what
      conclusions would we ourselves reach?

      Decision

17.   We are satisfied that all grounds submitted by the Secretary of  State
      have merit.  We consider that the Adjudicator has been in error in her
      assessment of the risks to this claimant on return to Paktia.  She has
      given a good analysis of the objective information that was before her
      but has failed to carry out the essential assessment of the  real,  as
      opposed to remote or speculative, risks that this claimant would  face
      on return to his home district.  The Adjudicator has heavily relied on
      the CIPU Report which states that there  are  security  concerns  from
      remnants of the Taliban in the province  of  Paktia.   This,  however,
      does not indicate specific  risks  to  a  person  of  this  claimant's
      profile.  Assessment of the objective information, as applied  to  the
      facts, has not been carried out and accordingly the  determination  is
      in error at that point.

18.    In  addition  the  assessment  of  the   internal   flight/relocation
      alternative is flawed both in respect of the  Refugee  Convention  and
      ECHR grounds.  The asylum claim has not  been  correctly  assessed  in
      this regard as the Adjudicator  has  failed  to  give  weight  to  the
      "unduly harsh test" relying solely on  whether  or  not  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate (see paragraph  56).  As
      noted above the determination in AE and FE stresses the  unduly  harsh
      test and the need to consider not only that the  conditions  could  be
      harsh but "unduly harsh".

19.   In this situation we find error in the assessment of  the  Adjudicator
      on all issues.  We have  then  considered  the  objective  information
      ourselves.  We are fully satisfied that considering the  CIPU  Reports
      and other objective evidence this claimant's case does not indicate  a
      real, as opposed to a remote or speculative, risk to him on return  to
      his home district.  His profile and that of his family in the past has
      not been a significant one.   Their  problems  with  the  Taliban  had
      arisen through  a  failure  to  serve  with  the  Taliban.   There  is
      certainly no indication in the objective evidence that the Taliban are
      actively recruiting people to serve with them in the manner  they  did
      when they were in power.  The security issues  set  out  in  the  CIPU
      Report,  at  most,  refers  to  random  security  riskd  rather   than
      widespread substantive control and enforcement by the Taliban.

20.   Even if we are incorrect on that matter we consider that the  internal
      relocation alternative is available to this claimant and it would  not
      be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to  undertake  it.   We  agree
      that the situation may be unpleasant and , because he does not have  a
      family network, he may have to live  in  a  camp  and  encounter  poor
      conditions.  There is  no  indication,  however,  from  the  objective
      evidence that those conditions would be unduly harsh.  He is a  single
      man, clearly with the ability to assist in the rebuilding of  his  own
      country.  He would be in  Kabul  as  a  person  without  any  previous
      profile in that city, where the majority ethnic group is Pashtun.

21.   Finally, on the Article 3 issue we agree and  adopt  the  decision  of
      Batiste VP in L -UKIAT 00076 (Afghanistan).   The  objective  evidence
      simply does not indicate that  this  claimant  would  suffer  torture,
      inhuman or degrading treatment if he  were  returned  to  Kabul.   The
      threshold for Article 3 is a high one, as recently  indicated  in  the
      determination of Laws LJ in "N".

22.   In the circumstances we are satisfied that the  determination  of  the
      Adjudicator is a substantially flawed one and for the reasons set  out
      above this appeal is allowed.
                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President






