
CA (Date of decision - Evidence) Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00243
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date of Hearing: 25 May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            1 September 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                         Mr K Drabu (Vice President)
                       Mr C P Mather (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                        Immigration Officer, Heathrow
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Miss M Bhamra, instructed by Chase Christopher
                       Roberts & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Offficer

Paragraph 321A(5) of HC 395 imports a discretion and section 84(1)(f) of
the 2002 Act therefore applies to it.  Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act
entitles and requires the Adjudicator to consider evidence arising after
the date of the decision in assessing the position at the date of the
decision.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who has been in this country  as
     a student.  He  was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a  student  on  12
     September 2002.  That entry clearance took effect under section  3A(3)
     of the 1971 Act and Part II of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
     Remain) Order 2000  (SI  2000/1161)  as  leave  to  enter  the  United
     Kingdom.

  2. On the Appellant's last arrival in the  United  Kingdom,  on  10  June
     2003, it duly took effect as leave to enter.  When he  passed  through
     customs his luggage was examined and it was found to contain a  number
     of Nigerian passports, one of which was forged.  This was reported  to
     the  Immigration  Officer,  who,  with  the  authority  of   a   Chief
     Immigration Officer, decided to cancel the Appellant's leave to enter.
      That decision was expressly taken by reference  only  to  the  forged
     passport, not the other passports which the  Appellant  was  carrying.
     The notice of decision is dated 11 July 2003 and is headed "Notice  of
     Refusal of Leave to Enter".  The substantive part  of  it  is  in  the
     following terms:

           "On 12 September 2002 you were given entry clearance  which  has
           effect as leave to enter the United Kingdom  on  10  June  2003.
           However, you were subsequently found in possession of  a  forged
           passport and from the information  available  to  me,  it  seems
           right to cancel your leave on the  ground  that  your  exclusion
           from the United Kingdom is conducive to the public good.


           I therefore cancel your continuing leave.   If  your  leave  was
           conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have the  effect
           of cancelling your entry clearance."


  3. Despite the rather odd circumstance  that  the  title  of  the  notice
     refers to refusal of leave to enter, which  is  not  mentioned  again,
     this  notice  does  appear  to  be  in  proper  form.   The  statutory
     provisions are in paragraph 2A of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act:

           "Examination of persons who arrive with continuing leave
           2A(1) This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived in  the
                 United Kingdom with leave to enter which is  in  force  but
                 which was given to him before his arrival.
              2) He may be  examined  by  an  immigration  officer  for  the
                 purpose of establishing-
                    a)  whether  there  has  been  such  a  change  in   the
                       circumstances of  his  case,  since  that  leave  was
                       given, that it should be cancelled;
                    b) whether that leave was obtained as a result of  false
                       information given by him or his failure  to  disclose
                       material facts;  or
                    c) whether there are medical grounds on which that leave
                       should be cancelled.
              3) He may also be examined by an immigration officer  for  the
                 purpose of determining whether it would be conducive to the
                 public good for that leave to be cancelled.
           ...
              8) An immigration  officer  may,  on  the  completion  of  any
                 examination of a person under this  paragraph,  cancel  his
                 leave to enter.
              9) Cancellation of a person's leave under subparagraph (8)  is
                 to be treated for the purposes of this act and [Part  5  of
                 the  Nationality,   Immigration   and   Asylum   Act   2002
                 (immigration and asylum appeals)] as if he had been refused
                 leave to enter at a  time  when  he  had  a  current  entry
                 clearance.
           ..."

  4. The effect of the decision is the subject of provision in Article 6(1)
     of SI 2000/1161:

           "(1)  Where an immigration officer exercises his power to cancel
                 leave to enter under paragraph 2A(8) of Schedule 2  to  the
                 Act ... in respect of an entry clearance which  has  effect
                 as leave to enter, the entry clearance shall cease to  have
                 effect."

  5. The Appellant exercised the in-country right of appeal which he has by
     virtue of paragraph 2A(9) of the 1971 Act and his appeal was heard  by
     an Adjudicator on 16 February 2004.  In the  meantime,  the  Appellant
     had been charged with an offence under the Forgery and  Counterfeiting
     Act 1981 and had been acquitted by a jury.  The Adjudicator  dismissed
     the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  ground  that  at  the  date  of  the
     Immigration Officer's decision, he was  entitled,  regardless  of  any
     subsequent acquittal, to  the  take  the  view  that  the  Appellant's
     exclusion was conducive to the public good and  that  the  Adjudicator
     was only concerned  to  consider  whether  the  Immigration  Officer's
     decision was within the range of reasonable options  open  to  him  on
     that date.  As Mr McGirr readily acknowledges, the Adjudicator made  a
     number of errors in his reasoning and thus in his conclusion.

  6. First, this appeal is not under  the  1999  Act,  as  the  Adjudicator
     thought.  It is under the 2002 Act.  The relevant sections of the  Act
     are:

           "82   Right of appeal: general
           (1)   Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
                 person he may appeal to an adjudicator.
           (2)   In this Part 'immigration decision' means-
                 (a)   refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
           ...
           84    Grounds of appeal
           (1)   An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                 decision must be brought on one or more  of  the  following
                 grounds-
           ...
                    f) that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                       exercised  differently  a  discretion  conferred   by
                       immigration rules;
           ...
             85. Matters to be considered
           ...
              4) On an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  or  83(2)  against  a
                 decision an adjudicator may  consider  evidence  about  any
                 matter which he thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the
                 decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a   matter
                 arising after the date of the decision.
              5) But in relation to an appeal under  section  82(1)  against
                 refusal of entry clearance or refusal of a  certificate  of
                 entitlement under section 10-
                    a) subsection (4) shall not apply, and
                    b) the adjudicator may consider only  the  circumstances
                       appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."

  7. The effect of the Adjudicator's error about the statutory  regime  was
     that he thought  that  he  was  dealing  with  a  case  to  which  the
     predecessor of s 85(5) applied.  That was why he refused to take  into
     account the subsequent acquittal.  Even if he had been right about the
     Act, however,  he  would  have  been  wrong  about  the  process.   In
     assessing the circumstances at any particular date in the past, it  is
     right to look at evidence subsequent to that date, provided  that  the
     evidence is relevant to assessing what the circumstances were on  that
     date.  This is a rule of common sense, as well as being  a  very  well
     established rule of law - so well established  that  no  authority  is
     necessary, although perhaps R v IAT ex parte Kotecha [1982] Imm AR  88
     will serve.  Even if the Adjudicator had  been  right  in  considering
     that s 77 of the 1999 Act applied to this appeal, he should have taken
     into account the acquittal as showing that, whatever  the  Immigration
     Officer's suspicions, the  Appellant  was  not  at  the  date  of  the
     decision properly to be regarded as a criminal.  The same would  apply
     in a case to which s 85(5) of the 2002 Act applies.  But although  the
     actual decision in this case  is  cancellation  of  continuing  leave,
     which has the effect of cancelling  entry  clearance,  the  appeal  is
     against refusal of leave to enter, to which s 85(5)  does  not  apply.
     There is therefore in this case no restriction on the  evidence  which
     the Appellant could adduce.

  8. The Adjudicator's third error was to consider this case as  though  it
     were a proportionality case, governed by decisions  such  as  Edore  v
     SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 716 and M (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT 00024*, which he
     cites.  As we attempted to explain  in  Noruwa  [2001]  UKIAT  00016*,
     there is a considerable difference between proportionality  cases  and
     cases  where  the  Adjudicator  is  entitled  to  substitute  his  own
     discretion.  That difference appears very clearly in s 84(1)(f), which
     we have set out above.

  9.  Paragraph  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   which   governs   the
     cancellation of continuing leave to enter,  is  not  lucidly  drafted.
     Unlike paragraph 320, to which it apparently makes reference, there is
     no  clear  dichotomy  within  it  between  mandatory   decisions   and
     discretionary decisions.  The opening words of the paragraph itself do
     not give any indication.  The title of the paragraph  is  "Grounds  on
     which leave to enter or remain which is in force is to be cancelled at
     port or while the holder is outside the  United  Kingdom".   That,  by
     comparison with the first subtitle in paragraph 320 (as compared  with
     the second subtitle) might be taken to  imply  that  all  the  grounds
     within paragraph 321A are matters of mandatory refusal.  That  may  be
     what the Adjudicator thought,  although  he  does  not  refer  in  his
     determination to the title of the paragraph.  If he did think that, we
     disagree with him.  The relevant subparagraph  in  this  case  is  the
     following:

           "(5)   where  from  information  available  to  the  Immigration
                 Officer or the Secretary of State, it seems right to cancel
                 leave on the ground that exclusion from the United  Kingdom
                 is conducive to the public good;  if, for example,  in  the
                 light of the character, conduct  or  associations  of  that
                 person it is undesirable for him to have leave to enter the
                 United Kingdom."

 10. Those words are, mutatis mutandis, the  same  as  those  in  paragraph
     320(19), which governs discretionary refusal  of  entry  clearance  or
     leave to enter.  Further, the words  of  the  subparagraph  themselves
     clearly envisage a discretionary judgment by the Immigration  Officer,
     who is to do what "seems right" to him.  We therefore hold that on its
     true construction  paragraph  321A(5)  is  one  to  which  s  84(1)(f)
     applies.  The Adjudicator is  therefore  entitled  to  substitute  his
     discretion for that of the Immigration Officer.

 11. The basis of the decision was the possession of the  forged  passport.
     Following the Appellant's acquittal, it cannot be said that he  is  to
     be suspected of crime.  Looking at the matter as a whole, and with the
     agreement of Mr McGirr on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  we  find
     that the Adjudicator erred in law in his determination of  the  appeal
     and that he ought to have allowed the appeal on the basis that,  given
     the acquittal, the discretion should have been exercised  differently.
     We therefore allow the Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal  and  direct
     that his entry clearance and continuing leave to enter be restored  to
     force.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
