

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |FD (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection-Roma-Munteanu)   |
|                           |        |Romania CG [2004] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00001                       |
|Date:  2 December 2003     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......12th January 2004......                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mrs E Hurst JP                                                    |
|Mrs S Hussain JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Romania, appeals the determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mrs C A Parker) who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for
      asylum.

2.    The appellant was represented before  us  by  Mr  I  Kumi  of  Counsel
      instructed by Rahman & Co.  Mr J Gulvin appeared for the Secretary  of
      State.

3.     The  appellant  was  born  in  1984.   He  arrived  in  this  country
      accompanied by his wife and their two  daughters.   They  applied  for
      asylum on 12 November 2002.

4.    The appellant and his wife are both of Roma ethnicity.  The  appellant
      was treated badly at school and after leaving school he found  day-to-
      day labouring and other jobs.  They suffered discrimination and verbal
      and physical abuse at the hands of Romanian people in the street.  The
      appellant had frequently reported such  matters  but  had  never  been
      allowed  into  the  police  station.   His  complaints  had  not  been
      recorded.

5.    On 15 October 2002 the appellant was queuing for bread outside a  shop
      when he was beaten by a man on the head.  The appellant went home  and
      then went to the police station together with his family in  order  to
      report the  attack.   The  appellant  and  his  family  were  detained
      overnight.  He was given verbal abuse and he was also beaten.  He  was
      told to leave the country and not return.  The appellant in due course
      did just that.

6.    The Adjudicator found that the core of  the  appellant's  account  was
      credible.  Her conclusions are set out as follows:

      "17.  Having found the core of the appellant's account credible I must
           now consider the issues, namely, whether he has  a  well-founded
           fear of persecution in Romania for a Convention reason.  I  have
           carefully  considered  the  appellant's  account   and   country
           information  to  which  I  was  referred  by   the   appellant's
           representative  during  submissions.   The  Human  Rights  Watch
           Report 2002 on Romania  confirmed  that  discrimination  against
           Roma continued to permeate society  and  cited  a  January  2001
           European Roma  Rights  Centre  investigation  which  found  that
           violations of Roma rights were 'highly unlikely to be prosecuted
           and the authorities retaliated against complainants.   Roma  had
           their houses raided and were detained, beaten and threatened  by
           private citizens and police' The US Department of State  Country
           Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  2001  (4  March  2002)
           confirmed that discrimination against Roma  continued  and  that
           for the most part they are poorly  educated  with  low  literacy
           rates. The Report continued:


                 'In April a national strategy for improving  the  condition
                 of the Romani community was announced, with the support  of
                 the Prime Minister; a commission to implement the plan  was
                 established and held meetings during the year.  A number of
                 Roma experts were hired in the Ministries, at  the  country
                 prefect's office, and in  many  local  mayoral  and  county
                 offices.   Nevertheless  the   Roma   office   within   the
                 Government is understaffed, with only three civil servants,
                 and long-term funding for the national  Roma  strategy  has
                 not yet been resolved.'


           The Report further confirmed that there had  been  instances  of
           individuals being denied medical treatment where they could  not
           pay for it and could not prove that they had  medical  insurance
           provided by the State.  However, 'a partnership protocol, signed
           by the Minister of Health and the representative for Roma in the
           Parliament in April, lays out co-operative measures between  the
           Health Ministry and the Romani Party in  order  to  ensure  that
           Roma have access to health care.  This protocol  helped  resolve
           most complaints of discrimination against  Roma  in  the  health
           system and sponsored  several  vaccination  campaigns  for  Roma
           children'.  Two further pieces of country information  contained
           in  the  appellant's  bundle  detailed  specific  instances   of
           discrimination of Roma.   Having  considered  all  this  country
           information as well as that  cited  by  the  respondent  in  the
           refusal letter, I conclude that whilst the government is  taking
           steps to improve the position of Roma, discrimination and  abuse
           still persist at a 'grass roots' level.   Whilst  I  have  every
           sympathy for the appellant and, in particular, find his  concern
           for the future of his daughters to be entirely understandable, I
           do not believe that the  treatment  he  experienced  in  Romania
           amounted to persecution.  He has been subjected  to  verbal  and
           physical abuse by the local population and has not been able  to
           seek redress from his local police.   However  he  has  made  no
           attempt to  complain  to  any  higher  authorities  nor  has  he
           attempted to relocate in order to improve his situation.  He was
           seriously injured on one occasion but this as an isolated event.
            Again, the treatment he received from the police was  appalling
           he made no attempt to report this to higher authorities so  that
           it could be investigated.  The appellant gave little  detail  of
           the nature  and  extent  of  the  abuse  and  discrimination  he
           suffered.  He was living with his parents,  wife  and  daughters
           and although he was only educated to a very basic level, he  has
           been able to find casual work and support his  family.   He  has
           claimed that the situation for Roma is the  same  everywhere  in
           Romania but without having attempted to relocate, his belief  in
           this regard is not based upon experience.  I note that there  is
           always a 'time lag' between anti-discriminatory  measures  being
           introduced and  for  social  attitudes  to  change.   Government
           measures to improve the position of Roma have only recently been
           introduced and it will take some years before the  situation  of
           Roma improves to  any  significant  extent.   However  it  would
           appear that the situation  is  likely  to  improve  rather  than
           deteriorate and given my finding  that  the  appellant  did  not
           experience treatment which amounts to persecution prior  to  his
           departure,  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  a   reasonable
           likelihood of him facing persecution upon return."


7.    Mr Kumi submitted that the Adjudicator had found the appellant  to  be
      credible and he had made thirty complaints  to  the  police  and  been
      rebuffed.  Mr Kumi referred to the  objective  material.   In  the  US
      State Department Report for 2003 it was stated that four  persons  who
      were arrested, tried and convicted in a 1993 incident in  which  three
      Roma died were released in 2000 after serving  their  sentences.   The
      victims had appealed to the European Court of Justice arguing that the
      sentences of two to six years were too light.

8.    Counsel submitted that although there might be  plans  to  remedy  the
      situation for Roma it did not mean there was currently  a  sufficiency
      of protection.  The appellant had  not  even  been  allowed  into  the
      police station.  Reference was made to "state of impunity" prepared by
      the ERRC, although there was an Ombudsman his role was still not fully
      clear to the public - see page 11 of the US State  Department  Report.
      Reference was made to various  Roma  human  rights  reports.   Counsel
      referred to Harakel [2001] EWCA Civ 884.

9.    Mr Gulvin submitted that the case of Svazas [2002]  EWCA  Civ  74  was
      relevant as was the Tribunal case of Munteanu [2002] UKIAT 04872.   It
      is important to demonstrate with clarity a system in place  to  enable
      an appropriate complaint to  be  made.   Reference  was  made  to  the
      Country Information Report for October 2003.  It was  clear  that  the
      appellant could and should have complained to  higher  authority,  the
      Roma Party or other organisations.   He  could  also  have  taken  his
      complaint to the Ombudsman.

10.   Mr Kumi submitted that the Ombudsman had no executive  power  and  the
      appellant in Munteanu had only been ill-treated on one occasion unlike
      the present case.  The National Strategy had only  just  been  set  up
      then.

11.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We have very carefully considered the submissions made by  both  sides
      and the objective material  in  the  appellant's  bundle  and  in  the
      Country Information Report together with the  authorities  which  have
      been cited to us.

12.   It does appear that the appellant suffered  abuse  and  discriminatory
      treatment from the general population and when he went  to  the  local
      police station he was rebuffed on many occasions and  suffered  verbal
      and physical abuse.  He does not, however, appear to  have  taken  his
      complaint any further as the Adjudicator noted.

13.   The appellant has suffered at the hands of police officers.   We  note
      in Svazas [2002] Imm A R 363 at 377 (see paragraph 38 of the  judgment
      of Sedley L J) that  a  practical  standard  of  protection  does  not
      require a guarantee against police misconduct but  it  does  call  for
      "timely and effective rectification of the situation which is allowing
      the misconduct to happen".  There  is  clearly  a  difference  between
      having a fear of the  police  as  opposed  to  a  fear  of  the  local
      population.  Mr Gulvin drew our attention to what was said in  Harakel
      and the apparent approval of the Tribunal's observations in  Havlicek.
      If an appellant does not seek the protection of the police  his  claim
      would almost certainly have failed because he had not demonstrated any
      ground for his alleged inability or unwillingness to avail himself  of
      the protection which was available - see  paragraph  10  of  Havlicek.
      Paragraph 29 of Havlicek is also quoted with approval in paragraph  31
      of the judgment.  At paragraph 32 of the judgment it  is  stated  that
      the question of whether all reasonable avenues of recourse  have  been
      exhausted is fact dependent and fact specific.  The Adjudicator  found
      in the instant case that the appellant had made no attempt  to  report
      the treatment that he had received to the  higher  authorities  -  see
      paragraph 17 of the determination which we have reproduced above.

14.   The objective country information was  reviewed  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Munteanu [2002] UKIAT 04872.  Mr Kumi sought to distinguish that  case
      where there were credibility issues. However, in paragraph 17  of  the
      determination the Tribunal proceeded on the footing that the  totality
      of the appellant's account had been accepted.  On his account  he  was
      beaten up by the police in 1999 and  released  after  three  days  and
      apparently had some difficulty in filing a case about the police - see
      paragraph 19 of the determination.  He was again taken into the police
      station later in 1999 and was not  beaten  but  was  threatened.   The
      Tribunal  states  as  follows  in  paragraphs  17   to   18   of   the
      determination:

      "17.  In any event, we have concluded that even if the totality of the
           appellant's account were to be have been accepted,  this  appeal
           should in any event have been dismissed.  It is not suggested on
           his behalf that  violence  towards  Roma  in  Romania  is  state
           sponsored or state tolerated and the background  evidence  would
           not, in any event, lend any support  to  such  a  claim.   While
           discrimination against Roma undoubtedly continues  to  exist  on
           the ground, the government in Romania has  taken  several  major
           initiatives to address the problems of the Roma minority.  These
           are based upon a National Strategy for Improving  the  Condition
           of Roma  adopted  in  April  2001.   It  includes  measures  for
           improving housing for Roma, increasing  their  participation  in
           civic life including access to justice, facilitating  access  to
           public services and countering discrimination.  At a local level
           police brutality does occur towards Roma but measures have  been
           introduced to combat this including co-operation by the Romanian
           General  Inspectorate  of  police  with  Roma  associations,  to
           develop a program to improve relations between Roma and  police.
           APADO, the Lawyers Association for the Defence of Human  Rights,
           runs a programme of juridical  assistance  to  Roma.   There  is
           evidence to how that those responsible for violence against Roma
           are being dealt with by the judicial system.   In  July  1998  a
           court in Mures sentenced 11 persons who in 1993 burned 13 Romani
           houses resulting in the deaths of  3  Roma,  to  3  to  7  years
           imprisonment.   Roma  as  a  recognized  minority  are  afforded
           protection under the constitution.  Numerous  Roma  associations
           have been created  to  represent  Roma,  as  to  have  political
           parties, and there is no  evidence  of  government  interference
           with their activities. There is an Ombudsman whose  role  is  to
           protect rights and liberties of civilians and a  Department  for
           the Protection of National Minorities was set  up  in  1997.   A
           National Office for Roma has been set up within this department.
            Measures have been taken to train police and eradicate  abuses,
           particularly those against Roma community member (page 48 of the
           bundle, ECRI Country report on Romania).  Seminars and  training
           courses on human rights in the administration  of  justice  have
           been organised by the Centre for Human Rights and  the  Romanian
           Institute of Human  Rights,  targeting  police  trainers,  among
           others.  A National Council for Combating discrimination was set
           up in December 2001.


      18.   The Home Office CIPU report shows that Romania has established a
           legislative framework to ensure effective judicial remedies  for
           any  person  whose  rights  and  freedoms  recognized   by   the
           international Convention on Civil and political Rights have been
           violated. The European Commission  concluded  in  November  2002
           that the government of Romania had made considerable advances in
           reforming it judiciary.  We note, however, that  judicial  cases
           involving the police would appear to be tried in military courts
           which have been criticized for over lengthy investigations which
           are often inconclusive.  The  Romanian  Helsinki  Committee  has
           reported and investigated numerous reports from individuals  who
           claimed to have been ill-treated by the police in  2000.   These
           accusations are by law investigated by the military  Prosecutors
           office.  The General Inspectorate of Police is  responsible  for
           investigating police abuses and it  cooperates  with  monitoring
           groups, albeit that it is uneven in its  response  to  enquiries
           from monitoring groups.  Notwithstanding these criticisms, there
           is no evidence to suggest that the protection and benefit of the
           judicial  system  and  these  procedures  and  systems  are  not
           available to Roma in Romania."

15.   Mr Kumi submitted that the optimism of the Tribunal was  misplaced  in
      that the National Strategy referred to had not had the  results  hoped
      for.  He referred us to the US State Department Report  for  2003  and
      submitted that the Ombudsman's office lacked  executive  powers  which
      limited his authority.  He submitted that  the  example  of  the  four
      persons who had been arrested, tried and convicted in 1993 showed that
      the Courts were ineffective in sentencing inadequately.

16.   The US State Department Report indicates that the  Ombudsman's  office
      was receiving an increasing number of complaints although only a small
      minority  fell  within  its  jurisdiction.   More  than  half  of  the
      complaints related to social, economic and  cultural  rights.   It  is
      recorded that the Ombudsman was moderately effective.   He  dealt  not
      only  with  human  rights  but  with  all  facets  of  its   citizen's
      interaction with the government.  The Ombudsman's role was  still  not
      fully clear to the public and many complaints  were  rejected  because
      they  related  to  problems   with   the   judiciary   and   not   the
      administration.

17.   The indication that persons were arrested,  tried  and  convicted  for
      the arson attack which resulted in the death of three  Roma  does  not
      appear to us to be  an  example  of  state  sanctioned  actions.   The
      argument concerned the leniency of the  sentencing.   These  sentences
      ranged from two to six  years.   Another  theme  running  through  the
      objective material is the fact that too few perpetrators  of  assaults
      go punished by the Courts.

18.    It  is  apparent   from   the   Country   Information   Report   that
      discrimination against the Roma minority continues to be widespread  -
      see paragraph 6.112 of the October 2003 Assessment.   However,  it  is
      also  recorded  that  the  European  Commission  considered  that  the
      government had made steady progress in implementing the 2001  National
      Strategy.  It is  of  course  true  that  the  implementation  of  the
      strategy remained at a very low level and that  little  resources  had
      been allocated for strategy  implementation  -  see  paragraph  6.115.
      However, the Roma community generally  approved  the  content  of  the
      strategy and local Roma offices had been set up in every  country  and
      nearly four hundred Roma experts had  been  hired  to  carry  out  the
      action plan for 2001-2004.  The structures for the  implementation  of
      the strategy were progressively established according to the  European
      Commission Report in October 2002.  The Roma Party had  been  involved
      with the implementation at country level of Roma offices.  Courts  for
      the  first  time  had  ruled  against  employers  and  newspapers  for
      publishing  discriminatory  job  vacancies  -  see  paragraph   6.117.
      Progress, no doubt painfully slow for those on the ground, does appear
      to be evident - see paragraph 6.118.  Many of  the  efforts  had  been
      improvised and uncoordinated but it was now possible to discern a more
      coherent and systematic approach.  Mr Gulvin  drew  our  attention  to
      numerous  Roma  political  organisations  which  are  referred  to  in
      paragraph 6.120, a health programme and the fact  that  political  and
      cultural rights were better  protected  (see  paragraph  6.127).   The
      Council of Europe Advisory Committee on the Framework  Convention  for
      the Protection of National Minorities considered that acts of violence
      by the police against Roma were decreasing: see  paragraph  6.126.   A
      programme of judicial  assistance  for  Roma  is  run  by  a  lawyers'
      association.  On 20 September 2002 a National Anti-Poverty and  Social
      Inclusion Promotion Plan was launched.

19.   Turning to the experiences of the appellant,  it  is  clear  from  his
      interview that it was  the  appellant's  local  police  station  which
      caused him the problems.  He says in answer  to  Question  15  at  his
      interview that there was only one main police station in Fetesti which
      was quite a small place.  The Adjudicator noted that the appellant had
      given little detail  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  abuse  and
      discrimination he had suffered.  The Adjudicator considered  that  the
      injury he had received was an isolated event.  He did  not  feel  that
      what had happened to the appellant had crossed the line to  amount  to
      persecution.  The remarks of Sedley LJ in Svazas at paragraph  39  may
      be apposite in this context.  The single question is whether  what  is
      feared by the asylum seeker amounts to persecution or not.  The  worse
      the persecution the more that will  be  required  to  demonstrate  the
      availability of adequate state protection - see also the  judgment  of
      Sir Murray Stuart-Smith.  The gravity of the ill-treatment  may  be  a
      material consideration. In Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 Auld  LJ
      expressed agreement with the approach of Simon Brown LJ and Sir Murray
      Stuart Smith in Svazas in particular "that the spectrum  of  intensity
      of risk for  consideration  and  evaluation  runs  across  the  divide
      between state agency and non-state  actor  cases.  However,  generally
      speaking, state agency cases, in particular those where Article 3 ill-
      treatment by state agents is rife and/or  emanates  from  the  top  or
      where the risk to life or of ill-treatment is exceptionally  acute  as
      in Soering and the Lord Saville case,  are  likely  to  have  a  lower
      threshold of risk for engaging Articles 2 or 3  than  non-state  actor
      cases."

      It appears to us that if the treatment experienced  by  the  appellant
      did pass the threshold amounting to persecution it  may  fall  towards
      the lower end of the scale - see paragraph 48 of the judgment  of  Sir
      Murray Stuart-Smith at p. 380.

20.   What is clear is that the appellant took no steps to file a  complaint
      against the police.  There are avenues that he could have resorted  to
      and he did not pursue them.  We disagree  with  Counsel's  submissions
      that the view taken by the Tribunal in Munteanu had been proved to  be
      wrong in the light of subsequent developments.  Progress is  slow  but
      evidence of progress there undoubtedly is.  The  appellant's  problems
      were at a local level at a local police station in what  he  describes
      as a small place.  It is not established that senior  police  officers
      were complicit in what happened.  The appellant  has  not  tested  the
      system.  It is not established that the state  would  not  have  taken
      appropriate action had the appellant pursued the remedies available to
      him.

21.   The Adjudicator found that the  appellant  had  been  able  to  obtain
      casual work and support his family.  He was entitled to conclude  that
      the situation was likely to improve rather than deteriorate.   On  the
      totality of the material before us, we find  that  the  appellant  has
      failed to make out his  case  that  there  is  not  a  sufficiency  of
      protection for him against both state and non-state actors and he  has
      not established that his human rights will be infringed on his  return
      to Romania.

22.   For the reasons we have given, this appeal is dismissed.





                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President


