
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 6 May 2004              |        |OM (Cuba returning          |
|                           |        |dissident) Cuba CG [2004]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00120                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Mr D K Allen                                                      |
|Mr K Kimnell                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is a  claimant's  appeal  from  the  determination  of  Mr  Price
      sitting as an Adjudicator on 14 October 2003.

2.    The claimant is a citizen of Cuba who arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
      on 12 October 2002 on a valid Cuban passport with a valid  visa.    He
      had permission to stay in the United Kingdom until 25 October 2002 but
      remained longer and then claimed asylum on 2 April 2003.

3.    Put very shortly  his  case  was  that  he  was  a  dissident  from  a
      dissident family in Cuba.   The family had  not  been  persecuted  and
      neither had he but they  had  been  subject  throughout  his  life  to
      discrimination  and  occasional  harassment  from   the   authorities.
      Despite this the claimant, who is now 31  years  old  had  managed  to
      obtain employment with two government  departments  during  his  life.
      The first was with MINVEC which is a government organisation connected
      with industrial development and, after he had been sacked  from  that,
      he managed to obtain a job at Amistur which is a nationalised  tourist
      organisation.    That provides tour  guides  for  foreigners  visiting
      Cuba.   He was employed as a tour guide.

4.    Further, despite his background of disagreement with  the  government,
      he had been granted an exit permit and had been able to  apply  for  a
      passport and a visa.

5.    The Adjudicator found, contrary to what he said, that he was never  of
      any interest to the authorities and could not have been, because if he
      had, the authorities would not have employed  him  as  they  did,  and
      would certainly not  have  granted  him  an  exit  visa.    Thus,  the
      Adjudicator found that he was a mere overstayer and that there was  no
      evidence that a person in his position  would  have  any  difficulties
      with the authorities on return; certainly no difficulties  that  would
      be capable of amounting to persecution.   In those  circumstances  the
      claimant's claim was dismissed.

6.    We have had the advantage of further  material  that  the  Adjudicator
      did not have which indicates that there is at least a possibility that
      someone even with the claimant's  asserted  past  history  could  have
      lived as he did live in Cuba and could have obtained an  exit  permit.
        The report of Lawrence Whitehead of Nuffield College, Oxford came to
      the conclusion that it was possible for someone  with  the  claimant's
      background and also with his academic  qualifications  as  a  graduate
      from Havana University and a fluent speaker of English to slip through
      the monitoring net that there is in Cuba  and  obtain  the  employment
      that he had there.

7.     Further  there  is  other  material,  including  material  from   the
      Secretary of State's Department which tends to show  that  people  who
      are thought to be something of a nuisance in Cuba are allowed to leave
      the country, quite possibly in the hope that they will not come  back.



8.    It seemed to us, on reading the material that had been provided to  us
      and on hearing the submissions made before us that  it  was  at  least
      arguable  that  the  Adjudicator  took  too  sceptical  view  of   the
      credibility of the claimant's account of his past.    We  stress  that
      the Adjudicator is not to be blamed for this at all because he did not
      have much of the material that we have.    This has left us  with  two
      options.  One is to remit the matter to be reheard and the other is to
      consider it on the basis that the claimant's account of  his  past  is
      true and see whether even on that basis he does not have a  real  risk
      of persecution on return to Cuba.  We considered it appropriate  first
      of all to examine his case on the basis that it were true and see what
      conclusions that led to.

9.    A summary of his history should  begin  with  the  protests  that  his
      father was engaged in during the 1970s.   His family  had  never  been
      supporters of the Castro regime.  As a result his father was sacked in
      1979 when the claimant was 6 years old.  He was then unemployed for 18
      months or so because in Cuba jobs are largely at the gift of the state
      and he was out of favour.   Despite his  father's  opposition  to  the
      regime, however, he was allowed to visit his own mother in the  United
      States on four occasions between 1982 and 1992.  In  the  early  1980s
      the claimant's father did eventually obtain employment, but a low rate
      of pay as a driver on a building site.

10.   When growing up at school the claimant himself made no secret  of  his
      dissident views and argued with  his  teachers  about  Cuban  society.
      At the age of 14 it seems he wrote  what  was  either  a  book  or  an
      article that was critical of the authorities and  was  suspended  from
      school for a term.

11.   By September 1989 he had graduated from  school   and  began  studying
      for an English degree at the University of  Havana.    He  joined  the
      Young Communist League; no doubt many who do not approve of the  Cuban
      regime have done the same so as to assist them in the future.   Whilst
      at University he kept his head down but nonetheless was  only  in  the
      league for a period of about  a  year  after  which  he  was  expelled
      without explanation.

12.   From 1992 to 1994 he spoke against the  regime,  but  at  the  time  a
      large number of people did and there were  demonstrations  because  of
      the dire economic situation so perhaps he did not come  to  particular
      attention.

13.   At this point we should  mention   an  organisation  called  the  CDR.
      The CDR stands for Committee for the Defence of the  Revolution  which
      is a national governmental organisation which infiltrates  every  town
      and village throughout Cuba and has its representatives throughout the
      country.   This organisation appears to exist to promote  support  for
      the government and all its  actions,  to  check  on  people  in  their
      localities for their loyalty and also to report upon any opposition to
      the regime.

14.   Where he lived there was of course a local CDR and  they  became  well
      aware of his anti-governmental views.

15.   In August 1994 a  large  number  of  Cubans  attempted  to  leave  the
      country on hand built rafts for the USA.  The  claimant's  father  was
      one of them.   He was  picked  up  by  the  US  Coastguard,  taken  to
      Guantanamo Bay  then,  after  several  months,  returned  home.    The
      situation was very bad for his father on return.    There was a search
      of the family home by the internal security department (DTI)  although
      they found nothing, but his father was out of work for over a year.

16.   These problems did not seem to affect the claimant  who  graduated  in
      August of 1994 with a fluent knowledge of English.

17.   After graduating he managed to get  a  job  through  his  uncle  as  a
      translator at MINVEC (Ministry for Foreign Investment and Economic Co-
      Operation).     This  job  was  obtained   entirely   through   family
      connections; it would have to be in view of the  claimant's  political
      past.   The  claimant  also   became  involved  with  the  Jose  Marti
      Foundation which is a dissident organisation  in  Cuba.   Due  to  his
      involvement with that he was questioned on two occasions  by  the  DTI
      who arrested him without charge and detained him for about 5 hours  on
      both occasions.   They found nothing against  him  nor  did  he  admit
      anything.     They caused him no further problems.  At or  about  this
      time he was dismissed from MINVEC in August 1996 because he refused to
      carry out  2  years  social  service  as  repayment  for  his  further
      education.    Under pressure from governmental bodies he decided  that
      discretion was the better part of valour and in the end did his social
      service.   He had no other employment and  was  unlikely  to  get  any
      unless he did.   He then worked at a school,  teaching  children,  but
      was very unhappy with that,  just  as  those  who  employed  him  were
      unhappy with him, and he was sacked at the end of May 1998.

18.   He had had a friend from University days who was employed  at  Amistur
      as a tour guide and had a high  reputation  there.    She  managed  to
      arrange things so that he obtained employment with Amistur in  January
      1999.   He managed to get round the various  checks  that  would  have
      been made by his local CDR by claiming to have an  address  where  the
      local CDR knew him but did not know about his past.    He  then  began
      work for Amistur translating for and guiding foreigners visiting Cuba.
         He worked with Amistur without problems  until  early  2002.     It
      seems from witness statements from American tourists that we have seen
      that the claimant took them to parts of Cuba and showed them things in
      Cuba that the authorities would very much rather had not been shown to
      foreigners.   This certainly seems to back up his account of  being  a
      political opponent of the Castro regime.  These witnesses, whom  there
      is no reason to doubt, speak of his honesty and the  outspokenness  of
      his views in  opposition  to  the  Castro  regime.    We  have  little
      difficulty in accepting that if information of what he had been  doing
      got back to the authorities he might have found himself in  difficulty
      if not worse at work.

19.   This is what seems to have happened, because around the end  of  March
      2002 he suddenly found that he was not being asked  to  take  tourists
      around any more.    Other  people  were  still  getting  work  and  he
      realised that it was his political opinions that had caused him to  be
      a target.   He approached his new boss and had an argument  with  him.
      His boss told him that he was doing business with the enemy  and  that
      he would not get any more work.   He did not get any more work and  it
      became clear to him that he never would, because he had obviously  had
      a black mark against him that had been noticed.  He  decided  that  he
      had to leave Cuba.

20.   He had the $600 needed to obtain a visa and gave as a foreign  address
      to go to, the address in Scotland of people whom he had  taken  around
      Cuba.   He managed to get a letter from Mr Gutierrez  his  boss  on  3
      September 2002 stating that he  was  a  reliable  worker  and  had  no
      knowledge of any sensitive information.   He  says  that  that  letter
      would simply have been passed under Mr Gutierrez's nose and  he  would
      have signed it without reading it, but it may also be the case, as  Mr
      Whitehead points out, that for a small bribe Mr Gutierrez  would  have
      been perfectly prepared to sign such a note.

21.   Since arriving in the United Kingdom he has not  registered  with  the
      Cuban authorities at the Embassy here, and as far as they are aware he
      has simply disappeared from view.   It is said on his behalf  that  if
      with this history, which is assumed to be correct for the purposes  of
      this appeal, he were to go back to Cuba he would be at  real  risk  of
      persecution.

22.   In order to assess the nature  of  any  risk  that  he  would  run  if
      returned to Cuba it seems to us necessary first of all to see what the
      Cuban rules and regulations are about persons who leave  the  country.
      At page 17 of the current 2003 US Secretary of State's report there is
      a passage that is of assistance to us:

       "In  1994  the  government  eased  restrictions  on  visits  by   and
      repatriations of Cuban immigrants.   Citizens who establish  residency
      abroad and who are in  possession  of  government  issued  permits  to
      reside abroad  may  travel  to  the  country  without  visas  although
      citizens who departed after 31 December  1970  must  obtain  a  costly
      passport to re-enter the country.   Persons who are at lest  18  years
      of age are eligible to travel abroad  and  may  remain  outside  their
      country for up to 11 months.  In 1995 the  government  announced  that
      emigrants who were considered not to have engaged in so called hostile
      actions against the government and who were not  subject  to  criminal
      proceedings in their countries  of  residence  could  apply  at  Cuban
      Consulates for renewable 2 year multiple entry travel  authorisations.
       However in 1999 the government announced that  it  would  deny  entry
      permits for  emigrants  who  had  left  the  country  illegally  after
      September 1994.   It remained  unclear  which  policy  the  government
      actually was implementing."

23.   The claimant had a permit to leave Cuba, which had a  date  of  expiry
      of 6 October 2003 but presumably that is the  date  of  expiry  before
      which the claimant was required to exercise a permit if he  was  going
      to leave the country.  On the basis of the passage from the  Secretary
      of State's report it would seem that once he had that  permit  he  was
      entitled to remain out of the country for  up  to  11  months  without
      Cuban authorities being aware that anything was amiss.    That  period
      would have expired on or about the 10 September 2003 and so he has now
      been out of the country longer than the permit allows and longer  than
      it would appear Cuban law allows.   It is has not been suggested to us
      that he has engaged in  any  acts  which  are  hostile  to  the  Cuban
      government whilst abroad.   He still retains his Cuban passport  which
      is valid until 15 May 2008.   We asked what punishment he  was  likely
      to face for going back on a valid Cuban passport having stayed  abroad
      for longer than he was supposed to do.

24.   We were shown a  letter  from  Amnesty  International  which  contains
      Article 215 of the Cuban Penal Code and which suggested at first blush
      that he might be liable to imprisonment for 1 to 3 years with a  fine.
       On closer reading, however, it was plain that  this  article  of  the
      penal code does not apply to the circumstances in which the claimant's
      find himself at all.   The article reads as follows:

      "Illegal entry into the national territory:

      1.    Any  one  who,  without  fulfilling  the  legal  formalities  or
           immigration requirements, enters the national territory,  incurs
           a sanction of depravation of liberty of 1 to 3 years or  a  fine
           of 3 to 1,000 Cuotas.

      2.    Anyone who carries out the above  described  act  in  search  of
           asylum is exempt from criminal responsibility."


25.   This article is plainly dealing with people who arrive in Cuba  either
      clandestinely or on false papers or otherwise illegally.   The article
      is of no application, as it seems to us, to a situation in  this  case
      where the claimant would be returning perfectly legally to Cuba  on  a
      proper Cuban passport with nothing in  his  documentation  to  suggest
      that he has done anything more than stay out  of  the  country  longer
      than his permit and the Cuban domestic law allowed him to do.

26.   It was suggested in a letter  written  by  a  Cuban  law  expert    Mr
      Wilfredo Allen, who is a practicing Attorney in Miami and who  assists
      Cuban exiles, that the fact that the claimant has  stayed  in  Britain
      without permission would lead the government of Cuba to assume that he
      claimed asylum and punish him accordingly.

27.   We can see how that could be the case in circumstances where a  person
      did not have proper papers in the United  Kingdom  or  had   conducted
      himself in such a way as to come  to  the  Cuban  authorities  abroad.
      Neither of these factors applies to the claimant, and  we  cannot  see
      why the authorities in Cuba should  assume  otherwise  than  that  the
      claimant was abroad, perhaps seeking  work and failing to find  it  or
      that he simply overstayed,  taking  an  opportunity  to  travel  which
      otherwise he might not have.  His return to Cuba would  have  all  the
      appearance of being voluntary and it is  implausible,  to  put  it  no
      higher, that he would volunteer the information that in fact he was an
      unsuccessful asylum seeker.   We do not follow the reasoning behind Mr
      Allen's suggestion.

28.   It has been argued that if he were to return to Cuba he would have  no
      employment and when his past was looked up it would be  apparent  that
      he was a dissident and the authorities might crack down on him.

29.   There was undoubtedly a crackdown by the authorities on 18 March  2003
      and a number of dissidents  was  arrested,  many  of  whom  remain  in
      custody, but  this  was  not  a  widespread  round  up  of  opposition
      elements, for only 90 people were arrested  of  whom  75  were  tried,
      convicted and sent to prison.  It is not easy to see how the  claimant
      would be likely to be affected by a round-up of  that  nature  on  his
      return.

30.   We do not wish to underestimate the  difficulties  that  the  claimant
      would have if he were to return to Cuba, because plainly life would be
      difficult and perhaps unpleasant for a  while.    He  might  be  under
      government surveillance.  He might very well find it difficult, if not
      almost impossible to obtain a job, but we have had no material  placed
      before us that indicates that he would be likely  to  be  arrested  or
      persecuted.  Mr Allen is of the view that the Cuban authorities  would
      dismiss him from his employment as being  politically  unreliable  and
      would assign him to a work battalion as a field hand,  presumably  for
      some particular period of time.   They might place him in a  detention
      facility until he could obtain housing and  he would be  monitored  by
      the neighbourhood CDR once he returned to the community.   Even if all
      this is true we cannot see that it amounts to  persecution  albeit  it
      amounts to treatment by an oppressive state of the type that would  be
      entirely unacceptable in Europe.     The threshold for persecution  is
      set very high and we cannot see that that threshold is passed  by  the
      claimant in this case, even one takes what  might  happen  to  him  as
      being what is likely to happen to him.

31.   For all these reasons we have come to the conclusion that even if  the
      Adjudicator had come to  the findings of fact for which  the  claimant
      contended before him, he would have found that the claimant had  never
      been persecuted in the past, albeit his life had been made  difficult,
      that the most he was guilty of at present was staying out the  country
      longer than he should have been, and that what might await him on  his
      return would be a closer enquiry into his political  past  that  might
      lead him at worst to being placed in a work battalion for a period  of
      time after which he would be returned to his community and family area
       under supervision by the CDR.

32.   Even if the Adjudicator found all this, it seems to us he  would  have
      been bound to  find  that  it  did  not  amount  to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution.

33.   Accordingly, we have come to the conclusion that this appeal  must  be
      dismissed.




                                        His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                        Vice President
