
 | |KK (Article 1F(c) ) Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00101 | |
|                           |        |                                 |
|                                                                       |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                            |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Date Determination notified:                                           |
|...............7/5/2004..................................              |
|                                                                       |
|                           |        |                                 |
|                           |Before: |                                 |
|                                                                       |
|Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)                                   |
|His Honour Judge N Huskinson (Vice President)                          |
|Professor D B Casson (Acting Vice President)                           |
|Between                                                                |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|APPELLANT                                                              |
|        |                                 |
|and                                                                    |
|                                                                       |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                             |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                       |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

I     INTRODUCTION

  1. This determination concerns the ambit of Article 1F(c) of the  Refugee
     Convention, which  excludes  from  the  benefits  of  that  Convention
     persons who have been guilty of acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
     principles of the United Nations.

II    THE FACTS

  2. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals  with  permission  against
     the determination of the  Chief  Adjudicator,  HH  Judge  Hodge,  OBE,
     dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  on  8
     April 2001 to grant him limited leave to enter.  His appeal  is  under
     section 69(3) of  the  1999  Act  and  is  on  the  grounds  that  any
     requirement that he leave the United Kingdom at the end of the  period
     limited by his  leave  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
     obligations under the Refugee Convention.

  3. This determination has had a long period of gestation.  We heard  oral
     arguments on  16th  and  17th  April  2003,  when  the  Appellant  was
     represented by Mr Scannell, instructed by Deighton Guedalla,  and  the
     Respondent was represented by  Mr  Tam,  instructed  by  the  Treasury
     Solicitor.  There were a number of matters left  uncompleted,  and  we
     made  directions  for  the  forwarding  to  the  Tribunal  of  certain
     information and any further written  submissions,  with  both  parties
     having liberty to apply for the appeal to be restored for further oral
     hearing.  There were extensions of  time  for  compliance  with  those
     directions, but by  the  beginning  of  July  2003,  we  had  received
     submissions from both sides and an acknowledgement that  neither  side
     wished to make any further oral  submission.   Shortly  thereafter,  a
     member  of  the  panel  became  ill.   Before  we  had  prepared   our
     determination, an  important  further  document,  the  UNHR's  revised
     'Guidelines', dated  4th  September  2003,  became  available  to  the
     parties.  That document, together with the  parties'  indication  that
     they had no further submissions to make based on it, was  sent  to  us
     only in mid-March 2004.

  4. The Appellant arrived alone at Heathrow on 10th March  1992,  when  he
     was aged about eighteen.  He claimed asylum.  For some reason, he  was
     not interviewed about that claim for over three years.  The  basis  of
     his claim has not changed substantially.  He is a Kurd and  a  Kurdish
     nationalist.  His political views  and  activity  are  stated  by  his
     solicitors as that he has "a known history of activism  on  behalf  of
     the  PKK  (and  in  alliance  with  Dev  Sol)  having  been  arrested,
     interrogated  and  detained  for  short  periods  on  seven  different
     occasions in Gaziantep and Istanbul, between June  1990  and  February
     1992, culminating in his respective implication in a  serious  bombing
     incident in Istanbul in February 1992 which forced  his  departure  to
     seek asylum abroad".

  5. The PKK, or Kurdistan Workers Party, advocates armed struggle both  at
     home and abroad, to achieve  an  independent  Kurdish  state  covering
     territories presently within Turkey, Syria, Iraq and  Iran.   Dev  Sol
     has transmogrified into DHKP-C or the Revolutionary Peoples Liberation
     Party-Front.  It is a radical  left  wing  Marxist  underground  group
     which seeks to use violence to overthrow the  Turkish  government  and
     create  a  Marxist  Leninist  regime  in  Turkey  by  means  of  armed
     revolutionary struggle.  Both Dev Sol  and  DHKP-C  have  carried  out
     attacks against Turkish police security forces targets and individuals
     and both have  attacked  or  tried  to  attack  British  and  American
     interests.

  6. The PKK and the DHKP-C are, as it happens, proscribed  in  the  United
     Kingdom under Section 3 of the Terrorism Act 2000:  see the  Terrorism
     Act (Proscribed Organisations) (Amendment) Order 2003.

  7. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant has a well-founded  fear  of
     persecution in Turkey for reason of his political opinions.  It is for
     that reason that he has granted him leave to enter, because  in  these
     circumstances to remove him to Turkey would breach Article  3  of  the
     European Convention on Human Rights.  The Appellant is therefore at no
     immediate risk of removal from the United Kingdom if his appeal fails.
     The principal matter at stake is his  entitlement  to  various  Social
     Security benefits, which he can receive as a  refugee  but  not  as  a
     person whose expulsion is inhibited merely by the European Convention.

  8. The Secretary of State also acknowledges  that  if  it  were  not  for
     events in the United Kingdom since the Appellant arrived, he would  be
     entitled to be regarded as a refugee.  It is to those events  that  we
     must now turn.

  9. On 15th March 1996, the Appellant was sentenced at  the  Inner  London
     Crown Court to four years imprisonment for conspiracy to commit  arson
     and three years imprisonment concurrent for  arson.   The  two  counts
     related to two attacks, one on the Turkish and Beyond Travel Agents in
     Marylebone Street, Marylebone, and the other on the  Turkish  Bank  UK
     Ltd in Borough High Street, Southwark.  In each case, the  attack  was
     by petrol bomb;  and in each case  a  red  flag  emblazoned  with  the
     insignia  of  DHKP  was  left  at  the  premises  attacked.    Further
     background facts are set out as follows in the  Secretary  of  State's
     skeleton argument.  They all appear to be accepted on  behalf  of  the
     Appellant with a few reservations to which we shall refer.

           "(1)  The attacks were aimed at  legitimate  Turkish  businesses
                 operating in the United Kingdom.


             (2) It is accepted that the arson attacks were committed for a
                 political  purpose.   It  is  common  ground  between   the
                 appellant and the Secretary of State that the offences were
                 'associated with Dev Sol [DHKP] and were  manifestly  aimed
                 against the Turkish State' since that is part of the  basis
                 of the application  for  asylum:   see  paragraph  1(b)  of
                 Deighton Guedalla's representations dated 24 November 1997.
                  This is significant because it is therefore common  ground
                 that the appellant's criminal acts were aimed at a  foreign
                 (friendly) state with the intention of influencing the acts
                 of the legitimate government of that foreign State.


             (3) The arson attacks were part of a concerted effort  by  two
                 (and probably more) people.   In  other  words,  they  were
                 planned and premeditated.


             (4) It is also accepted that the flag of the DHKP  was  placed
                 in the window of the premises as part of the attack by  the
                 appellant or his accomplices(s).


             (5) The DHKPC (and  the  PKK)  are  a  terrorist  organisation
                 committed to the overthrow of  the  Turkish  Government  by
                 violent  means.   They  have  a  history  of  carrying  out
                 terrorist attacks including murder.


             (6) The attack on the Bank appears to have been discovered  as
                 soon as it was committed and  the  appellant  was  arrested
                 immediately afterwards  as  he  fled  from  the  scene  (it
                 appears the car that he and  his  accomplice  had  borrowed
                 failed  to  start).   It  appears  that  the  flames   were
                 extinguished by members of the public.  It is a  reasonable
                 inference that this was not intended by the appellant - the
                 attack was no doubt carried out at the time it was in  part
                 at least to minimise the risk of detection and maximise the
                 chance of causing serious damage.


             (7)  There  is  no  dispute  between  the  appellant  and  the
                 Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant  'is  a  Kurdish
                 nationalist with a known history of activism on  behalf  of
                 the PKK  (and  in  alliance  with  Dev  Sol  [DHKP]':   see
                 paragraph 1(a) of Deighton Guedalla's representations dated
                 24th November 1997.  it is also correct (and common ground)
                 that the appellant accepts that he supports the  PKK  which
                 he accepts commits terrorist acts and  DHKP/Dev  Sol  'with
                 whom he has been to some  extent  willing  to  make  common
                 cause' and that he  justified  the  use  of  'revolutionary
                 force' against the  Turkish  State,  albeit  that  he  also
                 stated he had never been  directly  involved  in  terrorist
                 actions: see paragraph 6(b) and (c) of Deighton  Guedalla's
                 representations dated 24th November 1997.


             (8) It is also common ground that the appellant was an  active
                 supporter of the two terrorist organisations prior  to  his
                 arrest in  the  UK  including  propaganda  and  fundraising
                 activities and  'is  manifestly  a  political  animal'  who
                 maintained contact with his 'PKK comrades' while in prison:
                 see paragraph 10(a), (b) and  (d)  of  Deighton  Guedalla's
                 representations of 24th November 1997.


             (9) There is no evidence which  shows  whether  the  appellant
                 made any attempt to ascertain whether or not  the  premises
                 were empty at the time of the attacks.   It  is  apparently
                 accepted that he could not  have  been  sure  that  persons
                 would not be injured as a result of  the  attacks  or  that
                 serious damage would not result:  see  Deighton  Guedalla's
                 letter of 21st May 2000.


             (10)      It appears the trial Judge stated at the  conclusion
                 of the criminal trial that  he  was  'satisfied  that...the
                 detriment  to  this  country  of  your  remaining  here  is
                 overwhelming'.  As such, the trial Judge clearly  concluded
                 that the arson attacks were very serious."


 10. The reservations are as follows.  First, the Appellant has, since  the
     time of his interview  at  the  police  station,  consistently  denied
     taking any part at all in these two  attacks.   For  the  purposes  of
     these  proceedings,  however,  his  representatives  accept  that  the
     Secretary of State and the Appellate Authority are entitled to proceed
     on the basis that the Appellant was in fact involved in them,  because
     of his conviction.  In any event, given the Appellant's conviction for
     these  two  offences,  there  clearly   are   'serious   reasons   for
     considering' that he was involved in those two attacks,  which  as  we
     shall indicate shortly, is the appropriate test under Article 1F(c) of
     the Refugee Convention.

 11. Secondly, the Appellant claims that the fact that his  sentences  were
     of four and three years concurrent shows that the offences to which he
     was convicted were not seen as serious.  That,  in  our  view,  is  an
     argument without substance:  as the Chief Adjudicator appears to  have
     pointed out in argument, he was a person of previous  good  character.
     In our view that factor, taken with the judge's remarks in sentencing,
     show that the offences are properly to be regarded as serious.

 12. There is simply no substance in the argument that  the  Appellant  was
     not charged with any more serious offence, such as arson  with  intent
     to endanger human life.  It is not disputed  that  sometimes  offences
     are committed  that  are  more  serious  than  those  with  which  the
     Appellant was charged and of which he was convicted:   but  that  does
     nothing to reduce the seriousness of these offences.

 13. The third matter is that the Appellant  claims  it  is  not  right  to
     evaluate the attacks on the basis that  human  life  might  have  been
     endangered.  That argument is, in Mr Scannell's skeleton, based firmly
     on the Appellant's  own  remarks  at  the  time  he  was  arrested  in
     Southwark.  Those remarks are recorded as follows in  paragraph  6  of
     the Prosecution Case Summary at the trial:

           "[K] then agreed that he was a Kurd and he was then arrested for
           arson.   He  immediately  said  'this  is  political,  we   were
           demonstrating, we threw the petrol to  demonstrate  against  the
           Turkish'.   He  was  then  cautioned  and  repeated   'we   were
           demonstrating.  No one was hurt'."


 14. It is surprising that Mr Scannell's argument should be based on  those
     comments, because from his interview onwards the Appellant has  denied
     saying anything that admitted his involvement in these  attacks.   His
     acknowledgement now that, in these proceedings, the Secretary of State
     will not allow him to go behind the conviction does not, in our  view,
     allow him to say simultaneously both that he was not involved  in  the
     Southwark attack and that he knew all about  it.   Similarly,  without
     going behind the Appellant's denial, there can be no substance in  the
     assertion in Mr Scannell's skeleton  (paragraph  8(b))  that  'it  was
     known that no-one would be in the building'.

 15.  For  these  reasons,  having  taken  into  account  the   points   of
     disagreement, we have concluded that we can adopt in full the  passage
     from the Respondent's skeleton which we have set out above.

III   THE LAW

Relevant Provisions of the Refugee Convention

 16. Articles 1A(2) and 1F of the Refugee Convention, so far  as  material,
     provide as follows:

           "Article 1  Definition of the terms 'Refugee'


           A     For the purposes  of  the  present  Convention,  the  term
                 'refugee' shall apply to any person who:


           (2)   ... owing to a well-founded fear of being  persecuted  for
                 reasons of race, religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
                 particular social group or political  opinion,  is  outside
                 the country of his nationality and is unable or,  owing  to
                 such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the  protection
                 of that country ...


           ...


           F     The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any
                 person with respect to whom there are serious  reasons  for
                 considering that:


                 (a)   he has committed a crime against peace, war crime, or
                       a crime against humanity, as defined in international
                       instruments drawn up to make provisions in respect of
                       such crimes;


                 (b)    he  has  committed  a  serious  non-political  crime
                       outside the country of refuge prior to his  admission
                       to that country as a refugee;


                 (c)   he has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes
                       and principles of the United Nations."


 17. We shall also refer to Articles 32 and 33 of the Convention, which are
     as follows:

           "Article 32
           Expulsion.
           (1)   The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee  lawfully
                 in their territory save on grounds of national security  or
                 public order.
           (2)   The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance
                 of a decision reached in accordance  with  due  process  of
                 law. Except where compelling reasons of  national  security
                 otherwise require, the refugee shall be allowed  to  submit
                 evidence  to  clear  himself,  and  to  appeal  to  and  be
                 represented for the purpose before competent authority or a
                 person or persons specially  designated  by  the  competent
                 authority.
           (3)   The Contracting  States  shall  allow  such  a  refugee  a
                 reasonable period within which to seek legal admission into
                 another country. The Contracting States reserve  the  right
                 to apply during that period such internal measures as  they
                 may deem necessary.
           Article 33
           Prohibition of expulsion or return ("refoulement")
           (1)   No Contracting State shall expel or return ("refouler")  a
                 refugee in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the  frontiers  of
                 territories where his life or freedom would  be  threatened
                 on account of his race, religion,  nationality,  membership
                 of a particular social group or political opinion.
           (2)   The benefit of the present provision may not, however,  be
                 claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds  for
                 regarding as a danger to the security  of  the  country  in
                 which he is, or who,  having  been  convicted  by  a  final
                 judgment of a particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a
                 danger to the community of that country."

Burden and Standard of Proof


 18. Both parties before us take the view that it is for the Government  to
     show that an exclusion clause applies.  We would not  dissent.   In  a
     case such as this, however, where none of the facts are in dispute for
     the purposes of the appeal, it is by no means clear  that  the  phrase
     "burden and standard of proof" has any real application.  We  proceed,
     however, on the assumption that it is for the Government to  establish
     that Article 1F(c) applies to the Appellant.

 19. We do not accept some of the remarks on burden and standard  of  proof
     made by the UNCHR, particularly in their  most  recent  guidance  upon
     Article 1F.   We deal with this topic in more detail below.



IV    INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW

What persons are capable of committing acts covered by Article 1F(c)?

 20. Because the United Nations is an organisation of States,  there  is  a
     considerable amount  of  older  opinion  indicating  that  only  those
     responsible (whether de facto  or  de  jure)  for  the  government  or
     control of States  could  commit  acts  which  were  contrary  to  the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations.  Owing at least  partly
     to the growth of terrorist activity, it  is  now  accepted  by  almost
     everybody that the meaning of Article 1F(c) is not so confined.  As  a
     result, this issue was not argued before us.  For  our  part,  we  are
     perfectly content to hold that a private individual may be  guilty  of
     an act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United  Nations,
     and we see no difficulty in reading the words in this way.  Indeed, in
     the light of other materials before us, we think we  should  have  had
     some difficulty in confining Article 1F(c) to individuals who  control
     States.

What are the purposes and principles of the United Nations,  and  what  acts
are contrary to those purposes and principles?

 21. The starting point must be Articles 1 and 2  of  the  Charter  of  the
     United Nations (1945):

           "Article 1


           The Purposes of the United Nations are:


           1.    To maintain international peace and security, and  to  that
                 end:  to  take  effective  collective  measures   for   the
                 prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the
                 suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of  the
                 peace, and  to  bring  about  by  peaceful  means,  and  in
                 conformity with the principles of justice and international
                 law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes  or
                 situations which might lead to a breach of the peace;


           2.    To  develop  friendly  relations  among  nations  based  on
                 respect  for  the  principle  of  equal  rights  and  self-
                 determination of peoples, and  to  take  other  appropriate
                 measures to strengthen universal peace;


           3.     To   achieve   international   co-operation   in   solving
                 international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or
                 humanitarian character, and in  promoting  and  encouraging
                 respect for human rights and for fundamental  freedoms  for
                 all without distinction  as  to  race,  sex,  language,  or
                 religion;  and


           4.    To be a centre for harmonizing the actions  of  nations  in
                 the attainment of these common ends.


           Article 2


           The Organisation and its Members,  in  pursuit  of  the  Purposes
           stated in Article 1, shall act in accordance with  the  following
           Principles:


           1.    The Organisation is based on the principle of the sovereign
                 equality of all its members.


           2.    All Members, in order to ensure to all of them  the  rights
                 and benefits resulting from  membership,  shall  fulfil  in
                 good faith the obligations assumed by  them  In  accordance
                 with the present Charter.


           3.    All Members shall settle their  international  disputes  by
                 peaceful means in such a manner  that  international  peace
                 and security, and justice, are not endangered.


           4.    All Members shall refrain in their international  relations
                 from the threat or use of  force  against  the  territorial
                 integrity, or political independence of any  state,  or  in
                 any other manner inconsistent  with  the  Purposes  of  the
                 United Nations.


           5.    All Members shall give the United Nations every  assistance
                 in any action it  takes  in  accordance  with  the  present
                 Charter, and shall refrain from giving  assistance  to  any
                 state against which the United Nations is taking preventive
                 or enforcement action.


           6.    The Organisation shall ensure that  states  which  are  not
                 Members of the United Nations act in accordance with  these
                 Principles so far as may be necessary for  the  maintenance
                 of international peace and security.


           7.    Nothing contained in the present  Charter  shall  authorize
                 the United  Nations  to  intervene  in  matters  which  are
                 essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of  any  state
                 or shall require the Members  to  submit  such  matters  to
                 settlement under the present Charter;  but  this  principle
                 shall not prejudice the application of enforcement measures
                 under Chapter VII."


 22. Chapter VII is headed 'Action with respect to threats  to  the  peace,
     breaches of the peace, and threats of aggression'.  We do not need  to
     set out that chapter in full.  For present purposes, we only  need  to
     refer to Article 48:

           "1.   The action required to carry  out  the  decisions  of  the
                 Security Council for the maintenance of international peace
                 and security shall be taken  by  all  the  Members  of  the
                 United Nations or by some of them, as the Security  Council
                 may determine.


           2.    Such decisions shall be carried out by the Members of  the
                 United Nations directly and through  their  action  in  the
                 appropriate   international   agencies   of   which    they
                 remembers."

 23. The functions of the Security Council are laid  down  in  Article  24,
     which reads as follows:

           "Article 24


           1.    In order to ensure  prompt  and  effective  action  by  the
                 United Nations, its Members confer on the Security  Council
                 primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
                 peace and security, and agree  that  in  carrying  out  its
                 duties under this responsibility the Security Council  acts
                 on their behalf.


           2.    In discharging these duties the Security Council shall  act
                 in accordance with  the  Purposes  and  Principles  of  the
                 United  Nations.   The  specific  powers  granted  to   the
                 Security Council for the discharge of these duties are laid
                 down in Chapters VI, VII and VIII and XII.


           3.     The  Security  Council  shall  submit  annual  and,   when
                 necessary, special reports to the General Assembly for  its
                 consideration."

 24. Those Articles give the powers of the Security Council and the context
     in which they are exercised.  It is to  be  noted  that  the  Security
     Council is not said to have power to act other than in accordance with
     the purposes and principles of the United Nations:  see Article 24(2).

 25. Further, it  is  clear  that  in  deciding  what  those  purposes  and
     principles are, we should  not  limit  ourselves  to  the  wording  of
     Articles 1 and 2, for Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on  the  Law
     of Treaties reads as follows:

           "Article 31 General rule of interpretation


           1.    A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith  in  accordance
                 with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms  of  the
                 treaty in their context and in the light of its object  and
                 purpose.


           2.    The context for the purpose  of  the  interpretation  of  a
                 treaty shall comprise, in addition to the  text,  including
                 its preamble and annexes:


                 (a)   any agreement relating to the treaty which  was  made
                      between  all  the  parties  in  connexion  with   the
                      conclusion of the treaty;


                 (b)   any instrument which was made by one or more  parties
                      in connexion with the conclusion of  the  treaty  and
                      accepted  by  the  other  parties  as  an  instrument
                      related to the treaty.


           3.    There shall  be  taken  into  account,  together  with  the
           context:


                 (a)    any  subsequent  agreement   between   the   parties
                      regarding the interpretation of  the  treaty  or  the
                      application of its provisions;


                 (b)   any subsequent practice in  the  application  of  the
                      treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties
                      regarding its interpretation;


                 (c)   any relevant rules of international law applicable in
                      the relations between the parties.


           4.    A special meaning shall  be  given  to  a  term  if  it  is
                 established that the parties so intended."

Resolutions of the Security Council

 26. Article 31(3)(b), taken in combination with the articles of the United
     Nations Treaty to which we have referred,  clearly  demonstrates  that
     Resolutions of the Security Council are relevant in  interpreting  the
     phrase "the purposes and in principles of the United Nations".

 27. We have been referred to three  Security  Council  resolutions  and  a
     statement by the President of the Security Council.

           Security Council Resolution 1269 (1999)


           "The Security Council,


           Deeply  concerned  by  the  increase  in  acts  of  international
           terrorism which endangers the lives and well-being of individuals
           worldwide as well as the peace and security of all States,


           Condemning  all  acts  of  terrorism,  irrespective  of   motive,
           wherever and by whomever committed,


           Mindful of all relevant  resolutions  of  the  General  Assembly,
           including resolution 49/60  of  9  December  1994,  by  which  it
           adopted the Declaration on Measures  to  Eliminate  International
           Terrorism,


           Emphasizing  the  necessity  to  intensify  the   fight   against
           terrorism at the national level  and  to  strengthen,  under  the
           auspices  of  the   United   Nations,   effective   international
           cooperation in this field on the basis of the principles  of  the
           Charter of the United Nations and  norms  of  international  law,
           including respect for international humanitarian  law  and  human
           rights.
           ...
           Determined to contribute, in accordance with the Charter  of  the
           United Nations, to the efforts to combat  terrorism  in  all  its
           forms,


           Reaffirming  that  the  suppression  of  acts  of   international
           terrorism, including those in which States are  involved,  is  an
           essential contribution to the maintenance of international  peace
           and security,


           1.    Unequivocally condemns all acts, method  and  practices  of
                 terrorism as  criminal  and  unjustifiable,  regardless  of
                 their motivation, in all their  forms  and  manifestations,
                 wherever and by whomever  committed,  in  particular  those
                 which could threaten international peace and security;


           2.    Calls upon all States to implement fully the  international
                 anti-terrorist  conventions  to  which  they  are  parties,
                 encourages, all States to consider as a matter of  priority
                 adhering to those  to  which  they  are  not  parties,  and
                 encourages  also  the  speedy  adoption  of   the   pending
                 conventions;


           3.     Stresses  the  vital  role  of  the  United   Nations   in
                 strengthening  international   cooperation   in   combating
                 terrorism  and,  emphasizes  the  importance  of   enhanced
                 coordination  among  States,  international  and   regional
                 organizations;


           4.    Calls upon all States to take, inter alia, in  the  context
                 of such cooperation and coordination, appropriate steps to:


                 - prevent and suppress in their  territories  through  all
                   lawful means the preparation and financing of  any  acts
                   of terrorism;
                 - deny those who plan, finance or  commit  terrorist  acts
                   safe  havens  by   ensuring   their   apprehension   and
                   prosecution or extradition;
                 -  take  appropriate  measures  in  conformity  with   the
                   relevant provisions of national and  international  law,
                   including  international  standards  of  human   rights,
                   before granting  refugee  status,  for  the  purpose  of
                   ensuring that the asylum-seeker has not participated  in
                   terrorist acts;
           ...
           7.    Decides to remain seised of this matter."


           Statement by the President of the Security Council


           ..."The Security Council is deeply concerned by the increase,  in
           many regions of the world, of acts of terrorism in all its  forms
           and manifestations.  The Council reiterates its  condemnation  of
           all acts of terrorism, irrespective of motive,  wherever  and  by
           whomever committed.  It  welcomes  the  efforts  of  the  General
           Assembly and other organs of the United Nations in the  field  of
           combating international terrorism."....


           Resolution 1373 (2001) (adopted on 28 September 2001)


           "The Security Council,


           ...  Reaffirming  also  its  unequivocal  condemnation   of   the
           terrorist attacks which took place in New  York,  Washington,  DC
           and  Pennsylvania  on  11  September  2001,  and  expressing  its
           determinations to prevent all such acts,


           Reaffirming further that such acts, like any act of international
           terrorism,  constitute  a  threat  to  international  peace   and
           security,
           ...
           Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,


           1.    Decides that all States shall:


           (a)   Prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts;


           (b)   Criminalize the wilful  provision  or  collection,  by  any
                 means, directly or indirectly, of funds by their  nationals
                 or in their territories with the intention that  the  funds
                 should be used, or in the knowledge that  they  are  to  be
                 used, in order to carry out terrorist acts;


           (c)   Freeze without delay funds and other  financial  assets  or
                 economic resources of persons who  commit,  or  attempt  to
                 commit, terrorist acts or participate in or facilitate  the
                 commission  of  terrorist  acts;   of  entities  owned   or
                 controlled directly or indirectly by such persons;  and  of
                 persons and  entities  acting  on  behalf  of,  or  at  the
                 direction of such persons  and  entities,  including  funds
                 derived or generated  from  property  owned  or  controlled
                 directly or  indirectly  by  such  persons  and  associated
                 persons and entities;


           (d)   Prohibit their nationals or any persons and entities within
                 their territories  from  making  any  funds,  financial  or
                 economic resources or financial or other  related  services
                 available, directly  or  indirectly,  for  the  benefit  of
                 persons who commit or attempt to commit  or  facilitate  or
                 participate  in  the  commission  of  terrorist  acts,   of
                 entities owned or controlled, directly  or  indirectly,  by
                 such persons and of persons and entities acting  on  behalf
                 of or at the direction of such persons;


           2.    Decides also that all States shall:
           ...
            (d)  Prevent those  who  finance,  plan,  facilitate  or  commit
                 terrorist acts from using their respective territories  for
                 those purposes against other States or their citizens;


           (e)   Ensure that any person who participates in  the  financing,
                 planning preparation or perpetration of terrorist  acts  or
                 in supporting terrorist acts  is  brought  to  justice  and
                 ensure that, in addition  to  any  other  measures  against
                 them,  such  terrorist  acts  are  established  as  serious
                 criminal offences in domestic laws and regulations and that
                 the  punishment  duly  reflects  the  seriousness  of  such
                 terrorist acts;
           ...
           3.    Calls upon all States to:
           ...
           (g)   Ensure, in conformity with international law, that  refugee
                 status is not abused by  the  perpetrators,  organizers  or
                 facilitators  of  terrorist  acts,  and  that   claims   of
                 political motivation are  not  recognised  as  grounds  for
                 refusing  requests   for   the   extradition   of   alleged
                 terrorists;
           ...
           5.    Declares that acts, methods, and practices of terrorism are
                 contrary to the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
                 Nations and that knowingly financing, planning and inciting
                 terrorist acts  are  also  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
                 principles of the United Nations."

 28. We do not need to  set  out  any  of  the  text  of  Security  Council
     Resolution 1455 (2003), which  is  specifically  directed  against  Al
     Qa'eda, but which reaffirms  that  "acts  of  international  terrorism
     constitute a threat to international peace and security".

Resolutions of the General Assembly

 29. We have also been referred to a number of Resolutions of  the  General
     Assembly of the United Nations.  Resolutions of the  General  Assembly
     do not, unlike Security Council Resolutions, have  legislative  force:
     but, in the light of Article 31(3)(a) of the Vienna  Convention,  they
     are clearly relevant in determining the purposes and principles of the
     United Nations.

 30. In Resolution 49/60, dated 9th December 1994  and  adopted  without  a
     vote, the Assembly declared as follows:


           "1.   The States Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirm
                 their unequivocal condemnation of  all  acts,  methods  and
                 practices of  terrorism,  as  criminal  and  unjustifiable,
                 wherever and by whomever committed, including  those  which
                 jeopardize the friendly relations among States and  peoples
                 and threaten the  territorial  integrity  and  security  of
                 States;


           2.    Acts, methods and  practices  of  terrorism  constitute  a
                 grave violation of  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the
                 United Nations, which may pose a  threat  to  international
                 peace and security,  jeopardize  friendly  relations  among
                 States, hinder international cooperation  and  aim  at  the
                 destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms  and  the
                 democratic bases of society;


           3.    Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of
                 terror in  the  general  public,  a  group  of  persons  or
                 particular  persons  for  political  purposes  are  in  any
                 circumstance unjustifiable, whatever the considerations  of
                 a political, philosophical,  ideological,  racial,  ethnic,
                 religious or any  other  nature  that  may  be  invoked  to
                 justify them."


     It is this Resolution that is the subject of specific reference in the
     Preamble to Security Council Resolution 1269.

 31. General Assembly Resolution 51/210 is intended as a supplement to  the
     1994 Resolution.  It reads in part as follows:


           "1.   The States Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirm
                 their unequivocal condemnation of  all  acts,  methods  and
                 practices  of  terrorism  as  criminal  and  unjustifiable,
                 wherever and by whomsoever committed, including those which
                 jeopardize friendly relations among States and peoples  and
                 threaten the territorial integrity and security of States;


           2.    The States Members of the  United  Nations  reaffirm  that
                 acts, methods and practices of terrorism  are  contrary  to
                 the purposes and principles of the  United  Nations;   they
                 declare that knowingly  financing,  planning  and  inciting
                 terrorist acts  are  also  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
                 principles of the United Nations;


           3.    The States Members of the  United  Nations  reaffirm  that
                 States should take appropriate measures of conformity  with
                 the relevant provisions of national and international  law,
                 including international standards of human  rights,  before
                 granting refugee status, for the purpose of  ensuring  that
                 the asylum-seeker has not participated in  terrorist  acts,
                 considering in  this  regard  relevant  information  as  to
                 whether the asylum-seeker is subject to  investigation  for
                 or is charged  with  or  has  been  convicted  of  offences
                 connected  with  terrorism  and,  after  granting   refugee
                 status, for the purpose of ensuring that that status is not
                 used for the purpose of preparing or  organizing  terrorist
                 acts intended to be committed against other States or their
                 citizens; ...


           2.     In  particular,  for  purposes  of  extradition   between
                 Contracting States, none of the following offences shall be
                 regarded as a political offence or as an  offence  inspired
                 by political motives:


                 (a)   An offence within the scope of the Convention for the
                       Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of  Aircraft,  signed
                       at The Hague on 16 December 1970;


                 (b)   An offence within the cope of the Convention for  the
                       Suppression of Unlawful Acts against  the  Safety  of
                       Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal  on  23  September
                       1971;


                 (c)   An offence within the scope of the Convention on  the
                       Prevention   and   Punishment   of   Crimes   against
                       Internationally    Protected    Persons,    including
                       Diplomatic Agents, adopted by the General Assembly on
                       14 December 1973;


                 (d)   An offence within  the  scope  of  the  International
                       Convention against the Taking of Hostage,  signed  at
                       New York on 17 December 1979;


                 (e)    Murder,  manslaughter  or  assault  causing  serious
                       bodily harm, kidnapping or serious unlawful detention


                 (f)   An offence involving the use  of  firearms,  weapons,
                       explosives or other dangerous substances when used as
                       a  means  to   perpetrate   indiscriminate   violence
                       involving death or serious bodily injury  to  persons
                       or serious damage to property;


                 (g)   An attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences or
                       participation  as  an  accomplice  of  a  person  who
                       commits or attempts to commit such an offence.


           Article 3 (...)


           3.    The Contracting States shall  take  appropriate  measures,
                 before granting asylum for the purpose of ensuring that the
                 asylum seeker has not engaged in terrorist  activities,  in
                 particular those referred  to  in  Article  2,  and,  after
                 granting asylum, for the purpose of ensuring  that  refugee
                 status is not used in a manner contrary to  the  provisions
                 of this Convention. ..."

 32. There are other  resolutions  to  the  same  or  similar  effect,  for
     example, Resolution 55/158, dated 3rd January 2001, which:

           "... 2.     Reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated
                 to provoke a state of terror in the general public, a group
                 of persons or particular persons for political purposes are
                 in   any   circumstances   unjustifiable,   whatever    the
                 considerations of a political, philosophical,  ideological,
                 racial, ethnic, religious  or  other  nature  that  may  be
                 invoked to justify them; ..."

 33. Resolution 54/164, dated 24th February 2000:

            "1.  Expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism;

            2.   Condemns the violations of the right to live free from fear
                 and of the right to life, liberty and security;

            3.   Reiterates it unequivocal condemnation of the acts, methods
                 and  practices  of  terrorism,  in  all   its   forms   and
                 manifestations, as activities aimed at the  destruction  of
                 human   rights,   fundamental   freedoms   and   democracy,
                 threatening  the  territorial  integrity  and  security  of
                 States, destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments,
                 undermining pluralistic civil society  and  having  adverse
                 consequences for the economic  and  social  development  of
                 States;

            4.   Calls upon States to  take  all  necessary  and  effective
                 measures  in  accordance  with   relevant   provisions   of
                 international law,  including  international  human  rights
                 standards, to prevent, combat and  eliminate  terrorism  in
                 all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by  whomever
                 committed;

            5.   Urges the international community to  enhance  cooperation
                 at the regional  and  international  levels  in  the  fight
                 against   terrorism,   in    accordance    with    relevant
                 international  instruments,  including  those  relating  to
                 human rights, with the aim of its eradication;

             6.   Condemns the incitement of  ethnic  hatred,  violence  and
           terrorism;


            7.   Commends those Governments that  have  communicated  their
                 view on the implications of terrorism in  response  to  the
                 note verbale by the Secretary-General dated 16 August 1999;


            8.   Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General, and requests
                 him to continue to seek the views of Member States  on  the
                 implications  of  terrorism,   in   all   its   forms   and
                 manifestations, for the full enjoyment of all human  rights
                 and fundamental freedoms, with a view to incorporating them
                 in his report;


            9.   Decides to  consider  this  question  at  its  fifty-sixth
                 session, under the item entitled 'Human Rights questions'."

Other international conventions

 34. We were also referred to a number of international conventions against
     terrorism, including the European Convention  on  the  Suppression  of
     Terrorism (1997), the UN Convention for the Suppression  of  Terrorist
     Bombings (1997) and the International Convention for  the  Suppression
     of the Financing of Terrorism (1999), as well as other conventions  on
     similar topics including, in particular, those relating  to  hijacking
     of aircraft.  For reasons which we trust  will  become  clear  in  the
     course of this determination, we do not need to set out the  terms  of
     any of them.

The UNCHR's Position

 35. There are before us four documents from the UNCHR.   The  first  is  a
     letter from the Office of the Representative for  the  United  Kingdom
     and Ireland.  It is dated 3rd December 2001 and it is addressed to the
     Adjudicator.  It deals with both Article 1F(c) and Article 33.  We  do
     not need to make a further mention of the UNCHR's views on Article 33,
     as they are not relevant to this appeal.  On Article 1F(c), the  UNCHR
     writes as follows:

           "4.   The exclusion clauses need to be interpreted restrictively
                 because they detract from protections that would  otherwise
                 have been available  to  the  refugee.   As  emphasised  in
                 paragraph  149  of  the  UNCHR  Handbook,   a   restrictive
                 interpretation and application is also warranted in view of
                 the serious possible  consequences  of  exclusion  for  the
                 applicant.  The  exclusion  clauses  should  be  used  with
                 utmost caution being, in effect, the most extreme  sanction
                 provided  for  by  the   relevant   international   refugee
                 instruments.


            Article 1F(c)


           5.    Article 1F(c) refers to acts contrary to the purposes  and
                 principles  of  the  United  Nations.   The  purposes   and
                 principles of the United Nations are set out in Articles  1
                 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.  They enumerate
                 fundamental principles that would  govern  the  conduct  of
                 their members in relation to each other and in relation  to
                 the international community as a whole.  The very character
                 of the UN's  purposes  and  principles  suggests  that  the
                 violations that would properly fall  within  Article  1F(c)
                 would be those with an international or  global  dimension,
                 for example the way the crime was organised, its impact  or
                 its long-term  objectives.   Crimes  capable  of  affecting
                 peace, security and peaceful relations between States would
                 fall within this clause, as  would  serious  and  sustained
                 violations of human rights on a massive scale.


           6.    Given that the applicability of Article 1F(c)  is  related
                 to the international scale or impact of a given offence, it
                 follows that its use  should  be  confined  to  exceptional
                 situations and to situations that do not fall within any of
                 the  other  exclusion  clauses.   Comments   by   delegates
                 recorded in the travaux prparatoires  support  this  view.
                 The  drafters  of  the  1951  Convention   envisaged   this
                 provision  as  one  that  would  be  rarely  invoked,   and
                 applicable only to individuals who were in  a  position  of
                 power or influence in  a  State  and  instrumental  in  the
                 State's infringement of the UN purposes and principles.


           7.    While  it  is  fair  to  expect  that  'acts  against  the
                 principles and purposes of the United Nations' would in the
                 majority of cases be perpetrated by persons linked to State
                 power, recent developments demonstrate that individuals and
                 groups  are  capable  of  crimes  that   generate   serious
                 international  repercussions.   UNHCR  is  aware  that  the
                 assertion in Security Council Resolution 1377  (2001)  that
                 acts  of  international  terrorism  are  contrary  to   the
                 purposes and  principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United
                 nations, may promote the application of Article 1F(c) to  a
                 broader circle of persons, in the specific context of  acts
                 of  international  terrorism  which  may  be  qualified  as
                 serious threats to international peace and security.  UNCHR
                 does not rule out the possibility that individuals who  are
                 responsible for such acts could come within  the  ambit  of
                 Article 1F(c), particularly where none  of  the  other  two
                 exclusion clause are applicable.  It has,  however,  to  be
                 borne in mind, that this clause should only be  applied  to
                 those individuals involved in the most extreme of cases.


           8.    Applying Article 1F  often  involves  consideration  of  a
                 myriad of issues, some of  them  related  to  criminal  law
                 concepts, which require careful and differentiated analysis
                 in this context.  In  the  present  case,  Mr  K  has  been
                 convicted of criminal acts committed in the United  Kingdom
                 (arson and conspiracy to commit arson) and was sentenced to
                 4 years imprisonment.  Whilst the crimes committed by Mr  K
                 are reprehensible, UNCHR does not agree that  these  crimes
                 fall within the category  of  acts  falling  under  Article
                 1F(c)."

 36. The second document is a letter from the Office of the  Representative
     for the United Kingdom and Ireland.  It is dated  20th  November  2002
     and is addressed to the Tribunal.  It refers to  the  earlier  letter,
     and continues as follows:

            "The Scope of Article 1F(c) of the 1951 Convention

           Article 1F(c) excludes from protection as refugees  persons  who
           have  been  'guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes   and
           principles of the United Nations'.   Paragraph  163  of  UNCHR's
           Handbook (quoted in the Adjudicator's decision) notes  that  the
           purposes and principles are set out in the preamble and Articles
           1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.  These  provisions
           are couched in broad and general terms.  They do not specify the
           particular acts that would violate the purposes  and  principles
           of the United Nations.  However, they  explicitly  suggest  that
           the matters which engage the United Nations are those which  are
           pervasively global in their impact.


           Whilst the work of the UN is carried out in accordance with  its
           purposes and principles, this cannot mean that every  act  which
           obstructs the UN's broad aims  can  be  interpreted  as  falling
           within Article 1F(c).  Similarly,  while  Security  Council  and
           General  Assembly  resolutions  and   multilateral   conventions
           convened and adopted under the aegis of the UN are  carried  out
           in accordance with its purposes and principles, it is  incorrect
           to equate every action contrary to such instruments  as  falling
           within Article 1F(c).  In UNCHR's opinion, such an  approach  to
           Article 1F(c) would be misguided and could result in giving it a
           wider scope than is appropriate.


           The very character of the UN's purposes and principles  suggests
           that the violations that  would  properly  fall  within  Article
           1F(c) would be those with a potentially international or  global
           impact.  Crimes capable of  affecting  international  peace  and
           security would fall within this clause,  as  would  serious  and
           sustained violations of human rights on a massive scale.   Given
           that the applicability  of  Article  1F(c)  is  related  to  the
           international scale and universal impact of a given offence,  it
           follows  that  its  use  should  be  confined   to   exceptional
           situations that do not fall within any of  the  other  exclusion
           clauses.   Comments  by  delegates  recorded  in   the   travaux
           prparatoires support this view.


           UNHCR is aware that the international  materials  cited  by  the
           Adjudicator, notably Article 1 of Resolution 49/60 of 9 December
           1994 and Security Resolution 1373 (2001) of  28  September  2001
           assert that  'acts,  methods  and  practices  of  terrorism  are
           contrary to the purposes and principles  of  the  UN'  and  that
           'knowingly financing, planning and inciting terrorist  acts  are
           also contrary  to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  UN'.
           However, UNHCR is of the view that all 'terrorist acts', bearing
           in mind that an international definition has yet to be agreed by
           the international community, should not automatically be seen to
           fall  within  Article  1F(c).   Such  acts  would  normally   be
           considered under Article 1F(b).  In this connection,  it  should
           also be recalled that only terrorist acts which generate serious
           international repercussions - in the words of  General  Assembly
           resolution 51/210 - 'acts which  jeopardise  friendly  relations
           among States and peoples and threaten the territorial  integrity
           and security of States' - are  considered  as  contrary  to  the
           purpose and principles of the United Nations.


           As Articles 1 and  2  of  the  UN  Charter  essentially  address
           themselves to States, it would seem that persons who are or have
           been in positions of power in their countries or  in  state-like
           entities are capable of violating them.  This view is  reflected
           in paragraph 163 of the UNHCR Handbook.  However, UNHCR  accepts
           that under certain circumstances and  in  the  light  of  recent
           experiences, certain acts committed by  persons  not  associated
           with any State or State-like entity may engage the purposes  and
           principles of the UN.  Such circumstances could include  extreme
           acts of egregious terrorism threatening international peace  and
           security.  Such acts may,  however,  also  be  considered  under
           Article 1F(a) or Article 1F (b).


           Application of Article 1F(c) to the Appellant


           We understand that the appellant  was  convicted  of  arson  and
           conspiracy  to  commit  arson  and   sentenced   to   4   years'
           imprisonment.  UNHCR would like to reiterate that,  irrespective
           of  whether  the  acts  committed  by  the  appellant   can   be
           categorised as 'terrorist' or not, UNHCR is  of  the  view  that
           these acts fall short of  the  particularly  egregious  acts  of
           terrorism which have international  repercussions  envisaged  by
           Article 1F(c).


           In this respect, UNHCR would also make a comment  on  expiation.
           UNHCR is aware that the exclusion  clauses  in  Article  1F  are
           silent on this point.  Bearing in mind that the rationale of the
           exclusion  clauses  is  to  deny  international  protection   to
           "persons undeserving of international protection", UNCHR  is  of
           the view that a person who has served a  sentence  for  a  crime
           should not be  excluded  unless  the  crimes  for  which  he  is
           convicted is of such  a  truly  heinous  nature  as  to  justify
           continued denial of international protection.


           In conclusion, UNHCR would like to reiterate  its  opinion  that
           although the crimes committed by the appellant  in  the  present
           appeal are reprehensible, UNHCR does not agree that these crimes
           fall within the category of acts falling under Article 1F(c)  of
           the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees."


 37.  The  third  document  is  a  letter  is  from  the  Office   of   the
     Representative for the United Kingdom and Ireland and is addressed  to
     the Appellant's solicitor.  It was prepared in response  to  questions
     raised by the Tribunal at the hearing of this  appeal.   It  reads  as
     follows:

           "Please refer to your letter of  24  April  2003  in  which  you
           request UNHCR to respond to a query raised  by  the  Immigration
           Appeal Tribunal (IAT) regarding a particular sentence in UNCHR's
           letter of 20 November 2002.  We understand that  the  IAT  seeks
           clarification on UNHCR's use of the word "only" in the following
           sentence:


                 'In this connection, it should also be recalled  that  only
                 terrorist  acts  which   generate   serious   international
                 repercussions - in the words of General Assembly resolution
                 51/210 - "acts which jeopardise  friendly  relations  among
                 States and peoples and threaten the  territorial  integrity
                 of and security of States" - are considered as contrary  to
                 the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United   Nations'.
                 (Emphasis added).


           We further understand that in raising this query, the IAT had in
           mind:
           (a)    The   1994   Declaration   on   Measures   to   Eliminate
                 International  Terrorism  (approved  by  general   Assembly
                 resolution 49/60, point l(1) which condemns "all"  acts  of
                 terrorism "... including those  which  jeopardise  friendly
                 relations among  States...);  (Emphases  supplied  in  your
                 letter of 24 April 2003); and,
           (b)   The  1997  Convention  on  the  Suppression  of  Terrorist
                 Bombings (adopted by General  Assembly  resolution  52/164)
                 and the 1999 International Convention for  the  Suppression
                 of the Financing of Terrorism (adopted by General  Assembly
                 resolution 54/109).


           In your letter, you point out that neither of these  Conventions
           contemplate any limit on the range of terrorist activity covered
           other than as set out in each in Article 3.   You  mention  that
           the terms of Article 3 do not apply to the instant case.


           We  would  draw   the   IAT's   attention   to   the   following
           considerations:


           Our use of the word 'only' in our letter of  20  November  2002,
           should be understood within the particular context in  which  it
           was used.  In the paragraph in question, UNHCR was at  pains  to
           describe the circumstances under which it might  be  appropriate
           to invoke exclusion under Article 1F(c) of the  1951  Convention
           relating to the Status of Refugee in  preference  to  the  other
           exclusion clauses.  We stressed that the key  words  in  Article
           1F(c) - "acts contrary to the purposes  and  principles  of  the
           United Nations" should be construed restrictively, and that  the
           application of Article 1F(c) should be reserved  for  situations
           where an  act  and  the  consequences  thereof  satisfy  a  high
           threshold.  This threshold should be defined  in  terms  of  the
           gravity of the act in question, the manner in which the  act  is
           organised, its international impact and  long  term  objectives,
           and the  implications  for  international  peace  and  security.
           Crimes  capable  of  affecting  peace,  security  and   peaceful
           relations between States would fall  within  Article  1F(c),  as
           would serious and sustained violations of human rights.


           Thus, the assertion - even in a UN instrument - that an  act  is
           'terrorist' in nature would not by itself suffice to warrant the
           correct  application  of  Article  1F(c),  not   least   because
           "terrorism" is without clear or universally  agreed  definition.
           Rather than focus on the terrorism" label, a more reliable guide
           to the correct application of Article 1F(c)  is  the  extent  to
           which the act in question impinges on the international plane  -
           in terms of its gravity, international impact, and  implications
           for international peace and security.   In  UNHCR's  view,  only
           terrorist  acts  that  are   distinguished   by   these   larger
           characteristics  should  qualify  for  exclusion  under  Article
           1F(c).


           This view is consistent with the  above-cited  General  Assembly
           Declarations (GAR 49/60 of 1994 and GAR 51/210 of 1996) and  the
           Conventions of 1997 and  1999.  These  instruments  express  the
           resolve of the international community to condemn and  eliminate
           international terrorism, to suppress terrorist bombings, and  to
           curb the financing of  terrorist  activities.   Given  that  the
           object of these instruments is  to  denounce  terrorism  and  to
           identify and punish its perpetrators, it  is  quite  appropriate
           that the range of activities under their remit should be cast in
           the broadest possible terms.   Entirely  different  -  and  more
           restrictive - considerations apply  to  delineating  the  proper
           scope of exclusion under Article 1F(c).  There  may  be  overlap
           between the subject matter of the instruments  cited  above  and
           the acts that should properly fall within the scope  of  Article
           1F(c).  There is however, no exact congruence between them.


           We wish at this stage to reiterate a point we have  consistently
           argued - that the key words in Article 1F(c) - "act contrary  to
           the purposes and principles of the  United  Nations"  should  be
           restrictively  construed  for  the  specific  purposes  of  that
           particular  exclusion  provision.    We   recognise   that   the
           principles and purposes of the UN are reflected in a  myriad  of
           ways, for example in multilateral conventions adopted under  the
           aegis of  the  UN  General  Assembly  and  in  Security  Council
           resolutions.  We acknowledge that new  developments  have  taken
           place since the UN Charter was adopted and that the scope of the
           purposes and principles of the UN should be  considered  in  the
           light of contemporary  challenges.   These  developments  cannot
           however justify a simple equation between acts that violate  any
           UN instrument and acts that properly fall within  the  ambit  of
           Article 1F(c) and care should be taken  to  avoid  a  simplistic
           approach.


           UNHCR accepts that there are situations where a clear  link  can
           be established between the contravention of a UN instrument, the
           violation of the purposes and principles of the UN and exclusion
           under Article 1F(c).  For  example,  in  the  aftermath  of  the
           attacks of 11  September  2001,  the  UN  Security  Council  has
           reaffirmed in resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1377 (2001) that  acts
           of international terrorism are a threat to  international  peace
           and security and are contrary to the purposes and principles  of
           the UN.  These resolutions have called on States not to  provide
           refuge to terrorists, in particular SCR 1373 (2001  which  calls
           for appropriate measures with regard to asylum  seekers.   Given
           the general approach to Article 1F(c), as described in  previous
           communications  to  the  Tribunal  on   this   case,   acts   of
           international terrorism of type envisaged  by  these  particular
           resolutions may indeed fall within the scope of Article 1F(c).


           The position is much less clear  where  the  UN  instruments  in
           question  are  non-binding  resolutions  with  no   law   making
           authority, or where the interpretation of the UN instrument  has
           to be informed by the terms of an existing UN treaty,  (in  this
           case, the 1951  Convention),  or  where  the  UN  instrument  in
           question does not evince  a  clear  intention  to  override  the
           provisions of an existing UN treaty.  The application of Article
           1F(c) should be informed by such considerations as  well  as  by
           the objects and purposes of that provision.


           In conclusion, UNHCR remains of the view that to directly equate
           any act contrary to UN instruments with exclusion under  Article
           1F(c) is inconsistent with the object  and  purpose  of  Article
           1F(c).  Article 1F(c) is triggered only in extreme circumstances
           by activity,  which  attacks  the  basis  of  the  international
           community's  coexistence  under  the  auspices  of  the   United
           Nations.  The very nature of the UN's  purposes  and  principles
           suggests  that  acts  which  fall  under  1F(c)  must  have   an
           international dimension, for example, in terms of the manner the
           crime is organised, its  impact  or  its  long-term  objectives.
           Thus crimes capable of affecting peace,  security  and  peaceful
           relations between States would fall within this clause, as would
           serious and sustained violations of human rights."


 38. The fourth document is a letter from the Office of the  Representative
     for the United Kingdom dated 29th September 2003 and addressed to  the
     Appellant's solicitor.  Specifically referring to the present  appeal,
     it encloses a  copy  of  the  document  'Guidelines  on  International
     Protection: Application of the Exclusion  Clauses: Article 1F  of  the
     1951  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees'  dated  4th
     September 2003.  That document is a summary of the background note  of
     the same date, to which we have  not  been  otherwise  referred.   The
     relevant paragraphs are the following:

           "2.   The rationale for the exclusion clauses, which  should  be
                 borne in mind when considering their application,  is  that
                 certain acts are so grave as to render  their  perpetrators
                 undeserving of international protection as refugees.  Their
                 primary purpose is to deprive those guilty of heinous acts,
                 and  serious  common  crimes,  of   international   refugee
                 protection and to ensure that such persons do not abuse the
                 institution of asylum in order to avoid being held  legally
                 accountable for their acts.  The exclusion clauses must  be
                 applied "scrupulously" to  protect  the  integrity  of  the
                 institution  of  asylum,  as  is  recognised   by   UNCHR's
                 Executive Committee in Conclusion No 82 (XLVIII), 1997.  At
                 the same time, given the possible serious  consequences  of
                 exclusion, it is important to apply them with great caution
                 and  only  after  a  full  assessment  of  the   individual
                 circumstances of the case.  The exclusion  clauses  should,
                 therefore, always be interpreted in a restrictive manner.

            C.   Temporal Scope

           5.     Articles  1F(a)  and  1F(c)  are  concerned  with  crimes
                 whenever and wherever they are committed.  By contrast, the
                 scope of Article 1F(b)  is  explicitly  limited  to  crimes
                 committed outside the country of refuge prior to  admission
                 to that country as a refugee.


           D.    Cancellation or revocation on the basis of exclusion


           6.    Where facts which would have led to exclusion only come to
                 light after the grant of refugee status, this would justify
                 cancellation of refugee status on the grounds of exclusion.
                  The reverse is that information casting doubt on the basis
                 on which an individual has been  excluded  should  lead  to
                 reconsideration of eligibility for refugee status.  Where a
                 refugee engages in conduct falling within Article 1F(a)  or
                 1F(c), this would trigger the application of the  exclusion
                 clauses and the revocation of refugee status, provided  all
                 the criteria for the application of these clauses are met.


           F.    Consequences of exclusion


           8.    Although a State is precluded from granting refugee status
                 pursuant to the 1951 Convention or the OAU Convention to an
                 individual it has excluded, it is not otherwise obliged  to
                 take any particular course of action.  The State  concerned
                 can choose to grant the excluded individual stay  on  other
                 grounds,  but  obligations  under  international  law   may
                 require that the person concerned be criminally  prosecuted
                 or extradited.  A decision by UNHCR to exclude someone from
                 refugee status means that that  individual  can  no  longer
                 receive protection or assistance from the Office.


           II.   SUBSTANTIVE ANALYSIS


           C.     Article  1F(c):  Acts  contrary  to  the   purposes   and
                 principles of the United Nations


           17.   Given  the  broad,  general  terms  of  the  purposes  and
                 principles  of  the  United  Nations,  the  scope  of  this
                 category is rather unclear and  should  therefore  be  read
                 narrowly.  Indeed, it is rarely applied and, in many cases,
                 Article 1F(a) or 1F(b) are anyway likely to apply.  Article
                 1F(c)  is  only  triggered  in  extreme  circumstances   by
                 activity which attacks the very basis of the  international
                 community's  coexistence.   Such  activity  must  have   an
                 international  dimension.   Crimes  capable  of   affecting
                 international  peace,  security  and   peaceful   relations
                 between States, as well as serious and sustained violations
                 of human rights, would fall  under  this  category.   Given
                 that Articles  1  and  2  of  the  United  Nations  Charter
                 essentially set out the fundamental principle  States  must
                 uphold in their mutual relations, it would appear  that  in
                 principle only persons who have been in positions of  power
                 in a State or State-like entity  would  appear  capable  of
                 committing such acts.  In cases involving a terrorist  act,
                 a  correct  application  of  Article  1F(c)   involves   an
                 assessment as to the extent to which the  act  impinges  on
                 the  international  plane  -  in  terms  of  its   gravity,
                 international impact, and  implications  for  international
                 peace and security.


           E.    Grounds for rejecting individual responsibility


           21.   Criminal responsibility can normally only arise where  the
                 individual concerned committed the material elements of the
                 offence  with  knowledge  and  intent.   Where  the  mental
                 element is not satisfied, for example, because of ignorance
                 of a key fact, individual criminal  responsibility  is  not
                 established.  In some cases, the individual  may  not  have
                 the mental capacity to be held  responsible  a  crime,  for
                 example, because of insanity, mental handicap,  involuntary
                 intoxication or, in the case of children, immaturity.


           22.   Factors generally considered  to  constitute  defences  to
                 criminal responsibility should be considered.  For example,
                 the defence of superior orders will only  apply  where  the
                 individual was legally  obliged  to  obey  the  order,  was
                 unaware of its unlawfulness and the order  itself  was  not
                 manifestly unlawful.  As for duress, this applies where the
                 act  in  question  results  from   the   person   concerned
                 necessarily and reasonably avoiding a  threat  of  imminent
                 death, or of continuing or imminent serious bodily harm  to
                 him or herself or another person, and the person  does  not
                 intend to cause greater harm than  the  one  sought  to  be
                 avoided.  Action in self-defence or in defence of others or
                 of property must be both reasonable  and  proportionate  in
                 relation to the threat.


           23.   Where expiation of the crime is considered to  have  taken
                 place, application of the exclusion clauses may  no  longer
                 be justified.  This may be the case  where  the  individual
                 has served a penal sentence for the crime in  question,  or
                 perhaps where a significant  period  of  time  has  elapsed
                 since commission of the  offence.  Relevant  factors  would
                 include the seriousness of  the  offence,  the  passage  of
                 time, and any expression of regret shown by the  individual
                 concerned.  In considering the  effect  of  any  pardon  or
                 amnesty,  consideration  should  be  given  to  whether  it
                 reflects the democratic will of the  relevant  country  and
                 whether the individual has been  held  accountable  in  any
                 other way.  Some crimes are, however, so grave and  heinous
                 that the application of  Article  1F  is  still  considered
                 justified despite the existence of a pardon or amnesty.


           F.    Proportionality considerations


           24.    The  incorporation  of  a   proportionality   test   when
                 considering  exclusion  and  its  consequences  provides  a
                 useful analytical tool to ensure that the exclusion clauses
                 are applied in a  manner  consistent  with  the  overriding
                 humanitarian object and purpose  of  the  1951  Convention.
                 The concept  has  evolved  in  particular  in  relation  to
                 Article 1F(b) and represents  a  fundamental  principle  of
                 many fields of international law.  As with any exception to
                 a  human  rights  guarantee,  the  exclusion  clauses  must
                 therefore be applied in a  manner  proportionate  to  their
                 objective, so that the gravity of the offence  in  question
                 is weighed against the consequences of exclusion.   Such  a
                 proportionality analysis would, however,  not  normally  be
                 required in  the  case  of  crimes  against  peace,  crimes
                 against humanity, and acts falling under Article 1F(c),  as
                 the acts covered are  so  heinous.   It  remains  relevant,
                 however, to Article  1F(b)  crimes  and  less  serious  war
                 crimes under Article 1F(a).


           III.  PROCEDURAL ISSUES


           34.   The burden of proof with regard to  exclusion  rests  with
                 the  State  (or  UNCHR)  and,  as  in  all  refugee  status
                 determination proceedings, the applicant  should  be  given
                 the benefit of the doubt.  Where, however,  the  individual
                 has been indicted by an international criminal tribunal, or
                 where individual responsibility for actions which give rise
                 to exclusion is presumed, as indicated in paragraph  19  of
                 these Guidelines, the burden of proof is reversed, creating
                 a rebuttable presumption of excludability."

The United Kingdom Authorities

 39. Other than Adan and Aitseguer [2001] INLR 44, which is  authority  for
     the general principles of the interpretation of the Refugee Convention
     and the search for an autonomous meaning of  it,  only  three  of  the
     United Kingdom authorities cited to us are of  very  much  assistance.
     They are T v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 443, a decision of the House of Lords,
     Mukhtiar Singh and Paramjit Singh v SSHD, a decision  of  the  Special
     Immigration Appeals Commission (Potts J, HHJ Dunn QC and  Sir  Michael
     Weston) dated 31st July 2000, and Gurung v SSHD [2003] Imm AR  115,  a
     starred determination of this Tribunal.

 40. In T, the Appellant had been a member of the FIS in Algeria,  and  had
     been involved in the planning of the bombing of an  airport  in  which
     ten people were killed, as well as a raid to obtain arms.   His  claim
     to asylum was rejected on the grounds that he was excluded by  Article
     1F(b).  The submissions on his behalf were  to  the  effect  that  his
     activities in Algeria, based as they were under FIS's  armed  struggle
     against the government of Algeria, were properly  to  be  regarded  as
     "political", and so not such as to lead to the  Appellant's  exclusion
     from the Refugee Convention.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed  by
     the Adjudicator, the Tribunal, the Court of Appeal and  the  House  of
     Lords.  After a wide-ranging view of the authorities,  Lord  Lloyd  of
     Berwick (with whom Lord Keith  of  Kinkel  and  Lord  Browne-Wilkinson
     agreed) held as follows, at p480:

           "A crime is a political crime for the purposes of Article  1F(b)
           of the Geneva Convention if, and only if:


                 (1)   it is committed for a political purpose, that  is  to
                       say, with the object of overthrowing or subverting or
                       changing the government of a state or inducing it  to
                       change its policy;  and
                 (2)   there is a sufficiently close and direct link between
                       the crime and  the  alleged  political  purpose.   In
                       determining whether such a  link  exists,  the  Court
                       will bear in mind  the  means  used  to  achieve  the
                       political end, and will  have  particular  regard  to
                       whether  the  crime  was  aimed  at  a  military   or
                       governmental target, on the one hand, or  a  civilian
                       target on the other, and in either event  whether  it
                       was likely to involve the indiscriminate  killing  or
                       injuring of members of the public."


 41. Although that decision is in its terms limited to  the  interpretation
     of Article 1F(b), it is of clear relevance in any  attempt  to  assess
     the meaning of Article 1F as a whole.  It is also of interest to  note
     that Lord  Slynn  of  Hadley,  agreeing  that  the  appeal  should  be
     dismissed, stated as follows, at p469:

           "'... serious non-political crime' as a matter of interpretation
           of the Convention and of the Rules  includes  acts  of  violence
           which are intended or likely to create a state of terror in  the
           minds of persons  whether  particular  persons  or  the  general
           public and, which cause  or  are  likely  to  cause,  injury  to
           persons who have no connection with the Government of the state.
            This is not intended to be a complete definition.  There may be
           other acts which constitute terrorism which are far outside  the
           concept of political crime ... ."


 42. Lord Mustill also reviewed the authorities and took particular account
     of international statements  on  terrorism,  beginning  with  a  draft
     Convention on the prevention  and  punishment  of  terrorism  promoted
     within the League of Nations in  1937.   His  conclusion  was  that  a
     notion of terrorism should be written into  the  definition  of  "non-
     political crime", in order to reflect properly  the  meaning  of  that
     phrase in the modern world.  At pp465-6, he said this:

           "I am however more persuaded by the idea of writing  'terrorism'
           into the modern concept of the political crime.  To accept  this
           requires, as must any model which involves  departure  from  the
           concept of incidence, an important step:  the  recognition  that
           some characteristic of the crime  can  disconnect  it  from  its
           political origins, using the word in  its  widest  sense.   Once
           this step is taken, as I believe it  must  be,  I  would  prefer
           terrorism to atrocity as a test, because it concentrates on  the
           method of the offence, rather than its  physical  manifestation.
           The terrorist does not strike at his opponents:  those  whom  he
           kills are not the tyrants whom he opposes, but people to whom he
           is indifferent.  They are the raw materials of a  strategy,  not
           the objectives of it.  The terrorist is not  even  concerned  to
           inspire terror in the victims, for  to  him  they  are  ciphers.
           They exist only as a  means  to  inspire  terror  at  large,  to
           destroy opposition by moral enfeeblement, or to create a  vacuum
           into which the like-minded can stride.  It seems to me in a real
           sense that a political crime, the killing of A by B  to  achieve
           an end, involves a direct relationship between the ideas of  the
           criminal and the victim, which is absent in  the  depersonalised
           and abstract violence which kills twenty, or three, or none,  it
           matters not how many or whom, so long as  the  broad  effect  is
           achieved.  I find it hard to believe that the  human  rights  of
           the fugitive could ever have been intended to outweigh this cold
           indifference to the human rights of the uninvolved.


           There are two further reasons to think that this  is  the  right
           answer.   First,  there  is  detectable  in  the   international
           legislation and the debates surrounding it in a recognition that
           terrorism is an evil in its own  right,  distinct  from  endemic
           violence, and  calling  for  special  measures  of  containment.
           Secondly, the law of asylum fundamentally affects the  lives  of
           human beings,  and  yet  must  be  applied  at  speed.   Whether
           employed individually  or  as  parts  of  a  battery  of  tests,
           criteria  such  as  remoteness,  causation,  atrociousness   and
           proportionality seem too subjective to found the consistency  of
           decision which must surely be essential  in  a  jurisdiction  of
           this kind.  By contrast, once it is made clear that terrorism is
           not simply a label for violent  conduct  of  which  the  speaker
           deeply disapproves,  the  term  is  capable  of  definition  and
           objective application.  I quote again from the League of Nations
           Convention of 1937:  '"Acts" of  terrorism  mean  criminal  acts
           directed against a State and intended or calculated to create  a
           state of terror in the minds of particular persons, or  a  group
           of persons or the general public'.  The  Convention  never  came
           into force, but the definition is serviceable, and I am  content
           to adopt it."


 43. The other members of the House  did  not  expressly  agree  with  Lord
     Mustill's proposal.  All five of their Lordships did,  however,  agree
     that  no  concept  of   proportionality   was   appropriate   in   the
     interpretation or application of Article 1F(b).

 44. Singh and Singh v SSHD was, as we have indicated,  an  appeal  to  the
     Special Immigration Appeals Commission.  One of the issues before  the
     Commission  was  whether  the  Appellants  were  excluded   from   the
     protection of the Refugee Convention by Article 1F(c).  The Commission
     concluded (at paragraph 24) that the Secretary of State's  allegations
     in his open statements had been proved to a high degree of probability
     by the evidence heard in open and closed session.   Those  allegations
     were that each of the Appellants had, after  arriving  in  the  United
     Kingdom in 1995 (in the case of the first Appellant) and 1995 or  1996
     (in the case of the second Appellant) been involved in supporting  and
     organising terrorist activity in India to further the  aims  of  those
     who aspired to create an independent Sikh  homeland  in  Khalistan  by
     violent means.  They had been associated with Sikhist extremist groups
     in the United Kingdom, had engaged in conspiracies with those planning
     terrorist attacks which would take place in India, and  had  conspired
     with terrorists based in Pakistan to ship explosives from Pakistan  to
     India for the purposes of terrorist activities there.   On  behalf  of
     the Appellants, it was suggested that Article 1F(c)  applied  only  to
     those holding a position of authority in a state or acting  on  behalf
     of a state;  that acts could only fall within Article  1F(c)  if  they
     were committed other than for a political reason or in pursuance of  a
     right of  self-determination;   and  that  the  gravity  of  the  acts
     committed ought to be weighed against the risk  of  ill-treatment,  in
     order to assess the proportionality of applying  Article  1F(c).   The
     Commission's response to those arguments is in  paragraph  65  of  the
     determination:

           "65(a)      Requirement for State Authority or Position
                 We consider that Article 1F(c) is not limited in the  sense
                 contended for by the  Appellants.   We  have  reached  this
                 conclusion primarily because Article 1F(c) itself does  not
                 expressly  limit  those  who  may  be  excluded  from   the
                 protection afforded by the Refugee Convention to  those  in
                 positions of power who have ordered or  lent  authority  to
                 state actions, and there  is  no  other  provision  in  the
                 Refugee  Convention   suggesting   any   such   limitation.
                 Further, we accept the submission of the Secretary of State
                 that neither the Handbook on Procedures  and  Criteria  for
                 determining  refugee  status   nor   the   Joint   Position
                 (96/196/JHA) contain any firm statement that there  is  any
                 such limit.  Moreover, as the Secretary of  State  submits,
                 and as we accept, the  exclusions  in  Articles  1F(a)  and
                 1F(b) are plainly not  limited  to  any  such  category  of
                 individual,  even  though  they  (and  Article   1F(a)   in
                 particular) may clearly be committed by persons in  such  a
                 category, which suggests that Article 1F(c) allows for  the
                 exclusion of individuals outside that category, even if  it
                 also includes individuals within it.


              b) Political Crimes/Self Determination
                    i) We  consider  that  there  is  no  'political  crime'
                       exception to Article 1F(c).  Article 1F(b)  expressly
                       refers to  'non-political  crime'.   This  expression
                       could have been included in Articles 1F(a) and 1F(c).
                        It was not.  Many examples  of  conduct  which  fall
                       within the plain words of Articles  1F(a)  and  1F(c)
                       could be regarded as 'political'.  Had  the  drafters
                       of the Convention intended there  to  have  been  the
                       limitation suggested by the Appellants in  either  of
                       these provisions then it is surprising that they  did
                       not express it as they  did  in  Article  1F(b).   We
                       accept the Secretary of State's  submission  in  this
                       respect.
                   ii) [The Commission also decided that for the purposes of
                       the appeal before them, insofar as the definition  of
                       'terrorism' was in issue, the appropriate  definition
                       was that found in clause 1 of the Terrorism Bill then
                       before Parliament (which  became  the  Terrorism  Act
                       2000).]


              c) Proportionality
                 We accept that the  Handbook  and  the  EU  Joint  Position
                 suggest that the principle of 'proportionality'  should  be
                 applied  to  Article  1F(b).   However,  neither  of  these
                 sources suggests that  it  should  be  applied  to  Article
                 1F(c), or indeed to the related Article 1F(a).   We  accept
                 the submission of the Secretary of State that  there  being
                 no express suggestion of 'proportionality' in  relation  to
                 any of the three limbs of Article 1F, then it must be  open
                 to doubt whether the principle applies in respect of 1F(b).
                  1F(b) is in any event irrelevant for the determination  of
                 the instant case.  We therefore give Article 1F(c) what  we
                 consider to be its plain and clear meaning and  proceed  on
                 the basis that no principle of 'proportionality' is  to  be
                 adopted in relation to it."


 45. Having concluded that the acts in which  the  Appellants  before  them
     engaged were "terrorist  acts",  the  Commission  went  on  to  decide
     whether those acts were contrary to the principles and purposes of the
     United Nations.  The Commission's determination on that issue reads as
     follows:

           "67.  Were those acts contrary to the purposes and principles of
                 the United Nations?  We have  been  supplied  with  a  vast
                 quantity  of  written  material.   We  do  not  propose  to
                 rehearse  its  contents  in  this  Determination.   It   is
                 sufficient to refer only to 'The Declaration of Measures to
                 Eliminate  International  Terrorism'  (the  United  Nations
                 General Assembly Resolution 49/60), which  was  adopted  on
                 9th  December  1994  by  all  185  member  states   without
                 opposition and reaffirmed in 1996 and 1999.   It  expressly
                 declared that:


                       'Acts, methods and practices of terrorism  constitute
                       a grave violation of the purposes and  principles  of
                       the United  Nations,  which  may  pose  a  threat  to
                       international peace and security, jeopardise friendly
                       relations  among  states,  hinder  international  co-
                       operation and aim at the destruction of human rights,
                       fundamental freedoms  and  the  democratic  bases  of
                       society.'


             68. We accept the Secretary of  State's  submission  that  this
                 Declaration and the material supplied  to  us  show  beyond
                 doubt that  terrorism  is  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
                 principles of the United  Nations.   It  follows  that  the
                 Appellants 'terrorist acts' exclude them from  the  Refugee
                 Convention by virtue of Article 1F(c) and we so find."

 46. Needless to say, the Secretary of State relied on that  determination.
     It is clearly entitled to the highest  respect,  although  it  is  not
     formally binding on us.  Insofar, however, as it relates the  question
     to a definition of "terrorism", and uses a United  Kingdom  definition
     of that word, it must perhaps be read with some caution in  the  light
     of Adan and Aitseguer.  But that is not to say that it has been in any
     other sense superseded by later authority.

 47. In Gurung v SSHD, the claimant had admittedly been involved in  crimes
     in Nepal and the question was  whether  he  was  excluded  by  Article
     1F(b).  Much of the Tribunal's decision (which was, in the result,  to
     remit the appeal for rehearing) is concerned  with  procedural  issues
     arising out of the exclusion clauses.  The Tribunal's  decision  that,
     in appropriate cases, a decision on exclusion could  be  made  without
     considering whether, but for the exclusion, the claimant  would  be  a
     refugee indicates a rejection of a  notion  of  proportionality.   The
     Tribunal endorses the approach of a previous  Tribunal  in  Thayabaran
     (12250) that the words of the exclusion clauses should be given  their
     ordinary meaning, and not  glossed.   In  particular,  in  considering
     questions of terrorism, Article 1F was not to be regarded as a  simply
     anti-terrorism clause, but, in the words of Thayabaran, "the  question
     is not whether the claimant can be characterised as a  terrorist,  but
     whether the words of the exemption clause apply to him".

Overseas Jurisdictions

 48. It is perhaps slightly surprising that there is  little  authority  on
     Article  1F(c)  from  other  countries  around  the  world.   We   had
     anticipated that a considerable amount of overseas authority would  be
     cited to us, because of a passage in G S Goodwin-Gill's  'The  Refugee
     in International Law' (second edition 1996) where, at  p114,  we  find
     this:

           "Article 1F(c) of the Convention is potentially very wide.   ...
           Once rarely used, the exception is now frequently invoked;   its
           interpretation and development  are  likely  to  vary,  however,
           given the disparate interests of the sovereign States members of
           the United Nations."


      That is the concluding passage of the author's discussion  of  Article
      1F(c) in this work, which is sometimes regarded as authoritative.  The
      only case cited in the footnote to that paragraph is a  Canadian  one,
      Pushpanathan, which we shall consider shortly.  In the preceding pages
      of analysis, the author discusses "the  drafting  history  of  Article
      1F(c)", "the purposes and  principles  of  the  United  Nations",  and
      "individuals and persons acting on behalf of the state".   It  is  the
      second of those which is of particular interest to us.  No  cases  are
      cited there.  It was for this reason that we invited  the  parties  to
      see if the statement that "the exception is  now  frequently  invoked"
      could be elaborated in any way.


 49. A reply from the author of the  book  appears  to  indicate  that  the
     statement is incorrect.  He writes as follows:

           "[T]he reference to Article 1F(c) now being 'frequently invoked'
           is not free of ambiguity, particularly insofar as  it  may  give
           the impression that, in 1996, it was  being  invoked  frequently
           and successfully in proceedings for the determination of refugee
           status.  This was not the case;  exclusion under  Article  1F(c)
           was still relatively rare, although it appeared to  me,  on  the
           basis of developments in a number of jurisdictions, that it  was
           beginning  to  attract  increasing  attention,  particularly  as
           regards asylum seekers who appeared to have been associated with
           persecution in their country of origin.


           I have reviewed my manuscript notes from  the  period  1994-1996
           and I have not found any other instances in which Article  1F(c)
           was applied to individuals not  themselves  falling  within  the
           three general categories listed on page 114 of  the  Refugee  in
           International Law [that is to say policy makers,  officials  and
           government  members  implementing  policies,  and  'individuals,
           whether members of organisations or not, who, for example,  have
           personally participated in the  persecution  or  denial  of  the
           human rights of others']."


      The remainder of the reply is an indication that Article 1F(c)  should
      be restrictively interpreted and  restrictively  applied.   Again,  no
      decided cases are cited.  The inevitable conclusion is that  not  only
      were there no cases extending the ambit of Article  1F(c),  but  there
      were also no decisions restricting its ambit:  if there had  been,  no
      doubt they would have been cited.  It would appear to follow that  the
      assertion that the exception was in 1996 "frequently invoked"  is  far
      from easy to understand.


 50. We turn therefore to the overseas cases which were cited to us.

 51. Pushpanathan v Canada [1999] INLR 36 is  a  decision  of  the  Supreme
     Court of Canada on an  appeal  by  a  claimant  whom  the  Immigration
     Refugee Board and the Federal Court  had  decided  was  excluded  from
     refugee protection by Article 1F(c) because  he  was  a  drug  dealer.
     Five of the seven judges subscribed to the leading  judgment,  written
     by Bastarache J.  For present purposes, we can indicate its content by
     reference to the head-note:

           "(2)  The purpose of Art 1 of the 1951 Convention was to  define
                 a refugee.  The purpose of Art 1F, however, was to identify
                 persons who were ab initio excluded  from  that  definition
                 and not to protect the society  of  refuge  from  dangerous
                 refugees.  By contrast, the purpose of Art 33 was to  allow
                 for the refoulement of a bona fide refugee  to  his  native
                 country where he posed a danger  to  the  security  of  the
                 country of refuge, or to the safety of the community;   its
                 function was not to define a refugee.
           (3)   Article 1F(c) excluded from the  definition  of  'refugee'
                 those individuals responsible  for  serious,  sustained  or
                 systemic  violations  of  fundamental  human  rights  which
                 amount to persecution in a non-war setting.  As Art  1  was
                 concerned with the recognition of refugee status,  any  act
                 committed prior to the obtaining of refugee status, whether
                 within or outside the country of refuge, could be  relevant
                 to Art 1F(c).  The category of persons covered by Art 1F(c)
                 was not, however, restricted to  persons  in  positions  of
                 power.  Although it may be more difficult for  a  non-state
                 actor to perpetrate human  rights  violations  on  a  scale
                 amounting  to  persecution  without   the   State   thereby
                 implicitly adopting those acts, the possibility should  not
                 be excluded.
           (4)   In determining whether an act is one which is 'contrary to
                 the purposes and principles of the United Nations'  as  set
                 out in Art 1F(c), the guiding principle was that Art  1F(c)
                 was applicable where there was consensus  in  international
                 law that particular acts  constitute  sufficiently  serious
                 and sustained violations of fundamental human rights as  to
                 amount to persecution,  or  are  explicitly  recognised  as
                 contrary to the purposes and principles of the  UN.   Where
                 the rule which had been violated was very near the core  of
                 the  most  valued  principles  of  human  rights  and   was
                 recognised  as   immediately   subject   to   international
                 condemnation  and  punishment,  then   even   an   isolated
                 violation, particularly where  it  related  to  an  offence
                 which attracted universal  jurisdiction,  could  constitute
                 'persecution', depending on the facts, including the extent
                 of the applicant's complicity.  In the absence of  such  an
                 international   consensus    or    explicit    recognition,
                 individuals  should  not  be  deprived  of  the   essential
                 protections contained in the  1951  Convention  for  having
                 committed those acts.  Such an interpretation of Art  1F(c)
                 did not preclude a State from taking  appropriate  measures
                 to ensure the safety of its citizens as Art 33 allowed  for
                 the expulsion of individuals who presented a  threat  to  a
                 State's society.
           (5)   Article 1F(b) of the 1951 Convention was  generally  meant
                 to prevent ordinary criminals from avoiding extradition  by
                 seeking refugee status, but this exclusion was  limited  to
                 cases where serious crimes had been committed before  entry
                 into the State of asylum.  Given the precisely drawn  scope
                 of Art 1F(b), limited as it was to 'serious' 'non-political
                 crimes'  committed  outside  the  country  of  refuge,  the
                 unavoidable inference was that serious non-political crimes
                 were not included in the general, unqualified  language  of
                 Art 1F(c).  Article 1F(b) identified  non-political  crimes
                 committed outside the country of refuge,  while  Art  33(2)
                 addressed non-political crimes committed within the country
                 of refuge.  The presence of Art 1F(b) therefore,  indicated
                 that even a  serious  non-political  crime,  such  as  drug
                 trafficking, was not covered by Art 1F(c).
           (6)   Even though international  trafficking  in  drugs  was  an
                 extremely  serious  problem   that   the   UN   had   taken
                 extraordinary measures to eradicate, it was not clear  that
                 the international community recognised drug trafficking  as
                 a  sufficiently  serious   and   sustained   violation   of
                 fundamental human rights as to  amount  to  persecution  or
                 that it was to be considered contrary to the  purposes  and
                 principles  of  the  UN,  and   individuals   should   not,
                 therefore,  be  deprived  of  the   essential   protections
                 contained in the  Convention  for  having  committed  those
                 acts."

 52. The other two members of the Court differed because their analysis  of
     international  materials  led  them  to  the  conclusion   that   drug
     trafficking was indeed contrary to the purposes and principles of  the
     United Nations.

 53. In Suresh v Canada [2002] SCC 1;  [2002] 1 SCR 3, the Supreme Court of
     Canada had to examine the legality of the proposed deportation of  the
     claimant,  who  was  alleged  to  have  been  involved  in   terrorist
     activities in Sri Lanka.  The unanimous judgment of the Court contains
     some useful observations on the definition of "terrorism", but, so far
     as we can see, nothing on Article 1F(c), which  is  not  referred  to.
     Gonzalez v Canada, a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal [1994]  3
     FC 646, holds firstly that there is  no  question  of  proportionality
     when a person's acts are found to come within Article 1F(a);  but that
     the act by a private soldier engaged in action against an armed  enemy
     is not of itself to be found to be a war  crime  or  a  crime  against
     humanity.

 54. In submissions made on behalf of the Appellant on 25th June  2003,  we
     were referred to three further cases.  One of them, YZ  and  family  v
     Swiss  Federal  Office  for  Refugees,  Switzerland   Asylum   Appeals
     Commission, 14th September 1998, is merely an indication that, at  any
     rate at that date, the authority making that decision regarded Article
     1F(c) as requiring personal responsibility  or  co-responsibility  for
     government  in  direct  connection  with  any  contraventions  of  the
     principles  of  the  United  Nations.   Haddan  v  INS,  US  Board  of
     Immigration Appeals, 1st December 2000, which we have also not seen in
     full, appears to be a decision on the  interpretation  of  the  United
     States legislation.  The final case is an Australian one, SRLL v MIMIA
     [2002] AATA 795, a decision of the  Administrative  Appeals  Tribunal,
     dated 12th September 2002.  The applicant in that case was a Sikh  who
     had admitted that, before his  admission  to  Australia  he  had  been
     involved in the Bhindrawale Tiger Force, a militant movement, and  had
     killed three police officers.  The Deputy President  of  the  Tribunal
     held at paragraphs 56-59 that the applicant was excluded from  refugee
     protection under all three  paragraphs  of  Article  1F.   The  strong
     evidence showed that he had  committed  a  "crime  against  humanity",
     namely murder, which was  sufficient  to  exclude  him  under  Article
     1F(a).  The murder of three police officers was a  serious  crime  and
     even if a proportionality test were to be applied  to  Article  1F(b),
     the killing of three officers was disproportionate so he was  excluded
     by that paragraph.  There was also strong evidence that the killing of
     the three officers was terrorist in nature and the Tribunal considered
     it "reasonable to rely on paragraph 5 of Security Resolution 1373"  in
     order to find that  the  applicant  had  done  acts  contrary  to  the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations.

 55. This last decision obviously supports the Secretary of  State's  claim
     that an act of terrorism is sufficient to cause Article  1F(c)  to  be
     invoked;  but it is also of interest  in  that  it  patently  sees  no
     difficulty in the application of more than one part of Article  1F  to
     the same individual and the same past events.  This approach contrasts
     with  that  summarised  in  paragraph  (5)   of   the   head-note   of
     Pushpanathan.


V     SUBMISSIONS

 56. We have been greatly assisted by the submissions  made  on  behalf  of
     both parties, both in the form of skeleton arguments and  orally.   We
     intend no disrespect by summarising them here in the  form  of  a  few
     propositions.

The Secretary of  State's Arguments

 57. The Secretary  of  State's  argument  is  simple  and  can  be  simply
     expressed:


           R1.   The Claimant had committed acts of terrorism.

           R2.   Acts  of  terrorism  are  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
                 principles of the United Nations.


           R3.   Therefore the Claimant is excluded by Article 1F(c).


The Respondent's Arguments

 58. The Respondent seeks to meet the Secretary  of  State's  arguments  on
     several levels, as follows:

           C1a    There  is  no  international  or  internationally  agreed
                 definition of terrorism such as to give meaning  and  force
                 to the Secretary of State's arguments.


           C1b   In so far as there are any hints of an international sense
                 of the word "terrorism", they seem to indicate that applies
                 only to acts committed by states and  acts  of  the  utmost
                 seriousness.


           C1c    There  is  therefore  no  basis  for  characterising  the
                 claimant's crimes as terrorist in the  sense  required  for
                 the Secretary of State's arguments.


           C2a   The Secretary of  State  therefore  needs  a  freestanding
                 reason for saying that the Claimant's crimes  are  contrary
                 to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.  None
                 can be identified.


           C2b   The exclusion clauses are to be  interpreted  and  applied
           and restrictively.


           C3a   In any event, Section 1F(c) should not be applied so as to
                 exclude the Claimant from refugee  protection,  because  he
                 has expiated his crime by suffering full penalty under  the
                 criminal law.


           C3b   In any event, Article 1F(c) does not apply to the claimant
                 because it has no application to  acts  committed  after  a
                 person becomes entitled to  the  benefits  of  the  Refugee
                 Convention.

 59. Thus it appears that the Secretary of State's principal submission  is
     that Article 1F(c) should be  read  and  applied  entirely  literally,
     subject only to incorporation within it of some notion of "terrorism".
      The Appellant, however, whilst resisting  the  Secretary  of  State's
     arguments, seeks also to establish that the  words  of  Article  1F(c)
     should be glossed in various ways, with the effect  that  for  one  or
     more reasons they do not apply to him.

VI    OUR TASK

 60. We are searching for  the  international  autonomous  meaning  of  the
     relevant provisions of the Refugee Convention.  It is not open  to  us
     to provide a  purely  national  or  local  interpretation.   For  this
     reason, English statutes relating  to  the  definition  of  terrorism,
     treatment of terrorists, or even to the interpretation of the  Refugee
     Convention are of very limited assistance.  Likewise, the fact that as
     the Appellant finds himself in a  State  which  is  a  Member  of  the
     Council of Europe, he is  protected  from  return  to  Turkey  by  the
     application of Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
     can have no impact on the general question of whether he  is  entitled
     to protection as a refugee.

 61. In the same way, however, other international agreements are  also  of
     limited assistance.  Clearly, it is right  to  say  that  there  is  a
     measure of international agreement on  matters  within  the  scope  of
     other Conventions.  But it is difficult to see why it should  be  said
     that, if a particular matter is not the subject  of  an  international
     convention, there is no international  agreement  on  it.   Similarly,
     when we search for an international autonomous meaning, we are not  in
     principle looking for a meaning with which we are sure  that  everyone
     would agree today (despite Article 31 of the  Vienna  Convention),  as
     Adan itself shows.  What is sought is a meaning that is intellectually
     respectable and would have a  considerable  measure  of  international
     agreement, so that it could properly be said that the dissent from the
     interpretation proposed was a difficult position to take.

Restrictive Interpretation and Restrictive Application

 62. Proposition C2b has something in common with proposition C3a and b and
     we must look at it a little more closely.  There is in  the  materials
     before us a certain amount of elision between  declarations  that  the
     exclusion clauses should be restrictively interpreted and declarations
     that they should be restrictively applied.  In  our  view,  those  two
     principles are not identical.

 63. To interpret legislation restrictively is to give a  narrower  (rather
     than a more expansive) meaning to the  words.   To  apply  legislation
     restrictively is to decide that a situation that  is  covered  by  the
     words of the legislation is to  be  treated  as  if  it  were  not  so
     covered.  Both processes are, to an extent, arbitrary;  but the latter
     is likely to involve a greater  element  of  discretion,  in  that  it
     envisages decisions not to apply the legislation to  situations  where
     it is clearly (or  by  interpretation,  whether  restrictive  or  not)
     applicable.

 64. We readily accept that the exclusion clauses  are  to  be  interpreted
     restrictively.  There is,  for  example,  no  basis  for  saying  that
     Article 1F(c) should be read as  applying  to  acts  contrary  to  the
     purposes of any  international  organisation  other  than  the  United
     Nations; or acts contrary only to legislation of the  United  Nations;
     or to thoughts as well as acts.  The decision of the majority  of  the
     Canadian Supreme Court in Pushpanathan is, in this sense,  an  example
     of the restrictive interpretation of the paragraph.   If  the  Refugee
     Convention is a "living instrument", some other metaphor may  have  to
     be selected for those parts of it which, in this sense, should not  be
     allowed to grow or be developed.  In deciding this case,  we  restrict
     ourselves to considering whether the Appellant's acts are  acts  which
     were "contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations".

 65. We see, however, no basis at all for saying that there should  be  any
     restriction on the application of Article 1F(c) in cases where the act
     in question falls within the words of the Article.  It is inherent  in
     Article 1F that there will be those  who  need  protection  under  the
     Refugee Convention but do not have that protection  because  of  their
     past acts.  The High Contracting Parties who  agreed  to  the  Refugee
     Convention as a whole did so with the limitation  that  it  would  not
     apply to those within Article  1F.   It  has  never  been  decided  or
     accepted by those Parties that they should be obliged to shelter, as a
     refugee, any person who falls within Article 1F.  To require  decision
     makers to be sure that  a  person  falls  within  the  Article  1F  on
     applying it to him is one thing: that is  restrictive  interpretation.
     But to ask decision makers not to apply Article 1F to such a person is
     quite another thing.  In our view that is illegitimate.

 66. We appreciate that the first of  the  summarised  conclusions  in  the
     starred Tribunal decision in Gurung, is:

           "Bearing in mind the need to adopt a purposive approach  to  the
           interpretation of the exclusion clauses, they are to be  applied
           restrictively."


 67. We note, however, that in that case the Tribunal specifically  decided
     that no issues of proportionality applied in assessing whether conduct
     came within the exclusion clauses, and  that  in  the  fourth  summary
     conclusion the Tribunal  said  that  "the  exclusion  clauses  are  in
     mandatory terms".  We are confident that the Tribunal  in  Gurung  did
     not intend to say that  Article  1F  should  not  be  applied  to  any
     individual's conduct who came within  the  meaning  of  the  words  of
     Article 1F as  properly  interpreted.   Either  "applied"  in  summary
     conclusion 1 is a  mistake,  or  it  is  intended  as  a  synonym  for
     "interpreted", bearing in mind the determination as a whole.

 68. The views of  the  UNHCR,  which  has  the  responsibility  under  the
     governing statute for  administering  the  Refugee  Convention  as  it
     applies to nations and individuals, are of course entitled to the very
     greatest respect.  Those views are not, however,  binding  on  us  and
     they do not necessarily reflect  the  correct  interpretation  of  the
     Convention.  Such is apparent from Sivukumaran v SSHD  [1988]  AC  958
     and El-Ali v SSHD [2003] Imm AR 179, disapproving a passage  from  the
     Handbook and the effect of general UNHCR  guidance  respectively.   In
     the present case, it is clear  that  the  UNHCR's  view  is  that  the
     Appellant should not be  excluded  from  international  protection  by
     Article 1F(c).  We are not primarily concerned with assessing why  the
     UNHCR reaches that view.  We must reach  our  own  view,  taking  into
     account all the material before us.  We would  remark,  however,  that
     the position taken by the UNHCR does not appear to be shared by  other
     authorities;  and it is not even entirely consistent with the  UNHCR's
     own guidance.  The first letter, that of 3rd December 2001, makes,  in
     paragraph eight, no reference at all to the political dimension of the
     Appellant's crimes.  It asserts, however, that Article  1F(c)  "should
     only be applied to those individuals involved in the most  extreme  of
     cases".  Similar sentiments are expressed in the second letter,  dated
     20th November 2002, although here the sentiment is that  "irrespective
     of whether the acts committed by the appellant can be characterised as
     'terrorist' or not, UNHCR is of the view that these acts fall short of
     the particularly egregious acts of terrorism which have  international
     repercussions envisaged by Article 1F(c)".  Interestingly,  it  is  in
     the very next paragraph, beginning "in this respect", that  the  UNHCR
     considers the doctrine of expiation, which we discuss briefly below in
     paragraph 91.  It is not clear why  the  comments  on  expiation  were
     needed, in a case where the crimes were not serious  enough  to  evoke
     Article 1F(c) in any event.  The conclusion of the letter is that  the
     Appellant's acts simply do not fall within Article 1F(c).   The  third
     letter is the UNHCR's expansion of the view that only the most serious
     acts, capable of having an international  dimension  or  international
     impact, can fall within Article 1F(c).  As we understand  the  UNHCR's
     position, it is not consistently one advocating the application  of  a
     doctrine of proportionality, nor is it  consistently  (or  perhaps  at
     all) one which advocates a discretion in the decision-maker to  decide
     whether Article 1F should be applied  or  not.   Rather,  the  UNHCR's
     position is that  the  phrase  "acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
     principles of the United Nations" does not include all acts which  the
     United  Nations  has  condemned  as  contrary  to  its  purposes   and
     principles.

 69. Merely to state that position is to show how difficult it would be  to
     adopt it.  It appears to us that the major difficulty in accepting the
     UNHCR's reasoning is  its  confining  of  the  identification  of  the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations  to  those  set  out  in
     Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter, without any real recognition, in  the
     way we have described above, of subsequent Acts of the organs  of  the
     United Nations.  To fail to give full effect  to  these  Acts  is  not
     merely to ignore the Vienna Convention:  it is to prevent the  Charter
     of the United Nations being regarded as a living  instrument,  capable
     of  being  adapted  by  interpretation  and  use,  by  agreement   and
     endorsement, to the circumstances of changing ages.

 70. For these reasons, we have found little assistance in the views of the
     UNHCR as expressed either in the individual letters relating  to  this
     case or in the more  general  Guidelines,  although  we  have  reached
     similar conclusions to those of the UNHCR on some of the  issues  with
     which we are concerned.  Before we part from the Guidelines, we  would
     point out one passage in them which appears to be flatly contradictory
     to both the Convention and to other  guidance  issued  by  the  UNHCR.
     That is the phrase in paragraph 34 (almost at the end of  the  passage
     we cite in our paragraph 38) "as in all refugee  status  determination
     proceedings, the applicant should be given the benefit of the  doubt".
     We are surprised to find this phrase in a discussion  of  Article  1F,
     where the standard of proof is specifically expressed as  where  there
     are "serious grounds for considering"  that  an  individual  has  been
     guilty of the acts in question.  The wording of the  Convention  quite
     clearly excludes the principle of giving the claimant the  benefit  of
     the doubt.  We would further draw  attention  to  the  fact  that,  in
     paragraph 204 of its Handbook, the UNHCR's view is that the benefit of
     the doubt should not be given to  all  claimants  but  only  those  in
     respect of whom the person making the decision is satisfied  of  their
     general credibility.  This restriction has an obvious  application  to
     many of the types of circumstance that would arise under  Article  1F,
     even  without  the  specific  wording  of  that  paragraph,  for   the
     identification and conviction of criminals of any sort will very often
     depend (as indeed it did in the present case) on the formal  rejection
     of a story tendered by the defendant.

VII   CONCLUSION

The meaning of "Terrorism"

 71. It is true that  there  is  no  internationally  agreed  comprehensive
     definition of terrorism.  It is also  true  that  those  international
     conventions that deal specifically with terrorism apply  only  to  the
     most egregious acts.  These considerations do not, however, assist the
     Appellant, for two reasons.

 72. The first reason is that to which we have  made  reference  under  the
     heading  "Our  Task".   The  existence  of  international  conventions
     dealing with terrorism in a narrow sense does not begin to show  there
     would not be a  general  measure  of  agreement  on  a  definition  of
     terrorism in a wider sense - even if, because of rules of  voting  and
     considerations of practical diplomacy, no  formal  assent  to  a  more
     widely expressed international convention has yet been possible.

 73. Secondly, it is difficult to see why in order to  make  his  argument,
     the Secretary of State should be required to show  an  internationally
     accepted definition of terrorism.  This case is about what is contrary
     to the purposes and principles of  the  United  Nations.   The  United
     Nations is a vitally important and central organ in the  community  of
     international relations, but that is not to say that the  phrase  "the
     United Nations" is  synonymous  with  the  phrase  "the  international
     community",  much  less  "the  unanimous  view  of  the  international
     community".  If it were, the United Nations would need no  enforcement
     powers, and the Security Council would need no legislative powers,  as
     all  would  agree  with  its  conclusions.    Article   1F(c)   refers
     specifically to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.  It
     is, therefore, proper to look primarily at how the United Nations sees
     its own purposes and principles in both its legislative functions  and
     its expressions opinion.

 74. For  these  reasons  the  argument  that  an  "internationally  agreed
     definition of terrorism" is necessary to give meaning to the Secretary
     of State's argument is a flawed one.  When looking to  see  what  acts
     are contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations,  we
     look at what it is  the  United  Nations  says  are  contrary  to  its
     purposes and principles.  If it characterises terrorism  as  something
     that is contrary to its purposes and principles, as it does, then  the
     next  question  is  (not  'What  meaning  does  "terrorism"  have   by
     international agreement?', but) 'What does the United Nations mean  by
     "terrorism"?'  If  a  practicable  answer  to  that  question  can  be
     obtained, then it can properly be used to test  whether  certain  acts
     are or were contrary to the purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
     Nations.

 75. That process does not give a  comprehensive  answer  to  the  question
     "What acts are contrary to the purposes and principles of  the  United
     Nations?", because evidently  the  phrase  is  capable  of  bearing  a
     meaning not limited to acts of terrorism.  For the same  reason,  acts
     which some might call terrorist  might  not  fall  within  the  United
     Nations' understanding of the word, but might nevertheless,  for  some
     other reason, fall within the class of acts that are contrary  to  the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations.  But what  we  wish  to
     make clear  is  that  the  entire  process  of  analysis  is  properly
     independent of any use of the word "terrorism" in other contexts.

 76. This is entirely consistent with the view of Article  1F(c)  taken  in
     Pushpanathan, as summarised in paragraph  4  of  the  head  note  (see
     paragraph 51 above). The Court there recognised that  in  interpreting
     Article 1F(c) it was concerned with both (a) cases where "there was  a
     consensus  in  international  law  that  particular  acts   constitute
     sufficiently serious and sustained  violations  of  fundamental  human
     rights as to amount to persecution" and (b) cases where the acts  "are
     explicitly recognised as contrary to the purposes  and  principles  of
     the United Nations".  The fact that an act does not  fall  within  the
     first category does not prevent it from falling with the second.

 77. It follows that we reject proposition C1a, b and c of the  Appellant's
     argument as we have summarised it in paragraph  58.   Proposition  C2a
     therefore does not arise:  no freestanding reason is needed.

The structure and meaning of Article 1F

 78. It appears to us that, in interpreting Article 1F, we are entitled and
     indeed bound to take into account not only the range of  acts  covered
     by Article 1F in its various subparagraphs, but also  those  mentioned
     in Articles 32 and 33.  Taking those provisions together, we find four
     classes of act.

 79. Crimes against humanity and allied acts lead  to  exclusion  from  the
     Refugee Convention.  No exceptions are expressed,  and  the  exclusion
     applies when there are "serious  reasons  for  considering"  that  the
     claimant  has  committed  the  act  in  question.   In  other   words,
     conviction by a criminal court is not necessary.  These  are  acts  at
     the highest level of international criminality.

 80. The next type of act to be considered in Article 1F  is  crimes  which
     are both serious and non-political, and which  are  committed  outside
     the country of refuge prior  to  admission  as  a  refugee.   This  is
     Article 1F(b).  Again, exclusion is mandatory, but there is  room  for
     the exercise of judgment in considering whether the crime in  question
     is "serious", and "non-political".  If there are serious  grounds  for
     considering that such an act has been committed by the claimant before
     he reaches a place of refugee, then he is excluded.

 81. The test and the effects should be and are quite different where  non-
     political crimes are  committed  after  the  person  in  question  has
     obtained refugee status.  In that case,  provided  he  meets  all  the
     other requirements of Article 1, he is a refugee:  he is not generally
     excluded.  However, he may find  that  he  cannot  continue  to  claim
     refuge in his host country, because of the provisions of Article 32 or
     Article 33.  These Articles do not affect his  refugee  status:   they
     merely diminish  the  incidents  of  that  status.   If  he  has  been
     convicted of a particularly serious crime, so that he is a  danger  to
     the community of the country where he has  taken  refuge,  he  may  be
     expelled despite the fact that he is a refugee.

 82. There are three substantial differences between Articles 32 and 33  on
     the one hand and Article 1F(b) on  the  other.   Serious  grounds  for
     considering that the crime has been committed are not  enough:   there
     must be a legal process.   That a crime  is  serious  is  not  enough:
     either it  must  have  been  particularly  serious  or  the  refugee's
     continuing presence must pose a danger to national security or  public
     order.  In  any  event,  expulsion  is  only  permitted  where  it  is
     justified as conducive to the safety of the country of refuge.   These
     differences are entirely intelligible.  Under the Refugee  Convention,
     a person to whom Articles 32 and 33 apply is a person  in  respect  of
     whom the international community  has  accepted  a  duty  of  offering
     surrogate protection.  In such circumstances, the  actual  country  in
     which an individual may find himself  is,  or  may  be,  a  matter  of
     chance.  The important thing is that the protection which  he  obtains
     for himself is essentially an international  protection.   It  may  be
     well understood in such circumstances that, although some of those who
     are refugees may be as inclined to criminality as any other members of
     the population of their host state, mere suspicion of crime is not  to
     be regarded as sufficient to enable the host state  to  cast  off  its
     duties of protection and possibly impose  them  on  another  state  in
     which  the  individual  may  subsequently  find  refuge.   Hence   the
     restrictions on the expulsion of refugees who commit  acts  of  common
     criminality.  Some nation is probably going to have  to  protect  them
     and, in international terms, save where Article 32 or 33 applies, that
     will be the country where they currently are.

 83. What then of political crimes?  It is evident  that  although  Article
     1F(b) is confined to non-political crimes, Articles 32 and 33 are  not
     so confined.  Is it therefore right to say, as is urged on  behalf  of
     the Appellant in this case, that Article 1F(c) can have no application
     to acts committed after a person has arrived in a country  of  refuge,
     because Articles 32 and 33 cover the case?  We do not think  that  the
     answer is as simple as that.  In order to explain why not, we  observe
     the fact that most or much  feared  persecution  has  its  origins  in
     politics in the widest sense, for the risk  of  persecution  generally
     arises from the policies of a sufficiently powerful group, that  group
     being either formally in power or de facto able to carry out its acts.
      A person who has reached a country of  refuge  has  reached  a  place
     where he is protected from the  politics  which  in  his  own  country
     exposed him to risk of persecution.  The purpose of the restriction to
     non-political crimes in Article 1F(b) is to ensure that a claimant  is
     not excluded from Refugee  Convention  protection  simply  because  of
     having committed an act which, by the law of a country where he was at
     risk of persecution, amounted to a crime.  To exclude  such  a  person
     from protection, without more, would in many cases  be  to  perpetuate
     the persecution in that country.  If the truth of the matter  is  that
     the act characterised as criminal  derived  its  criminality  entirely
     from a political and persecutory  classification  by  the  country  of
     persecution, then the  commission  of  the  act  should  not  lead  to
     exclusion and, under Article 1F(b), it does not.

 84.  In  the  country  of  refuge,  however,  the  situation  is  entirely
     different.  The claimant is, ex hypothesei, in a place where he is  no
     longer at risk of his  acts  being  classed  as  criminal  for  purely
     political reasons.  He accedes to the  criminal  law  of  the  country
     where he takes refuge and it is not for the international community to
     draw fine distinctions in the application of that law to him.

 85. On the other hand, however, there are some acts which,  despite  being
     political or politically-inspired, do not depend for their criminality
     on the individual matrix of power within a  particular  state.   These
     acts, in our view, are those which  are  intended  to  be  covered  by
     Article 1F(c).  That subparagraph does not apply to every  crime,  nor
     to every political crime.  It applies to acts which are the subject of
     intense disapproval by the governing body of the entire  international
     community.  An individual who has committed such an act  cannot  claim
     that his categorisation as criminal depends upon the attitudes of  the
     very  regime  from  whom  he  has  sought  to  escape,   because   the
     international condemnation shows that his acts would have been treated
     in the same way wherever and under  whatever  circumstances  they  had
     been committed.

 86. We see no objection in principle or in practice to  an  interpretation
     of these Articles which would lead to the  conclusion  that,  in  some
     cases, more than one subparagraph of Article 1F is applicable.  On the
     other hand, Articles 32 and 33 cannot apply to a  person  excluded  by
     Article 1F, because if he is excluded, then none of the  rest  of  the
     Convention (including Articles 32  and  33)  can  apply  to  him.   In
     Pushpanathan,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Supreme   Court   of   Canada
     distinguished between Articles 32 and 33 and Article  1F(b).   But  it
     does not in our view follow that the mere fact that a person satisfies
     the requirements of Article 1 before he commits the act identified  as
     causing exclusion under Article 1F(c)  enables  him  to  say  that  he
     continues to be a refugee.  Article 1F(c) does not contain  the  words
     "outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that  country
     as a refugee", which are found in Article 1F(b).  There is  no  reason
     at all to suppose that that  difference  is  accidental.   Acts  which
     merit the condemnation of the whole international community must  lead
     to exclusion from the benefits of the Refugee Convention whenever they
     occur.

 87. One argument raised on behalf of the Appellant in this appeal is  that
     the application of Article 1F(c) rather than Article 32 or 33  to  him
     is a matter purely of accident or indeed possibly of mismanagement  by
     the Respondent.  He says that he ought to have been  recognised  as  a
     refugee when he arrived in the United Kingdom, and if he had  been  so
     recognised it would have been too late to apply Article 1F(c)  to  him
     when he committed these offences.  It will be clear from the foregoing
     discussion that we entirely reject that submission.  Article 1F(c)  is
     not limited to acts committed before obtaining refuge.  If he had been
     recognised as a refugee earlier, it would make no difference now.

 88. Where, therefore, there are serious reasons for  considering  that  an
     act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations  has
     been committed, it does not matter when or where it was committed,  or
     whether it is categorised by municipal law as a crime.   It  leads  to
     exclusion from the  Refugee  Convention.   For  acts  of  a  political
     character which are not contrary to the principles and purposes of the
     United Nations, however, there is no exclusion, and the individual  is
     protected internationally by  the  Refugee  Convention,  although  the
     application of Article 32 or 33 may lead to  his  expulsion  from  the
     host country.

 89. This interpretation of the relevant clauses of the Refugee  Convention
     is entirely coherent and sensible.  It identifies what acts will  lead
     to exclusion despite their being "political".  A person whose acts (at
     any time) are contrary to the purposes and principles  of  the  United
     Nations disqualifies himself from protection under the United Nations'
     Refugee Convention.

Proportionality and Expiation

 90.  In  some  of  the  other  cases,  there  has  been  an  argument   on
     proportionality.  This asserts that, in deciding whether an individual
     should be excluded under Article 1F, the decision-maker should balance
     the harm which the claimant  may  suffer  if  deprived  of  protection
     against the harm he has committed.  It is fair to say  that  that  was
     not specifically argued in this appeal, although, as we have shown, it
     is urged in the UNHCR's 'Guidelines on International Protection' dated
     4th September 2003 at paragraph 24.  There is in  the  United  Kingdom
     clear authority against applying any principle of  proportionality  to
     exclusion under Article 1F:  see T v SSHD, Singh and Singh v SSHD  and
     Gurung v SSHD.  That view  is  also  reflected  in  the  bulk  of  the
     overseas decisions.

 91. The UNHCR also suggest that a principle of "expiation" applies  to  an
     exclusion under Article 1F(c):  see their letter of 20th November 2002
     in the  penultimate  paragraph  cited  by  us  in  paragraph  36,  and
     paragraph 23 of the generally-applicable 'Guidelines on  International
     Protection' as cited to us.  It is suggested that a person  apparently
     excluded by Article 1F is to be treated as  not  excluded  if  he  has
     served a sentence for the relevant crime, unless "the crime for  which
     he is convicted is of such  a  truly  heinous  nature  as  to  justify
     continued  denial  of  international  protection".    As   the   UNHCR
     recognises, that doctrine does not appear in the  Convention,  and  it
     appears that it is not consistently urged even by  the  UNHCR.   There
     does not seem  to  us  to  be  any  basis  for  reading  it  into  the
     Convention.  It has never  been  suggested  that  it  would  apply  to
     Article 1F(a), although we appreciate that it may be  that  any  crime
     under that subparagraph would be governed by the  exception  from  the
     doctrine of expiation in the words we have just quoted from the  UNHCR
     letter.  More importantly, however, we are unaware that  it  has  been
     held to apply to Article 1F(b) where the principal evidence upon which
     the decision-maker relies will very often be conviction  and  sentence
     in the claimant's home country.  It would have been entirely  open  to
     the framers of the Convention to restrict the application  of  Article
     1F(b) by excluding  from  its  effects  any  person  who  had,  having
     committed such an offence, served  the  appropriate  sentence  for  it
     before admission to the country of refuge.  They did not  do  so.   We
     reject the suggestion that the doctrine of expiation  applies  in  the
     way urged by the UNHCR.

 92. Our conclusion is that we should reject all the arguments  put  before
     us for applying glosses to Article 1F, and should  instead  apply  its
     words exactly as they are written.  We appreciate that in so doing  we
     are adopting an approach to the Refugee Convention which  is  somewhat
     similar to that which we have criticised when the UNHCR adopts  it  in
     relation to the Charter of the United Nations.  But the difference  is
     that, in relation to the Refugee Convention, we  have  been  shown  no
     material properly leading to the invocation of Article 31(3)(b) or (c)
     of  the  Vienna  Convention.   So  far   from   being   supported   by
     international  agreement  as  to  the  application  of   the   Refugee
     Convention, the arguments made on behalf of the Appellant, although to
     an extent endorsed  by  the  UNHCR,  lack  authority,  sometimes  lack
     coherence and occasionally lack consistency.

 93. We therefore simply ask ourselves whether there  are  serious  reasons
     for considering that the Appellant has been guilty of acts contrary to
     the purposes and principles of the United Nations.   Although,  as  we
     have, we hope, made clear, the characterisation of acts as "terrorist"
     is neither necessary nor sufficient for exclusion under Article 1F(c),
     it is not irrelevant, because of the clear view of the United  Nations
     on certain sorts of terrorism.

The Characterisation of the Offences

 94. Despite the submissions made  by  Mr  Scannell,  we  accept  Mr  Tam's
     argument that the act of placing the DHKP flag at  the  scene  of  the
     attacks was significant.  There is no plausible explanation other than
     that it was intended to indicate that the attacks were to be  seen  as
     DHKP activities.  The Appellant, given his active support, knew  about
     the activities of the DHKP and must have intended not  to  be  caught.
     The acts were bound to imply that the terrorist activities of the DHKP
     had moved to the mainland of Britain.  We are entirely satisfied  that
     the purpose of leaving the flags was to  provoke  a  state  of  terror
     amongst those engaged in  lawful  Turkish  businesses  in  the  United
     Kingdom and thus to  indicate  that  the  fight  against  the  Turkish
     Government was being pursued by violent means even here.  Further, the
     attacks were avowedly aimed against the Turkish state, which is, as it
     happens, a friendly government.

 95. These factors bring into these offences of arson both an international
     and a terrorist element.  We are thus also entirely satisfied that the
     Appellant's acts fall within the category of  acts  condemned  by  the
     Security Council and by  the  General  Assembly  as  contrary  to  the
     purposes and  principles  of  the  United  Nations.   That  conclusion
     follows whether or not the acts come within any other internationally-
     accepted free-standing definition of terrorism.

 96. As we read and interpret the Refugee Convention, Article 1F(c)  admits
     no exceptions.  There are no acts that are contrary  to  the  purposes
     and principles of the United Nations that do not cause exclusion under
     Article 1F(c).  Any person guilty of such acts is  excluded  from  the
     protection of the Refugee Convention.

 97. The Appellant is accordingly excluded.  He  is  not  a  refugee.   His
     appeal is dismissed.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT









