
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |SN (Medical and             |
|                           |        |Corroborative Evidence -    |
|                           |        |Credibility - Article 3)    |
|                           |        |Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00053    |
|On 23 February 2004        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.....23 March 2004....                                            |
|Dictated 3 March 2004                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|His Honour Judge R J Rubery                                       |
|Ms J A Endersby                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Ms G Bruce, Counsel instructed by Glazer Delmar
For the respondent:    Mr G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     This  determination  is  being  reported  in  relation  to  (a)   the
      corroborative value of medical evidence (paragraphs 12 to 15); (b) the
      approach to considering whether an adjudicator has taken into  account
      the  totality  of  the  evidence  before  making  findings   of   fact
      (paragraphs 16-18); and (c) the  treatment  of  suicidal  ideation  in
      relation to claims under Articles 3 and 8 of the  European  Convention
      and the effect of the decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in  N  [2003]
      EWCA Civ. 1369 and Djali [2003] EWCA Civ. 1371 (paragraphs 20 to 24).

2.      The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on  1  January  1972.   She
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 February 1998 and  claimed  asylum
      after being refused leave to enter.  She was accompanied by one son as
      her dependant.  She was due to be removed on third country grounds  on
      17 September 1998 but absconded.  On 18 May 1999 she claimed asylum as
      a Somali but withdrew this application  at  interview.   In  a  letter
      dated 21 August 2000 and served on  her  on  10  September  2000,  the
      appellant was refused asylum.  She appealed against that decision  but
      withdrew her appeal by letter dated 6 April 2001.  At  the  same  time
      she claimed that removal would be in breach of her human rights citing
      Article 3 of the European  Convention.   On  24  September  2001  that
      application was refused on such information as was then  available  to
      the Secretary of State and it is relevant to set out the terms of  the
      refusal which are as follows:

           "The Secretary of State has noted your claim that to return your
           client to Kenya would breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
           under the European Convention on Human Rights.  You  state  that
           your client will  suffer  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  if
           removed from the United Kingdom because she  is  suffering  from
           depression as a result of being raped.  You claim that to return
           Ms Nganga would lead to the deterioration of  her  health.   The
           Secretary of State has considered your claim but is  aware  that
           case law at Strasbourg makes clear that depression cannot amount
           to  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  even  when  a  condition
           deteriorates on return.  This opinion has been confirmed in Cruz
           Varas v Sweden (1991-14EHRR1) and  Kudla  v  Poland  (26/10/LO).
           Such conditions do  not  meet  the  minimum  level  of  severity
           required to achieve a claim under the  ECHR.   Furthermore,  the
           Secretary of State is of the opinion that should  your  client's
           condition continue or deteriorate on return to Kenya she will be
           able to access adequate medical facilities there.   He  is  also
           aware that there are  numerous  of  human  rights  organisations
           [sic] in Kenya.  These include NGOs such as the KHRC, the  Kenya
           Anti-Rape Organisation, the Legal Advice Centre and Development,
           People  Against  Torture,  the  Independent  Medico-Legal   Unit
           [IMLU].


           The  Secretary  of  State  has  considered  your  claim  but  is
           satisfied that you have failed to show substantial grounds  that
           your client or her child would face  a  real  risk  of  torture,
           inhuman or degrading treatment if returned to Kenya."

3.    On 16 February 2002 the  Secretary  of  State  issued  his  notice  of
      refusal of leave to enter coupled with removal  directions  to  Kenya.
      The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  came
      before Mr C J Tipping, an Adjudicator, on 30 May 2003.   He  dismissed
      the appeal in which she claimed that her removal would  be  in  breach
      both of her  Article  3  and  Article  8  rights  under  the  European
      Convention.

4.    Before the Adjudicator the appellant elected not to give evidence  and
      the Adjudicator summarises the appellant's claim at paragraph 6 of his
      determination in the following terms:

           "The basis of the appellant's claim is that at some date in 1994
           she was attacked  and  raped.   (Ms  Bruce's  skeleton  argument
           refers to this event occurring in 1998, but  it  is  clear  that
           this is a typographical error).  As a result of this attack,  it
           is claimed that the appellant now suffers from a mental  illness
           so severe that it would be a breach of Article 3 to  return  her
           to Kenya, especially as her symptoms would be likely  to  worsen
           in that country.  Further and in the alternative, it is  claimed
           that returning the appellant and her son would also represent  a
           disproportionate interference with the private life  which  they
           have established in this country."

5.    The Adjudicator did not believe her factual  claims  as  to  what  had
      occurred in Kenya.  He noted that at interview the appellant had  made
      no mention of any personal attack on her but had merely said that  she
      had left Kenya because of  the  danger  arising  from  ongoing  tribal
      violence.  That inconsistency was not addressed in the evidence before
      the Adjudicator although he noted that she had told  the  psychiatrist
      who has examined her that she  was  too  embarrassed  to  mention  the
      alleged attack at interview.  The Adjudicator deals with these  issues
      at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the determination as follows:

           "7.  ... While I can understand the  appellant's  reluctance  to
           mention the alleged sexual nature of an attack, it is to my mind
           inconceivable that, if it occurred, she  would  have  failed  to
           mention that she had been physically attacked;   the  attack  is
           alleged to have included a  wound  to  her  knee  from  a  knife
           wielded by her assailant which subsequently  required  stitching
           and now carries a scar.  She  maintained  this  silence  on  the
           matter until the Additional Grounds were lodged, more than  four
           years after her arrival here.


           8.  The appellant has made a  number  of  attempts  to  deceive,
           including a fraudulent attempt  to  gain  entry  to  the  United
           Kingdom and a false claim to asylum based on Somali nationality.
            In the absence of oral evidence from the  appellant  tested  in
           cross-examination, I do not accept that the  appellant  suffered
           the attack she claims.  I recognise that the appellant's son was
           born in 1995, but that is not evidence that he was conceived  in
           the course of a rape."

6.    Before the Adjudicator, the appellant placed considerable reliance  on
      two reports by Dr Rose Anne Varley, a psychiatrist  at  the  Traumatic
      Stress Service at the Maudsley Hospital, who says that  she  had  been
      involved with the psychiatric assessment and treatment of refugees for
      some eight years prior to the  first  report  based  on  consultations
      which apparently took place on  24  and  25  June  2002.   The  second
      report, which is also undated, is based on a further consultation on 2
      May 2003.  Dr Varley had before her  a  report  from  the  appellant's
      general practitioner, Dr F Hussain, which stated  that  from  November
      2000 he had  prescribed  anti-depressants  for  the  appellant.   This
      appears to have been the first medical treatment  which  she  received
      after her arrival in the United  Kingdom.   In  her  first  report  Dr
      Varley diagnosed the appellant as suffering from  severe  symptoms  of
      Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and co-morbid depression  (of  moderate
      severity).  She said that these symptoms appear to have  developed  in
      response to the appellant having been raped while living in Kenya  and
      that she started to suffer symptoms in the week following the  alleged
      rape which had persisted since then with  some  decrease  in  severity
      after the departure from Kenya.   She  had  been  treated  with  anti-
      depressants as noted above and seen by a counsellor  on  a  couple  of
      occasions at her GP's surgery but was unable to continue.   Dr  Varley
      was of the opinion that she was in need of  specialist  treatment  for
      her symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder which  could  be  long-
      term.  She then continued:

           "Ms Wanja  Nganga  does  not  have  such  stability,  safety  or
           security as long as her asylum status remains uncertain and  her
           fear of having to return to Kenya persists.


           I believe if she were asked to  return  to  Kenya  her  symptoms
           would most likely worsen and her risk of suicide would increase.
            [There is nowhere else within the report any analysis of a risk
           of suicide].  Ms Wanja Nganga's potential suicidality  increased
           not only in relation to Kenya but also in relation to protecting
           her son from having to return there also. She believes  that  if
           she were not around he would not  be  sent  back  and  would  be
           fostered safely here in the UK."

      In her second report Dr Varley states that the appellant continued  to
      take anti-depressant medication which had been recently increased  and
      had also recently  been  prescribed  sleeping  tablets,  although  the
      appellant told her that the medication had only minimal effects on her
      mental state.  She continued  to  wait  for  reference  to  the  local
      psychiatric  service  who  had  not  yet  been  able  to  provide  any
      appointment.  The report continues that the appellant had

           "admitted to an increase in her suicidal thoughts but denied any
           current  intent.   She  did  not  present  with  any   psychotic
           phenomena.  She complained of symptoms  of  panic  and  anxiety.
           She was fully orientated.   Her  concentration  was  poor.   She
           continues to show good insight into her  psychological  symptoms
           and is very motivated to have appropriate treatment."

      Dr Varley then said  that  the  appellant  continued  to  suffer  from
      symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder  which  had  increased  in
      intensity since she had learned of the date  of  her  appeal  hearing.
      Dr Varley said that she was of the same opinion as  she  was  in  June
      2002 for the initial assessment report.  She continued:

           "As stated previously, I believe if  Ms  Wanja  Nganga  were  to
           return to Kenya  her  symptoms  would  worsen.   This  has  been
           demonstrated in the recent exaggeration of her symptoms of  Post
           Traumatic Stress Disorder as  a  result  of  the  issue  of  her
           possible return to Kenya has come to the forefront [sic].


           Ms Wanja Nganga remains at suicidal risk  in  relation  to  both
           herself and her son's return to Kenya as she sees this as a  way
           of protecting herself and her son."

7.    We would comment at this point that there is nothing in either  report
      to indicate the clinical basis on which Dr Varley bases  her  opinions
      as to the suicide risk of the appellant.  The only  reference  to  the
      diagnostic tools employed in reaching these assessments is  a  heading
      in the first report which refers to the psychiatric assessment  having
      included assessment for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder using the  SCID
      questionnaire, version 2.0 for DSN 1IV PTSD.

8.    The Adjudicator says this about the first report at  paragraph  11  of
      his determination:

           "These conclusions as to the appellant's mental condition (quite
           apart from my conclusion above as to its alleged origin)  appear
           to overlook the facts that the appellant was  able  to  live  in
           Kenya for four years after the alleged  attack,  and  needed  no
           psychiatric assistance until November 2000, two years after  her
           arrival in the United Kingdom, when her general practitioner, Dr
           F Hussain, wrote to say that he had started the appellant  on  a
           course of anti-depressants;  the weight to be attached  to  this
           note is perhaps reduced, give that it was written in support  of
           an application at the hearing of the appellant's  asylum  appeal
           be postponed."

9.    He then continues at paragraphs 13 and 14 as follows:

           "In all these circumstances, I am unable to attach  much  weight
           to the medical evidence.  It may be that Dr Varley  has  herself
           fallen victim to  the  appellant's  attempts  to  deceive.   The
           appellant lived without apparent mental problems  for  at  least
           six  years  after  the  alleged  rape  without  being  seriously
           hampered by her mental condition.  There is no  suggestion  that
           she has ever attempted suicide.


           14.  She has been able to take advantage of  her  stay  of  five
           years in the United Kingdom to educate herself, not in  my  view
           indicative of someone disabled by  severe  mental  illness.   Ms
           Bruce states that the appellant had to  break  off  her  studies
           temporarily because of mental problems, but there is no evidence
           before me  to  that  effect.  Although  Dr  Varley  now  advises
           counselling, all that the appellant has previously required is a
           supply of anti-depressants.  Nothing in the background  evidence
           suggests that these would not be available in Kenya."

10.   For this reason the Adjudicator concluded that return would not  cross
      the very high threshold set by the courts so as to amount to a  breach
      of Article 3 of the European Convention.  As to Article  8,  he  noted
      that the appellant's son had commenced at school in September 2002 and
      that the appellant had undertaken some computer  training.   He  noted
      her stated intention to train  as  a  nurse  but  that  there  was  no
      evidence that she had taken any steps towards this goal in the  period
      of over five years she had by then spent in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      considered that this goal had been recently  adopted  as  a  means  of
      enhancing her claim.  He pointed out that she had a mother and aunt in
      Kenya with whom the appellant remained in contact and that he had  not
      been directed to any evidence to support her claim that life in  Kenya
      would be made difficult  by  her  being  a  single  mother.   He  also
      dismissed her Article 8 claim although it is not wholly clear  whether
      this was on the basis that her removal would not engage Article  8  at
      all or that he considered that removal would  be  proportionate  under
      Article 8(2).

11.   The grounds of appeal settled by Ms Bruce, which are  of  considerable
      length, sought first to challenge the adverse credibility finding made
      by the Adjudicator, including the assertion that the  Adjudicator  had
      erred in law by failing to take into account the corroborative  nature
      of the medical evidence in relation  to  her  claim  as  to  what  had
      happened in Kenya; and secondly  asserted  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      wrong to give little weight to the medical evidence.  The main  thrust
      of the grounds is aptly summarised  in  the  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal as being:


           "That the Adjudicator erred in rejecting  the  medical  evidence
           adduced on the claimant's behalf because he had already  arrived
           at an adverse credibility finding in  relation  to  her  account
           generally.  In light of the judgment of Mr Justice Forbes in the
           High Court of Justice, Queen's  Bench  Division,  Administrative
           Court, in Virjon  B  v  Special  Adjudicator  [2002]  EWHC  1469
           (Admin), this raises an  arguable  point  of  law  which  merits
           further consideration."


12.   Before us Ms Bruce sought remittal of the appeal  for  hearing  afresh
      before another Adjudicator.  It was  her  submission  that  the  clear
      findings in relation to credibility were rendered unsustainable by the
      failure of the Adjudicator to mention the medical  report  earlier  in
      his determination and she submitted that  where  in  paragraph  9  the
      Adjudicator said that his views as to credibility called into question
      the weight to be attached to the medical evidence, this was indicative
      of the fact that he had made up his mind as to credibility of the core
      elements of the claim without first taking into account the extent  to
      which  the  diagnosis  made  by  Dr  Varley  might  be  considered  as
      corroborative of the appellant's claim to have been raped, albeit  not
      disclosed until very late in the course of her claim for relief.

13.   Whilst we accept that the findings made in the medical reports may  be
      corroborative of a claimant's account, this Tribunal has in  the  past
      commented upon the fact that it is no part of the primary function  of
      the doctor consulted to  question  the  veracity  of  their  patient's
      account to them.  What is quite clear from the various medical reports
      both from Dr Varley and from the general practitioners  is  that  they
      have accepted unreservedly the account which the appellant did not, as
      the Adjudicator notes, make until  more  than  four  years  after  her
      arrival here despite the fact that she had claimed asylum  immediately
      on her arrival.  That is not a  criticism  of  the  doctors  concerned
      because it is not their function as such to evaluate  the  credibility
      of the appellant.  That is  the  function  of  the  Adjudicator  after
      considering the totality of the evidence before him.   The  most  that
      the doctor can do  in  our  view,  either  in  the  case  of  physical
      conditions such as scarring or in diagnoses of mental  conditions,  is
      to  say  whether  in  his  or  her  opinion  such  findings   may   be
      corroborative of the account given by the appellant.

14.   In the present appeal, there is no medical evidence whatsoever  as  to
      the existence of a scar from a wound which required stitching.  It may
      exist but it is not evidentially supported  on  any  of  the  material
      before us or the Adjudicator.

15.   We have no reason  to  doubt  that  Dr  Varley  was  able  to  observe
      clinical symptoms by reference to the International Standards to which
      she makes brief reference which would support her  diagnosis  of  Post
      Traumatic Stress Disorder and a depressive condition.  What  is  quite
      clear, however, is that this appellant wishes to remain in the  United
      Kingdom and to avoid removal to  her  own  country.  At  the  time  of
      hearings which may affect her ability  to  do  so,  her  condition  is
      stated to deteriorate.  That would seem to  underline  the  degree  to
      which she is anxious to avoid  removal.   There  is  nothing  directly
      stated in Dr Varley's reports as to the degree to which anxiety as  to
      the outcome of her appeal alone may be responsible for  her  diagnosed
      condition but it  is  clearly  a  factor  which  is  relevant  to  her
      condition.  We derive no assistance from Dr Varley's report as to  the
      degree to which the appellant's mental condition may derive  from  the
      undoubted stress factors of fear of removal from a  country  in  which
      the appellant is anxious to remain in preference to her  own  country.
      Nor would it  appear  that  the  attention  of  the  doctor  was  ever
      critically directed to the effect of the changes which  have  occurred
      in the nature of the appellant's account  during  the  course  of  her
      application.  Those are not matters of criticism  of  the  doctor  but
      they serve to illustrate the important distinction between the role of
      the expert and of the judge whose function is to determine  the  facts
      on the evidence before him.

16.   Having very carefully considered the determination, we do  not  accept
      Ms Bruce's primary submission that the Adjudicator had closed his mind
      to any corroborative weight to be given  to  the  medical  reports  in
      arriving at his findings on credibility.  It  is  inevitable  that  in
      setting out his reasoning, an adjudicator will have to decide  on  the
      order in the determination in which he  will  deal  with  the  various
      aspects of the evidence. But the fact that he must necessarily  do  so
      cannot be taken in  the  absence  of  very  clear  indication  to  the
      contrary to suggest  that  he  has  failed  in  his  primary  judicial
      function of considering the totality of the evidence in  reaching  his
      findings.  At  paragraph  5  of  his  determination  this  experienced
      Adjudicator details the sources of evidence before him  which  include
      the interview notes, statements made by the  appellant,  the  skeleton
      argument of Ms Bruce, the documents personal to the appellant and  her
      son, including medical evidence, and the background evidence  relating
      to her own country.  He refers there also to the case law produced  to
      him.  All this is to our mind clearly indicative of the fact that  the
      Adjudicator has considered the evidence in the  round  before  setting
      out his reasoning, which he then  proceeds  to  give  in  the  ensuing
      paragraphs.  In those paragraphs he first of all points to  the  clear
      inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence before him and notes  what
      are her admitted false claims to be a Somali national.   It  does  not
      seem to us that his  statement  that  he  does  not  accept  that  the
      appellant suffered the  attack  she  claims  at  paragraph  8  of  the
      determination, before then going on to make  his  comments  about  the
      medical evidence, can be read as suggesting that  he  has  closed  his
      mind to the medical  evidence  up  to  that  point.   That  is  wholly
      inconsistent with what he says at paragraph 5 of the determination.

17.   It is certainly correct that, on his analysis at paragraphs  9  to  12
      of the determination, he then concludes at paragraph  13  that  he  is
      unable to attach much weight to the medical evidence.  Insofar  as  it
      may be said that he fails to accept the medical diagnosis  made,  that
      may  perhaps  give  rise  to  legitimate  argument  but   Ms   Bruce's
      submissions as to the sustainability of the primary findings rests  on
      her contention that the Adjudicator has  failed  to  give  appropriate
      weight  to  the  degree  to  which   the   medical   reports   provide
      corroboration of the appellant's latest account of her experiences  in
      Kenya.  That the medical reports are based on an uncritical acceptance
      of the latest  version  given  by  the  appellant  does  in  our  view
      substantially affect the  degree  to  which  it  can  be  said  to  be
      corroborative of the appellant's claims.  Although the earlier history
      of the claims and the explanation that the appellant felt too  ashamed
      to speak of what had  happened  earlier  than  four  years  after  her
      arrival here is noted in the history, there is, as we  have  said  and
      would expect, no comment on this aspect by the doctor because  it  was
      not part of her function to assess credibility as such.

18.   It  may  be  arguable  that  the  Adjudicator  could  have  reached  a
      different conclusion on the totality of the evidence but he did not do
      so and his reasons for  his  findings  are  clearly  set  out  in  the
      determination.  We agree with Mr Elks' submission that  they  show  no
      error of law on the part of the  Adjudicator  in  his  approach.   The
      findings cannot in our view  be  regarded  as  unsustainable  and  the
      Tribunal is always very reluctant to interfere with findings  made  by
      an Adjudicator unless they are plainly wrong and unsupportable on  the
      evidence.

19.   This accordingly leaves the Article 3 and Article 8  claims  dependent
      upon the appellant's claim that she will  be  socially  ostracised  by
      reason of having an illegitimate child and that the effect  of  return
      will be so severe having regard to her mental condition that it  would
      be in breach of her human rights.

20.   As to the first proposition, Ms Bruce  properly  conceded  that  there
      was no objective evidence to support that claim.  As to  the  question
      of effect on her mental  health,  we  bear  in  mind  the  two  recent
      decisions of the Court of Appeal in N v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 dealing with Article 3 claims and
      Sefer Djali v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1371,
      dealing with Article 8 claims.

21.   Whilst we acknowledge that  there  is  some  authority  in  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence for the proposition that prospective suicide  by  reason
      of removal is capable of engaging both Articles  3  and  8  (see  also
      [2003] UKIAT 00017 P(Yugoslavia)), there would in our view need to  be
      the clearest possible evidence of a real risk that  this  would  occur
      which would  not  otherwise  be  preventable  by  appropriate  medical
      supervision both on the part of the removing country and having regard
      to facilities which might reasonably  be  expected  to  exist  in  the
      country of destination.  As to the latter point, the  evidence  before
      us is that there are generally good medical  services  in  Kenya  (see
      CIPU Assessment of April 2003 at paragraphs 5.70 and 5.71). The degree
      to which D v United Kingdom [1997] IAR 172 is to be strictly  confined
      is made clear in paragraph 40 of the judgment of Laws LJ in N where he
      says:

           "I would hold that  the  application  of  Article  3  where  the
           complaint in essence is of want of resources in the  applicant's
           home country (in contrast to what has been available to  him  in
           the country from which he is to be removed)  is  only  justified
           where the humanitarian appeal of the case is so powerful that it
           could not  in  reason  be  resisted  by  the  authorities  of  a
           civilised state.  This does not,  I  acknowledge,  amount  to  a
           sharp legal test;  there are no sharp legal tests in this  area.
           I intend only to emphasise that an Article 3 case of  this  kind
           must be based on facts  which  are  not  only  exceptional,  but
           extreme;  extreme, that is judged in the context of cases all or
           many of which (like this one) demand one's sympathy on  pressing
           grounds ...  I consider  that  any  broader  view  distorts  the
           balance between the demands of  the  general  interests  of  the
           community whose service is conspicuously  the  duty  of  elected
           government, and the  requirements  for  the  protection  of  the
           individual's fundamental     rights.  It is a  balance  inherent
           in the whole of the Convention: ..."

22.   In that case the appellant was suffering  from  HIV/AIDS  and  it  was
      accepted that her removal would result in a substantial shortening  of
      her anticipated life span in comparison with that which would apply in
      the United Kingdom were she to continue to receive  medical  treatment
      here.  We accept that this case is differently based but it  seems  to
      us that the principles enunciated by Lord Justice Laws in the  passage
      which we have quoted are nevertheless applicable.  The evidence of  Dr
      Varley as to suicide risk is in our judgment speculative in  the  same
      sense that similar, if not stronger, medical evidence was so  regarded
      by the European Court in Bensaid v UK [2001] INLR 325.  In the present
      case there is no history of past self-harm  and  in  her  more  recent
      report Dr Varley noted that there was no  current  intent  of  suicide
      although there was an increase in suicidal thoughts (see  passage  set
      out earlier in this determination).  It is claimed that  the  risk  of
      suicide arises only as a means of preventing her return  to  Kenya  on
      the basis that her son would then be fostered in this country.  It  is
      not, in other words, linked to an  anticipated  deterioration  in  her
      current condition on such return but is put forward  as  a  basis  for
      preventing any attempt at removal by a threat of self-harm.  Whilst we
      cannot say that there is not a possibility  that  someone  would  take
      such extreme measures, we cannot emphasise  too  strongly  that  there
      would need to be the clearest and must unequivocal  evidence  of  real
      risk before such a threat to prevent  legitimate  immigration  control
      could be regarded as engaging Article 3.  The appellant is said in the
      report  to  be  lacking  any  psychotic  phenomena  and  to  be  fully
      orientated with a good insight into her  psychological  symptoms.   On
      the evidence before us, we do not regard this threat  as  posing  more
      than a speculative risk.  We consider what was said at paragraph 40 in
      Bensaid to be applicable:

           "The court accepts the seriousness of  the  applicant's  medical
           condition.  Having regard however to the high threshold  set  by
           Article 3, particularly where the  case  does  not  concern  the
           direct  responsibility  of  the  contracting   state   for   the
           infliction of harm, the court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the applicant's removal ... would be
           contrary to the standards of Article 3.  ..."

23.   Precisely similar considerations apply to the threat of  serious  harm
      to her made in the Article 8 claim.  This arises  only  on  the  basis
      that the interference with the appellant's right to physical and moral
      integrity would be such as to engage Article 8 and to  render  removal
      in the interests of effective  immigration  control  disproportionate.
      In cases of this nature we do not  consider  that  the  appellant  can
      succeed under Article 8 if she fails under Article  3.   There  is  no
      measurable difference in  the  test  for  engaging  Article  8,  which
      requires a flagrant denial of  those  rights,  and  we  rely  in  this
      respect on the judgments in Sefer Djali.  The  speculative  nature  of
      the evidence as to suicidal ideation  is  equally  applicable  to  the
      Article 8 claim.  We do not consider on the facts that  Article  8  is
      engaged at all but, were we wrong in  this,  we  have  no  doubt  that
      removal would be proportionate under Article 8(2) in  the  sense  that
      the decision to remove is lawful  as  falling  within  the  margin  of
      appreciation open to the Secretary of State in reaching  decisions  as
      to the proportionality of removal.  This is not a case where it  could
      be said that a decision to remove would be  so  plainly  wrong  as  to
      render it unlawful.  To achieve that result,  it  would,  as  we  have
      observed, be necessary to reach a standard akin to that which would be
      in breach of Article 3 rights.  This  reflects  the  approach  of  the
      Tribunal in the starred decision of [2004] UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia).

24.   Up to this point we have considered this appeal on the basis that  the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings are sustainable.  If we are
      wrong in this, however, it would make no ultimate  difference  to  our
      conclusions.  On that basis the appellant would have been  subject  to
      one attack by an unknown male in which she was raped and as  a  result
      of which she became pregnant and subsequently gave birth to  her  son.
      She continued to live in Kenya for nearly four years and  suffered  no
      further attack throughout that period.  She was living with  her  aunt
      and she currently maintains contact with her mother in Kenya.  It  was
      Ms Bruce's submission to us that the cases of N and  Djali  should  be
      distinguished because this appellant additionally feared a  repetition
      of what had previously happened and would be  ostracised  in  society.
      Given the length of time between the claimed attack and her departure,
      and the accepted absence of any evidence to support the claim that the
      appellant would be ostracised in Kenya  (even  were  that  capable  of
      engaging Article 3 or Article  8  in  the  circumstances)  we  see  no
      evidential basis to support Ms Bruce's submissions  in  this  respect.
      She is, however, wrong in  our  view  in  her  attempt  to  limit  the
      importance of the principles enunciated in N and Djali simply to cases
      which replicate their specific facts.  In our view, the judgments  set
      out the issues of general principle on which Article 3 and  Article  8
      claims should be approached by illustrating the high  threshold  which
      has to be reached in any case in which it is claimed that removal will
      be in breach of human rights under those Articles.

25.   For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.






                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President










