
ar
                 SJ (issue of risk of suicide in UK and in country of
           origin)
                 Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00265


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                               Date of Hearing: 20  May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           22 September 2004

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                  Mr G Warr






                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives:  Mr  S.  Cox  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  A.J.   Paterson
Solicitors for the appellant;  Miss T. Hart for the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national  of  Sri  Lanka.   He  appeals  against  a
      determination of  Adjudicator,   Mr  D.A.  Radcliffe,  dismissing  his
      appeal  against  the  decision  giving  directions  for  his   removal
      following refusal to grant asylum.

2.    The Adjudicator found the appellant credible.  However,  he  dismissed
      the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds because he considered  that
      even if his record were to show (falsely) that he  escaped,  it  would
      also show that he had never been charged with an offence or  confessed
      to anything and had only ever been perceived by authorities as a  low-
      level LTTE supporter. As regards the appellant's Article 8 grounds  of
      appeal, the Adjudicator  accepted  that  he  suffered  from  PTSD  and
      depression but considered that he could access available treatment  in
      Sri Lanka and that in his home area he would  also  receive  from  his
      mother moral and palliative care. He specifically did not accept  that
      the appellant had attempted to take his own life in October 2002.

3.    Permission to appeal was limited to the  human  rights  issue  in  the
      light of the appellant's psychiatric condition.  In  a notice dated 17
      May 2004 a request was made that the  Tribunal  consider  grounds   on
      which permission had been refused. These relied on developments in the
      political situation  in Sri Lanka in the ten months or  so  since  the
      decision to give permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal.  However,  in
      view of  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  has  not  found  that  recent
      developments in Sri Lanka  have  significantly  altered  the  approach
      taken by the authorities to persons previously identified as low level
      LTTE supporters, we did not accede to this request.

4.    Leaving aside, therefore, those grounds  which  raised  asylum-related
      points,  the  grounds  were  essentially  threefold.  Firstly  it  was
      contended that the Adjudicator erred in failing to consider Article  3
      in the context of the claimant's mental health.  Secondly, the grounds
      submitted that in respect of both Articles 3 and 8 the Adjudicator had
      failed to properly consider the  medical assessment  that  he  was  at
      real risk of  suicide  or  breakdown  if  subject  to  removal.   They
      highlighted the fact that  the claimant  had  said  he  had  attempted
      suicide previously (in  October  2000)  and  might  attempt  to   kill
      himself again if returned. Thirdly, it was  submitted  in  respect  of
      Article 8 that the Adjudicator's description of the appellant's family
      life in  the  UK  with  his  uncle  and  brother  as  "incipient"  was
      perverse, because he had lived with his uncle since arrival in the  UK
      in September 2000 and had a high level of dependency on his uncle.

5.    In amplification of the grounds Mr Cox urged the  Tribunal  to  follow
      the approach set out in  Soumahoro [2003] EWCA Civ 840 and in  Kurtoli
      [2003] EWHC 2744 (Admin), [2004] INLR 198. He highlighted the lack  of
      reasons given by the Adjudicator for finding that  the  appellant  had
      not  attempted  suicide  in  October  2002.   He  alleged   that   the
      Adjudicator had taken a selective approach  to  the  medical  evidence
      concerning risk  of  suicide.   There  was  further  medical  evidence
      available showing that a week after  the  appellant  learnt  that  the
      Adjudicator had dismissed his appeal, the psychiatrist had re-admitted
      him for three days.

6.    In this type of case it was essential, submitted Mr Cox,  that  proper
      weight be given to the appellant's subjective belief that upon  return
      to Sri Lanka he would face a real risk of serious  harm  either   from
      the authorities, the LTTE or both.   The Adjudicator had accepted that
      he had been tortured and ill-treated by  both.  The  LTTE  were  still
      present in the appellant's home area. There was no evidence  that  any
      family member would be able to meet the appellant upon his  return  to
      Colombo.

    7.      Miss Hart submitted  that  the  position  of  the  appellant  in
      Kurtoli was different as the  evidence  in  that  case  was  that  the
      appellant's condition was getting worse. If the appellant was at  risk
      of attempting suicide in reaction to  an  adverse  decision  from  the
      Tribunal, precautionary action could be taken  by  those  representing
      him, in cooperation with doctors in the UK.  It was not a question  as
      in Kurtoli, of assessing what precautionary measures might be taken in
      another country (France).

8.    In addressing the main issue  in  this  case  we  have  taken  careful
      account of leading cases, including Kurtoli and  Soumahoro.   However,
      we note that in  both cases the focus was on whether, in the light  of
      psychiatric evidence, the claim was arguable.  Neither decision  dealt
      with the proper approach to such cases on the merits,  as  opposed  to
      the  legality. In respect of  the  proper  approach  to  be  taken  to
      medical evidence in cases being  decided  on  their  merits,  we  have
      applied  the principles set out by  the  Tribunal  in  P  (Yugoslavia)
      [2003] UKIAT 00057.

9.    We have also to decide this case in  the  light  of  further  evidence
      submitted to the Tribunal, dealing both with the appellant's  previous
      medical history and with his current medical  condition.  The  medical
      reports we  have  before  us  include  a  psychiatric  report  by   Dr
      Kanagaratnam,  Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 20  November  2002,  and
      two reports by Dr Anne Patterson, MB, ChB, MR, CPsych,  one  dated  10
      January  2003  and  a  supplementary  report  dated   15   May   2004.
      Nevertheless, even though the evidence casts  a  different  light   on
      some aspects of the evidence, we do not consider that it  demonstrates
      that the Adjudicator reached erroneous conclusions.

10.   We do accept, particularly in the light of the further evidence,  that
      the Adjudicator was wrong to find that the appellant had not attempted
      to take his own life in October 2002.   Equally,  however,  the  later
      evidence does not demonstrate that  he has made any  further  attempts
      at self-harm, notwithstanding that he was re-admitted to  hospital  in
      August 2003 for several days following news that  his  appeal  to  the
      Adjudicator had been dismissed.

11.   We also  accept  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  describe  the
      appellant's  personal relationships with his uncle and brother  in the
      UK as "incipient" family  life relationships.  Given that the  medical
      evidence confirmed the appellant's dependency on his uncle  throughout
      the  period of his psychological difficulties, the Adjudicator  should
      have accepted that the appellant  had family life relationships in the
      UK.  However, we do not think that  this error was sufficient to  show
      that the Adjudicator was wrong to conclude that any interference  with
      his right to respect and private  life  was  proportionate.  We  shall
      return to this matter below.

12.   Dealing first  with  the  extent  of  the  appellant's  mental  health
      difficulties in  the  UK,  we  accept  that  he  has  been   receiving
      treatment in the UK and has been assessed by two  medical  experts  as
      suffering from  PTSD and  depression  consistent  with  the  traumatic
      experiences he described.
      We also accept, on the basis of the letter of 11 September  2003  from
      Springfield Hospital that the appellant had been admitted  to   Crocus
      Ward in October/November 2002  with  severe  depression  following  an
      attempt at deliberate self-harm by overdosing with  Buspirone.

13.   In his May 2004  report  Dr  Kanagaratnam  noted  that  following  his
      discharge from Springfield Hospital the appellant  was  provided  with
      regular follow-up, as he continued to be depressed and to suffer  from
      PTSD.  In the same report the doctor explained that his  decision   to
      readmit the appellant as an in-patient for several days in August 2003
      arose because he was  "sufficiently concerned by the increased risk of
      suicide, here at that time" in reaction to news of  the  Adjudicator's
      dismissal of his appeal earlier that month.  He wrote:

             'He  continues  to  express  helplessness,  hopelessness   and
             pointlessness. He has a sense of foreshortened future, with  a
             severely damaged self-concept along with a features  (sic)  of
             loss of personal and moral integrity.


             In my opinion, there is a very significant risk  of  completed
             suicide in the UK if [the appellant] knows for certain that he
             is to be removed to Sri Lanka.    He has as mentioned  already
             made one serious attempt at suicide here.


             He has found support and sympathy from his relatives in the UK
              which to a large extent has provided  him  with  a  sense  of
             stability.

14.   In her May 2004 report supplementing that furnished in  January  2003,
      Dr Anne Paterson confirmed that  the appellant continued to  take  the
      same antidepressant medication and had continued to attend psychiatric
      outpatient appointments  for  review  of  his  mental  state  and  the
      Traumatic Stress Clinic for psychological  treatment.  Her  assessment
      was that his mental state was "little changed"  since  the  assessment
      made in 2002, despite continuing psychiatric treatment. She considered
      that the  need of the appellant  to  be  re-admitted  in  August  2003
      confirmed her  view  that  he  remained  "at  a  significant  risk  of
      committing suicide in the  UK if he knew for certain that he would  be
      returned to Sri Lanka".  She did not think, in his interview with her,
      either in 2002 or May 2004, that the appellant was at  immediate  risk
      of killing himself, but his "continued suicidal ideation" indicated  a
      continued risk. She considered  that the  appellant   being  told  for
      certain that he must return  to  Sri  Lanka  was  "likely  ...  to  be
      experienced  as  a  significant  negative  life   event,   likely   to
      precipitate just such a development of serous suicidal  intent".   She
      further considered that since the appellant had no one to support  him
      in Colombo he would be at similar risk of committing suicide  actually
      either en route to Sri Lanka or upon return there.   She  repeated  in
      closing the point made  in  her  earlier  report  that  the   risk  of
      completed suicide increased one hundred fold in those who have  had  a
      previous suicide attempt.

15.   In relation to the risk of suicide in the UK, we do not consider  that
      the medical evidence, even take at its highest,  demonstrates  a  real
      risk that the appellant would commit suicide in the  UK. We  say  this
      because it is clear that there has been and continues to be  excellent
      cooperation between the appellant's uncle, who supervised him closely,
      and the medical authorities  in the UK. In particular, the  events  of
      August  2000  demonstrated   that   precautionary   steps   had   been
      successfully taken in the past to ensure he was not at immediate  risk
      of suicide - by re-admitting him to hospital - and there was no reason
      to suppose that similar steps could not be taken in the  future.   (In
      order to further ensure that precautionary measures could be taken, we
      agreed  to  Mr  Cox's  request  that  the  appellant's  copy  of   our
      determination be relayed through his representatives).

16.   As regards the issue of risk to  the  appellant  upon  return  to  Sri
      Lanka, it is important to note that his claim to face a real  risk  of
      serious harm from  the authorities on return to Colombo has been found
      to be wanting.  We have already noted that we refused a request to re-
      argue the asylum  grounds of appeal following their rejection  by  the
      Vice President who granted permission  to  appeal.   Our  refusal  was
      based on the fact that we were satisfied  that   the  Adjudicator  was
      fully justified in concluding that neither  the  authorities  nor  the
      LTTE would any longer have  an  adverse  interest  in  the  appellant.



17.   As regards whether the appellant would  be  returned  to  a  situation
      where he had  no  family  support,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      appellant would be able to return to his home  village  of  Alvai  and
      there have palliative care and moral support from his mother.  Mr  Cox
      has challenged this finding on the basis that  the  appellant's   home
      area remained under LTTE control. However, whilst accepting  that  the
      LTTE detained the appellant between 1998 and 2000 (during  which  time
      he had to perform forced labour) and that he eventually  escaped  from
      them, the Adjudicator concluded that the appellant  would no longer be
      of adverse  interest  to  this  organisation.  In  the  light  of  the
      objective evidence before the Adjudicator, which  included  the  April
      2003 CIPU Report, we consider that this conclusion was  entirely  open
      to him. Even if there continue on the latest evidence to be  incidents
      of LTTE forcibly conscripting young people, it is clear that  this  is
      no longer a regular occurrence; and there is no evidence  that  within
      the appellant's home area it has remained  a  regular  practice  after
      commencement of the peace process. Furthermore there was  no  evidence
      that the appellant's family in his home area  continued  to  have  any
      problems with the authorities or the LTTE.

18.   Even had we found for some reason that the appellant could not  return
      to his home area, we consider  that  it  would  still  not  have  been
      reasonably likely the appellant  would  have  to  live  in  Sri  Lanka
      without family support. On the  appellant's  own  account  his  family
      members, both in Sri Lanka and  the  UK,  had  gone  to  extraordinary
      lengths to help him in the past, including by driving him to different
      parts of Sri Lanka. It was quite implausible, therefore,  to  maintain
      that when his family members in his  home  area  learnt  he  would  be
      arriving (and remaining) in Colombo, that they would not take steps to
      ensure that one or more of them joined him.  As  Miss  Hart  correctly
      pointed out by reference   to  recent  objective  evidence,  there  is
      freedom of movement in Sri Lanka currently, in practice as well as  in
      theory.

19.   We consider, therefore, that the Adjudicator was quite  entitled  when
      assessing the implications for this appeal of the  appellant's  mental
      health to find that he would have family support on return.

20.   We also consider that it was open to the Adjudicator to find that  the
      appellant would be able to access medical treatment in Sri  Lanka,  if
      he needed it. In this regard we  note  that  despite  the  extent  and
      length of the appellant's mental health problems, the treatment he has
      received has in  the  main  consisted  of  antidepressant  medication.
      Whilst he has seen  psychiatrists,  he  has  not  been  placed  in  an
      institutional  setting  for  treatment,  apart   from   two   isolated
      occasions.

21.   Turning to the assessment by two specialists that the appellant is  at
      risk of suicide, we would  make  two  main  points.  Firstly,  as  the
      Tribunal has emphasised in  P  (Yugoslavia),  assessment  of  risk  of
      suicide in the context of an  asylum  claim  has  to  be  made  by  an
      Adjudicator taking into account the evidence as a whole, including but
      not confined to the medical  evidence.  Doctors  are  not  experts  in
      conditions in  destination  countries,  nor  are  they  expert  in  or
      familiar with the criteria of real  risk  that  Adjudicators  have  to
      apply under the  Refugee  and  Human  Rights  Conventions.   Secondly,
      whether  or not the Adjudicator was correct to attach significance  to
      the fact that the appellant was not  "actively suicidal" in  interview
      (with doctors), we see no error of law  in  his  conclusion  that  the
      removal decision  would not violate his right to  physical  and  moral
      integrity.

22.   In this case the medical evidence was that  the  appellant's  suicidal
      ideation was very closely linked to his fears  about  risk  on  return
      from the authorities and the LTTE.   His  subjective  fears  are  also
      evident from his asylum interview and 17 November 2000  statement.  In
      the letter, for example, he referred at one point to his  alarm  at  a
      recent incident  he  had  heard  about  in  which  twenty-seven  Tamil
      detainees  had  been  attacked  by  a  Sinhalese  mob.   However,  the
      Adjudicator for valid reasons found that  the  appellant's  subjective
      fears were not objectively based.

23.   Mr Cox's response to this finding is to argue that it does not  matter
      what the objective reality will be for the appellant on return to  Sri
      Lanka: it does not  matter  because  the  medical  evidence  is  that,
      irrespective of objective reality, he believes he  will  be  subjected
      (again) to serious harm.  However, even though the   medical  evidence
      does state that he is at risk of suicide, it does not demonstrate that
      this appellant is delusional or unable to distinguish between  reality
      and fantasy.  In the absence of medical evidence of this kind,  we  do
      not think it can be assumed that, once the appellant  realises  he  is
      required to return and that there is no prospect of further appeal, he
      will not take stock by reference to objective realities.

24.   This is an important point in this appeal because in  large  part  the
      appellant has overtly put his case on the following footing:  "If  you
      (the appellate authorities) refuse me, I will harm myself. I  did   it
      once before when I learnt of a refusal, and I will do it again".

25.   In concluding that the appellant could be expected to  come  to  terms
      with  the  fact  of  removal  and  to  take  cognisance   of   changed
      circumstances in Sri Lanka, we would re-emphasis the  significance  in
      our view of the fact that throughout the time he continues  to  remain
      in the UK, it is reasonably likely he will  be in  receipt  of  family
      and medical supervision, and that, upon arrival in Sri Lanka  he  will
      have family support, and medical support if needed.

26.   As regards the concerns  raised  about  the  appellant's   conduct  en
      route by aeroplane to Sri Lanka, we do not accept that these could not
      be allayed by action on the part of the appellant's  uncle in the  UK,
      in cooperation if necessary with medical and immigration  authorities.
      If there was any continuing concern on the  part  of  his  uncle,  the
      latter could if need be purchase a ticket and  accompany  him.  It  is
      quite absurd, in our view, to voice concerns of this kind  without  at
      the same time being practical about what could be done to allay them.

27.   In reaching our conclusions we have take careful account of  Mr  Cox's
      submissions  based on Kurtoli and Soumahoro.  However, not only   were
      these cases concerned essentially with the arguability of a  claim  as
      opposed to its merits, but both decisions are fact-specific and  fact-
      sensitive.   We  are  not  persuaded  that  they  establish  that  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions in this case were  erroneous.  Nor  have  we
      found  that  the  further  medical  evidence  adduced  in  this   case
      demonstrates that return of this appellant would cause a breach of his
      fundamental human rights.

28.   Even though the Adjudicator did not address Article 3  separately,  we
      consider that his conclusion as to the lack of serious threat  to  the
      appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity  under  Article  8   were
      sufficient in themselves to  establish  that  the   decision  did  not
      violate his Article 3 rights either.

29.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.





                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT






-----------------------
      1


