

                                   FA (Fresh Evidence) Iran [2004] UKIAT
                                  00291                                  | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                               Date of Hearing: 5th May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                           ...29th October 2004...

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice President)
                              Mr M J Griffiths

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr Huffer, instructed by Dicksons HMB
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal from a determination of a Special Adjudicator, Dr  H
     H Storey, promulgated as long ago as 30th  September  1999.   By  that
     determination he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision
     of the Secretary of State to refuse him asylum.  He was a  citizen  of
     Iran who arrived in the United Kingdom  in  August  1998  and  claimed
     asylum because of a fear of persecution, as a  result  of  his  having
     abandoned  Islam  to  become  a  Jehovah's   Witness.    The   Special
     Adjudicator did not find credible the  crucial  parts  of  his  claim,
     which centred around  his  claim  that  the  Iranian  authorities  had
     considered that he was an apostate from Islam.

  2. The Special Adjudicator found that he had never been in  trouble  with
     the Iranian authorities for his religion, that he had never  abandoned
     Islam and had never had a real interest in the Jehovah Witness  faith.
     His reasoning was that the Appellant had married  a  Muslim  woman  in
     Cyprus where he claimed first to have become interested in becoming  a
     Jehovah's Witness;  he would not have married a Muslim if he had  been
     as interested as he had claimed to be in being  a  Jehovah's  Witness.
     She, as a Muslim, would not have married him because that was  against
     her religion, as both of them would  have  known  well.   The  Special
     Adjudicator commented:

           "When questioned on this matter, the appellant said that in  the
           eyes of his wife he was still a Muslim.  In my  view  the  truth
           was much more likely to be that he had never had any involvement
           with Jehovah's Witnesses and that she knew that when she married
           him.  I note in this regard that the appellant has not taken the
           opportunity afforded to him by this hearing to call his wife  as
           a  witness  and  have  her   testimony   tested   under   cross-
           examination."

  3. He found unsatisfactory the explanation which the Appellant  gave  for
     going from Cyprus to Iran with his wife in 1997, after his brother was
     said to have warned him that people there  were  saying  that  he  had
     changed his religion.  The Appellant also gave evidence  that  he  had
     been detained on at least two occasions but  the  Special  Adjudicator
     pointed out that there  were  significant  discrepancies  between  the
     account he gave of what questions he was  asked  and  of  how  he  was
     treated, in his interview and in answers  to  his  written  statement.
     There  were  also  other  discrepancies  in   detail.    The   Special
     Adjudicator concluded:

           "However, in this case,  I  simply  do  not  believe  that  this
           appellant has ever in fact taken a real interest in the  Jehovah
           Witness creed nor do I believe that he has ever  been  or  would
           ever be perceived as  an  unbeliever  by  anyone  in  Iran.   If
           returned to Iran, I consider that he would be viewed in the same
           way as any other ordinary Iranian  citizen  with  an  equivalent
           immigration history."

  4. The Appellant sought leave to appeal to the  Tribunal  on  the  ground
     that there was further written evidence and witness  statements  which
     the IAS, which had represented him before the Special Adjudicator  had
     advised him not to produce which should have  been  produced,  and  he
     also wished to call two further witnesses  because  he  had  not  been
     aware that he could call witnesses.  He  was  by  now  represented  by
     Challinors & Dickson.  The Deputy President granted leave saying:

           "This matter merits further consideration.  The  solicitors  who
           have entered this application will be aware that it  it  is  not
           the Tribunal's practice to consider evidence which could readily
           have been produced before the  Special  Adjudicator.   The  only
           reason given for its non-production  amounts  to  an  allegation
           relating to the Immigration Advisory Service's  conduct  of  the
           Applicant's appeal and the Applicant will need to  be  ready  to
           establish the truth of that application as a preliminary  matter
           before the Tribunal."

  5. Before the appeal came on, the Deputy  President,  in  response  to  a
     letter from those solicitors saying that they were proposing  to  call
     two witnesses, of whom it was not said that they were able to give any
     evidence about what had  happened  at  the  hearing  between  the  IAS
     representative and the Appellant, said that  the  Appellant  only  had
     leave to give evidence himself and  that  would  be  confined  to  the
     preliminary issue as to whether the allegation  against  the  IAS  was
     correct.  At the hearing, it was accepted by Mr Green of Challinors  &
     Dickson that there was nothing in the IAS  file  which  supported  the
     Appellant's version of events.  The Tribunal  declined  to  allow  the
     Appellant to be called, saying that Mr Green:

           "... told us,  however,  that  although  he  had  contacted  the
           Immigration Advisory Service to obtain  the  file,  he  had  not
           mentioned the Appellant's allegation to them or sought to obtain
           their reaction to it.  He told us also that there was nothing in
           the file to which he would be drawing our attention  in  support
           of the Appellant's allegation.  In the circumstances we declined
           to allow him to call the Appellant, as it seemed to us  that  we
           should be being asked to make  a  judgment  on  the  Immigration
           Advisory Services' professional conduct of the case on the basis
           of evidence which could only be partial.  The new representative
           had had every opportunity to  discover  whether  there  was  any
           merit in the Appellant's allegations but had chosen  not  to  do
           so, and had full notice that the allegation was to be considered
           as a preliminary issue but had not  prepared  to  establish  it.
           Although it may be that in certain  circumstances  the  Tribunal
           will act  in  order  to  remedy  incompetent  or  misconduct  by
           representatives, it will not do  so  unless  properly  satisfied
           that the Appellant has actually been prejudiced  by  his  former
           representatives."

  6. After the hearing but before the determination was sent  out,  further
     material arrived upon which the Tribunal commented as follows:

           "Following the hearing of this appeal we have received a  letter
           from the Immigration Advisory Service, enclosing  a  copy  of  a
           letter written to them on 13 January 2000 by Mr Green.  Mr Green
           had written to the Immigration Advisory Service as follows:


                 'The Immigration Appeal Tribunal requires to know  why  you
                 have not submitted the two documents, ...  at  the  hearing
                 before ... the Special Adjudicator.'


           As must have been perfectly clear to the author of that  letter,
           that statement was not the truth.  We required  nothing  of  the
           Immigration Advisory Service.  The statement implies  a  further
           untruth, that we had concluded  that  the  Immigration  Advisory
           Service had it  in  their  power  to  adduce  the  documents  in
           question.  As we said at the hearing and have said again in this
           determination, we were not prepared to allow a retrial  of  this
           appeal on a bare allegation  against  the  Immigration  Advisory
           Service, when Mr Green had not even sought  their  view  on  the
           allegation.  To write to them after the hearing  misrepresenting
           what had happened at the hearing does not help the Appellant  at
           all.  So far as we are concerned, the matter was closed  at  the
           end of the hearing before us: it is right to say, however,  that
           nothing in the letter from  the  Immigration  Advisory  Services
           gives any support for the Appellant's allegations against them."

  7. It was accepted by Mr Green that there was no criticism which could be
     made of the Special Adjudicator's determination on the material before
     him.  There was no breach of natural justice, the Appellant  had  been
     represented throughout by representatives of his own  choice  and  had
     lost his case on his own evidence.

  8. This decision was challenged by way of  judicial  review  and  in  the
     Court of Appeal, the decision of the Tribunal  was  quashed,  on  14th
     June 2001.  It said that the approach in R v IAT ex parte Aziz  [1999]
     INLR 355 was correct. This case discussed  the  relevance  of  Ladd  v
     Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489 to an asylum claim.  Lord Denning had  said
     at p1491:

           "In order to justify the reception of fresh evidence  or  a  new
           trial, three conditions must be fulfilled:  first,  it  must  be
           shown that the  evidence  could  not  have  been  obtained  with
           reasonable diligence for use at the trial: second, the  evidence
           must be such that, if given, it would probably have an important
           influence on the result of the case, although  it  need  not  be
           decisive: third, the evidence must be such as is  presumably  to
           be believed, or in other words, it must be apparently  credible,
           although it need not be incontrovertible."


  9. Latham J said in Aziz:

           "Both the applicant and the respondent agree that  the  decision
           in Ladd v Marshall is not determinative of  the  question  which
           arises in asylum appeals.


           In my judgment, they  are  right  insofar  as  Ladd  v  Marshall
           requires the litigant to establish that the evidence  could  not
           have been  obtained  with  due  diligence.   That  would  be  an
           unjustifiably  restrictive  approach  in  this   sensitive   and
           difficult jurisdiction.


           The second and third  tests  do,  however,  remain  valid.   The
           evidence  cannot  justify  the  grant  of  leave  unless  it  is
           apparently credible and could affect the ultimate decision.  The
           fact  that  it  is  tendered  late  is,  however,   a   relevant
           consideration.  There is a public policy interest  in  ensuring,
           so far as possible, that all relevant material is  presented  to
           the special  adjudicator.   Where  an  asylum  seeker  has  been
           legally advised throughout, the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  is
           entitled to look with scepticism at any new  material  submitted
           in support of  a  leave  application,  if  it  could  have  been
           obtained for the hearing before the special adjudicator.  If  it
           appears as though it is material which  was  withheld  from  the
           special adjudicator, although available, the Immigration  Appeal
           Tribunal would be unlikely to allow it to support an application
           for leave.  Even where the applicant has not  been  represented,
           the Immigration Appeal Tribunal is entitled to an explanation of
           why  the  material  was  not  made  available  to  the   special
           adjudicator so that an informed  decision  can  be  made  as  to
           whether or not the applicant should be permitted to  use  it  to
           support his application for  leave  to  appeal.  But  where  the
           evidence is credible and sufficiently cogent to  be  capable  of
           affecting the ultimate decision, the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
           should be slow to decline to permit it to support an application
           for leave."

 10. Keene LJ said in this appeal:

           "Nonetheless, finality  in  litigation  is  very  important  for
           obvious reasons and  a  party  is  not  entitled  to  hold  back
           relevant evidence at first  instance  and  then  produce  it  on
           appeal as a second bite of the cherry.  For  my  part,  I  agree
           with the approach indicated in Aziz.  Of  course,  as  Latham  J
           said in that  case,  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  look  with
           scepticism at new material which could have been adduced  before
           the special adjudicator and it is entitled to an explanation  as
           to why it was not put before him.  But what  it  cannot,  in  my
           judgment, properly do is to focus entirely on that aspect and to
           pay no attention to the credibility of the fresh evidence or  to
           the impact which, if it is credible, its receipt might  have  on
           the issues in the case.   The  reason  for  that  is  that  very
           important and apparently credible evidence  might  otherwise  be
           excluded from consideration, evidence which indeed might in some
           cases produce a different result on the appeal,  solely  because
           of the lack of any proper explanation for its non-production  at
           the original hearing.  That could sometimes  lead  to  injustice
           and this is why the balancing  exercise  is  required.   It  may
           often come down in favour of its exclusion  where  there  is  no
           proper explanation for the failure to  produce  at  the  initial
           state.  That in itself provides no justification  for  departing
           from the balancing exercise."

 11. He concluded that the Tribunal had failed to consider the  credibility
     of the proffered fresh evidence.  Although the significance of the new
     material was limited and there could be doubts as to its  credibility,
     it was not so obviously deficient that a Tribunal might not regard  it
     as sufficient to outweigh the lack of an  acceptable  explanation  for
     its  earlier  non-production.   He  recognised  that  the  Appellant's
     credibility might not be enhanced by the allegations made against  the
     IAS.  The IAT should reconsider  its  decision  not  to  consider  the
     further evidence.

 12. Pill LJ thought that the conduct of the Appellant was close  to  being
     an affront to the processes of  the  Tribunal  because  there  was  no
     evidence that there had been a failure to advise  in  advance  by  the
     IAS, the concern expressed in the grant of leave about the evidence on
     the preliminary point had not been addressed, there was no explanation
     for the failure to  produce  satisfactory  evidence  as  to  what  had
     happened and when at last the Appellant's solicitors  had  written  to
     the IAS, the letter had been less than frank.

 13. There then followed a catalogue of listing problems.   On  30th  April
     2002, at an adjourned hearing, the then President gave leave  for  the
     wife to be called to give evidence and had to adjourn the  hearing  to
     another date.  After various other problems for which the Appellant is
     not to blame, the matter came on before the Tribunal on 15th  December
     2003 when again it had to be adjourned but the Appellant and his  wife
     had attended to give evidence.  Directions were given for the  hearing
     to take place in  February  but  that  was  adjourned  shortly  before
     because the Appellant had been in hospital, over Christmas  it  turned
     out, and his wife was to give birth  at  around  that  time.   Shortly
     before the appeal come on this time, we were told that the wife  would
     not be attending.  We shall come to the reasons later.  We rejected an
     application by the Secretary of State for an adjournment.

 14. By this time, the fresh evidence which the Appellant  wished  to  call
     had grown from that which featured before the Tribunal  in  2000.   We
     heard evidence from the Appellant himself which related to the reasons
     why evidence which he now wished to  call  had  not  been  before  the
     Special Adjudicator and as to the present position in relation to  his
     beliefs as a Jehovah's Witness.  We received a number  of  statements,
     letters and other documents which we have considered.  There was  some
     fresh material relating to  background  conditions  for  apostates  in
     Iran, but it was accepted that that could only become relevant and  at
     a later stage, if we were to come to a view of  the  personal  factual
     material which was favourable to the Appellant.

 15. The approach towards the admission of fresh  evidence  which  was  not
     before an Adjudicator has moved on a little since the Court of  Appeal
     ruling in this case.  The case before us does not depend, at least  at
     this stage upon any question of up to date country  evidence,  as  was
     agreed, and concerns instead whether the further  evidence  undermines
     the adverse credibility findings.  In E and R v SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ
     49, it was held that the principles in Ladd v  Marshall  remained  the
     starting point for the consideration of whether further evidence could
     be received upon appeal in asylum and  human  rights  cases  but  that
     there  was  a  discretion  to  depart   from   them   in   exceptional
     circumstances where the wider interests of justice  so  require.   The
     failure of a party's advisers to act carefully  did  not  support  any
     general departure from those principles.

 16. The approach in that case is the one which we should now apply to  the
     various pieces of evidence in this case.   It  remains  the  position,
     however, as Keene LJ pointed out in his judgment in this case, that it
     is not correct simply to require that an allegation of prejudice owing
     to professional misconduct be put to the professional in question, let
     alone proved, before the fresh evidence is examined.  But even if such
     failings are proved, it does not  follow  that  the  evidence  becomes
     admissible.  That depends upon the application of the tests in Ladd  v
     Marshall and the consideration of any exceptional factors.

 17. It is the practice of the Tribunal to require such allegations  to  be
     put to the  professional  in  question  because  it  is  so  easy  for
     allegations to  be  made  without  any  support  except  that  of  the
     disappointed claimant, who may have been disbelieved and who may again
     be less than reliable.  As Pill LJ pointed out, the  failings  of  the
     Appellant and his new advisers were considerable in the light  of  the
     specific directions of  the  Tribunal,  and  a  failure  to  put  such
     allegations properly to the professional in question is bound to raise
     serious question of credibility as to the allegations.   That  is  why
     the Tribunal expects that that will be put in to the representative in
     question and that any reply will be made available  to  the  Tribunal.
     It is difficult to think of a sound reason why the  allegation  should
     not be put, although there may be exceptional circumstances.

The evidence which the representative allegedly ignored

 18. It was alleged that two pieces of  evidence  were  shown  to  the  IAS
     lawyer representing the Appellant before the  Adjudicator,  but  which
     the representative ignored.  First, was a letter to the Appellant from
     M Georgiou who had known the Appellant in Cyprus.   It  contains  very
     little that would not have been told to him by the  Appellant  and  so
     added very little beyond that the  Appellant  had  been  studying  the
     Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses for about a year  before  he  left  for
     Iran.  Second, was a letter with envelope and  translation,  from  the
     Appellant's sister in Iran, referring to government agents looking for
     the Appellant because he was no longer a Muslim and hoping  that  they
     would not see this letter.

 19. The Appellant provided a statement as to what happened in relation  to
     those pieces of evidence with the IAS representative.  This was  dated
     after the Tribunal hearing, but before its decision on the preliminary
     issue.  A friend who had accompanied  the  Appellant  to  the  hearing
     provided a very similarly worded statement of  the  same  date.   Each
     statement said that the two documents  had  been  handed  to  the  IAS
     representative by the Appellant, in the presence of the friend.   Each
     said that the IAS representative had said to the Appellant that it was
     all rubbish but that he had a case strong enough to win  anyway.   The
     statements are silent as to the existence  of  a  translation  of  the
     letter from the sister, as to the friend translating for the Appellant
     what the IAS representative said, and as  to  his  being  there  as  a
     witness himself.  The straightforward reading  of  the  statements  is
     that the IAS representative spoke to the Appellant in English.   There
     is no reference in  them  to  the  wife  being  a  potential  witness.
     Neither statement deals with the suggestion that the Appellant had two
     witnesses whom he would have wished to call, but that he did not  know
     that he could;  there is no suggestion that this was ever raised  with
     the representative, although the grounds of appeal could be read as so
     saying.

 20. After those statements had been sent to the  IAS,  the  representative
     replied to the Tribunal.  The IAS letter  of  17th  January  2000  was
     before the Court of Appeal  but  inexplicably  was  omitted  from  the
     bundles provided by Dicksons.  Having found it in our files, we  asked
     why it had not been included in the bundles and were told by Mr Huffer
     upon telephone instructions that previous counsel had advised that  it
     be omitted.  If that is true, as to  which  we  make  no  comment,  we
     regard it as astonishing that Dicksons did not disregard that  advice,
     as they should have done.

 21. The representative pointed out that he had a great deal of  experience
     appearing for appellants and in receiving last-minute material.  He is
     clear and emphatic that he was not handed any material and that he did
     not regard the  case  as  strong  at  all,  instead  speaking  to  the
     Appellant about his concerns;  in any event he would always have  used
     corroborative evidence.  He had written to the Appellant  specifically
     asking for supporting evidence on  3rd  August  1999,  pre-dating  the
     sister's letter;  he found it surprising that the Appellant had waited
     then until the end of September before allegedly handing over material
     which dated from July and early August 1999,  but  continued  that  he
     would still have "jumped for joy" at their receipt even on the date of
     the hearing.

 22. The Appellant's evidence to us was that he could not  remember  if  he
     had told the representative that he wished to call witnesses,  one  of
     whom at least was present, and said  that  he  only  tried  to  obtain
     witnesses after he had lost.  Later, he said that his friend had  come
     as  a witness and also as an interpreter;  he then said  that  he  had
     come as a friend and not as a witness;  he then was not sure as to why
     he had not asked him to help as a witness:  he did not want to  bother
     him;  he later denied saying that the friend had come  as  a  witness.
     But he did  say  that  his  own  English  was  not  good  although  he
     understood some words.  He alleged that he had told the representative
     about his wife but had been told by him that she  was  not  necessary.
     In cross-examination, he said that he was 100 percent certain that  he
     handed the documents to the representative and that he had  spoken  to
     him through his friend  acting  as  interpreter.   He  said  that  the
     representative had not even accepted the documents.

 23. Mr Huffer, for  the  Appellant,  urged  that  we  should  be  slow  to
     disbelieve the Appellant;  there was scope for  misunderstanding;   it
     was understandable that at the door of the  court  the  representative
     would be reluctant to accept self-serving  material  from  the  family
     which had no professional heading and was of no  great  relevance  and
     was untestable.

 24. We do not believe what the Appellant had to say;  his evidence was  at
     odds with the earlier statement on this issue;  it was vague and self-
     contradictory.  There were omissions in it of important material  such
     as whether the representative had asked for  supporting  material  and
     why it came so late at the hearing.  We see  nothing  to  support  the
     notion that an experienced representative would not have examined that
     material carefully.  Although there are times when advice may be given
     that reliance upon a particular document is more likely to be damaging
     than helpful, that is not what is said in respect of  these  documents
     and it is not obvious that they would be damaging even if not of  real
     help.  We believe that the Appellant was lying.  He lost his case  and
     is  now  casting  about  in  a  disreputable  way  for  some   further
     opportunity to put in additional evidence.  We do not believe him when
     he says that he did not know that he could call witnesses in the light
     of his being represented by the IAS, nor do we believe for one  moment
     the Appellant's assertion that the IAS  representative  had  told  him
     that it was not necessary to call his wife;  this  allegation  emerged
     in 2002.  It is simply not credible that such advice would  have  been
     given;  her statement  says  that  she  had  difficulty  entering  the
     country and was in Cyprus or Jordan at the time.  These lies  did  not
     help his case in other respects  and  tended  only  to  reinforce  the
     unfavourable view of his credibility which the Special Adjudicator had
     reached.

 25. Mr Huffer's submissions also show that the material, even  if  omitted
     by professional misjudgement, could not have had a significant  impact
     on the outcome of the case, in the light of  the  significant  defects
     which the Special Adjudicator found in the evidence, not the least  of
     which went to the Appellant's credibility.  On this basis, his  appeal
     was hopeless.

Other evidence which was not put before  the  Adjudicator  but  which  could
have been

 26. The next tranche of evidence which the Appellant sought to persuade us
     to admit consists of statements which could have been but  which  were
     not before the Special Adjudicator.  The Appellant accepts that  after
     the case was lost he sought that evidence  so  that  he  could  appeal
     further.  Some of those statements contain material  which  could  not
     have been before the  Special Adjudicator, which we shall deal with in
     the next section.

 27. There are a number of statements dated  18th  or  19th  October  1999,
     shortly  after  the  promulgation   of   the   Special   Adjudicator's
     determination.  This is consistent  with  the  Appellant  deciding  to
     gather the evidence after he had lost.  M Georgiou's statement repeats
     his earlier statement  and  it  adds  little.   Mr  Davies,  Presiding
     Overseer of the Newcastle-under-Lyme Central Congregation of Jehovah's
     Witnesses, provided a statement in response  to  a  request  (no  date
     given).  He had met the Appellant and had  answered  his  request  for
     assistance by putting him in touch with a Farsi speaker and Elder,  Mr
     Nassehi.  He said, as at that date, that the Appellant attended  local
     lessons and Farsi-speaking meetings in Manchester.  He  wrote  of  the
     Appellant's genuine interest in being a Jehovah's Witness and in being
     baptised soon, adding that the Appellant spoke  to  people  about  his
     beliefs.  Mr Nassehi  wrote  mostly  what  must  have  come  from  the
     Appellant himself and so adds little.  Despite the Appellant's lack of
     English, he  met  with  them  and  also  attended  Farsi  meetings  in
     Manchester.  Mr Nassehi also wrote of the Appellant's sincerity.

 28. Neither of the latter two statements dealt with the  wife's  views  or
     the relationship with non-believers (which the Appellant himself dealt
     with), notwithstanding the adverse points made in that respect by  the
     Adjudicator.

 29. The friend who attended before the Adjudicator  provided  a  statement
     which predates the one he gave describing what transpired,  allegedly,
     with the IAS representative,  and  is  surprisingly  silent  on  those
     matters.  It said that when the friend had been in Iran in early 1999,
     he had been asked by the Appellant's parents to tell him not to return
     because word was spreading that he had become a Jehovah's Witness  and
     they were fearful of being blamed.

 30. Mr Laksari, a local shopkeeper originally from the same town  in  Iran
     as the Appellant, stated that he knew, but  the  source  is  unstated,
     that the Appellant had kept up instruction in the beliefs of Jehovah's
     Witnesses and intended to be baptised  soon.   He  did  refer  to  the
     conflict between the Appellant and his wife over religion, saying that
     it "seems that his wife no longer wishes to be married to  him  if  he
     persists in this faith".  He added that the Appellant's  attitude  was
     that if his wife loved him she would also convert to  his  faith.   As
     Muslims, however, he had  turned  away  the  Appellant's  attempts  to
     interest him in being a Jehovah's Witness.  Most of the  other  points
     were ones which he could only have been told either by  the  Appellant
     or by his wife, including that neither of them had any idea  that  his
     marrying a Muslim was  contrary  to  Islam.   (The  wife's  statement,
     though not his, states that she did not know of  his  religious  views
     until after they were married.)  Mr Laksari  continued,  stating  that
     the Appellant's wife no longer wished to spend her life with  him  and
     that he was willing to forego her for the sake of his religion.  (That
     is not quite how matters turned out.)

 31. Mr Laksari produced a further statement in December  1999,  describing
     it as within his personal knowledge that the Appellant  was  a  devout
     Christian and was also known to the authorities in Iran, but  that  he
     would stick to his beliefs at all costs.  No means of  acquiring  this
     personal knowledge was given.  Mr Huffer wished to  withdraw  reliance
     on these statements, as they added nothing, he said.  They do  contain
     material, which is of interest in relation to the enthusiasm, which it
     is said the Appellant feels for his religion to the point of accepting
     the breakdown of his marriage.  Mr Huffer's wish reflects  more  of  a
     recognition that the material  did  not  assist,  because  it  was  so
     clearly exaggerated and not borne out by the  continued  marriage  and
     additional children which it had led to, coupled  with  the  evidently
     diminishing interest which the Appellant  had  in  being  a  Jehovah's
     Witness.  It served instead to illustrate how far the unreliability of
     the Appellant's supporting evidence had spread.

 32. Mr Nassehi and the friend  provided  further  statements  in  December
     1999, the latter again being silent as to what had happened  with  the
     IAS representative.  They added little to what had already been stated
     to them.

 33. These statements  were  all  obtained  within  a  short  time  of  the
     Adjudicator's determination.  There is no reason why  they  could  not
     have been provided to him.  We do not accept that  the  Appellant  did
     not know that he could call witnesses or provide statements.   He  had
     not asked them until afterwards, he said, because he only  asked  them
     to give evidence when he had lost.  He gave contradictory answers over
     his friend as a witness, but if he had not  asked  him,  that  is  the
     Appellant's fault.  We do not accept that he would not have raised the
     issue with the IAS or they with him. As we have said,  we  reject  his
     claim that the  IAS  said  that  the  wife's  evidence  would  not  be
     necessary.  All this evidence fails the first test in Ladd v Marshall.
      We shall deal with its apparent credibility and significance when  we
     have considered all the evidence which  the  Appellant  wished  us  to
     consider, as well as whether there are any special circumstances which
     would warrant its reception.

The 2002 statements

 34. As the first substantive Tribunal hearing neared in  April  2002,  yet
     further statements were produced.  The first  was  a  third  statement
     from the Appellant himself;  it adds  very  little  to  the  statement
     which was before the Adjudicator and much of what it adds  could  have
     been  before  him.   He  refers  to  a  nasty  assault  (para  4,  p86
     Appellant's bundle) by immigration officers when he returned in  1997,
     which he felt had to do with his being a Jehovah's Witness.  He  gives
     no particular reason for his feeling that that  was  why  he  received
     such treatment.  He gives no explanation for the  surprising  omission
     of any reference to that  assault  from  his  first  statement,  (p24,
     Appellant's bundle).   There  was  no  reference  to  his  wife  being
     unavailable  to  give  evidence  before   the   Special   Adjudicator,
     notwithstanding what the latter had to say  about  her  absence  as  a
     witness.   Nor  was  there  any  reference,  by  way  of   alternative
     explanation, as he later gave to us, that the IAS  representative  had
     said that she was not a necessary witness.

 35. What could not have been before the Adjudicator was  the  position  in
     relation to his progress as a Jehovah's Witness over  the  intervening
     time.  He makes no reference to family or marital difficulties, but he
     said that he had still not been baptised  because  he  had  still  not
     completed  his  studies  because  of  language  and  his   immigration
     difficulties.

 36. His statement introduced three documents:  a letter from Iran from the
     friend there who had  helped  him  leave  in  1997,  saying  that  the
     Appellant's life was in danger there;  another letter from his  sister
     saying that death awaited his return;  and a  "Warning  Notice"  dated
     11th August 2001, faxed on 31st March 2002, requiring  him  to  attend
     for trial in August 2001 on charges as a Jehovah's Witness.

 37. The first  letter  had  been  requested  by  the  Appellant,  but  the
     requesting letter was not produced.  This friend, notwithstanding  the
     help which he had given the Appellant to leave and  which  could  have
     occasioned questions as to how he knew the Appellant or was interested
     in him, had talked about the Appellant with old friends in  the  Sepah
     Pasdaran who had ascertained that the Appellant's name  was  still  on
     the list at Teheran Airport and that he would still be arrested if  he
     returned.  The  Appellant   gave  no  evidence  of  brutality  at  the
     immigration office until his second statement.  His evidence had  been
     of arrest and ill-treatment at the hands of the  Sepah  Pasdaran,  but
     who had nonetheless released him on payment of a bribe.

 38. The sister's letter was in the same terms as her earlier one.

 39. The Warning Notice only came to his attention, he said in evidence  to
     us, when it was posted to him.  It was pointed out that  it  had  been
     faxed to him;  he said that he had asked for the original but that had
     got lost in the post.  No recipient fax address  was  available;   the
     Appellant  said  that  he  had  borrowed  the  machine.    In   cross-
     examination, he said that he knew  about  the  Notice  from  telephone
     calls which he made every ten days or so to his  family  in  Iran.  He
     explained that the delay in informing him about the Notice arose  from
     the  fact  that  his  family  had  not  wanted  to  worry   him   and,
     contradictorily, that they all thought that some other  family  member
     had told him.  Mr Huffer recognised the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
     genuineness of documents involved a consideration of their reliability
     in the context of all the evidence as a whole.  The  CIPU  Report  for
     October 2003 in paragraph 5.37 referred  to  an  Embassy  report  that
     there were freelance typists outside every  Court  who  could  produce
     most types of legal and  court  documents  very  cheaply,  which  were
     unlikely to have security markings or uniformity in format.

 40. The Appellant's wife also produced a statement in  March  2002.   This
     differs from the Appellant's first statement in saying that she  first
     found out about his  involvement  in  and  adherence  to  the  Jehovah
     Witness' faith when she asked why  he  was  being  arrested  and  ill-
     treated in Iran when they  visited  there  in  1997  after  they  were
     married.  His first statement said that she had all of this  explained
     to her before they were married and she had understood.  There  is  no
     room for misunderstanding here;  one or other is lying.  She had  lost
     contact with him for some months when he was hiding in  Turkey.   They
     had experienced  matrimonial  problems  because  each  was  trying  to
     persuade the other to the merits of their  respective  religions;   he
     does not speak of that.  She accuses the IAS of doing nothing to help,
     of rejecting her as a witness but also saying that she was  in  Cyprus
     or Jordan at  the  relevant  time  because  of  visa  difficulties  in
     entering the United Kingdom.  Some of what she says depends  upon  her
     husband.  We do not accept that she had been rejected as a witness and
     that explanation is not consistent generally with her being out of the
     United Kingdom and unable to give evidence anyway.  It was not in  her
     husband's statement, although he said it in evidence to us.   She  had
     only stayed in the United Kingdom since the birth of her second child.

 41. The friend who attended the hearing also provided a third statement in
     March 2002 which provided a little more detail  about  his  friendship
     with the Appellant, a boyhood friend with whom he  had  re-established
     contact when they were both in the United Kingdom.  He  explains  that
     the Appellant had told him he had left Islam because he did  not  like
     fanatical  Islam.   It  adds  nothing  of  substance  save  that   the
     Appellant's family were still being questioned about the Appellant.

 42. Mr Nassehi provided another statement saying that  the  Appellant  had
     now stopped going to Manchester and went instead  to  meetings  at  Mr
     Nassehi's house.  Divorce had been threatened after the birth  of  the
     second child and this had led to an end to  that  association,  though
     the Appellant continued with his readings.

 43. Mr Davies' next statement, of April 2002, said that he had not met the
     Appellant for eighteen months, but confirmed that the association  had
     ceased because, he said, of opposition from the wife,  though  contact
     with Mr Nassehi continued.  A Ms Egerton, who said that she had  known
     the Appellant since 1998, wrote that she had seen him being instructed
     in the faith and had discussed it with him.

 44. There was also an undated letter from Mr and  Mrs  Mohammed  who  were
     practising Muslims.  They had known the  Appellant  for  three  years,
     spoke of his commitment and of the tensions which that had caused with
     his wife but said that she was willing to accept that he should  be  a
     Jehovah's Witness.  This seems at odds with  what  Mr  Davies  and  Mr
     Nassehi had to say about her opposition.

 45. The final evidence in  this  context  is  the  oral  evidence  of  the
     Appellant himself, to which we have already made some  reference.   He
     had resolved past tensions with his wife, with whom he now  had  three
     children, on the basis that each would follow their own religion.   He
     said nothing else about how this was seen by either religion,  because
     he had not asked any Witness or Elder about it although he  was  aware
     that a Witness  could  not  marry  a  non-Witness.   He  talked  about
     Jehovah's Witnesses to his work colleagues and others and continued to
     believe strongly in this faith.  But he had still  not  been  baptised
     because he had still not finished his studies as a result of having to
     work day and night.

 46. There was very considerable  confusion  in  his  evidence  about  what
     contact he had with the Jehovah's Witnesses  and  where,  a  confusion
     which was not attributable to the questions but to  the  unreliability
     of the answers.  He still seemed at one point, in the teeth  of  other
     evidence to say that he had continued going to Manchester  until  late
     2003.  Eventually, he seemed to settle on his  last  attendance  at  a
     meeting as being some seven or eight months previously and that he had
     not been a regular attender after  2002;   he  had  last  been  to  Mr
     Nassehi's house meetings in March 2002,  and  had  been  some  ten  to
     fifteen times in the last two years.

 47. He explained what appealed to him about the faith and a little of what
     he understood of its beliefs.  It was not very much for all his  years
     of study and his asserted commitment to a faith which might  cost  him
     so dear;  and its paucity impelled Mr Huffer to add something  in  his
     submissions.  But we were not  seeking  enlightenment  but  rather  to
     gauge the depth, or shallows, of the Appellant's knowledge.  One thing
     that did attract him, apart from the believed lack of a Hell, was  the
     refusal of blood transfusions because of the limit which  that  placed
     on  transmitting  diseases.   We  did  not,  however,  find  that  his
     knowledge of  that  well-known  facet  of  the  beliefs  of  Jehovah's
     Witnesses had translated itself into action,  for  when  he  underwent
     surgery recently he  had  made  no  arrangements  to  prevent  such  a
     transfusion, nor had he discussed it with the surgeon or did he  carry
     a card refusing such treatment.

 48. The Appellant's wife was not present on this  occasion,  although  she
     had been present at the earlier adjourned hearing.  He  said  that  he
     could not afford the alleged  �300  train  fare  and  could  not  find
     someone to look after the young children so as to allow them to travel
     by bus the previous day.  He had only sought a ticket  from  NASS  for
     himself.  So, despite what the Adjudicator had said,  she  had  stayed
     behind.  There was no other evidence as  to  the  efforts  being  made
     through the solicitors to obtain her presence.  Mr Huffer said that no
     adverse inferences  should  be  drawn  in  those  circumstances.   The
     Appellant had been honest in his evidence about his faith  and  if  he
     had wanted to exaggerate he could have done so;  he  had  been  honest
     about his wife's views.

Conclusions

 49. We have already said that the evidence in  the  October  and  December
     1999 statements fails the first test in Ladd  v  Marshall.   The  only
     material in the later statements which does not also fail  that  first
     test  is  that  which  relates  to  the  progress  of  his   religious
     activities, his relationship with his wife, and the  current  view  of
     him in Iran including the Warning Notice.  His  wife's  statement  for
     the most part is not new but adds a little about what the IAS is  said
     to have said, although that should have come  from  the  Appellant  to
     whom it was said.

 50. The third test in Ladd v Marshall relates to the apparent  credibility
     of the evidence.  We did not accept  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
     himself, the critical evidence, as apparently credible.  We have  said
     that he lied about what happened between him and  the  IAS,  not  just
     over the two documents allegedly handed  to  the  representative,  but
     also over whether he was not told that he could call witnesses and yet
     that his wife was said to be unnecessary as a  witness.   He  did  not
     raise these issues in his  written  evidence.   He  provided  a  third
     statement in which he added detail which he could not  have  forgotten
     about:  an assault at the immigration office  which  was  not  in  his
     first evidence. He contradicts his wife about when she  knew  that  he
     was a Jehovah's Witness;  it seems on her evidence to have been  known
     to everyone but her.  But it is impossible for him to promote her as a
     witness of truth without damning himself as a liar.  He is  silent  as
     to any discussion with Elders about what must have been a tense aspect
     of the marriage, if he is to be believed, given that he knew  or  must
     have known from any studies that there are rules preventing a  Witness
     marrying a non-Witness;  the history of his involvement is not one  of
     increasing commitment but of diminishing  involvement  and  one  which
     over the years never reached its climax in baptism;  he does not go to
     meetings now and has not been a frequent attender for  rather  longer.
     His knowledge of the distinctive tenets of the faith  was  slight  for
     all his studying, and his actual  adherence  to  any  marked  by  non-
     observance of rules in relation to marriage and indifference to one of
     the few he could remember, the prohibition on blood transfusions.

 51. We did not think that in the light of what the Adjudicator had had  to
     say about the absence of his wife as a witness that the asserted  cost
     and difficulties of her attendance were  persuasive  reasons  for  her
     absence, but since she had attended on an earlier occasion we did  not
     draw adverse inferences from her absence this time.  It is simply  the
     fact that through her absence she has not offered  the  support  which
     she might  have  done  to  her  husband's  evidence,  although  cross-
     examination about the timing of her knowledge of his religious change,
     her attitude  towards  it  and  the  effect  which  that  had  had  in
     diminishing his  enthusiasm  for  the  time-consuming  and  disruptive
     attendances could  have  proved  illuminating  without  advancing  his
     cause.  Her absence before the Special  Adjudicator  would  also  have
     called for investigation.  Any more that  she  had  to  say  would  be
     viewed critically in the light of our unfavourable assessment  of  his
     evidence.  There are significant differences  between  the  two  in  a
     number of areas, although she would have offered support to his  claim
     to have had an interest in the Jehovah's Witness faith.

 52. The evidence of Mr Davies is apparently credible in showing  that  the
     Appellant had at least an ostensible interest in the faith in 1999 and
     had done some studying.  But it also shows that little had happened in
     the eighteen months preceding the March 2002  statement  and  has  not
     been updated.   The  evidence  is  therefore  of  little  significance
     looking at the case now.   He  is  silent  about  how  he  judged  the
     genuineness of the Appellant in his first statement, and how his views
     stand with the Appellant's own evidence about the bar on  marriage  to
     those of different faiths.

 53. Mr Nassehi's evidence offers support for the ostensible interest which
     the Appellant had in the faith,  and  refers  without  any  supporting
     detail to his sincerity.  The third statement is  apparently  credible
     in showing that the Appellant had gone to meetings at  his  house  but
     that had stopped by March 2002, indeed following the earlier birth  of
     the second child.  Nothing further has been provided and in the  light
     of the Appellant's own evidence  as  to  his  lack  of  attendance  at
     meetings, it supports a considerable diminution of  whatever  interest
     he had had.  It is not significant in the context of this case.

 54. We did not find the statements  of  Mr  Laksari  apparently  credible;
     they were considerably over-egging whatever it was that the  Appellant
     himself had to say, and we are not surprised that Mr  Huffer  did  not
     wish to rely on them.  Even if apparently credible, they can hardly be
     said to be of potential significance for  the  case.   The  Mohammeds'
     letter also  struck  us  as  difficult  to  accept,  in  view  of  the
     contradictions between what they had to say about the wife's  attitude
     and what was said by Mr Davies and Mr Nassehi, and what the  Mohammeds
     had to say about his commitment contrasted with what those  other  two
     had to say as well.

 55. Mr Georgiou's  evidence  about  the  studying  in  Cyprus  is  not  of
     significance even if perhaps true to an extent;  we note  Mr  Huffer's
     submissions as to why the IAS might have not thought it  weighty.   We
     have already said that we do not accept as true the evidence which the
     friend gave as to what transpired between the Appellant  and  the  IAS
     and do not see a sound basis for treating him as more reliable when he
     refers, briefly, to being told in Iran to warn the  Appellant  against
     returning.  The Warning Notice, the timing  of  its  sending  and  the
     delay in drawing so allegedly conclusive a document to the Appellant's
     attention despite his regular phone calls, his explanation  for  that,
     the absence of the original which was sent by post, and  the  evidence
     of  the  CIPU  Report  about  the  ready  production  of  false  court
     documents, preclude it being seen in the  context  of  all  the  other
     evidence as anything other than unreliable, applying the  approach  of
     Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439, [2002] Imm AR 318.   The  letter  from
     the friend in Iran does not add to the picture and  does  not  justify
     being treated as apparently credible or significant.

 56. We have concluded that the evidence does not  satisfy  the  cumulative
     Ladd v Marshall tests.  Almost all  except  the  updated  position  in
     relation to his beliefs could have been available to the  Adjudicator.
     We do not regard the Appellant as having been truthful to us and  that
     reinforces the adverse conclusion which the Adjudicator reached.  Much
     of the new material which the Appellant says supports his  appeal  and
     justifies a remittal for the whole case to be examined afresh  is  not
     apparently credible in its own  right,  but  is  vague,  inconsistent,
     fails to deal with obvious questions, is  of  unexplained  source  and
     dubious value.  There is very little that would  be  of  significance.
     The comment of the Adjudicator that the Appellant had  shown  no  real
     interest in the Jehovah's Witness faith in Cyprus remains sound.  None
     of the material casts significant doubt on the Adjudicator's rejection
     of the Appellant's account of what happened to him in Iran in 1997.

 57. The subsequent interest in being a Jehovah's  Witness  in  the  United
     Kingdom, which was not before the Adjudicator in  the  way  the  later
     evidence portrays, might have led to a tempering of those comments  as
     a result of the statements from Mr Davies and  Mr  Nassehi.   However,
     those cannot now be seen as of significance, in view of the passage of
     time and the way in  which  the  ostensible  interest  has  diminished
     rather than progressed.  With that hindsight, it casts doubt upon  the
     reality of any interest which  they  may  then  have  perceived.   The
     evidence of the Appellant himself did not assist him in that regard.

 58. There is no sound evidence to support the claim that  whatever  modest
     interest he had in that faith in the United Kingdom continues, or that
     he would seek to continue it at any risk to himself were he  returned.
     We do not accept that the  later  material  from  Iran  is  apparently
     credible or significant.  None of the subsequent material is  said  to
     have been based on any additional information about his attendance  at
     meetings in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  later  material  reflects  a
     continuation of the position in 1997, which the  Adjudicator  did  not
     accept, which  conclusion  is  not  disturbed  by  evidence  of  later
     activities.   Nor  is  the  Appellant's  case   up   to   that   point
     significantly reinforced by any new material.   There  is  nothing  to
     suggest a new,  even  if  erroneous,  basis  upon  which  the  Iranian
     authorities would now perceive him as an apostate.

 59. We see nothing in this case which would  warrant  the  evidence  being
     received in the interests of  justice.   Rather,  it  illustrates  the
     dangers in gathering evidence after a  case  has  been  lost,  and  of
     unfairly blaming failure on what was a competent representative.
 60. This appeal is dismissed.  This case is reported as an illustration of
     the Tribunal's approach to fresh evidence  on  a  pre  9th  June  2003
     Adjudicator's determination.
















                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT
