
ar
                                                            JG (HIV-Kenya)
                          Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00190

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing  : 5 April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                12 July 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                              Mrs M E McGregor
                                Mr G F Sandal



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
Mr J. Jackson of Counsel, instructed by South West Law, for  the  appellant;
Mr P. Deller for the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is  a  national  of  Kenya.   She  appeals  against  the
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  N.J.  Osborne,  dismissing  his
      appeal against the decision giving directions  for  removal  following
      refusal to grant asylum.

2.    The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that  she  had  suffered
      persecution  at the  hands of the  Mungiki sect.  Her  husband  was  a
      member of a Mungiki family who had  converted  to   Christianity.  His
      family wrongly blamed the appellant for  his  conversion.  Members  of
      this sect had attempted to forcibly circumcise her and had killed  her
      husband. After she had moved back to her father's house they had raped
      both the appellant and her daughter, the latter died as a result.  She
      moved again to the house of a  friend  in  Nairobi  but  the   Mungiki
      traced her through her brother. They brutally assaulted her and forced
      her to promise to take her children back to her father-in-law.

3.    The appellant also claimed that return would  violate  her  Article  3
      right not to be subjected to ill-treatment, as she suffered from  HIV,
      herpes, syphilis and post-traumatic stress disorder.

4.    The appellant wholly rejected the appellant's account of  her  adverse
      experiences at the hands  of  the   Mungiki.  The  grounds  of  appeal
      challenge his adverse credibility findings but fail  in  our  view  to
      undermine  them.  The   Adjudicator   correctly   identified   serious
      inconsistencies in the appellant's account in relation to the date  on
      which she said the  Mungiki raped her,  and in relation to the date of
      the  final  incident  which  caused  her  to  flee  to  Kenya.     The
      Adjudicator also correctly identified inconsistencies in her  evidence
      as to whether she was visited by members of the  Mungiki in  May  2000
      before her father died and on what date she arrived in the UK. He  was
      also quite entitled to find implausible the following aspects  of  the
      appellant's account:  being saved from suicide by a  "Good  Samaritan"
      who within  twenty-four hours conveyed her to the UK; her  failure  to
      know when her husband converted to  Christianity; her account  of  the
      police taking no action when she reported the killing of her  husband;
      and her account of the Mungiki simply forcing her to promise  to  take
      her children back  to  their  father-in-law  rather  than  taking  the
      children there and then. The Adjudicator properly drew support for his
      adverse findings in respect of the  appellant's  claims  about  police
      inaction from the objective country materials, which described  active
      steps taken by the authorities  to crack down on the  Mungiki.  We  do
      not consider that the  BBC News article referred  to  in  the  grounds
      contraverted the Adjudicator's principal point  that  in  general  the
      authorities  did not simply do  nothing  in  response  to  reports  of
      serious crimes committed by the Mungiki.

5.    Mr Jackson sought to argue that the Adjudicator's  assessment  wrongly
      discounted the evidence of three medical experts  (doctors  Lilywhite,
      Dent and  Greenhouse)  each  of  whom  had  assessed  her  as  heavily
      traumatised as a result of past incidents.  The Adjudicator's  finding
      regarding the  PTSD diagnosis, he argued, improbably implied that  the
      appellant  had  'managed  to  deceive  not  one,  but  three   medical
      professionals'.   He  drew  our  attention   to   responses   to   the
      Adjudicator's determination by  Dr Lillywhite and Dr Greenhouse.

6.    With respect to Mr Jackson, these submissions seek to glean  too  much
      from the Adjudicator's comments on  Dr Lilywhite's  medical  evidence.
      They  represent that he assumed this doctor was wholly  uncritical  in
      his acceptance of what the appellant had told them. However, what  the
      Adjudicator actually said was that this doctor 'did not  carry  out  a
      forensic analysis of the credibility of what she said'. Having read Dr
      Lillywhite's further comments and considered also what  Drs  Dent  and
      Greenhouse have said, we are  not  persuaded  that  the  Adjudicator's
      essential point was unsound. Whatever evaluation they had conducted of
      the appellant's  evidence it was not one which subjected it to careful
      assessment in the light of the evidence as a  whole.  They  had  based
      their medical judgment  on  a  broad  acceptance  of  the  appellant's
      narrative. Furthermore, the principal matter the  Adjudicator  had  to
      assess was not whether, by virtue of some unfortunate  experiences  in
      Kenya, the appellant had been seriously traumatised, but, whether  the
      specific account of adverse experiences at the hands  of  the  Mungiki
      sect was credible.

7.    It is further submitted that the Adjudicator erred  in  first  finding
      the appellant's account  incredible  and  only  then  considering  the
      medical evidence. Mr Jackson highlighted the  Adjudicator's  statement
      at paragraph 27 that 'due to my above findings I  can  in  no  way  be
      satisfied how, or indeed, when the appellant  suffered the assault  or
      the circumstances  in which it was suffered'.  However,  in  our  view
      the Adjudicator was doing no more here than dealing sequentially  with
      submissions. At paragraph 9 the Adjudicator reminded  himself  of  his
      duty  'to consider the  evidence as a whole'.  We  are  not  persuaded
      that he in fact diverged from this approach.

8.    In relation to the medical  evidence  stating  that  injuries  to  the
      appellant's vagina  were  consistent  with  her  account  of   Mungiki
      attacks on her person, the Adjudicator plainly did  bear this in mind,
      and specified himself that: 'I further accept that  she  has  a  2  cm
      jagged scar in her vagina area which I am satisfied is consistent with
      a serious assault'.  Once again, we consider that in  the  context  of
      the evidence  as a whole he was entitled to conclude that he could not
      be satisfied with the appellant's account  of  the  circumstances   in
      which she suffered these injuries.

9.    Mr Jackson also submitted that the  Adjudicator   failed  to  consider
      whether the appellant's ability to give coherent evidence  might  have
      been  adversely affected by her  PTSD.  However, none of  the  doctors
      in the medical reports submitted in  this  case  identified  cognitive
      impairment at a level preventing the appellant from giving a  coherent
      account.

10.   As  regards  the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  the  demeanour  of  the
      appellant whose distress at the hearing was said to be evident, it  is
      true he did not refer in  his  determination  to  her  displaying  any
      distress.  That  is  perhaps  unsurprising  since   Adjudicators   who
      specialise in asylum appeals  are often required to  conduct  hearings
      in which a witness is  distressed  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent.
      However, as the written grounds themselves  recount,  the  Adjudicator
      asked the appellant to  compose  herself  on  a  number  of  occasions
      throughout the hearing. Accordingly we are satisfied he was  sensitive
      to the fact that the appellant was distressed to some extent and  took
      active steps to ensure this  did  not  prevent  her  giving  a  proper
      account of herself.

11.   He did  not  consider  her  degree  of  distress  in  giving  evidence
      demonstrated that her account of  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the
      Mungiki sect was true. We  see  nothing  unsustainable  about  such  a
      conclusion.

12.   We do not propose to address  each  and  every  point  raised  in  the
      extremely prolix grounds of appeal,  although  we  would  observe,  in
      relation to grounds 5.1.2 and 5.1.3,  that  the  Adjudicator  was  not
      obliged to accept the appellant's  explanations for  her  difficulties
      with dates.  As regards the complaint raised about  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment  that the appellant's purpose in coming to the UK   was  to
      obtain medical treatment, whether or not this assessment was sound, it
      remains that the appellant had not shown that she had  a  well-founded
      fear of the Mungiki.

13.   We do not consider that it  has  been  shown  that  the  Adjudicator's
      adverse credibility findings were unsustainable.

14.   It remains, however,  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  medical
      condition meant or would mean that return would cause serious harm  to
      her physical and moral integrity.

15.   Before addressing the  medical evidence  directly,  we  would  observe
      that, as  a  consequence  of  the  Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility
      findings, there  is  no  proper  basis  for  concluding  that  if  the
      appellant is returned to Kenya she  will be without family  support of
      some kind. On her own evidence she  had  left  her  children  in  good
      hands; that was sufficient to indicate that  she  would  herself  have
      some family or extended family  network to return to.

16.   That brings us  to  the  medical  evidence.   As  we  observed  to  Mr
      Jackson, the benchmark  for  how  the  appellate  authorities  are  to
      approach cases of persons who are  HIV positive has been  set  by  the
      Court of Appeal in N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 in two respects. Firstly  it
      defines  the correct legal  test,  that  the  person's  case  must  be
      extreme and exceptional. Secondly, it identifies by reference  to  the
      particular case of N, what level of illness  and  life  expectancy  is
      required to cross the threshold of Article 3.

17.   What is clear in this respect about the appellant's condition is  that
      it is much less serious  than  that  considered  in   N.    In  N  the
      appellant's CD4 count prior to commencement of treatment was  20.   In
      this case her  CD4 count  was  33.   In  N  life  expectancy  (without
      treatment) was assessed as less than twelve months. In this  case   Dr
      Gompels, on the basis of her initial (very low) CD4 count  of  33  and
      her viral load of  33,847  copies,  estimated  that  she  had  an  85%
      probability of  progressing  to  AIDS  in  three  years  and  a  97.9%
      probability of progressing to AIDS in six years time.  In addition  to
      being   HIV  positive  the  appellant  in  N  had  additional  medical
      complications. The appellant in this case had a history  of   syphilis
      but it is not suggested that she still has this  condition.  Otherwise
      she has an ongoing herpes virus and she also suffers  from  PTSD.   As
      sympathetic as we are to these difficulties  they  do  not  constitute
      serious ongoing conditions  and  they  do  not  identify  her  overall
      medical condition as extreme  or  exceptional.   The  only  additional
      factor cited by Mr Jackson was that the appellant has  an  allergy  to
      sulphur-based drugs. We will return to this factor in a moment.

18.   Bearing in mind that the appellant's illness was not  as  advanced  or
      as serious as that of N, we turn next to consider what  would  be  her
      situation on return to Kenya.

19.   Much space is devoted in the  grounds  to  highlighting  the  lack  of
      likelihood that the appellant would be able to obtain adequate medical
      treatment. In the UK the appellant was on combination therapy and  was
      also been prescribed nebulised pentamidine as  a  prophylaxis  against
      pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) an acute terminal illness,  which
      she is at risk of developing. She is prescribed nebulised penatamadine
      because she  is  allergic  to  the  normal  sulphur  drugs.  Professor
      Barnet's  and   Dr   Meadway's  expert  opinions   were   before   the
      Adjudicator. The former expert stated that without the prophylaxis the
      appellant was likely to develop PCP rapidly. The  latter  expert  said
      that the special nebuliser which is required to administer pentamidine
      would not be available in Kenya.

20.    The  Adjudicator  did  not  find  the  unavailability  of  a  special
      nebuliser  an  insuperable  problem.  He  considered  on   alternative
      treatment regime could be implemented.  Since  his  determination  was
      promulgated there has now been adduced to us further responses from Dr
      Gompels and  Dr Meadway. These make clear that the only alternative to
      pentamidine is Atovaguone 'which is exorbitantly expensive even by  UK
      standards' and within Africa is only available in South Africa in  any
      event.

21.   In the light of these additional responses we are prepared  to  accept
      that the Adjudicator was wrong to find that an alternative prophylaxis
      against PCP would be available.

22.   In relation to the availability of treatment for persons who  are  HIV
      positive generally, the Adjudicator was right to identify a number  of
      initiatives undertaken the Kenyan government to combat AIDS and  treat
      HIV and to describe its approach as 'serious and urgent'.  He was also
      correct to give weight to the fact that the Kenyan government  is  set
      to receive  179.4 million dollars from the United Nations Global  Fund
      to fight AIDS and other diseases in  the  next  five  years.  Equally,
      however, we accept that he was wrong  to  deduce  from  this  body  of
      information that anti-retroviral drugs are available  to  HIV-positive
      sufferers generally.  Mr Jackson's grounds cite figures which  suggest
      that only 32,000 of the 200,00 people  requiring   AVRs  will  benefit
      from the UN Global Fund.

23.   There is thus no certainty that the appellant would be able to  access
      appropriate  medical  treatment  within  the  context  of   public  of
      voluntary sector medical provisions.

24.   However, in considering the appellant's ability to access  appropriate
      treatment the Adjudicator also took account of the fact that  she  had
      not shown she would be unable  to  access  needed  treatment  to  some
      degree. At paragraph 33 he found it  "likely that she has  more  money
      available to  her than she has disclosed ... I am  not  satisfied  she
      would be unable to pay for necessary drugs in Kenya upon her  return".
      In the context of the evidence  as a whole we consider that  this  was
      an  entirely  sustainable  finding.  So  far  as  access   to   normal
      combination therapy in the form of AVRs, therefore, we  are  satisfied
      that the Adjudicator was entitled to conclude the appellant  would  in
      fact be able to obtain proper treatment.

25.   The only outstanding difficulty the appellant would  face  in  respect
      of available medical treatment, therefore, relates to the  prophylaxis
      she needs to prevent the onset of PCP.

26.   At this  point,  however,  we  consider  it  is  necessary  to  remind
      ourselves of the benchmarks set by the Court of Appeal in  N.   N  was
      considered to have a life  expectancy  of  less  than  twelve  months.
      Depressing though the prognoses of Drs Meadway, Gompel  and  Professor
      Burnet  are  on  the  assumption  that  no  prophylaxis    regime   is
      maintained, none suggest that this  appellant's   life  expectancy  in
      such circumstances would be similarly short.

27.   We come back, therefore, to this simple fact. The Court of  Appeal  in
      N did not consider that  her  circumstances  brought  her  within  the
      category of an  extreme  and  exceptional  case.  Notwithstanding  the
      commendable care taken by all the  medical  experts  who   have  given
      their valuable time to write reports and responses in this  case,  the
      medical evidence considered overall  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
      appellant's case falls within the extreme and exceptional category.

28.   Mr Jackson sought to argue that even  if  we  were  not  persuaded  to
      allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds, we should do so  on  Article  8
      grounds. However, we would once again return to the view of the  Court
      of Appeal in N that the facts of that case did not engage Article 8 in
      any specific way. We  accept  that  in  this  case  the  appellant  in
      addition to being HIV  positive,  suffers  from  PTSD.   However,  she
      failed to show that her psychological difficulties were related to her
      claimed fears of ill-treatment at the hands of the Mungiki sect and we
      see no basis in this case,  therefore,  for  considering  that  return
      would significantly aggravate her  PTSD  condition,  a  condition  for
      which  she  is  currently  being  treated  by  way  of  antidepressant
      medication.

29.   Even  considering  the  appellant's  physical  and  mental  conditions
      cumulatively, therefore, we are not satisfied that return would pose a
      serious threat to her physical and moral integrity so far as  to  give
      rise to a breach either of Article 3  or  her  right  to  respect  for
      private life under Article 8.

30.   Our  conclusion  is  that  although  the  Adjudicator's  determination
      contains some errors, these were not fundamental. Notwithstanding  the
      considerable body of additional further  evidence,  including  medical
      evidence, placed before the Tribunal, we have not been persuaded  that
      the Adjudicator was wrong to dismiss the appeal.





                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
