


           AB (Witness corroboration in asylum appeals) Somalia [2004] UKIAT
                                                                       00125



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                  Date heard:    4 May  2004

                              Date notified:     3 June 2004

                                   Before

                       DR H H STOREY (VICE PRESIDENT)
                               MR A G JEVANJEE
                              MR M G TAYLOR CBE


                                                               Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And


                                                                  Respondent

Representatives

Ms A Holmes for the appellant; Mr B Lams of  Counsel  instructed  by  Shehan
Pinidiya & Co Solicitors for the respondent.

                     DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr F E P Meadows,  allowing
the appeal of the respondent, a national of Somalia,  against  the  decision
giving directions for removal following refusal to grant  asylum.  To  avoid
confusion the respondent is hereafter referred to as the "claimant".


2. The Adjudicator accepted that the claimant was a  member  of  a  minority
clan, the Shansiya Banadari, and was therefore at real risk of  persecution.
The grounds of appeal argued that the Adjudicator failed  to  give  adequate
reasons.

3. The Adjudicator`s reasons were stated as follows:


      "10.1. I found the Appellant to be a credible witness.  I  also  found
      the Appellant witness credible.


      10.2. The Appellant's cousin Ahmed Bashir corroborated a great deal of
      the Appellant's evidence. Ahmed Bashir despite what Ms Shocker said in
      her submissions was able to mention the correct  number  of  siblings,
      which the Appellant had. He knew about the Appellant's father's death.
      He said that his own father died of natural causes which is  what  the
      Appellant had said. He  also  mentioned  his  uncle's  restaurant  and
      described the Appellant's house and the colour of the  front  room  in
      exactly the same way as the Appellant had done".


4. We have several difficulties with the Adjudicator's  reasons.  First  and
foremost, he failed to give any  reasons  that  related  to  the  claimant's
evidence as such or indeed to the witness's  evidence  as  such.  He  relied
simply on the fact that the  claimant  and  his  witness  corroborated  each
other's accounts. In our view that was an error on his  part.  If  A  and  B
concur in their evidence that does not without  more  prove  that  they  are
telling the truth, even under the lower standard of proof. It may be that  A
and B are telling  the  truth;  equally  it  may  be  they  are  lying.  The
Adjudicator should have identified something about the claimant's  evidence,
other than that it was corroborated, which made it creditworthy.

5. Secondly, and compounding this error, the Adjudicator failed  to  address
the respondent's  very  clear  challenges  to  the  claimant's  credibility,
challenges which had been raised in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  and
repeated in large part at the hearing.

6. One of these challenges was to the effect that  the  respondent  did  not
consider the claimant's account of his clan identity and  history  could  be
taken at  face  value,  since  information  relevant  to  his  alleged  clan
membership was available in the  public  domain  and  such  knowledge  could
easily be learnt in order to portray him as a clan member. Given the  nature
of this challenge, the Adjudicator should  have  specifically  addressed  it
and  indeed  should  also  have  addressed  whether  other  aspects  of  the
claimant's evidence, including the concurrence between the claimant and  his
witness, could be taken at face value rather  than  being  regarded  as  the
result of coaching. He should have said something to  indicate  why  he  did
not consider the claimant's (or his witness's) account was contrived.

 7. Another of  the  challenges  raised  by  the  respondent  was  that  the
claimant had not given a consistent or plausible account  of  what  happened
to his father's and uncle's restaurant business once the  Hawiye  were  said
to have taken over. On the one hand the claimant's  evidence  was  that  his
father continued to run his warehouse business and his  uncle  a  restaurant
business. On the other hand, his evidence was that they both had to work  in
those businesses "like slaves". Even if this  apparent  discrepancy  in  the
evidence was capable of resolution, it was essential for the Adjudicator  to
address it and state why he considered that the claimant  had  explained  it
satisfactorily.

8. A further difficulty was that the Adjudicator  did  not  explain  why  he
considered the witness was to be believed, notwithstanding  he  was  related
to the claimant. Obviously, being a relative does not prevent a person  from
giving truthful testimony, but such a person cannot be regarded as a  wholly
independent witness and, given the decisive weight  the  Adjudicator  sought
to attach to this man's evidence, it was incumbent on him to explain why  he
did not consider the family connection lessened the veracity of the  account
he gave. We are not helped by the Adjudicator`s failure to  clarify  whether
the witness was present during the appellant`s evidence: if the witness  had
not been present, the fact that his evidence accorded with  the  appellant`s
may have meant it carried more weight. It may be that  the  Adjudicator,  in
assessing the witness, attached weight to the documentary  evidence  showing
he had been granted refugee status,  although  in  the  absence  of  further
evidence that the grant was made on the basis of the witness being from  the
Shansiya tribe that may have added little. On all these  matters  we  simply
do not know what was in the Adjudicator`s mind.

 9. A final difficulty we have is that the  Adjudicator  in  paragraph  10.3
appeared to think it relevant to the risk the claimant had faced  and  would
face that  he  had  described  himself  at  one  point  as  "white-skinned".
However, in the asylum interview the claimant had said that a Hawiye  person
would not be able to tell his clan origin just by looking at him.

10. Mr Lams sought valiantly to persuade us that we  should  read  paragraph
10.2 as  cogent  and  sufficient  reasons  for  the  Adjudicator's  positive
credibility  findings.  However,  we  were  not  persuaded  by  any  of  his
submissions. His submissions did identify a number of reasons that may  have
been  in  the  mind  of  the  Adjudicator,  but  these  were  no  more  than
speculation. The fact is proper reasons were not given. We do  not  consider
that it can be implied from  the  Adjudicator's  earlier  rendition  of  the
evidence  that  he  carefully  weighed  all  the  relevant  matters.  As   a
consequence we consider that his principal findings of fact are unsafe.

11. We would add a comment on the  growing  practice  of  appellants  and/or
their representatives adducing letters granting refugee  status  to  someone
who is (or is said to be) a relative or  colleague.  All  too  often  it  is
assumed such letters magically prove that the person concerned  was  granted
refugee status on the basis he says he was. All too rarely are such  letters
accompanied by documents confirming  on  what  basis  the  person  concerned
actually claimed asylum or, if an appeal was involved,  on  what  basis  the
Adjudicator  allowed   that   person`s   appeal.   Since   such   additional
documentation should often be still available to the person concerned or  to
that person`s solicitors, Adjudicators should consider what weight they  can
attach  to  refugee  grant  letters  when  they  are  not   accompanied   by
confirmatory documents of this kind.

12. For the above reasons and in accordance with the provisions of  Rule  23
of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000, the appeal  is
allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  be  heard  by  an  Adjudicator
other than Mr F E P Meadows.

                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT


