
H-KM/DU-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 21 September 2004       |        |AG (Returnees - deserters - |
|                           |        |prison conditions) Rwanda CG|
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00289          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28th October 2004                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane - Vice President                                      |
|Ms D K Gill - Vice President                                      |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr B. Naumann, Counsel, instructed  by  Messrs
                  Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  P  Deller,  Senior  Home  Office   Presenting
            Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Rwanda, appeals with  permission  against
    the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  K  Robb,  sitting  at  Taylor
    House, in which he dismissed on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  the
    Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to  give
    directions for the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

2.    As the grounds of appeal acknowledge, the Adjudicator has made  clear
    findings about what aspects of the Appellant's case  he  accepted,  and
    what he did not.  At paragraphs 11 to  23  of  the  determination,  the
    Adjudicator  set  out  his  findings  of  credibility  and  fact.   The
    Adjudicator believed there to  be  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant had joined the Rwandan Patriotic Army in,  it  would  appear,
    1990, when the Appellant would have been about 12 years old.  Prior  to
    that time, he had been bearing arms in Uganda.  The Appellant served in
    the Rwandan armed forces from that time until his  departure  from  the
    country in 2003.  The Adjudicator accepted that the  Appellant  "wished
    to leave the Rwandan army and that he has expressed this desire by  his
    departure from  the  country"  (paragraph  20  of  the  determination).
    Although the Adjudicator does not expressly say so, it  is  plain  from
    his findings that the Appellant has deserted the Rwandan  army.   There
    is no suggestion that he had  any  express  or  implied  permission  to
    remove himself from its service.

3.     That  is  the  extent  of  the  Adjudicator's  positive  credibility
    findings.  He expressly rejected the Appellant's assertion to have been
    ill-treated by the Rwandan authorities because he was accused  in  1999
    and, again, in 2003, of spying for  the  Ugandans.   The  Adjudicator's
    determination contains legally sustainable reasons why the  Adjudicator
    found these parts of the Appellant's account to lack credibility.

4.    The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal do  not  take  issue  with  the
    Adjudicator's findings  of  fact.   They  contend,  however,  that  the
    Adjudicator, having in effect found the  Appellant  to  be  a  military
    deserter, should  have  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    objective evidence discloses a  real  risk  that  the  Appellant  would
    suffer treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the  ECHR,  if  returned  to
    Rwanda.

5.    The  skeleton  argument  submitted  by  the  Appellant's  instructing
    solicitors in connection with the Tribunal  hearing  asserts  that  the
    Adjudicator was wrong to reject the Appellant's claim to have been ill-
    treated by the Rwandan authorities  in  1999  and  2003  and  that  the
    Appellant is entitled to succeed by reference to the Refugee Convention
    on  the  grounds  that  he  would  suffer   disproportionately   severe
    punishment for desertion on account of an  imputed  political  opinion,
    namely, his supposed sympathies for the Ugandan authorities.

6.    At the Tribunal hearing, Mr Naumann did not seek permission to  amend
    the grounds of appeal.  Nor did he seek to rely upon  so  much  of  the
    skeleton argument as relates to the  matters  to  which  we  have  just
    referred.  Accordingly, the appeal proceeded  before  the  Tribunal  by
    reference to the Adjudicator's findings of fact, the issue  before  the
    Tribunal being whether, on  those  findings,  the  Appellant  would  be
    reasonably likely to suffer Article 3 ill-treatment if returned.

7.    At paragraph 21 of the determination, the Adjudicator considered risk
    on return.  In doing so, he had regard to the Home Office  CIPU  Report
    on Rwanda (October 2003) and the  British-Danish  Fact-Finding  Mission
    Report 2002.   Those  materials  persuaded  the  Adjudicator  that  the
    Appellant "will not be treated any different (sic)  from  other  asylum
    seekers being returned.  He will be asked why he  has  been  absent  so
    long but an explanation of having been seeking asylum appears to be  an
    acceptable explanation.  There was no evidence placed  before  me  that
    the Appellant is now sought in respect of his departure.  I  find  that
    the Appellant is not reasonably likely to be apprehended on his  return
    because of his desertion from the army".

8.    In submitting on behalf of the Appellant  that  the  Adjudicator  has
    misapplied the objective evidence, Mr Naumann relied in particular upon
    paragraph 415 of the British-Danish Report,  the  relevant  portion  of
    which reads as follows:-

       "415.      In the event of a Rwandan having a supervised  return  to
            the country or returning to the country without the appropriate
            travel documentation Rutikanga [Chief Security Officer,  Rwanda
            Airport Authorities] stated that additional questions would  be
            asked.   Firstly,  the  authorities  would  wish   to   satisfy
            themselves that the returning  individual  is  not  wanted  for
            suspected involvement in the genocide or any other crime".


9.    Paragraph 416 tells us that "all  requests  for  new  or  replacement
    passports submitted outside the country are referred to the authorities
    in Rwanda where records are checked".  Mr Naumann accordingly submitted
    that if, as he accepted was the case, the Appellant, if removed,  would
    return with some form of travel documentation that had been obtained on
    his behalf by the United Kingdom government  in  conjunction  with  the
    Rwandan Embassy in London, this in itself would be sufficient to  cause
    checks to be made, as a result of which the Appellant's desertion  from
    the army would be discovered.

10.   Leaving aside the issue of the Appellant's desertion from the Rwandan
    army, it is plain from the objective  evidence  that  returning  failed
    asylum seekers to Rwanda are not as such  at  any  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment.  Paragraph 438 of  the  British-Danish  Report  notes  Human
    Rights Watch as having stated in April 2000 "that government  officials
    and leaders of the RPF have for some time shown their displeasure  with
    the flight of  Rwandans  from  the  country,  particularly  when  those
    fleeing are prominent or important politicians,  journalists,  soldiers
    or former soldiers.  In some cases those who have  assisted  others  to
    flee are being threatened, harassed or imprisoned".  There is, however,
    nothing in the Report to indicate that returning failed asylum  seekers
    were, even in 2000, at real risk of serious harm.  In any event, by the
    time of the compilation of the Report  in  2002,  the  evidence  showed
    firmly that this category would not be at risk.  At paragraph  417,  we
    find a Western embassy in Kigali  expressing "a strong view that it was
    safe for the overwhelming majority of Rwandans outside the  country  to
    return home.  The source suggested the number  of  Rwandans  -  whether
    inside or outside the country - who are at risk, is minimal 'maybe just
    5,000 including all Category One g�nocidaires'.   Whilst  acknowledging
    there was no scientific basis to this figure the source  stressed  that
    the intention was to  illustrate  the  very  small  proportion  of  the
    population facing a significant risk in a country of eight million".

11.    Paragraph  419  records  the  same  source  as  observing  that  the
    "Government of Rwanda is active in encouraging the return of  nationals
    residing  in  neighbouring  countries.   The  embassy  summed  up   the
    government's message to its citizens outside the  country  as  'if  you
    want to come home we will help you'.  It was considered that this offer
    would apply to all but a very tiny group of Rwandans such as the former
    king, and that all returnees are provided with  a  modest  resettlement
    package to assist their reintegration into society".

12.   At paragraph 422 we find a western embassy source as  recalling  that
    many Rwandans who had returned from the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    "said they would have returned much earlier had they been aware of  the
    situation.  Many of these people had believed  that  the  RPF  murdered
    everyone when they took power and the country would  remain  unsafe  as
    long  as  they  were  in  control.   After   six   months   living   in
    rehabilitation camps  these  people  are  now  living  in  villages  in
    Rwanda."

13.   Captain Rutikanga is quoted at paragraph 427 as stating that "even if
    the authorities are aware  that  a  returning  individual  has  claimed
    asylum whilst outside Rwanda this will not result in them being treated
    any differently to others returning to the country  after  a  prolonged
    period.       He acknowledged that for some, the motivation for seeking
    asylum  overseas  is  purely  economic.   He  confirmed  that  innocent
    Rwandans who went abroad to 'chance their luck'  would  be  treated  no
    differently to nationals who had been abroad for  work  or  study.   He
    added that those who departed illegally or have other cases  to  answer
    will answer the cases and then be integrated into society".

14.   This,  then,  is  the  clear  picture  that  emerges  in  respect  of
    "ordinary" returning failed asylum seekers  to  Rwanda.   There  is  no
    documentary evidence to which  the  Tribunal  has  been  referred  that
    refutes the  findings  of  the  British-Danish  Report.   We  must  now
    consider whether the Appellant's desertion from the army is such as  to
    place him at real risk on return.

15.   As the Tribunal has already observed, the Adjudicator at paragraph 21
    of the determination did not consider it  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would be apprehended on his return because of  his  desertion
    from the army.  With respect to the Adjudicator, he gives no reason why
    he reached this view and the Tribunal finds that  the  evidence  before
    him compels the contrary conclusion.  Paragraph  415  of  the  British-
    Danish Report states that, compared with a properly documented  Rwandan
    national, those  without  appropriate  travel  documentation  or  those
    "having  a  supervised  return"  will  be   subjected   to   additional
    questioning at Kigali Airport.  That questioning will  be  intended  to
    ascertain whether the returnee is wanted "for suspected involvement  in
    the genocide or any other crime".  Desertion from the armed forces  is,
    plainly, likely to be regarded by the Rwandan  authorities  as  falling
    within the category of "crime".  Paragraph 5.77 of the April 2004  CIPU
    Report on Rwanda (repeating material contained in earlier CIPU Reports)
    states  that  "Desertion  is  punishable  by  2  months'  to  2  years'
    imprisonment in peacetime".  Additional penalties  may  be  imposed  in
    "aggravated circumstances" but there is no evidence to show that  these
    apply in the present case.  The Tribunal agrees with Mr Naumann that it
    is reasonably likely the Rwandan authorities will  be  alerted  to  the
    fact that the Appellant is a deserter, when checks on him are  made  in
    connection with the issuing to him in the United Kingdom of  a  Rwandan
    passport or other appropriate travel documentation.  In any event, even
    if the Appellant makes  his  way  through  the  airport  without  being
    apprehended, it is reasonably likely that he will subsequently be found
    to be a deserter.

16.   Desertion from the armed  forces  of  any  nation  is  without  doubt
    something that the authorities of that nation are entitled to regard as
    sufficiently serious to attract a  term  of  imprisonment.   It  cannot
    possibly be argued (nor did Mr Naumann  attempt  to  do  so)  that  the
    imposition upon the Appellant of a sentence of imprisonment of anything
    between two months and two years is so  disproportionate,  relative  to
    the offence of desertion, as to be regarded  as  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

17.   The Appellant's case, however, rests upon the assertion  that  prison
    conditions in Rwanda are so grave  as  to  amount  to  a  violation  of
    Article 3.

18.   There is no suggestion that, if proceedings were to be taken  against
    the Appellant in connection with his desertion, these would take  place
    anywhere than in a Military Court.  Paragraph 348 of the British-Danish
    Report records the National Human  Rights  Commission  as  being  "very
    happy in the way that Military Courts are run... that the  courts  were
    very well organised, set a very good standard for human rights and also
    staff undertook some human rights training.  It was  also  stated  that
    Military Courts were very efficient in providing a verdict within eight
    days of the hearing".  Paragraph 349 cites Human Rights Watch as having
    reported that the military  justice  system  in  Rwanda  has  "received
    substantial support from foreign donors like the United States and  the
    United Kingdom".

19.   Prison conditions in Rwanda are covered by paragraphs 5.65 to 5.74 of
    the CIPU Report, Section 1c of the US State Department Report  of  2003
    and paragraphs 350 to 386 of the British-Danish Report.  The  US  State
    Department Report for 2003, in common with  previous  years,  describes
    prison conditions in Rwanda as "harsh and life-threatening".  According
    to paragraph 357 of the British-Danish  Report  this  situation  arises
    from "chronic overcrowding, extremely poor sanitary  conditions  and  a
    lack of adequate food or medical treatment".   There  is,  however,  no
    evidence to show that  there  is  any  widespread  practice  of  active
    physical  ill-treatment  of  prisoners  by  the  Rwandan   authorities.
    Paragraph 5.73 of  the  CIPU  Report  states  that  the  British-Danish
    delegation received information from  three  sources,  suggesting  that
    torture no longer occurred within national prisons. This represented  a
    change from what a Danish-based NGO had found in 2000.

20.   The fact  that  the  US  State  Department  Report  describes  prison
    conditions in Rwanda as "life-threatening" is plainly a matter to which
    the Tribunal must have regard, in assessing whether the Appellant would
    be  subjected  to  Article  3  ill-treatment.   The  fact   that   this
    description is applied to prison conditions in the Report is,  however,
    not determinative of the issue.  All three of the  documentary  sources
    to which we have specifically referred are in agreement that the  worst
    prison conditions in Rwanda are (or were) to  be  found  in  "Cachots",
    which are local detention facilities designed to hold people on remand,
    but which have been used to hold some people for  much  longer  periods
    (5.74 of the CIPU Report).  Whilst, as we  have  stated,  there  is  no
    evidence of any widespread  active  ill-treatment  within  the  Rwandan
    prison system, paragraph 5.74 notes that "there was also evidence  that
    torture, particularly in the form of beatings following arrest,  occurs
    in the Cachots".  Paragraph 374 of the British-Danish  Report  observes
    that those held in Cachots are not provided with food, with the  result
    that prisoners must rely upon families and friends for sustenance.

21.   It  is  therefore  of  particular  significance  that  the  US  State
    Department  Report  for  2003  records  that  "during  the  year,   the
    government shut down the Cachots (local detention centers) in  all  but
    two provinces in the country, which were considered to have  the  worst
    conditions".  Whilst the Report notes that the  resulting  transfer  of
    prisoners to other prisons exacerbated prison  overcrowding  elsewhere,
    the government have begun work on new  prison  construction.  Paragraph
    5.72 of the CIPU Report observes that IRIN reported in March 2004  that
    "at least 4,500 common law prisoners had been pardoned and released  in
    an attempt to  decongest  the  prisons.  Those  released  included  the
    elderly and the sick as well as those who had  been  in  prison  longer
    than the sentences they could face."

22.   It is also significant  that,  as  a  person  who  is  likely  to  be
    proceeded against in  a  Military  Court,  where  justice  is  speedily
    dispensed, the Appellant is in  any  event  unlikely  to  find  himself
    detained at all or at least for any significant period in  one  of  the
    few remaining Cachots.  Indeed, even after  conviction,  it  is  by  no
    means likely that he would find himself in a civilian prison.  Both  Mr
    Naumann and Mr Deller acknowledged that there is a dearth  of  evidence
    on this issue.  We have nevertheless approached the matter on the basis
    that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant would find himself in a
    civilian prison.

23.   The closing of most of the  Cachots  during  2003  is  a  significant
    development in any assessment of whether, as a general matter, the type
    of prison conditions likely to be experienced by  the  Appellant  would
    violate Article 3 of the ECHR.  It is also, however,  of  note  that  -
    even prior to the closure of  the  Cachots  -  there  was  in  fact  no
    consensus  that  Rwandan  prison  conditions   were   life-threatening.
    Paragraph 360 of the British-Danish Report quotes a source described as
    "an  informed  expatriate  in  Kigali"  as  expressing  the  view  that
    conditions vary greatly between different prisons and that, in  summing
    up conditions in Rwandan prisons, the  source  "did  not  consider  the
    conditions to be life-threatening".   Paragraph  361  observes  that  a
    prominent intellectual in Kigali  "indicated  to  the  delegation  that
    overcrowding was not as much of a problem now as it had been  in  1994-
    96.  The person in question had been in prison for five  years  between
    1994 and 1999".  That source "described physical conditions in  prisons
    [as] harsh, but they vary from prison to prison".

24.   If, as a general matter, conditions in Rwandan prisons were so bad as
    to  reach  the  high  threshold  required  for  Article  3,  one  might
    reasonably assume that inmates would  go  to  considerable  lengths  to
    avoid them, if possible.  It is, accordingly, noteworthy that paragraph
    362 of the Report quotes a United Nations source in Kigali as  pointing
    out that "there is no violence and few security personnel"  in  Rwandan
    prisons and that a United Nations development programme  representative
    visiting the Gitarama Central Prison observed that "a piece  of  string
    was tied across the entrance; however,  nobody  attempted  to  escape".
    Paragraph  362  concludes  by  referring  to  a  representative  of  an
    international human rights organisation in Kigali  as  explaining  that
    the "relaxed security precautions in Rwandan prisons" were due  to  the
    fact that Rwandan society is "very transparent and small" and that  any
    prisoner who escaped would be in serious trouble  outside  the  prison.
    At paragraph 367, a source is quoted  as  stating  that  "escapes  from
    Gitarama Central Prison occur at a rate of  about  one  a  month,  with
    escapees being punished by being placed in isolation in the Cachot  for
    up to a week, thereafter they are subjected to increased  supervision".
    Despite references to the local population being hostile to an escapee,
    the overall picture that emerges is one of general acceptance of prison
    conditions in "ordinary" prisons.  With the subsequent closure  of  the
    Cachots, there is no longer any realistic prospect of  a  person  being
    placed in such an institution as punishment for escaping.

25.   Finally, the US State Department Report observes that in 2003 "unlike
    in the previous year, prison deaths did not result from the  cumulative
    effects of severe overcrowding".  The connection between this fact  and
    the closure of the vast majority of Cachots is, in the Tribunal's view,
    inescapable.

   26. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that:-


    (a) a failed asylum seeker is not as such at real risk upon  return  to
              Rwanda;

    (b)     the  Appellant,  as  a  deserter  from  the  Rwandan  army,  is
         reasonably likely to be identified as such upon return;


    (c)    he will be proceeded against for the offence of desertion in the
         Military Courts;


    (d)    any punishment he is  likely  to  receive  for  the  offence  of
         desertion will not be disproportionate;


    (e)    conditions in Rwandan prisons are in  general  not  such  as  to
         violate Article 3 of the ECHR; and


    (f)    as a 26 year old young man with no identified medical  problems,
         there is nothing in his own circumstances to show  that  he  would
         suffer Article 3 ill-treatment by reason of being imprisoned.


27.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.


                                                                    P R LANE
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                        Approved for electronic distribution
