

                MM and others(Out of time appeals) Burundi * [2004]
UKIAT 00182
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 14th May 2004
                                 Date Determination notified:  7th July 2004


                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)


Between:






                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                                     and





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                                     and





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances

For the Appellants:          Mr K McGuire, instructed by Moss Beachley
Mullem &
                       Coleman (MM)
                       Ms S Solomon, instructed by Parker Bird Solicitors
(CN)
                       Mr R Solomon, instructed by Hoshi & Co Solicitors
(MG)
For the Respondent:          Mr A Hutton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction


  1. These  are  three  appeals  which  raise  similar  issues  as  to  the
     jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal  to  hear  appeals  from  decisions  of
     Adjudicators on what are  sometimes,  but  not  always  aptly,  called
     "preliminary  issues".   Each  case  involves  the  decision  by   the
     Adjudicator that  an  appeal  from  an  immigration  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State was out of  time  under  the  Rules  and  that  the
     discretionary power to extend time should  not  be  exercised  in  the
     Appellant's favour.  These cases are concerned, as we  shall  explain,
     with the Immigration and Asylum Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2003,  in
     force on 1st April 2003 subject to transitional provision.  There  was
     an issue as to whether it was those  Rules  or  the  predecessor  2000
     Rules which applied to the appeal of MG.

  2. The general issue is whether those are appealable decisions within the
     scope of section 101 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
     2002 and the 2003 Rules:  must they be "determinations"  and,  if  so,
     are they "determinations"?


The Facts



MM


  3. The Adjudicator, Mr J R Aitken, decided on 23rd December 2003 that the
     Notice of Appeal had been given  out  of  time.   The  Respondent  had
     contended in  writing  that  it  was  too  late  and  the  Appellant's
     solicitors had failed to persuade the Adjudicator otherwise  in  their
     written response.  The Adjudicator also said that they  had  given  no
     reason why time should be extended.  So, under Rule  10  of  the  2003
     Rules, he decided that the appeal was  out  of  time  and  refused  to
     extend time. Leave to appeal was granted and the grant of leave raised
     the question of whether there was jurisdiction to hear an appeal  from
     such a decision.  It was conceded before us, as was evident  from  the
     papers before us, that the appeal had in fact been lodged within  time
     and that the Secretary of State and Adjudicator had counted time  from
     the wrong start date, taking the date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     refusal letter rather than the date of its receipt.
CN

  4. The Adjudicator, Mr Poole, decided  on  20th  October  2003  that  the
     appeal was out of time and that there were no  reasons  for  extending
     time.  It was not in dispute that the appeal was out of time by  about
     five weeks.  The complaint was that the Adjudicator  had  ignored  the
     reasons provided for an extension of time under the Rules and ought to
     have  found  that  the  explanation   satisfied   him   that   special
     circumstances made it unjust not to extend time.  This was  reinforced
     with new evidence before us.  The grant of leave to appeal raised  the
     jurisdiction issue but did not suggest that it should  be  dealt  with
     separately from the merits of the extension of time  if  the  Tribunal
     had jurisdiction.  We extended time for her appeal to us.


MG


  5. The Adjudicator, Ms C Jarvis, in a decision dated 2nd July  2003  held
     that the appeal was out of time and that there were no special reasons
     for extending time.  It was not at  issue  but  that  the  appeal  was
     submitted late;  it was said that the Adjudicator had  overlooked  the
     reasons given for seeking  an  extension  of  time.   The  Adjudicator
     rightly rejected the Secretary of State's start date for  the  running
     of time because on the documents before her it was probable  that  the
     relevant decision was made on 26th January 2001.   Before  us,  it  is
     clear that that was so and service was effected on  the  28th  January
     2001.  The Notice of Appeal was lodged on 20th February 2001 with  the
     Secretary of State as the Rules require  and  not  at  the  IAA,  with
     certain consequences which follow all too commonly.  A letter  of  the
     same date explained why the appeal was late;  it  was  sent  with  the
     Notice of Appeal to the Home Office.

  6. The appeal came on for hearing on 23rd June 2003.  It had been sent to
     the IAA by the Secretary of State on 1st May 2003,  alleging,  on  any
     view incorrectly, that the appeal was a year out of date.   Meanwhile,
     the Appellant had changed  address  and  solicitors  on  a  number  of
     occasions; they had each kept the Secretary of State informed of those
     changes but not the IAA.  This is not uncommon  either  for  practical
     reasons;  the Secretary of State has the file until it  is  passed  to
     the IAA;  it is the Secretary of State who needs  to  correspond  with
     the Appellant up to that date and there is no file or  file  reference
     at the IAA with which any letter indicating any change of  address  or
     of solicitor can be associated. It is exceedingly  difficult  to  link
     that sort of unreferenced correspondence to a file when it  comes  in,
     because of the number of files and letters.

  7. The last change of address and of solicitor occurred before  the  file
     was sent to the IAA.  Even if the Appellant had sent those details  to
     the IAA, it is very unlikely that the  IAA  would  have  retained  the
     details, in those circumstances.  If the notifications had  been  sent
     to the IAA making it clear that an appeal had been lodged, bearing the
     Home Office reference number, and if it was  clear  from  IAA  records
     (IRIS) that the appeal papers had not yet been forwarded to the IAA by
     the Home Office, the IAA would routinely have sent the letter  to  the
     Home Office for it to update its file, so that  when  the  appeal  was
     sent to the IAA by the Home Office,  it  would  appear  on  the  newly
     received file.  The Appellant is informed that that has been done  and
     that the appeal is still at the Home Office.  No copy or record of the
     Appellant's letter is kept by the IAA.  Accordingly,  the  ability  of
     the IAA to notify Appellants correctly of the date and  place  of  the
     hearing of their appeals, is critically dependant on the  Home  Office
     forwarding the complete file to the IAA.

  8. From the files before us, it appears probable that the notification of
     changes of solicitors and addresses  were  not  forward  by  the  Home
     Office to the IAA and it is for that reason that the Appellant was not
     represented before the Adjudicator;  notice was sent to solicitors who
     had ceased acting more than a year previously and had had  no  contact
     therefore with the Appellant.

  9.  Although  the  Appellant  did  not  comply  with  the  Rules  as   to
     notification of changes of address to the IAA, compliance  would  have
     made no difference to what the IAA did, because none  of  the  changes
     occurred after the file had been received from the  Home  Office,  and
     the IAA would have simply reacted to any notifications received before
     that event by sending them to the Home Office.  Direct notification to
     the Home Office alone simply reflected what would have  been  achieved
     at best by notification to the IAA at any stage up to its  receipt  of
     the file.

 10. It also seems to us probable  that  the  letter  which  contained  the
     explanation as to why the Notice of Appeal was out  of  time  was  not
     forwarded to the IAA by the Secretary of State  or,  if  so,  was  not
     linked to the file and was therefore not seen by the Adjudicator.   We
     are sure that she would have referred to it, had she had it.  Briefly,
     the Appellant's accommodation had burnt down on 20th January 2001,  he
     had been made homeless, the property was boarded up and it was a while
     before  he  received  the  refusal  letter.   Had  she  received  that
     explanation and accepted it, it would have persuaded  the  Adjudicator
     to extend time.  There was no reason not to accept it and in the light
     of the Appellant's later endeavours to keep in touch, we would  accept
     it and extend time if we have  jurisdiction  to  do  so.   Indeed,  Mr
     Hutton  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  accepted  that  if   we   had
     jurisdiction to do so, we should allow  the  appeal,  extend  time  to
     appeal and remit the case.

 11. The additional issue in this case was whether the  2003  or  the  2000
     Rules applied.


The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002


 12. Sections 101, 102 and 103 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
     Act 2002 state in so far as relevant:

           "101(1)     A party to an appeal to an adjudicator under section
                 82 or 83 may, with the permission of the Immigration Appeal
                 Tribunal, appeal to the Tribunal against the  adjudicator's
                 determination on a point of law.


           102(1)      On an  appeal  under  section  101  the  Immigration
                 Appeal Tribunal may -


                 (a)   Affirm the adjudicator's decision
                 (b)   Make any decision which the  adjudicator  could  have
                       made ...
                 (c)   In reaching their decision on an appeal under section
                       101 the Tribunal may ...


           103(1)      Where the Immigration Appeal Tribunal determines  an
                 appeal under section 101 a party to the appeal may bring  a
                 further appeal on a point of law -


                 (a)   Where the original decision of  the  adjudicator  was
                       made in Scotland, to the Court of Session, or...


              (3) The remittal of an appeal to  an  adjudicator...is  not  a
                 determination of the appeal for the purposes (of the Act)."
                  (Our underlining.)


The 2003 Rules




           "10(1)      Where a  notice  of  appeal  is  given  outside  the
                 applicable time limit in rule 7, the appellant must -


                 (a)   state in the notice of appeal his reasons for failing
                       to give the notice within that period, and


                 (b)   attach to the notice of appeal any  written  evidence
                       upon which he relies in support of those reasons.


              (2) Where the respondent receives a notice of  appeal  outside
                 the applicable time limit, he may treat the notice as if it
                 had been given in time, if  satisfied  that  by  reason  of
                 special circumstances it would be unjust not to do so."


 13. Provision is made for the  filing  of  evidence  in  relation  to  the
     timeliness of an appeal and any extension of time.  Rule 10 continues:




           "10(6)      If the appellant files evidence under paragraph (4),
                 an adjudicator must decide whether the notice of appeal was
                 given in time.


             (7) Where the notice of appeal was  given  out  of  time,  the
                 adjudicator may extend the time for appealing if  satisfied
                 that by reason of special circumstances it would be  unjust
                 not to do so.


                (8)    The adjudicator must decide the issues in  paragraph
           (6) and (7) -
                  (a)  without a hearing; and
                 (b)   on the basis of the documents filed by the respondent
                       and any written evidence filed by the appellant.


             (9)  The  appellate  authority  must  serve  notice   of   the
                 adjudicator's decision on the parties."

 14. There are provisions requiring appeals to be considered at  a  hearing
     except for circumstances where it lapses or is treated as abandoned or
     withdrawn.

 15. Part 3 deals with appeals to the Tribunal. Rule 14 (1) provides:

           "14(1)      This Part applies to appeals to  the  Tribunal  from
                 the determination of an adjudicator."

 16. The same word "determination" appears in the definition of "appellant"
     in Rule 15 as one who appeals against a "determination" as the subject
     matter of the appeal, and in Rule 16 as the document, service of which
     starts time for the  appeal  running.   Rule  17  appears  to  draw  a
     distinction between  the  "decision"  and  the  "determination";   the
     latter is where the alleged errors of law are to be found, yet  it  is
     the former which must have been affected by those errors.   The  Rules
     governing the Tribunal use "determination" to cover the decision on an
     application to appeal and the decision on  that  appeal.   It  is  the
     "determination" which in turn leads to the  right  of  appeal  to  the
     Court of Appeal.  Rule  45  provides  for  appeals  to  be  determined
     without a hearing in certain circumstances.

 17. It is however a "decision" which is made  to  grant  or  refuse  bail.
     Rule 49, which deals with the burden of proof and cannot apply only to
     the Secretary of State's decision, refers to  an  appeal  against  the
     relevant decision.  Rule 53 covers the giving of determinations:

           "53(1)      This  rule  applies  where  an  adjudicator  or  the
                 Tribunal  determines  an  appeal  or  an  application   for
                 permission to appeal under any of Parts 2, 3 or 4 of  these
                 Rules.


              (2) The appellate authority must record the  decision  of  the
                 adjudicator or the Tribunal and the reasons for it.


                  (3)  Unless a  rule  provides  otherwise,  the  appellate
           authority must serve on -
                  (a)  every party; and
                  (b)  any representative acting for a party,


                 a written determination  containing  the  decision  of  the
                 adjudicator or the Tribunal and the reasons for it."

 18. It is important to note that there is no definition of "determination"
     in either the Rules or in the Act.  This contrasts with  the  position
     under the 2000 Rules  in  which  Rule  2  defined  "determination"  as
     meaning the "decision of the Appellate Authority to allow  or  dismiss
     an appeal and the reasons for that decision".


Earlier Tribunal decisions


 19. The impact of that definition of "determination" in the 2000 Rules was
     considered in the Tribunal  decision  in  B  (Zimbabwe)  [2004]  UKIAT
     00076, notified on 23rd April 2004.  That concerned  an  appeal  which
     was lodged well out of time  and  where  the  Adjudicator  decided  in
     consequence that there was no valid appeal before her.   As  with  the
     decisions here, the Adjudicator had not dealt with the merits  of  the
     appeal at all and had simply declined to extend time.  In paragraph 8,
     the Tribunal said:


           "8.   ... It is common ground, as we understand it, between  the
                 parties, that if  that  is  in  truth  a  determination  as
                 defined by Rule 2 or as intended by the relevant provisions
                 of the 1999  Act,  then  it  would  amount  to  an  implied
                 dismissal of the Appellant's appeal and would carry a right
                 of appeal (subject, again, to requirements as to notice and
                 time) to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  If on the  other
                 hand, the document signed  by  the  Adjudicator  is  not  a
                 determination as defined, it is difficult to see that there
                 could be a right of appeal to this Tribunal."

 20. It pointed out that there were a number of types of decision  made  by
     the Tribunal which were  treated  as  "determinations"  under  earlier
     Rules.  It referred to the policy which underlay the 1999  Immigration
     and Asylum Act of discouraging late notices of appeal which would have
     the effect of suspending removal.

 21. It concluded in paragraph 12:

           "12.   ...  if  an  Adjudicator  decides  that   there   is   no
                 jurisdiction to hear an appeal for some reason  other  than
                 time, then it is right that that decision should be subject
                 to  examination  and  re-determination  by  the   Tribunal,
                 because what the Adjudicator may have done is to decline to
                 hear an appeal which was in fact valid and  pending  before
                 him.  In the present case, unless the  Adjudicator  decides
                 to exercise an inclusionary discretion in order to hear  an
                 appeal which at its inception is invalid, then there is  no
                 appeal before the Adjudicator."

 22. So it concluded that it had no jurisdiction in that case and that  any
     challenge to that decision of  the  Adjudicator  had  to  be  made  by
     Judicial Review, as it was not a "determination".   But  the  Tribunal
     made it clear that it was reaching a view only on the 1999 Act and the
     2000 Rules, and  not  on  the  later  provisions  with  which  we  are
     concerned.

 23. We were also referred to the decision in SSHD  v  Nzinga,  a  Tribunal
     decision of 25th February 2000 under the 1971 Act and the 1996  Rules.
     The question was whether the decision of the Adjudicator  to  treat  a
     Secretary of State's decision as withdrawn for failure to comply  with
     directions was a determination which could be appealed.  There was  no
     definition of "determination" in the 1996 Rules.  The  Act  seemed  to
     use the words "determination" and "decision" almost synonymously.  The
     Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction to hear an appeal.

 24. In Gremesty 23rd February 2001, the Tribunal considered whether  under
     the 2000 Rules, a decision to treat an appeal  as  abandoned  was  one
     which could be appealed to the Tribunal;  the question  arose  because
     it was thought that such a  decision  merely  recognised  a  state  of
     affairs to exist.  The Tribunal held that it was appealable because it
     was in reality a determination which  led  to  the  dismissal  of  the
     appeal and it would have been absurd if the dismissal  of  the  appeal
     with consideration of the merits, an option open to that  Adjudicator,
     had led to a right of appeal.


Conclusions on the jurisdiction issue


 25. Mr Hutton for the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  there  has  in
     effect been no change of significance  in  the  legislation  with  the
     dropping of the specific definition of "determination".  He also  said
     that, in line with the reasoning in B (Zimbabwe),  "an  appeal  to  an
     adjudicator" in section 101 could only mean a valid  appeal  and  that
     did not include an appeal which was out of  time  and  in  respect  of
     which the Adjudicator had refused to extend time.

 26. Of course, there is force in the point  that  there  needs  to  be  an
     appeal before there can be a decision or determination of it but if an
     "appeal" meant a valid appeal the Tribunal cannot  be  prevented  from
     examining whether the appeal was valid.  That, indeed,  was  what  the
     Tribunal decided in B (Zimbabwe); it accepted that  the  Tribunal  had
     jurisdiction to hear an appeal where the issue was whether  there  was
     or was not a valid appeal.  This would mean that under either the  old
     or new Rules the Tribunal would have power to  hear  an  appeal  on  a
     point of law where the issue was whether the Adjudicator  had  wrongly
     held that the appeal was invalid as out of time.  This would be a good
     example of the error of fact as error of law  jurisdiction  which  was
     defined in E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

 27. But we do not accept the wider submission of Mr Hutton.  The Tribunal,
     under the 2002 Act and the 2003 Rules has power to hear  appeals  from
     the determinations of Adjudicators.  There is  now  no  definition  of
     "determination" which limits the application of that  power  to  those
     decisions which allowed or dismissed an appeal.

 28. The 2002  Act  uses  the  word  "determination"  in  section  101  and
     "decision"  in  section  102  to  refer  to  the  same   decision   or
     determination.   It  cannot  have  been  intended  to  give  the  word
     "determination" a very specific meaning, limiting rights of appeal, if
     Parliament  then  uses   the   words   indifferently   and   seemingly
     synonymously.  We do not accept that the limitations of the definition
     in the 2000 Rules should be carried  over  into  the  new  Rules  when
     Parliament has not so provided.  It is that very  specific  definition
     which led to the decision in B (Zimbabwe).

 29. In the absence of the limiting effect  of  the  former  definition  of
     "determination", there would appear to be  every  reason  to  treat  a
     decision to  refuse  to  extend  time  for  lodging  an  appeal  as  a
     determination of it.  It is a decision which concludes the appeal  and
     finally disposes of it;  it determines it.  It is the decision on  the
     appeal;  there will be no more.  The language of the Act  in  sections
     101 and 102 support that broadening of  the  word  "determination"  to
     cover decisions which would finally dispose of the appeal, subject  to
     onward rights of appeal.  That is the context in which  they  operate.
     That is also consistent with the Rules and Rule 53 in particular;  the
     determination is the written decision and the  reasons  for  it.   The
     written reasoned decision that time for lodging an appeal  should  not
     be extended is the determination of  the  appeal.   That  also  covers
     those decisions which confirm that an appeal  is  at  an  end,  eg  in
     relation to the abandonment or withdrawal of an appeal.  We do not for
     a moment think that "determination" is broad enough to cover the  many
     and varied procedural decisions which an Adjudicator may make  in  the
     course of an appeal but which do not bring it to an  end.   Those  are
     not appealable.  This would be consistent with  the  jurisprudence  of
     the Tribunal before the 2000 Rules and with  Gremesty.   The  area  to
     which B (Zimbabwe) applied and to which it no longer  applies  is  the
     appealability of a decision by an Adjudicator to refuse to extend time
     for appealing.  The grant of an extension however is  not  appealable;
     it does not dispose of the appeal.

 30. It was suggested by Mr Hutton that there was no policy reason for  the
     change in the Rules;  Parliament, if anything, would have been  trying
     to tighten them up and would scarcely have allowed greater  rights  of
     appeal, as would happen if the Tribunal had a wider jurisdiction  than
     before;  it was an oversight that the definitions  had  been  dropped.
     He had to accept, however,  that  the  decisions  at  issue  would  be
     challengeable by the more prolonged process of judicial review  if  he
     were right.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  Tribunal  was  right  in  B
     (Zimbabwe) to  point  to  the  policy  of  the  Act  as  showing  what
     Parliament envisaged.  But the change  in  wording  may  well  be  the
     consequence of its realisation that the removal of  rights  of  appeal
     would simply lead and did in fact  lead  to  Judicial  Review  of  the
     decision, rather than to an absence of challenge to the decision.  The
     re-instatement of the rights of  appeal  reflects  the  need  for  the
     greater speed which a specialist appellate Tribunal can bring. If this
     change had simply been an accident, as he suggested, then it has  been
     a sound step towards the achievement of the  overriding  objective  as
     set out in the Rules nonetheless.


The effect on the individual appeals


 31. This means that the appeal of MM is allowed and the appeal is remitted
     for hearing.  The Adjudicator made an error of law  in  counting  time
     from the wrong start date.  The  date  when  the  Secretary  of  State
     letter was served is a known fact and was known at  the  time  of  the
     Adjudicator's decision but was  inaccurately  presented;   it  is  not
     contentious once ascertained.  The error was not the Appellant's fault
     and arose in part from the Secretary of State's wrong calculations  of
     time.  At all times there was a valid appeal which has not been heard.
      A similar result would have been achieved under  the  2000  Rules  in
     line with the decision in B (Zimbabwe).

 32. However, there are further considerations which apply in CN's  appeal.
     Ms Solomon argued that the Adjudicator had erred in law in refusing to
     extend time because in paragraph 5 he said:

           "Under the Rules the letter of 8th October could only be used to
           challenge the fact that the Appeal was lodged out of  time,  but
           the letter concedes that it was lodged out of time."

      This, she said, showed that he had ignored  the  explanation  for  the
      delay provided by the then solicitors and had treated that explanation
      as going solely to whether the appeal was in time.  She is right  that
      the Adjudicator erred in that paragraph because although  the  reasons
      for any extension should appear in the Notice of Appeal (Rule  10  (1)
      (a)), Rule 10 (8) requires the written evidence to  be  considered  in
      deciding whether to extend time;  the failure to comply with the Rules
      does not preclude other evidence showing the reason for the  extension
      being sought.  But her argument is without sound foundation  when  the
      decision is read as a whole.  It is clear  that  the  Adjudicator  did
      consider  the  explanation  on  its  merits   and   rejected   it   as
      insufficient.  He was right to do so.  He said in paragraph 6:

           "I take the view that the Appeal having been lodged out of time,
           no explanation whatsoever has been put forward as  to  why  that
           had happened.  The letter of 8th October makes  mention  of  the
           lateness being neither the Appellant's fault nor Asghar  &  Co's
           fault, but I have been given no explanation at all as  to  whose
           fault it was.  I can only assume that it was the  fault  of  the
           Appellant."

 33. Mr Chowdry, the solicitor with Asghar & Co who had responsibility  for
     the file, put in a signed statement to the Tribunal saying that he had
     omitted to say in the letter of 8th October 2003 that  the  fault  lay
     with the late receipt of the  papers  from  the  Appellant's  previous
     solicitors on 25th September  2003.   The  letter  from  the  previous
     solicitors sending the papers is dated 19th August 2003, with a simple
     receipt date stamp of 25th September 2003 put  on  it.   There  is  no
     reason why this further information could not  have  been  before  the
     Adjudicator and none was offered to us beyond that it was yet  another
     error by solicitors.  That  explanation  for  the  omission  does  not
     satisfy the requirements for its admission as fresh evidence.

 34. But even taking it at face value, there is nothing to suggest that the
     previous solicitors were ever chased for the papers even  though  time
     was running out, or that the  Appellant  was  asked  to  supply  those
     papers which she would have had also sent to her, or  that  there  was
     any protest to the previous solicitors or the delivering  organisation
     at the late arrival of the material.  It is not a good explanation for
     the delay even if the evidence about it is admitted.

 35. We have also examined the grounds of appeal and the material available
     to us to see if there is any obvious point of real merit  which  would
     be shut out. There is  none:   the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  of
     refusal is thorough and focused on the claims made by  the  Appellant.
     The grounds of appeal are general in the extreme, making no attempt to
     grapple with what the Secretary of State said and merely  saying  that
     the substance would follow.  Nothing further has been provided to  us;
     so even though the potential merits of a case can influence the way in
     which procedural issues are decided particularly in this  area,  there
     is no material which can assist the Appellant.  We do not  think  that
     the Adjudicator erred in his approach.  Rule 10(2) permits time to  be
     extended if there are special reasons which  make  it  unjust  not  to
     extend time.  There are none;  even if the fresh evidence is admitted,
     we would not extend time ourselves.  Accordingly, the appeal of CN  is
     dismissed.

 36. We add that  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  put  to  the  previous
     solicitors the failings said to be attributable to them;  that  should
     always be done where there is  an  allegation  that  another  firm  of
     solicitors was at fault.  It is all too easy an allegation to make and
     failure to raise the issue with those who  might  rebut  it  does  not
     assist the credibility of the allegations.

Which Rules apply to MG?

 37.  Mr  Solomon  accepted  that   his   case   was   significantly   more
     straightforward if he was right that  it  was  governed  by  the  2003
     Rules, which he said it was, than  if  the  2000  Rules  applied.   Mr
     Hutton did not accept his argument but was  not  able  to  counter  it
     effectively  and  we  accept  it.   Mr  Solomon  accepted   that   the
     Adjudicator was right to consider the lateness of the  appeal  and  an
     extension of time under the 2000 Rules;  this was because at 1st April
     2003, the appeal pending before the Adjudicator was one to  which  the
     2000 Rules applied.

 38. However, the transitional provisions  for  the  2002  Act  provide  as
     follows.  Schedule 2, paragraph 1(4A) to Commencement Order No  4  (SI
     2003, No 754) to the 2002 Act, Schedule 2, paragraph 1(4A) section 101
     of the 2002 Act,  which  deals  with  appeals  to  the  Tribunal  from
     determinations of Adjudicators, applies  to  appeals  to  Adjudicators
     determined, as here, after 9th June 2003. Section  102  also  applies.
     Paragraph  1(4B)(b)  to  the  Commencement   Order   then   disapplies
     paragraphs 7, 22  and  23  of  Schedule  4  to  the  1999  Act.   That
     disapplication is important because it is paragraph 22  which  governs
     the  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the  "determination"  of  the
     Adjudicator in accordance with the 2000 Rules, and which  contain  the
     restrictive definition of "determination", so crucial to the  decision
     in B (Zimbabwe).

 39. The result is consistent with what the 2003 Rules show.

 40. The 2003 Rules revoked  the  2002  Rules  on  1st  April  2003.   Rule
     61(1)(b) applies the 2003 Rules to any appeal  to  the  Tribunal  made
     after 1st April 2003 under an enactment other than  the  2002  Act  to
     which the 2002 Rules would have applied if they had not been  revoked.
     Therefore whether the 1999 Act or the 2002 Act applied, the 2003 Rules
     apply to the appeal to the Tribunal.  The modification in  Rule  61(2)
     is irrelevant.  The provisions in Rule 61(4)-(9) do not apply.

 41. Accordingly, the new regime now applies to this appeal  and  the  same
     reasoning that meant that MM and  CN  could  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
     applies to MG's appeal.

 42. On the merits of the appeal against the refusal to  extend  time,  the
     adjudicator was not aware as a matter of fact that an explanation  for
     the delay had been provided and had been omitted from  the  file,  for
     whatever reason.  This can be seen  either  as  an  error  of  law  by
     uncontentious error of fact or as  an  omission  to  take  a  material
     factor into account.  There had seen a failure to serve notice of  the
     hearing on the Appellant  although  Rules  39  and  55  were  strictly
     complied with by the IAA, and  the  obligation  on  the  Appellant  to
     notify the IAA of changes of address had to been complied with.   This
     failure arose because the changes notified to the Home Office  do  not
     appear to have been sent to the IAA;  if they were, the error was then
     that of the IAA.  The failure would  not  have  been  avoided  if  the
     Appellant  had  complied  with  the  Rules.   Accordingly,  there  was
     procedural unfairness, unknown to the Adjudicator in the Appellant not
     being given notice of the appeal hearing in a  way  which  would  have
     enabled him to attend and proffer the explanation for the late lodging
     of the appeal.

 43. For those reasons the appeal of MG is allowed.  The appeal  of  MM  is
     also allowed.  The appeal of CN is dismissed.  This decision is to  be
     starred for what it says about rights of appeal.



                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


