


                 IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312


                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                                                                   Date of
                 Hearing:         6, 7, 8 & 19 October 2004
                   Date Signed:                                November 2004

                           Date Determination Notified:      2 December 2004




                                   Before:




                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice-President)
                                Mr S J Widdup




Between


                     THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


      Appellant


                                     and



                                     [ ]

            Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Ms L Giovannetti, Counsel,  instructed  by  Treasury
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:   Mr E Grieves,  Counsel, instructed by Messrs Sheikh  &
Co.


A summary of our conclusions appears at the end of the determination

History of this Appeal
  1. The Respondent is a citizen of  Turkey.  The  Appellant  appeals,  with
     permission, against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Ms  Sarvanjan
     Kaler, promulgated on 20  September  2002,  allowing  the  Respondent's
     appeal against the Appellant's decision on 7  December  2001  to  issue
     removal  directions  and  refuse  asylum.  The  Tribunal  allowed   the
     Appellant's appeal on 2 June 2003, but that determination  was  quashed
     on 12 March 2004 on appeal to the Court of Appeal and, with the consent
     of the parties, the appeal was remitted to  a  differently  constituted
     Tribunal for reconsideration, in the light  of  the  then  new  country
     guidance by the Tribunal in A (Turkey) CG [2003] UKIAT 00034.

  2. The appeal was listed for rehearing by the Tribunal on 28 July 2004. It
     was then adjourned because, on the  day,  Mr  Grieves  produced  a  new
     report from Mr McDowall concerning the scope of the records kept by the
     authorities at Istanbul Airport, and  the  Respondent's  Representative
     requested time to consider it. Mr Grieves then asked  if  the  Tribunal
     would grant permission to call Mr McDowall to give  oral  evidence.  We
     agreed. He also asked for permission to approach other expert witnesses
     to see if they would agree to give oral evidence.  We  agreed  to  this
     also. Subsequently, with the agreement of the parties, this appeal  was
     linked for hearing with six other appeals, in which Messrs Sheikh &  Co
     acted for the claimants, making  7  in  all.   Prior  to  hearing,  the
     Appellant granted leave to the claimants in three of these appeals, and
     later we adjourned one other  appeal  (in  which  Mr  Grieves  was  not
     involved) for hearing separately  by  a  different  Tribunal.  The  two
     additional appeals in the event heard by us were
           1. HX/27475/2002 AO
           2. AS/06367/2004 MA

  3. The Claimants are the appellants  in  AO  and  MA.  By  reason  of  the
     respective dates of the determinations under appeal, the lead appeal of
     IK, and the appeal of  AO  are  not  subject  to  the  "error  of  law"
     limitation  on  appeals  to  the  Tribunal,  under   the   Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. MA however was determined in 2004, and
     is. Separate determinations will be issued in each appeal, but this  is
     the lead determination, in which we deal in detail with  the  objective
     evidence and general submissions as  a  whole  with  the  intention  of
     providing country guidance,  as  well  as  dealing  with  the  specific
     circumstances of the lead appeal.


Facts of this Appeal

  4. The Respondent is an Alevi Kurd from a village in Karamanmaras  in  the
     southeast of Turkey. He was a sympathiser of the PKK and supplied  them
     with food.  Two of his cousins  joined  the  PKK  in  1992.  They  were
     subsequently captured and convicted of terrorist offences in  1995  and
     sentenced to life imprisonment. This triggered specific interest by the
     authorities in the Respondent's family. The  Respondent  was  arrested,
     questioned and beaten by the authorities on two occasions in 1997.

  5. On the first occasion, on 14 October 1997, the village was attacked  by
     TIM, a special private security force. They took all the young  people,
     including the Respondent, to the police  station.  The  Respondent  was
     asked if he was a supporter of the PKK, which he denied, and if he  was
     Kurdish, which he could not deny. They kicked and  punched  him.   They
     administered electric shocks through his  feet.  They  verbally  abused
     him. They tied a plastic bag around his head and threatened to strangle
     him.  They took off his clothes and laid him on the concrete floor with
     others and subjected them to cold water pressure hosing. They  put  hot
     boiled eggs under their armpits and made them stand like that for  some
     time.  Their feet were burned with cigarettes.  They were kept for four
     days and then released without charge.

  6.  On 4 December 1997, the Respondent's  uncle  and  brother-in-law  were
     attacked by village guards  whilst  taking  the  livestock  to  pasture
     outside the village.  The guards shot at them and the uncle was shot in
     the shoulder.  There is some uncertainty about precisely  why  and  how
     the uncle was shot. It may be, as suggested in a local newspaper report
     that this had something to do with an order from the gendarmes  a  week
     earlier to evacuate the village, presumably as part  of  the  clearance
     policy practised by the authorities in that area at that time.  It  may
     also be, as suggested in another newspaper report that it related to  a
     curfew on the villagers from leaving the village confines. Indeed these
     two matters may well be inter-connected. There is also some  suggestion
     that he might have been used as a human shield. At all events, it would
     appear  from  the  reports  and  various  statements  supplied  by  the
     Respondent and members of his family, that many of  the  villagers  did
     evacuate the village, but some 20 households remained  in  defiance  of
     the order, of which nine households were part of the Respondent's wider
     family.

  7. The  uncle  complained  about  this  shooting  incident  to  the  local
     prosecutor and then became the focus  of  pressure  from  the  security
     forces to prevent him from  pursuing  his  complaint,  leading  to  his
     leaving the area and ultimately coming to the UK where he  was  granted
     asylum.

  8. On 18 December 1997, the military took  all  the  young  males  of  the
     village, including the Respondent, to the mountains. They threatened to
     kill everyone. The Respondent asked why and was hit with a gun.  He was
     asked about his uncle and about people in Europe.  He  was  ordered  to
     find his uncle within two days.  They hit other villagers  also.  After
     this incident the military forces came frequently to the  village.  His
     father therefore sent him on 25 December 1997 to Istanbul, to a  family
     friend.  The Respondent, who was then 18 and using  a  false  identity,
     was found a job in a factory in Istanbul. For the next  four  years  he
     worked and slept in the factory without experiencing any problems  from
     the authorities. However, in September 2001, some two  years  after  he
     was due for compulsory military service, the military, having  at  some
     point in time found out about his whereabouts, asked the factory  owner
     about him, using his real name. The owner said that there was no one of
     that name working in the factory and did  not  provide  them  with  any
     information about the Respondent. He warned the  Respondent  and  asked
     him to leave the factory. The Respondent went to stay with a friend and
     telephoned his father to  tell  him  what  had  happened.   His  father
     confirmed that the military were looking for him in the  village  also.
     Arrangements were made for the Respondent to leave Turkey illegally  in
     a lorry.  He arrived in the UK on 5 October 2001.  He was discovered in
     a lorry and claimed asylum.

  9. Although the Appellant challenged  the  Respondent's  credibility,  the
     Adjudicator concluded that he  was  consistent  and  clear  about  what
     happened to prompt his departure from Turkey.  The Adjudicator accepted
     his claim that he had assisted the PKK at the lowest level in 1997, and
     that he had been detained twice for short  periods.   These  detentions
     appear to have been justified and were not just the arbitrary targeting
     of a Kurd.  The Respondent had assisted the  PKK  and  the  authorities
     wished to question him. The detention and  questioning  was  justified,
     but not the ill-treatment that occurred during it. However this was not
     the reason why the Respondent left Turkey.   He  had  lived  safely  in
     Istanbul for many years without difficulty under an assumed  name.   He
     left when the military came to look for him to undertake his compulsory
     military service. The Adjudicator then assessed the question of risk on
     return on the  evidence  available  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  in
     September 2002. Her conclusions in paragraph 19  of  the  determination
     were as follows.
           "The relevant question is whether he would as  of  today  be  at
           risk of persecution were he to be returned.   This  [Respondent]
           has by his own account been released without charge and has  not
           come to the attention of the authorities for many  years  since.
           I am satisfied that he  has  been  detained  and  questioned  on
           suspicion  of  assisting  the  PKK.   The  reports   show   that
           computerised records are kept by the authorities,  and  so  this
           fact is likely to  be  discovered  by  the  authorities  at  the
           airport, even though he has not been charged with any  offences.
           Suspicion of sympathies with and assisting the PKK is enough  to
           place him at risk on return to Turkey, and  he  is  not  one  of
           those returnees who would simply  be  questioned  and  released.
           Paragraph 5.85 of the CIPU states that  the  Dutch  Ministry  of
           Foreign  Affairs  notes  that  PKK  sympathisers   "risk   being
           insulted,   threatened,   maltreated    or    tortured    during
           questioning"."

 10. The original grounds of appeal were drafted to reflect  the  Tribunal's
     country guidance in Polat [2002] UKIAT 04332, which was  overtaken,  as
     we have stated, by  the  subsequent  Tribunal  country  guidance  in  A
     Turkey. The grounds of appeal by the Appellant were therefore  amended,
     with the consent of the Tribunal, to read as follows.
           "The Adjudicator erred  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
           Respondent has a well founded fear of persecution on  return  to
           Turkey, and that, for the same reasons, the Respondent's  appeal
           under Article 3 ECHR should be allowed (see paragraphs 19-25  of
           her determination). The Adjudicator's reasoning is inadequate in
           this regard, most particularly in the following respects:
                    i) having  found,  as  she  was  entitled  to  do,  that
                       computerised records are kept by the authorities, the
                       Adjudicator  concluded  that  the   fact   that   the
                       Appellant had  twice  been  detained  and  questioned
                       would  be  discovered  by  the  authorities  at   the
                       airport.  However, she identified no material capable
                       of supporting the conclusion that brief detentions of
                       the  sort  described  by  the  Respondent  would   be
                       recorded on  computerised  records  and  revealed  by
                       checks at the airport;
                   ii) moreover, the Adjudicator  failed  to  give  adequate
                       consideration  to  the  question  of  whether   there
                       existed "reasonable grounds for believing" or "a real
                       risk" that the Respondent would face  persecution  or
                       treatment in breach of Article 3 ECHR  if  checks  at
                       the  airport  did  reveal  that  he  had  twice  been
                       detained,  some  five  years   previously,   in   the
                       circumstances he described.  In this respect  it  was
                       significant that the Respondent had stated (as to the
                       first detention)  "....TIM  forces  (special  private
                       security forces) attacked the village.  They took all
                       young people to the police station.   I  was  one  of
                       them....". As to the second detention, the Respondent
                       stated "on 18 December 1997  the  military  took  all
                       young males to the mountains".  On both occasions the
                       Respondent  was  amongst   those   released   without
                       charge."

The Country Guidance of the Tribunal - A (Turkey)
 11. The Tribunal regularly reviews the risk to returnees in the context  of
     new  objective  evidence  relating  to  Turkey  as   it   arises,   and
     periodically  undertakes  more  comprehensive  reviews  in  which   all
     relevant material to date is fully argued before a  full  legal  panel.
     The last comprehensive review by the Tribunal was in A (Turkey),  which
     was promulgated on 28 July 2003. It noted that:
           "7. The background evidence is  that  torture  continues  to  be
           endemic in Turkey. Thus we find the following in  the  US  State
           Department report for 2003 at pages 1-2:
                 "Security forces continued  to  commit  unlawful  killings,
                 including deaths due to excessive use of force and torture.
                 Torture, beatings  and  other  abuses  by  security  forces
                 remained widespread, although the number of reported  cases
                 declined.  There were  reports  that  police  and  Jandarma
                 often  employed  torture   and   abuse   detainees   during
                 incommunicado detention and  interrogation.   The  lack  of
                 universal  and  immediate  access  to  an  attorney,   long
                 detention periods for those held for political crimes,  and
                 the  culture  of  impunity  were  major  factors   in   the
                 commission of torture by police and security  forces.   The
                 rarity of convictions and the light  sentences  imposed  on
                 police and  other  security  officials  full  killings  and
                 torture continued to foster a climate of impunity."
           8. Again at paragraph 6.1 of the April 2003 CIPU report (this is
           the current report of the one  to  which  we  shall  refer)  the
           following is stated:
                 "There  have  been  numerous  reports   by   human   rights
                 organisations of systematic  use  of  torture  by  security
                 forces,  deaths  in  police  custody,  disappearances   and
                 extrajudicial executions."
           At paragraph 6.2 is  recorded  the  view  of  the  UN's  Special
           Rapporteur following a visit to Turkey in 1998 that the practice
           of torture in numerous places around country might well  deserve
           the categorisation  of  systematic  in  the  sense  of  being  a
           pervasive technique of law enforcement agencies for the  purpose
           of investigation, securing confessions and intimidation."

 12. The Tribunal in A (Turkey), when reviewing  this  evidence  noted  that
     Turkey had made a formal application to become a  full  member  of  the
     European Community in 1987 and in December 1999 had been given official
     status as a candidate for European Union membership.  In order to  meet
     membership requirements there was a need to improve its record on human
     rights. In order to pave the way for EU membership, the Tribunal  in  A
     (Turkey) noted that on 3 October 2001 Turkey  completed  a  significant
     legislative overhaul comprising a  package  of  34  amendments  to  the
     constitution. On 3 August 2002 it approved a package of the  democratic
     reforms including the end to the death penalty  in  peacetime;  TV  and
     radio broadcast being allowed in languages other than Turkish;  Kurdish
     dialects to be taught in special courses in private schools; an  easing
     of restrictions on public demonstrations and association; allowing  48-
     hour notification to the authorities;  and  an  end  to  penalties  for
     written, vocal or pictorial criticism of state institutions,  including
     the Armed Forces. However the Tribunal also  noted  that  the  European
     Commission  in  its  "Regular  Report  on  Turkey's  Progress   towards
     Accession" of October 2002, whilst welcoming the reforms,  nevertheless
     concluded that Turkey did not fully meet the political criteria for  EU
     membership for a variety of  important  reasons,  including  the  fight
     against torture and ill-treatment, the situation of persons  in  prison
     for expressing non-violent opinions and compliance with  the  decisions
     of the European Court of Human Rights. The Tribunal therefore concluded
     as follows.
           "13. From this, we conclude that there have been  steps  in  the
           right direction in improving human rights in Turkey,  though  we
           consider there is some force in the point  made  by  Mr  Grieves
           that there have been no significant signs of  implementation  of
           the reforms which have little benefit to individuals potentially
           at risk."

 13. The Tribunal then went on to consider the specific situation of risk on
     return to Turkey in the following terms.
           "23. With these  background  matters  in  mind  we  move  on  to
           consider the specific situation of risk on return to Turkey.  Mr
           Grieves argued that this was the essential  point  at  which  if
           problems were going to occur they would occur.   He  based  this
           upon the existence of the  central  information  system  usually
           abbreviated  as  GBTS,  which  is  available  to   the   Turkish
           state..... It is said that the system  stores  various  personal
           data, including  information  on  outstanding  arrest  warrants,
           previous arrests restrictions on travel abroad,  possible  draft
           evasion or refusal to perform military service and tax  arrears.
           Sentences which have been served are in principle  removed  from
           the system and  entered  in  the  national  accessible  judicial
           records......  [Reference  was  then  made   to   the   relevant
           paragraphs in  the  then  current  CIPU  report  concerning  the
           treatment of returned asylum seekers.]
           25. In the light of this evidence, Mr Deller (for the  Secretary
           of State) very helpfully made it clear that he accepted that the
           computer system exists as recorded and  that  interrogations  at
           the border take place.  He  also  accepted  that  if  there  was
           reason for a person to get into the  hands  of  the  Anti-Terror
           Branch then there was a risk of torture....
           42. It will be clear from our assessment of the  general  issues
           above that we agree that there is a real risk that any history a
           person has of previous  arrests,  outstanding  arrest  warrants,
           criminal  records   or   judicial   preliminary   enquiries   or
           investigations by the police or Jandarma will  be  contained  on
           the GBTS computer system.  The typical returned  Turkish  asylum
           seeker will be travelling either  on  no  documents  or  one-way
           emergency travel  documents,  which  we  accept  may  place  the
           authorities on notice that they return as someone who has sought
           asylum and has been unsuccessful.  If however the claimant holds
           a current valid Turkish passport it is significantly less likely
           that this perception will arise.
           43. Assuming possession of only a temporary travel document,  it
           is likely that the returnee will be detained  for  interrogation
           at the point of entry while enquiries are carried  out  by  them
           because they are identified as being a failed asylum seeker  who
           may therefore have a history, or if the  GBTS  computer  records
           reveal information regarded as relevant.

 14. On this basis, the Tribunal in A (Turkey) identified the potential risk
     factors to be taken into account. It concluded as follows.
           "46. The following  are  the  factors  which  inexhaustively  we
           consider to be material in giving rise to potential suspicion in
           the minds of the authorities concerning a particular claimant.
                 a) The level if any of the appellant's known  or  suspected
                 involvement with a separatist organisation.  Together  with
                 this must be assessed the basis upon which it is  contended
                 that  the  authorities  knew  of  or  might  suspect   such
                 involvement.
                 b) Whether the appellant has ever been arrested or detained
                 and if so in what circumstances.  In this context it may be
                 relevant to note how long ago such  arrests  or  detentions
                 took place, if it is the case that there appears to  be  no
                 causal connection between them and the claimant's departure
                 from Turkey, but  otherwise  it  may  be  a  factor  of  no
                 particular significance.
                 c)  Whether  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  past
                 arrest(s) and  detention(s)  (if  any)  indicate  that  the
                 authorities did in fact view him  or  her  as  a  suspected
                 separatist.
                 d) Whether the appellant was charged or placed on reporting
                 conditions or now faces charges.
                 e) The degree of ill treatment to which the  appellant  was
                  subjected in the past.
                 f) Whether the appellant  has  family  connections  with  a
                 separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.
                 g) How long a period elapsed between the  appellant's  last
                 arrest and detention and his or her departure from  Turkey.
                 In this regard it may of course be relevant to consider the
                 evidence if any concerning what the appellant was  in  fact
                 doing between the time of the last arrest and detention and
                 departure from Turkey.  It is a factor that is only  likely
                 to be of any particular relevance if there is a  reasonably
                 lengthy period between the two events without  any  ongoing
                 problems being experienced on the  part  of  the  appellant
                 from the authorities.
                 h) Whether in the period after the appellant's last  arrest
                 there is any  evidence  that  he  or  she  was  kept  under
                 surveillance or monitored by the authorities.
                 i) Kurdish ethnicity.
                 j) Alevi faith.
                 k) Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.
                 l) Whether there is any evidence that the authorities  have
                 been pursuing or otherwise expressing an  interest  in  the
                 appellant since he or she left Turkey.
                 m) Whether the appellant became an informer or was asked to
                 become one.
                 n)  Actual  perceived  political   activities   abroad   in
                 connection with a separatist organisation.
                 o) If the returnee is a military draft evader there will be
                 some logical impact on his profile to those  assessing  him
                 on his immediate return.  Following Sepet  of  course  this
                 alone is not a basis for a refugee or human rights claim.


            47. We cannot emphasise too strongly the importance of avoiding
            treating these factors as some kind of  checklist.   Assessment
            of the claim must be in the round bearing in mind  the  matters
            set out above as  a  consequence  of  a  careful  scrutiny  and
            assessment of the evidence.  The central issue as always is the
            question of the real risk on return of ill treatment  amounting
            to persecution or breach of a person's Article 3  rights.   The
            existing political and human rights context overall is  also  a
            matter of significance as will be seen from our  assessment  of
            the particular appeals in our determinations  of  those  below.
            The particular circumstances that prevail today may not  be  in
            existence in 6 months time for all we know."

Subsequent Developments in the Country Guidance of the Tribunal
 15. The availability to the authorities of  information  about  a  specific
     individual is an integral element of the risk assessment, as stated  by
     the Tribunal in paragraph 46(a) of A (Turkey) above. As  failed  asylum
     seekers are returned to Istanbul Airport that is  the  first  point  at
     which the available information will be checked and for this reason  it
     has in recent years become the focus of the  risk  assessment,  as  was
     argued by Mr Grieves in A (Turkey).

 16. However, in early 2004 some new evidence emerged about the scope of the
     records held on the GBTS, which  suggested  that  they  might  be  more
     limited than had hitherto been assumed. It has been  known,  since  the
     Netherlands Government report of July 2001, and this was accepted in  A
     (Turkey), that essentially only personal data relating  to  outstanding
     arrests warrants, previous  arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,
     possible draft evasion or refusal to perform military service, and  tax
     arrears would be recorded on GBTS. However evidence came  to  light  in
     2004 that for the first time  drew  a  distinction  between  "arrests",
     which in the Turkish context require a court decision, and "detentions"
     by the security forces without court sanction or charge.  This was  not
     something new in the sense that some change had taken place in  Turkey,
     but was rather a correction of a long-standing  misunderstanding  about
     what an "arrest" meant in the context of Turkey and the GBTS. As  there
     is well established objective  evidence  that  the  large  majority  of
     detentions (sometimes put as high as 90%) are relatively brief and  end
     in release without charge or court appearance,  this  new  evidence  is
     potentially significant.

 17. This question and others relating to it have been addressed  in  recent
     months by the Tribunal in a variety of determinations, as new  evidence
     and opinions have emerged and been considered. The relevant aspects  of
     the recent Tribunal country guidance can in broad terms  be  summarised
     as follows:
           1. HO (National records) Turkey CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00038.  On  4
              February 2004, this was the first Tribunal case  to  consider
              in detail the new evidence of the distinction between arrests
              and detentions in the GBTS, and held it to  be  reliable.  It
              also concluded that there could be other records or  personal
              knowledge by individual security personnel  in  a  returnee's
              home area that might expose him there to greater risk than at
              the airport or elsewhere in Turkey, and  thus  the  issue  of
              internal relocation might assume importance.
           2. SA (GBTS records) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00229. On  31  March
              2004, the Tribunal considered an  opinion  from  Mr  McDowall
              that either GBTS covered  a  much  wider  range  of  security
              interest or the security forces operated another computerised
              screening system including recourse to individual police  and
              gendarmerie stations across Turkey.  The  Tribunal  concluded
              that Mr McDowall, though knowledgeable  on  Turkish  matters,
              acted not as an independent expert but as an advocate and his
              unsupported opinions should  be  seen  in  that  light.  This
              concern about Mr McDowell's objectivity  has  been  expressed
              also for some time by several other Tribunals, for example in
              MO (McDowall Reviewed - Objectivity)  Turkey  CG  [2002]UKIAT
              02583, promulgated on  12  July  2002.  The  Tribunal  in  SA
              (Turkey) accepted the evidence in the  CIPU  report  at  5.71
              that
                 "The Turkish  Intelligence  Agency,  MIT,  allegedly  keeps
                 close tabs on political activities  against  Turkey.   With
                 manpower constraints, routine surveillance by the MIT seems
                 to concentrate on leading figures.  Information  on  people
                 of lower rank is apparently obtained by chance".
              It did not accept however that this record, which essentially
              related to activities outside Turkey, meant that there  would
              be computerised records available at Istanbul  airport  apart
              from GBTS of persons  who  had  been  detained  and  released
              without charge within Turkey. The  Tribunal  did  not  accept
              either Mr McDowall's opinion that a person registering with a
              Mukhtar in a new area, outside his home  area,  would  be  at
              real  risk  of  material  ill-treatment  as   a   result   of
              information available in his home area  on  such  matters  as
              detentions and releases without charge. Having said that, the
              Tribunal acknowledged that there was limited evidence  before
              it on the  subject  of  other  records  systems  or  on  what
              happened in relation to records when a person registered with
              the Mukhtar in a new area.
           3. LT (Internal flight - Registration system) Turkey  CG  [2004]
              UKIAT 00175, which concluded on 10 May 2004 that if a  person
              was able to pass safely through Istanbul Airport,  but  might
              be at real risk from other records in his  home  area,  there
              could be a viable internal flight option elsewhere in Turkey.
              It also noted evidence that large numbers of Turkish citizens
              lived in Turkey without registering with  the  local  Mukhtar
              and that it would not in the absence of specific  factors  be
              unduly harsh to expect a returning failed asylum seeker to do
              so.
           4. AG (GBTS, "tab" and other records)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
              00168. On 12 May 2004, the Tribunal assessed written evidence
              from the Swiss Organisation for  Refugees  (SWOR),  Ms  Sheri
              Laizer and Mr Kanat  concerning  record  files  kept  by  the
              security forces known as "tab records". It concluded that the
              various security forces may each have their  own  information
              systems and accepted that if an individual is "sought" by the
              anti-terror police or  by  the  state,  there  will  be  some
              information about it at the airport. It would also be  likely
              to be in the GBTS. There were also lists of wanted people and
              photographs in the border police booths at the airport. There
              may also be information about "undesirables," which explained
              why Ms Laizer was refused entry into Turkey in 1998.  However
              it concluded there was  no  evidence  that  records  of  mere
              detentions  in  south-east  Turkey  would  be  available   at
              Istanbul Airport.
           5. KK (GBTS - Other information systems -  McDowall)  Turkey  CG
              [2004] UKIAT 00177. On 14 June  2004,  the  Tribunal  further
              reviewed the  evidence  of  SWOR  and  of  Mr  McDowall,  and
              considered an article from Zaman On-Line and  concluded  that
              this  evidence  did  not  undermine  the  conclusions  in   O
              (Turkey), which should  be  followed.  It  assessment  of  an
              internet article  by  Zaman  On-Line  was  expressed  in  the
              following terms
                 "The Zaman On-Line article dated 1 February 2004 refers  to
                 a single computer system which  will  replace  all  records
                 kept by the police and gendarmerie.  This article gives the
                 name of the  system  as  "Information  Collection  System".
                 This article states that under the  single  on-line  system
                 all records of police and gendarmerie in provinces would be
                 abolished and the new on-line system  will  be  used.   The
                 document entitled Project for Police Information Systems of
                 April 2002  also  makes  reference  to  a  police  computer
                 network but gives it a different name  -  "Police  Computer
                 Network and Information System". Those  documents  must  be
                 referring to one of the same computing system - since  both
                 articles  referred  to  one  system  to  cover  the  police
                 departments.  If this is the case, then the  Zaman  On-Line
                 article makes it clear that only criminal records would  be
                 collected into the single system.  The inference  therefore
                 is that mere detentions would not  be  collected  into  the
                 single on-line system."
           6. MS (GBTS information at borders) Turkey [2004]  UKIAT  00192.
              The Tribunal considered reports  from  Mr  Kanat,  a  Turkish
              defence  lawyer,  Ms  Sheri  Laizer  and  Mr  McDowall,   and
              concluded that
                 "It seems to us to be clear..... that  the  computers  that
                 are  at  the  airports  are  the  GBTS  computers  and  the
                 information they contain is what is in the GBTS records. It
                 is also plain that there are other less formal records that
                 are maintained but that these will not be looked at  unless
                 somebody is placed into custody.  There  is  no  suggestion
                 that people are being picked up at the airport  because  of
                 these information files."
           7. CE (KK confirmed - McDowall report) Turkey CG  UKIAT   [2004]
              00233. The Tribunal reviewed and approved LT, KK  and  MS  in
              light of further evidence,  including  a  new  report  by  Mr
              McDowall.

 18. We have the benefit of substantially more, and  more  recent,  evidence
     than was before the various panels of the Tribunal in the  above  cases
     and the benefits of more wide-ranging and fuller argument.  There  have
     also been other developments that must be taken into account  including
     the ending of the PKK cease fire followed  by  escalating  violence  in
     southeast Turkey, greater recognition of the threat posed by  Al  Qaeda
     following the two bombings in Turkey in November 2003, and the new 2004
     EC assessment of human rights developments in Turkey  published  during
     the course of our hearing. Accordingly this determination  is  intended
     to update and replace the 7 decisions listed above and to set  out  the
     Tribunal's current country guidance on the issues covered in it.

The Evidence
 19. The documentary evidence placed before us comprises the following.
           1. The Tribunal bundles in the 3 extant appeals before us.
           2. The Home Office objective bundle from Ms Giovannetti.
           3. Volumes I and II comprising objective evidence and  case  law
              from Mr Grieves.
           4. Volumes III and IV comprising case specific material from  Mr
              Grieves
           5. Statement by Denise Graf and statement of truth  relating  to
              it by Cecile Porter.
           6. Supplemental statement by Levent Kanat re registration.
           7. Press articles relating to report of  Ulya Ucpinar.
           8. Communication from the EU Commission to the Council  and  the
              Parliament.
           9. Regular Report of 2004 by the Commission on Turkey's progress
              towards accession.
          10. Various written submissions by Mr Grieves on the generic  and
              specific issues arising.
          11. Various written submissions by Ms Giovannetti  on the generic
              and specific issues arising
          12. Written statements from Mr Y Karadogan and Mrs O  Golovtchouk
              concerning Nufus records,  produced  after  the  3rd  day  of
              hearing, in response to submissions by Ms Giovannetti.
          13. A paper by Mr Norton on Nufus records.

 20. We should make clear that we have taken all the  documentary  and  oral
     evidence and submissions before us into  account  in  our  conclusions,
     even if we do not mention everything specifically.   We  should  record
     that on the fourth day of the  hearing,  when  we  moved  from  hearing
     generic submissions  to  those  relating  to  the  specific  individual
     appeals, Mr Grieves sought to introduce a further bundle  of  documents
     comprising some Adjudicator determinations relating to the  various  of
     the Respondent's relatives who have sought and been granted  asylum  in
     the UK, some of which post dated the  Adjudicator's  decision  in  this
     appeal. Ms Giovannetti objected to the late production of  this  bundle
     on the basis that it  would  prejudice  her,  in  that  time  would  be
     required to  assess  what  was  said  in  each  determination  and  its
     relevance to this appeal. Mr Grieves then asked for an adjournment.  We
     refused Mr Grieves' applications both that we should accept  this  late
     bundle  and  that  we  adjourn  the  hearing  to  give  Ms  Giovannetti
     additional time. In reaching  these  conclusions,  we  note  that  both
     representatives have had ample notice of this appeal and ample time  to
     prepare thoroughly. Mr Grieves suggested that he had only considered in
     detail the specific  bundle  relevant  to  this  appeal  after  he  had
     prepared the generic  bundles.   We  do  not  accept  that  this  is  a
     satisfactory  explanation,  bearing  in  mind  that  this  appeal   was
     originally listed to be heard on its  own,  without  identification  as
     being for country guidance, as  far  back  as  28  July  2004.  It  was
     adjourned to enable Mr Grieves to produce oral expert evidence.   There
     was no suggestion then that the case specific material was  incomplete.
     In any event since then there has been ample opportunity for Mr Grieves
     to produce all the relevant evidence, if he had addressed his  mind  to
     it in a timely fashion.  The  appeal  was  adjourned  part-heard  on  8
     October until 20 October and this offered another opportunity to him to
     produce further evidence if necessary. His failure to do so until  well
     into the fourth and final day of the hearing meant that Ms  Giovannetti
     would be severely prejudiced in the presentation of her submissions. We
     have also taken into account the fact that  if  material  evidence  was
     required in this appeal from relatives of the  Respondent,  other  than
     those who actually attended at the hearing of  his  appeal  before  the
     Adjudicator, they should have attended then to give such  evidence  and
     be tested on it. Finally we had regard to Mr Grieves summary of what he
     sought to rely upon from these documents and concluded  that  it  would
     unlikely to make any material difference to the outcome of this appeal.
      We could assess from the evidence before us for ourselves the size  of
     the Respondent's village and a number of his relatives who lived there.
     Also we would consider  it  normal  that  the  authorities  would  make
     enquiries as to the whereabouts of  a  young  man  from  a  village  in
     southeast Turkey who suddenly disappeared,  particularly  if  he  would
     soon  be  due  for  conscription.   We  therefore  concluded  that  the
     overriding  objective  under  the  Immigration   and   Asylum   Appeals
     (Procedure) Rules 2003 of  ensuring  the  just,  timely  and  effective
     disposal of this appeal in the interests of the parties and  the  wider
     public interest would not be met by any  further  adjournment  at  that
     late stage or by the  admission  of  the  additional  documents  by  Mr
     Grieves.

 21. As previously indicated, the Tribunal granted permission to adduce oral
     evidence from expert witnesses. This originally  related  to  Mr  David
     McDowall, Ms Sheri Laizer and Mr  Kerim  Yildiz.  However,  Mr  Grieves
     subsequently, in a note dated 22 September 2004, informed the  Tribunal
     he would not call Mr McDowall, whose evidence would  mainly  be  second
     hand, or Ms Laizer, who was not available, though  they  have  supplied
     written statements that are before us. He did wish to call  Mr  Yildiz,
     and additionally wished to call Mr  Orhan  Dil  and  Mr  Levent  Kanat.
     Permission was granted accordingly.  However in the event only Mr Kanat
     gave oral evidence. Some time was lost on the first day of the  hearing
     (though it was subsequently made up) due to  the  initial  lack  of  an
     interpreter  and  the  hearing  of  Mr  Kanat's  oral   evidence   took
     considerably longer than was originally  anticipated.  Mr  Dil,  though
     available on the first day, was unable to stay and Mr Grieves  did  not
     inform us of this until it was too late to do  anything  about  it.  Mr
     Yildiz was taken ill in Poland and was unable to attend. However we had
     full reports from them, and as Ms Giovannetti indicated  that  she  did
     not wish to cross-examine either of them, nothing of material substance
     has been lost by their  absence.  We  should  add  that  we  also  have
     received within the papers written  reports  from  a  number  of  other
     people with some knowledge and/or expertise to  which  we  shall  refer
     later. We have assessed the weight to be given to the evidence of  each
     of the experts in line with the approach described by the  Tribunal  in
     the cases of SK Croatia CG UKIAT [2002] and GH  Iraq  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
     00248, which we adopt.

 22. In SK Croatia, a legal panel chaired by its then President, Collins  J,
     stated
           "The tribunal is accustomed to  being  served  with  reports  of
           experts.  We have to say that many  have  their  own  points  of
           view, which their reports seek to justify.  The whole  point  of
           the country reports is to bring together all relevant  material.
           From them, the tribunal will reach its own conclusions about the
           situation in the country and then will  see  whether  the  facts
           found in relation to the individual before it establish  to  the
           required standard a real risk of  persecution  or  of  treatment
           which breaches his or her human rights.  Further,  the  tribunal
           builds up its own expertise in relation to the limited number of
           countries  from  which  asylum  seekers  come.   Naturally,   an
           expert's report can assist, but we  do  not  accept  that  heavy
           reliance is or should be placed upon  such  reports.   All  will
           depend on the nature of the report and  the  particular  expert.
           Furthermore, it is rare for such experts to be  called  to  give
           evidence or for their views to be tested.  We were fortunate  in
           S to have had called  before  us  two  experts  who  were  truly
           knowledgeable and who had no particular axes to grind.  We  have
           reports from experts in the present  case,  which  we  shall  of
           course take into account and we will decide what  weight  should
           be accorded to their views.

 23. In GH (Iraq), the Tribunal drew an important distinction, which we also
     adopt, between an "expert" and an "independent expert".
           "48. An expert witness is in a privileged position because he is
           able to give evidence relying on hearsay and to give his opinion
           based on his area of expertise drawing on such hearsay  evidence
           as well as  his  personal  knowledge.   But  the  weight  to  be
           accorded to such evidence depends upon demonstrable impartiality
           and objectivity in addition to the requisite  expertise  in  his
           subject. If the witness  is  partial,  so  that  he  becomes  an
           advocate for the person commissioning his  report,  or  shows  a
           lack of objectivity in his approach to the body of  evidence  on
           which he draws to form his opinions, then the weight to be given
           to his opinion  as  an  expert  witness  will  be  substantially
           diminished  if  not  altogether   eroded.   Nevertheless,   such
           testimony may remain of value on a factual  basis  arising  from
           the witness's expert knowledge even where the weight to be given
           to expressed opinions is so reduced or eroded.


The Generic Issues

 24. The Tribunal is grateful to both Mr Grieves (who  by  agreement  opened
     the proceedings) and Ms Giovannetti (who replied) for the detailed  and
     thorough written submissions provided by them prior to the first day of
     the hearing, subsequent to the third day, and finally  on  two  further
     matters in response to Tribunal questions raised  on  the  fourth  day.
     This has assisted us in identifying the areas where there is  agreement
     between parties and in focusing upon and refining the  material  issues
     for our decision. In our view, the broad generic issues raised in  this
     appeal can conveniently (though not necessarily in  the  precise  terms
     and order set out in the written submissions) be summarised as follows.
           1. What is  the  ambit  and  accessibility  of  the  information
              system/s maintained by the authorities in Turkey?
           2. In what circumstances is there a real risk that a returnee to
              Istanbul  airport  will  be   placed   in   the   non-routine
              investigation stream and be subject to detailed questioning?
           3. If a person faces non-routine investigation what should he be
              expected to say when questioned and what further  information
              is reasonably likely to be accessed in this process?
           4. Does the guidance of  the  Tribunal  in  A  (Turkey)  require
              review in the light of subsequent developments?
           5. Should an individual (and his family) be expected to live  in
              Turkey without registration with the local Mukhtar  in  order
              to avoid persecution.
           6. Is there an internal relocation option for a person who is at
              real risk of persecution by the authorities  in  his  or  her
              home area?

What is the ambit and accessibility of the information  system/s  maintained
by the authorities in Turkey?
 25. This is the issue on which the new line of jurisprudence began with  HO
     Turkey concerning the scope of the GBT computer system in Turkey.  Both
     representatives acknowledged that there was  some  difficulty,  arising
     from lack of clear evidence  in  areas  where  there  was  no  credible
     statement by the Turkish government, in gauging the nature  and  extent
     of the record keeping systems maintained in Turkey. The sources  quoted
     by some of the experts are quite limited in number and appear to "echo"
     around various of the opinions submitted to  us.  Such  difficulty  has
     been compounded by the very different ways in which  some  experts  and
     some of the material before us have used the  term  "GBTS".  Some  have
     described it as a specific, defined and relatively transparent computer
     system. Other uses of the term appear to have ranged up to using it  to
     describe all computer based information held by the Turkish government.
     The terms "tab" and "information record"  have  also  been  used  in  a
     variety of different  ways  to  cover  different  secret  and  possibly
     illegal information, held by the Turkish state. We shall return to this
     shortly.

 26. In support of his submissions, Mr Grieves has relied upon  written/oral
     evidence from a number of people, most of  them  having  been  actively
     involved as human rights advocates for some years. They are
           1. Levent Kanat, a Turkish  human  rights  lawyer  of  13  years
              standing and a Board Member of the Human  Rights  Association
              in Turkey.
           2.  Dr  Haruk  Gerger,  a  Turkish  academic,  specialising   in
              political science and international politics, who has written
              a number of books and has received a variety  of  awards  for
              his  human  rights  activities.  He  spoke  out  against  the
              military after the 1980 military coup and has not taught in a
              university in Turkey since then.
           3. Ulya Ucpinar, a human rights lawyer in Turkey with  extensive
              experience.
           4.  Denise  Graf,  now  a  Swiss  based  employee   of   Amnesty
              International, who has researched on Turkey for some 20 years
              and is or was involved with the Swiss Organisation to the Aid
              of Refugees (SOAR).
           5. Tahir Elci, a Turkish human  rights  lawyer  who  is  on  the
              Turkish Board of Amnesty International.
           6. Kerim Yildiz, the founder and Executive Director  of  Kurdish
              Human Rights Project in London.
           7. Orhan Dil, a Turkish asylum seeker, who was granted  4  years
              exceptional leave to remain in the UK  and  is  awaiting  the
              outcome of his application for indefinite  leave  to  remain.
              Between 1990-1991, whilst undertaking his compulsory military
              service, he worked at a gendarme station in Erzurum province.
              He does not claim to be an expert, but rather describes  what
              he then saw.
           8. Sheri Laizer, a UK writer  and  journalist,  specialising  in
              Turkish/Kurdish human rights issues.
           9. David McDowall, a UK writer on Middle  East  affairs  with  a
              particular interest in Kurds who has written many reports  on
              behalf of asylum seekers.

 27. As already mentioned, for various reasons, we only heard oral  evidence
     from Mr Kanat but have taken the written evidence from all these people
     into account along with the other material documentary evidence  before
     us. In doing so we have recognised that they all  (Mr  Dil  apart)  are
     human rights activists. That is not intended in any  derogatory  sense,
     as Mr Grieves at one point suggested it  might,  but  it  does  reflect
     potentially on their objectivity and the difference between  an  expert
     and an independent expert. In that light we have carefully assessed the
     merits of the opinions they have offered.

 28. We should mention, because it was  raised  by  Mr  Grieves  during  the
     course of  Mr Kanat's oral evidence on the first day  of  the  hearing,
     that there were some  limited  difficulties  over  interpretation.  The
     interpreter on that day, who came at very short notice to  fill  a  gap
     caused by an administrative oversight at the IAT, informed us that  she
     was not familiar with some of the technical terms used by Mr Kanat.  We
     monitored the situation with great care and concluded that this  caused
     no material difficulty in our full understanding  of  the  evidence  he
     gave.

 29. As we have mentioned, when we came to compare the evidence relating  to
     the record systems in Turkey it rapidly became apparent that there were
     considerable inconsistencies in  the  evidence  placed  before  us.  Mr
     Yildiz in  his  statement  acknowledged  that  parts  of  the  material
     appeared contradictory, but ascribed this as a "direct  result  of  the
     lack of comprehensive information made publicly available regarding the
     GBT system".  On careful scrutiny of the evidence as a whole we  accept
     that many  of  these  inconsistencies  reflect  the  use  of  different
     terminology to describe what  is  in  part  rather  opaque  information
     gathering systems, though for the reasons we shall describe we  do  not
     consider that there is a lack of publicly available  information  about
     the GBTS component of it. Thus Mr Kanat for example, spoke of a variety
     of different systems (such as GBTS, tab and information systems created
     at various levels by the security forces, judicial  records,  exit  and
     entry passport records, NUFUS records, and records of the activities of
     Turks  overseas  and   of   non-Turks   with   perceived   anti-Turkish
     sentiments). Mr Kanat also stated that all this information is gathered
     and computerised centrally under the aegis  of  the  KIHBI.     Others,
     such as Ms  Ucpinar  and  Mr  Elci  appear  to  believe  that  all  the
     information is recorded on  the  GBTS.   Dr  Gerger  takes  a  somewhat
     different view and talks of there being not a single  GBT  system,  but
     three different  layered  GBT  systems,  each  layer  of  data  storage
     including distinctive details about a person,  progressing  from  basic
     data at level 1 to much more comprehensive information  at  the  higher
     levels. Ms Graf states that  the  GBTS  is  a  defined  and  accessible
     computer system but other information is held elsewhere. Other evidence
     suggests that part of the information gathered remains  paper-based  at
     local level.

 30. Ms Giovannetti argued that the GBTS is a clearly  defined  system,  and
     stated the Home Office  position  on  other  information  gathering  as
     follows.
           "We accept that the intelligence services in Turkey will collect
           and collate information about certain individuals.  We say there
           is no satisfactory evidence  that  demonstrates  any  reasonable
           likelihood what information is kept,  about  which  individuals,
           who holds it, and who it is made accessible to.  There is a  big
           issue in Turkey at the moment about  the  very  fact  that  such
           information is compiled and held. Mr Kanat's evidence made  that
           clear and  also  that  the  state  has  no  right  to  hold  the
           information  he  described  about  individuals.   He   routinely
           referred to it as a tab.  We do not accept there is any evidence
           to demonstrate any  reasonable  likelihood  there  is  a  system
           called the tab system, which  is  a  single  information  source
           accessible by  computer  or  otherwise  to  anyone  outside  the
           intelligence services.  With regard to the list in  Mr  Grieves'
           skeleton argument paragraph 140, we accept that it is reasonably
           likely that the anti terror branch of the  police  and  the  MIT
           would have access to this information  as  a  matter  of  common
           sense.  Anything beyond that is speculation.  There is no cogent
           evidence that the  security  information  is  available  to  the
           border police at passport control or to the police at the police
           station attached to the airport."

 31. Mr Grieves took a dual approach on this issue. On one hand, he  adopted
     the position described by Mr Kanat in his oral evidence to  the  effect
     that this information is very comprehensive and relates to  potentially
     millions of Turkish citizens, and is now combined with the  GBTS  in  a
     central and fully computerised information centre run by  the  Ministry
     of the Interior called KIHBI. Mr  Kanat  referred  to  all  the  secret
     information generically as "tab" records. He said it is available in  a
     limited form in immigration booths at the airport and in  full  at  the
     airport police station, to which returnees in  the  non-routine  stream
     will be sent for questioning.   On  the  other  hand,  if  we  were  to
     conclude that Mr Kanat was wrong on this, and this information  is  not
     available in a computerised form  at  the  immigration  booths  or  the
     airport police station, Mr Grieves submitted that during the course  of
     extended questioning at the police station it is reasonably likely that
     appropriate enquiries could and would be made either to the anti terror
     police or to the authorities in the  returnee's  home  area,  when  any
     relevant information will be produced, be it computerised or not.

 32. To resolve these matters we have assessed the evidence before us. There
     is in our view clear, credible and compelling evidence that the GBTS is
     a well defined and relatively accessible computer  database  maintained
     by the  Anti  Smuggling  and  Organised  Crime  Department  within  the
     Ministry of the  Interior.  It  contains  essentially  the  information
     described in the Netherlands report and accepted by the Tribunal  in  A
     (Turkey) as  being  "outstanding  arrest  warrants,  previous  arrests,
     restrictions on travel abroad, possible draft  evasion  or  refusal  to
     perform military service and tax arrears".  We also see no good  reason
     to dispute the clarification from the  Turkish  authorities  that  this
     must be  read  subject  to  the  previously  unappreciated  distinction
     between  "arrests"  and  "detentions."  This  clarification   and   the
     description of the full scope of the GBTS is spelled  out  in  somewhat
     idiosyncratic English in a letter dated  3  September  2003  from  Omer
     Aydin, a  senior  officer  in  the  Department  of  Anti-Smuggling  and
     Organised Crime, which runs the GBT system. It appears in Volume I  Tab
     1 and states
           "1. In the GBT system, records of following are being kept as  a
           general rule: records of people who committed crime but have not
           been caught: those who committed serious crimes  like  organised
           crime, smuggling crimes,  drug-related  crimes,  terror  related
           crimes, unlawful seizure, murder, fraudulent trade:  people  who
           have search warrants about or arrest warrants in their  default:
           people who were barred from public  services,  missing  persons:
           association management committee members who  are  found  guilty
           according to article 4/4 of Associations Law  2908:  records  of
           motor vehicles which are stolen or missed or unlawfully  seized:
           records related to firearms and records of documents which prove
           identity.
           2. Records for people who are  found  guilty  and  sentenced  of
           above crimes are kept until their death.  Likewise,  records  of
           people who are acquitted or cases against them are being  abated
           as  a  result  of  decisions  made  not  to  prosecute  or  time
           limitations, are erased as soon  as  the  decision  reaches  the
           security forces.  In other  crimes,  the  records  of  criminals
           being kept, are  erased  after  the  person's  capture  and  the
           records of stolen or missed goods are deleted  after  the  items
           are being found.
           3. Records of people who committed crimes mentioned in clause  1
           are kept even if they spend their time.
           4. In the GBT system, only the most recent arrest  warrants  are
           taken into board and the rest are voided.
           5. Information about  people  who  are  convicted  are  kept  by
           Judicial Record Directorate which is different than GBT system.
           6. In our country detention  is  carried  out  by  the  security
           forces whereas arrest  is  a  court  decision.  Nonetheless  the
           police can detain a person on their initiative but has to inform
           the public prosecutor's office within 24 hours.
           7. Only records of people who are under judicial proceedings  or
           judicial examination by the judiciary are being kept in the  GBT
           system. No records of people are being kept in the  system,  who
           are detained and released by the security forces."

 33.  The  is  confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  Denise  Graf   of   Amnesty
     International in Switzerland. She states that the GBTS database can  be
     searched by representatives of Turks in Turkey and abroad to  see  what
     information is stored against their names. Indeed she  says  that  that
     the Swiss Refugee Service regularly carries out such research. Ms  Graf
     states that
           "During my 20 years activity on Turkey, I have come across  only
           one case of a person whose record has been  found  on  the  GBTS
           computer yet regarding who there was no arrest warrant  and  who
           has never been convicted of an offence in court. So in general I
           would agree with the view  of  the  directorate  that  the  GBTS
           computer focuses on individuals who are the  subject  of  arrest
           warrants."

 34. This evidence about the GBTS comes  from  a  direct  and  authoritative
     source from within the relevant Department, speaking on the  record  of
     matters within his knowledge. It is confirmed by  Ms  Graf  of  Amnesty
     International from her own practical  experience  and  that  of  others
     within the Swiss Refugee Service. Whilst  we  are  surprised  that  the
     other human rights workers who have given written/oral evidence  to  us
     have not said the same, nevertheless we accept  this  evidence  of  the
     limited scope of the GBTS, and indeed its relative transparency.

 35. If then that is the actual scope of the GBTS, what then is the evidence
     of what lies beyond  it?  Mr  Grieves  gave  us  translations  of  four
     newspaper articles, which support in part the opinions expressed by  Ms
     Ucpinar and Mr Kanat. There is an article in the Radikal  newspaper  of
     13 June 2001. It covers a speech by Assistant Professor Dr Vahit Bicak.
     He is also a human rights activist and a long-time friend of Mr  Kanat.
     He, according to Mr Kanat, lectures  on  Security  Law  at  the  Police
     Academy where he  meets  many  senior  police  officers.  Dr  Bicak  is
     reported as saying that
           "The intelligence services are able  to  gather  information  in
           relation to the issue was such  as  individual's  personalities,
           their financial status, their way of  life, their  past,  social
           status, individuals they interact with and locations,  and  that
           information is kept as confidential records."
     The report also states that the Turkish authorities are entitled at law
     to undertake the tapping  of  telephone,  fax,  computer  messages  and
     letters. We also have a report from the Evrensel newspaper of  10  June
     2003 to the effect that when the Turkish Prime  Minister,  Mr  Erdogan,
     was heckled at a conference by two students who were then detained,  he
     disclosed soon afterwards to the media what was said to be  their  "GBT
     records" which showed that they had "a stain  in  their  past  records.
     However despite that they have neither  been  detained  nor  arrested."
     Next we have been given an article from the  Radikal  newspaper  of  18
     April 2003 to the effect that the police do not delete from  their  own
     records, judicial records which have been pardoned but keep them on the
     files of individuals to assist  security  investigations.  The  article
     suggests that some 1.5 million  people  have  been  registered  by  the
     police with a record since the military coup of 12 September 1989.  The
     final article, also from the Radikal newspaper,  is  from  14  February
     1999. It states that 90 percent of people detained by  the  police  are
     released as a result of clean GBTS records. It also suggests that there
     is a record of individual detentions maintained in a detention book  at
     the police station involved.

 36. We would observe at this point that this  material  and  the  incidents
     described are somewhat limited in  range  but  are  relied  upon  to  a
     considerable extent by various of the experts for key aspects in  their
     evidence.

 37. The broadest view was taken by Mr Kanat. Indeed it is fair to say  that
     some of his oral evidence to us went beyond his  written  evidence  and
     appeared to take Mr Grieves by surprise, in that he had  to  amend  his
     very detailed written submissions to take account of it. In essence, Mr
     Kanat described a deep and pervasive culture of  information  gathering
     about its citizens undertaken by the Turkish Government as a result  of
     having experienced three military coups in 80 years. He took  the  view
     that every record kept by any branch of the authorities over very  many
     years had now been fully computerised centrally by KIHBI, which  is  an
     information centre where the Ministry of the Interior of Turkey gathers
     and keeps information from various departments on  its  citizens.  This
     information comes from mainly  three  different  organisations  -  GBTS
     (which is maintained by  the  Department  dealing  with  smuggling  and
     organised  crime),  the  Gendarmerie,  and  the  National  Intelligence
     Department (MIT). It also included information from  the  Courts  about
     people who were wanted or  arrested;  tab  records  which  covered  all
     previous detentions and family members (extending to cousins)  who  had
     been imprisoned or punished; entries and exits from  passport  control;
     information records about a person and  his  family's  closeness  to  a
     political party, their activities, movements  and  economic  situation,
     and the people they associate with. All this information goes into  the
     KIHBI computer system, which is accessible from the computer  terminals
     at the airports and land borders.   It  can  be  accessed  in  passport
     booths, although  the  border  police  at  passport  control  are  only
     responsible for  checking  the  information  about  the  passport.   If
     further questioning is required the person is handed over to the police
     at the police station attached to the airport.

 38. Mr Kanat insisted that his detailed information  was  certain  and  not
     speculative. He was pressed at various times both by Mr Grieves and  Ms
     Giovannetti to explain the sources of his information, especially about
     the breadth of the computer  records  and  their  availability  at  the
     airport. He offered the following.
           1. Much of what he said was common knowledge in Turkey.
           2. He had acted as a human rights lawyer and activist  for  many
              years and relied upon his own observations, and those of  his
              colleagues.
           3. He had had a meeting with Mr Omer Aydin on the GBTS.
           4. Mr Vahit Bicak, who was a lecturer on  security  law  at  the
              Police Academy, was an old friend from law school. He let him
              from time to time and discussed these issues with him.
           5. There were reports in the media.

 39. Although a part of what Mr Kanat  had  to  say  was  reflected  in  the
     evidence of others, his very broad oral evidence about  the  extent  of
     the integration of information at KIHBI and its  full  availability  on
     computer at the airports and elsewhere was not.  Despite many  attempts
     to elicit more specific sourcing  for  this  information,  he  did  not
     provide it. We do not consider that this was the result of any problems
     of interpretation, because similar difficulties arose on the second day
     of the hearing when there was a  different  and  extremely  experienced
     interpreter with whom there were no interpretation difficulties at all,
     be it on technical terms or otherwise. We consider  that  a  lawyer  of
     many years experience like Mr Kanat should readily understand our  need
     for proper sourcing of definite information and the distinction  to  be
     made between speculation and certainty.  Unfortunately  we  formed  the
     view that Mr Kanat did not, and appeared  to  us  to  treat  relatively
     limited information as being supportive of his general  preconceptions,
     when in reality and on fuller enquiry it was not.

 40. Thus, if everything that Mr Kanat had to say is  common  knowledge,  we
     would have expected fuller evidence of it in the other reports  of  the
     experts and elsewhere. Equally, the limited examples he cited from  his
     own experience did not, in our judgement, support the broad assumptions
     he derived from them. One of the few specific examples  quoted  by  him
     related to an incident in July 2003 when a client of  his,  of  Turkish
     origins who lived in Dsseldorf in Germany  and  who  was  involved  in
     political activities there, asked for his assistance  in  returning  to
     Turkey for a holiday.  He asked Mr Kanat  to  be  available  at  Ankara
     airport to assist him if necessary. On the date of his return, Mr Kanat
     went to the airport and presented his  letter  of  authority  from  the
     client.  In due course he was allowed to walk through to  the  passport
     booth, when his client had arrived.  Mr Kanat said that he was able  to
     see the computer screen used by the border  policeman  and  saw  on  it
     information such as that his client had been detained on 21 March  1991
     by the Elazig Security Department  because  of  Nevroz  activities.  Mr
     Kanat said that the border policeman said "Yes that's OK.   This  is  a
     tab record.  You can take your  client  and  go".  This  was  the  most
     specific source cited by Mr Kanat for his view that all records of  all
     detentions everywhere in the country  about  all  people  detained  are
     computerised and available to the border police at the airport passport
     booths. We consider there  are  some  obvious  difficulties  with  this
     proposition. First, his client was not a typical case.  He was  himself
     concerned that his political activities abroad might lead to his  being
     picked out on return. This  would  be  broadly  consistent  with  other
     evidence that there could be detailed records maintained at the airport
     relating to expatriate Turks, and indeed non-Turks, if they were  known
     to  the  Turkish  authorities  for  perceived  anti-Turkish  activities
     abroad.  Second, his decision to ask Mr Kanat to appear at the  airport
     to assist him if necessary and, for this purpose, to provide him with a
     signed letter of authority, whilst apparently not  unusual  in  Turkey,
     must nevertheless have  indicated  to  the  authorities  prior  to  the
     client's actual arrival at the passport  booth,  that  there  might  be
     something for them to investigate  and  to  seek  further  information.
     Finally we note that notwithstanding the information  revealed  on  the
     computer screen, the client was allowed to  walk  through  the  airport
     with Mr Kanat without difficulty. Though we do not know the history  of
     this individual, this example does not appear to be consistent with  Mr
     Kanat's  evidence  that  policemen  at  passport   booths   were   only
     responsible for checking information about passports, and that  further
     inquiries would be made after transfer of the individual to the  police
     station if any concern was aroused from the tab record.

 41. We also consider that the press articles produced to us, including  the
     references to Mr Bicak's comments, do  not  support  Mr  Kanat's  wider
     conclusions. Nor do the observations by Mr Aydin as  described  in  his
     letter quoted above correspond with Mr Kanat's view that Mr  Aydin  had
     confirmed his wider conclusions. Indeed it  appeared  from  Mr  Kanat's
     testimony that the focus of their meeting was his  objection  to  spent
     convictions appearing in the GBTS. We also note that the joint  written
     report of 20 September 2004, submitted by Mr Kanat  together  with  the
     chairman of the Human Rights Association, Mr Husnu Ondul who is also  a
     lawyer, is more circumspect in its conclusions.  It states for example
           "12.  We  think  that  the  police  officers  that  conduct  the
           detention procedure at the airport could have knowledge  of  the
           unofficial tab records about the  individual,  apart  from   the
           GBTS records".
     We do not consider that this difference can be satisfactorily explained
     away, as Mr Kanat sought to do by saying that the joint report used the
     official language of the Association. For these reasons we do not  give
     weight to the opinions expressed by Mr Kanat that are not reflected  in
     other evidence or supported by specific sourcing.

 42. Dr Gerger confirms that the GBTS comprises the  matters  that  we  have
     described above as detailed by Mr Aydin, but also states that:
           "In fact, technically, it would not be correct  to  speak  of  a
           single GBT  system  as  there  are  three  different  GBD  [sic]
           systems, each layer of data storage scheme includes  distinctive
           details about a person.  The first level only contains  a  basic
           set of data.  For example, a record of an  evasion  of  military
           service (draft  evasion)  does  not  show  up  in  this  system.
           Officials in the ordinary police stations only  have  access  to
           this level of data storage and records.  For  more  detail  they
           need to refer the case to central authorities, who  have  access
           to the higher levels which contain  more  information  including
           previous  detentions  that  have  not  been  followed  by  legal
           action."
           "Previous detentions where there has been no further  action  or
           criminal charges are the most worrying feature  of  the  system.
           In that sense, it contains data which is profoundly political in
           nature and hence of an extrajudicial character."

 43. Dr Gerger cites as the source for his latter view the  example  of  the
     student, Mehtap Yurtluk, who heckled the Turkish Prime Minister  during
     a speech. We have already referred to a press account of this incident,
     which apparently received very wide coverage in the media.   Dr  Gerger
     interviewed Ms Yurtluk himself and was told that she had been  detained
     on  several  occasions  during  protests  against  the  Turkish  higher
     education system that none of these had ever resulted  in  criminal  or
     other proceedings being brought against  her.  He  therefore  concluded
     that  the  GBTS  must  contain  information  about  detentions  without
     judicial involvement and can be  accessed  at  short  notice.  He  also
     states that the outcome of a GBTS search is unpredictable as  there  is
     no  "universal,  common,  internalised  behaviour   by   the   security
     agencies". Nor is there a  legally  sanctioned,  practically  respected
     procedure.

 44. It appears to us that Dr Gerger is in effect saying here  is  that  the
     security  services  at  high  levels  in  Turkey   collect   additional
     information beyond that contained in the GBTS (as we have  accepted  it
     is defined) and this is accessible to security officers on  the  ground
     on a selective basis. This appears to us to be  broadly  in  line  with
     what Ms Giovannetti accepted on behalf of  the  Appellant.  Indeed,  we
     would expect the security detail attached to the Turkish Prime Minister
     to have access to the highest level of information.

 45. This additional secret information, which some refer to generically  as
     "tab" or "information" records, would  appear  to  include  information
     about  at  least  some  detentions  that  have  not  involved  judicial
     intervention. By way of examples, Dr Gerger has identified the case  of
     the young student who was detained in a number of protests against  the
     Turkish university system. Mr Kanat has identified the expatriate  Turk
     from Dsseldorf, who was involved in political  activities  there,  and
     which produced a record  on  return  of  a  previous  determination  in
     Turkey.

 46. This view is also reflected and extended in the evidence of  the  other
     experts such as Mr Elci. Ms Ucpinar describes a newspaper report  about
     a student at an army college  who  was  expelled  three  months  before
     graduation because a security investigation showed that his father used
     to be a member of the teachers' association that was closed during  the
     period of military rule, and his elder brother  was  a  member  of  the
     teachers' union. She also relied upon  the  case  of  the  student  who
     heckled the Prime Minister.

 47. Ms Graf states that the  various  branches  of  the  security  services
     maintain records other than the GBTS. They are secret  and  it  is  not
     possible to get information about them. She maintains that they are not
     centralised but are easily accessible  from  across  the  country  when
     inquiries are made. Thus certain asylum seekers living  in  Switzerland
     are wanted by the Turkish police without being  recorded  in  the  GBTS
     system.

 48. It seems clear that some further information is  collected  about  some
     people. The more difficult issue is how far this further record keeping
     extends. Mr Grieves has invited us to accept the evidence of  Mr  Kanat
     and others  that  the  Turkish  state  has  a  voracious  appetite  for
     information about its citizens arising from  its  history,  as  meaning
     that it keeps and maintains secret and  illegal  information  in  great
     detail on a very large number of its citizens.

 49. Dr Gerger identified a report in the national newspaper Hurriyet of  10
     March 2004, publishing a directive sent by the 2nd Armoured Brigade  to
     certain military headquarters and top civilian administrators demanding
     that local authorities  provide  intelligence  on  certain  people  and
     groups,  such  as  separatists,   leftists,   thinkers   and   writers,
     philosophical societies, minorities  and  those  who  are  inclined  to
     perceive themselves as members of  minorities,  certain  radio  and  TV
     stations, Internet chat groups, artistic societies,  pro-Americans  and
     supporters of the European Union.

 50. Mr Kanat also referred to the Hurriyet article and gave evidence that a
     tab record would be opened  on  every  individual  who  had  ever  been
     detained  for  a  political  reason  as  perceived   by   the   Turkish
     authorities, and every member of his family extending even to  maternal
     cousins. The record would  include  information  about  their  economic
     situation, where they go, where they  come  from,  who  they  see,  any
     family involvement with HADEP etc. He suggested that  this  information
     would be kept locally in  the  individual's  home  area  and  would  be
     transferred to any new area, upon registration with the  local  Mukhtar
     there.  Moreover records would be sent from the local area to KIHBI  to
     be included in their central computer system.

 51.  Mr  Elci  considers  that  records  of  detentions  without   judicial
     intervention are maintained. Both Mr Kanat and Ms Ucpinar  referred  to
     the press report quoting Dr Bicak to the effect  that  "information  is
     collected by intelligence units on  individual's  characters,  economic
     circumstances, lifestyles, backgrounds, social  status,  contacts,  and
     whereabouts."

 52. We do not consider that the evidence from  Mr  McDowall  adds  anything
     material. Mr Grieves told us he was not called to  give  oral  evidence
     because what he had to say was mainly second hand. We agree  with  this
     judgment. As the Tribunal has held on various  occasions,  Mr  McDowall
     cannot be considered as an "independent expert" but rather has his  own
     strong personal views, and acts in  effect  as  an  informed  advocate.
     Indeed he himself effectively acknowledges that in his statement of  25
     July 2004 where he states "Incidentally I never claim to be  an  expert
     and it would be an arrogance for me to do so. I only wish to be  judged
     by the quality of what I say".

 53. Mr Yildiz uses the term GBTS generically. Subject to  that,  he  states
     that where a person detained is alleged to have been politically active
     or is otherwise perceived as an  opponent  of  the  state,  it  is  the
     practice for their detentions to be placed on the GBTS,  which  can  be
     accessed by the police.

 54. Mr Yildiz also produced what he said was a copy of  extracts  allegedly
     from a notebook kept by a member of the JITEM (the intelligence  branch
     of the  Jandarma)  in  the  1990s,  demonstrating  the  extent  of  the
     information gathered by a single official in a particular area. It  had
     been obtained via a news agency in the context of preparation of a case
     against Turkey in the ECHR. Mr Yildiz said it related to the years 1997
     to 1999. We have no credible provenance for this document.  It  appears
     to have been written in part on diary paper from as early as 1994  (not
     1997). There are 21 pages only. If it is a genuine  document,  we  have
     either  been  given  only  selective  extracts  or  alternatively  this
     individual did not actually maintain much of a record of his activities
     over the three or six years the record was allegedly kept. Thus  we  do
     not consider that much weight could be given to this  document  on  its
     own. Nevertheless we have taken it into account as an  illustration  of
     the broader evidence that the authorities collect, at a local level  at
     least, a wide variety of information but we note  it  does  not  reveal
     what use was made of that information, or what weight was given to  it.
     Some of it relates to a review of  the  prosecution  of  policemen  and
     soldiers in respect of an incident in an E-type prison on 24  September
     1996. Other parts relate to people against whom  arrest  warrants  were
     issued or prosecutions undertaken, voting patterns  in  certain  areas,
     and a ragbag of information  about  a  variety  of  people,  with  some
     individuals, such as the lawyer Abdullah Akin, appearing on a number of
     occasions.

 55. Of potentially more general interest is the  written  statement  by  Mr
     Dil, who describes the sort of information he saw recorded at  a  local
     Jandarma gendarme  station  on  a  card  index  system  in  the  period
     1990/1991,  whilst  he  was  serving  there  during   his   period   of
     conscription. Again we have some reservations about this  evidence.  Mr
     Dil is not an expert witness but in  effect  a  witness  of  fact.  The
     statement offered is not a contemporaneous note of his observations but
     arose from evidence given in support of his sister's successful  asylum
     appeal in June 2004. He himself came to the UK as an asylum  seeker  in
     1995 and was granted  exceptional  leave  to  remain  under  a  backlog
     clearance scheme in 1999. He has now applied for  indefinite  leave  to
     remain. It is stated in the determination of his sister's  appeal  that
     he comes from a well  known  family  in  Kayseri  of  Alevi  Kurds  and
     supporters  of  revolutionary  left  wing  politics.  Yet  it   appears
     nevertheless that he was posted to a gendarme station in Oltu  Town  in
     Erzurum, which on the face of it is somewhat  surprising.  He  explains
     that because of his background he was not trusted with secret work  but
     was  an  "ordinary"  gendarme  performing  routine  tasks.  However  he
     sometimes helped the "clerks" who were trusted and chatted to them.  As
     a result of this he picked up some information about the record keeping
     system. Despite our reservations  about  his  evidence  for  the  above
     reasons, we nevertheless found what he had to say was  informative  and
     much in line with the conclusions we formed from the general evidence.

 56. His account was set in the early 1990s when the records in the gendarme
     station were not computerised. However there is no good evidence before
     us to show that subsequent computerisation, insofar as it occurred, did
     not reflect the established pattern of the existing manual records.

 57. Mr Dil differentiated between different levels  of  information,  which
     were kept in different rooms according to their importance  and  degree
     of security. Thus documents with a high  degree  of  national  security
     were kept locked in the room of the Commander.  Documents  relating  to
     people who were accused and brought before the Prosecutor  or  where  a
     court order was made against them were kept in a filing cabinet in  the
     Commander's room. Administrative documents and "less important security
     documents" were kept  in  the  administration  room  where  the  clerks
     worked.  This  included  a  list  of   "suspected   and   ne'er-do-well
     (delinquent) persons" that was typed  and  kept  up  to  date  and  was
     readily available in the clerk's room.  This list comprised many  types
     of things, including suspected crimes and suspected  political  crimes,
     when there was no proof. Anyone suspected of giving support to a banned
     organisation would be put on the list. There was a list of banned books
     in the Jandarma station.  People suspected of reading  banned  material
     could be put on the list. If an incident happened in the area, then the
     Jandarma would detain and investigate suspects on their list.
.
 58. Mr Dil described the record keeping system in some detail  and  made  a
     clear distinction between information about the "suspected and ne'er-do-
     wells" on the one hand, and people who were accused, and for whom there
     was a prosecutor's decision made or court order issued, on the other.

 59. The latter were maintained on a  colour  coded  filing  system  in  the
     stations. It distinguished  between  petty  criminals,  draft  evaders,
     smuggling and "forest" (sic) crimes, and  political  offences.  Details
     were sent to the  central  system  in  Ankara  and  to  the  provincial
     gendarme HQ. There were strict rules about when these files had  to  be
     destroyed. A name would only appear on a  card  in  this  system  if  a
     person was brought before the prosecutor or there was  a  court  order.
     This system sounds remarkably similar to the GBTS and in our  judgement
     corroborates the evidence of Mr Aydin and Ms Graf. In  effect  the  new
     computerised system reflected the structure and rules of the  old  card
     system, as we would have expected in the absence of  good  evidence  to
     the contrary.

 60. The other information, such as about the "suspected and ne'er-do-wells"
     was maintained at the  station  where  it  was  gathered.  It  was  not
     routinely sent to Ankara or to the provincial gendarme HQ.  However,  a
     summary was available  on  request  from  another  police  or  gendarme
     station, or government office, e.g. if a person was seeking a job as  a
     policeman, or was applying for a firearms licence, or  wanted  to  sell
     alcohol in a restaurant. If an enquiry was made, a gendarme would  look
     at the relevant file and make a recommendation. If a person came to the
     adverse attention of the authorities in another city details  could  be
     exchanged. A list could also be taken when gendarmes were going to make
     random identity checks.

 61. Additionally Mr Dil said that relevant information could be sent to the
     tax authorities or to the Civil  Registry  Office  e.g.  to  request  a
     marker be placed on the NUFUS file to the effect that "If  this  person
     comes to obtain a new NUFUS card, contact the police." He did no say in
     what circumstances this would be done, but logic suggests that it would
     arise  if  a  person  about  whom  there  is  material  suspicion   has
     disappeared from his home area without explanation.

 62. What conclusions then do we draw from all this evidence?


     GBTS

 63. As we have said we accept the evidence of Mr Aydin, corroborated by  Ms
     Graf as accurately describing the defined and limited ambit of the GBTS
     system. It does not include detentions by the security forces that have
     not resulted in some form of court intervention.  We  also  accept  the
     evidence (and this has  not  been  disputed  by  either  representative
     before us), that the  GBTS  is  fairly  widely  accessible  and  is  in
     particular available to the border police in  the  immigration  control
     booths at Istanbul airport as described in A (Turkey). Nor is there any
     reason to suppose that it would not also be relatively widely available
     elsewhere in Turkey to those in the security forces with  access  to  a
     computer terminal. Dr Gerger, of whom we shall say more  later,  indeed
     confirms that it is a digital data storage system that  is  nationality
     accessible and  can  be  retrieved  by  the  police,  Jandarma,  border
     security guards, and by the mobile security personnel  with  laptop  or
     handheld computers. This would be the logical  computerised  embodiment
     of the regulated system described by Mr Dil. We therefore  accept  this
     evidence and conclude that the  GBTS  would  appear  to  be  the  basic
     information tool of various arms of the Turkish security forces.


     Other Information Systems

 64. Of course this leaves open further issues about what other  information
     systems there are, and what may be available or accessible to  specific
     branches of the Turkish authorities, and in what circumstances. We have
     been urged by Ms Giovannetti, when considering these wider issues  that
     may not be so clearly defined in the evidence, to use common sense  and
     avoid speculation. Mr Grieves reminded us of the low standard of  proof
     that is applicable in asylum and associated human rights cases.


     Border Control Information

 65. Using this recommended approach, we put it to Ms Giovannetti  that,  on
     the evidence before us, there would logically be two other  information
     systems, independent of GBTS, available in the  immigration  booths  at
     Istanbul airport. The first is  the  record  maintained  of  all  legal
     arrivals and departures to and from Turkey  by  Turkish  citizens.  The
     second is a list of undesirable aliens to be denied  entry  to  Turkey,
     and of expatriate Turks, whom the authorities had identified  as  being
     involved in anti Turkish activities  abroad.  The  evidence  before  us
     suggests that such records are indeed kept. The IND  Home  Office  Fact
     Finding Mission report states -
           "2.2.5 The national police (Department for  Foreigners,  Borders
           and Asylum) are responsible for carrying out passport and  other
           checks on all those  entering  and  leaving  Turkey.   They  are
           supported by a sophisticated computer system  that  records  and
           links the arrival and  departure  of  all  nationals.   On  both
           arrival  and  departure  the  names  of   all   passengers   are
           automatically run for a computer to  establish  whether  amongst
           other things the individual is on  the  list  of  people  to  be
           prohibited from entering the country or prevented  from  leaving
           the  country  for  reasons  of,  for  example,  tax  evasion  or
           committing a crime.

 66. In part, such as in relation to people to  be  prevented  from  leaving
     Turkey, this refers to GBTS but it also goes beyond the ambit  of  that
     database and indicates that other  systems  are  accessed.  Records  of
     legal arrivals and departures are not kept on GBTS. Nor are  the  names
     of people prohibited from entering Turkey. If such  records  are  kept,
     and common sense suggests that they are, in Turkey  as  in  most  other
     countries, it must be for a purpose that is best served by having those
     records available at the immigration booths at the points of entry.  As
     noted in AG Turkey and confirmed in her own addendum statement of April
     2004, Ms Laizer was  refused  entry  to  Turkey  in  1998  at  Istanbul
     Airport. There has been speculation about the basis of this refusal but
     in our view it simply confirms that some record is also kept beyond the
     GBTS of those whom the Turkish authorities regard rightly or wrongly as
     "undesirable aliens". Ms Laizer suggests that some 55  other  non-Turks
     were included in the GBTS along with her. We do not accept  that  there
     is any credible evidence that the GBTS  has  itself  been  extended  to
     include non-resident non-Turks, but we consider it very likely  that  a
     list of "undesirable aliens" is made available  on  the  border  police
     computers. It is also reasonably likely, given the  evidence  that  the
     perceived anti-Turkish political activities of some Turkish expatriates
     living abroad are monitored by the Turkish authorities, that records of
     this will be included with the records of  "undesirables"  from  abroad
     and may well include relevant extracts from their "history" in  Turkey.
     Again the main point of keeping such a  record  would  be  to  have  it
     available in an accessible form at the border posts and  in  particular
     at the airports.

 67. Thus we conclude that, in addition to  the  information  on  the  GBTS,
     there is information available at the border control point, collated by
     the national police (Department for  Foreigners,  Borders  and  Asylum)
     recording past legal arrivals and departures of  Turkish  citizens.  We
     put this to Ms Giovannetti and she agreed. In addition we conclude that
     the names of people prohibited from entering  Turkey  as  a  result  of
     their activities abroad will be available at border points and again Ms
     Giovannetti agreed. This information relating to activity  from  abroad
     could in practical terms come only come from  information  gathered  by
     MIT and passed on by them to the border guards

 68. In our view this reconciles the personal experience of Ms  Laizer,  and
     the information seen  by  Mr  Kanat  on  the  computer  screen  in  the
     immigration booth about his client in July 2003, especially when by his
     very presence he will have signalled in advance to the authorities that
     there might be some potential cause for concern about this individual.

     Nufus Records
 69. Next, records of individuals are maintained under  the  national  Nufus
     registration system. There are two main types. The Nufus Cuzdani is the
     national  identity  card.   There  is  also  the  Nufus  Kayit   Ornegi
     (population register extract),  which  is  available  from  a  computer
     database on  request  and  upon  payment  of  a  small  fee.  Mr  Yasar
     Karadogan, a British citizen of Turkish origin recently obtained a copy
     of his own extract. He explained in a letter  that  the  basic  extract
     could be obtained by an individual, or  his  immediate  family  members
     (being parents or siblings). It comprised details  of  age,  residence,
     marriage, death, parents' and children's details, and religious status.
     Several copies of  such  documents  have  been  supplied  to  us.  This
     information was broadly confirmed in a statement by Mr J D Norton,  the
     Director of the Centre for Turkish Studies at Durham University. We see
     no reason to doubt this evidence.  Mr Karadogan also indicated that the
     full entry on the register included arrest warrants and if people  were
     stripped of nationality, but the authorities were reluctant  to  supply
     this further information. We see no good reason to doubt  this  either,
     as this would be a logical place to record such  information.  We  note
     however that the extracts supplied to us  do  not  include  information
     about anyone  beyond  immediate  family  members.   Nor  is  there  any
     evidence that this information is  available  directly  at  immigration
     booths at the airport. For the sake of completeness, we should add that
     there is also a certificate, apparently linked  to  Nufus,  called  the
     Ikametgah Belgesi. It shows a person's  place  of  residence  to  which
     official correspondence is sent, and must be  produced  if  seeking  to
     replace a lost ID card.

 70. We would also accept that it  is  possible  that  if  a  person  is  of
     material adverse interest to the authorities in his home area  but  has
     not been charged with any offence, and disappears  from  sight  without
     registering his residence elsewhere, then a marker could be  placed  on
     his NUFUS file to alert the authorities to  inform  the  police  if  he
     applies for a new NUFUS card.


     Judicial Records

 71. We also accept the evidence, to which Mr Aydin made brief reference  in
     his letter quoted above and  is  mentioned  also  elsewhere,  that  the
     Judicial Record Directorate keeps judicial records on sentences  served
     by convicted persons, separate from  GBTS.  This  is  confirmed  by  Dr
     Gerger. He names the system as "Adli Sicil." We consider it unlikely on
     the evidence before us and given the scope of GBTS on material matters,
     that there is any good reason why this separate system  would  also  be
     accessible at immigration booths at point of entry.


     "Tab" Records

 72. Thus far, we consider the evidence of  record  keeping  systems  to  be
     reasonably clear. However there  is  a  greyer  area  beyond  this.  Mr
     Grieves  has  pointed  out  that  Turkey  has  a  number  of   security
     organisations, which logically must  collect  information  relevant  to
     their activities. These comprise the police, the anti-terror branch  of
     the police,  the  Jandarma,  Jitem  (the  intelligence  branch  of  the
     Jandarma), the military police, the military/special  forces,  and  MIT
     (the Turkish Intelligence Service).

 73. What then do we make this? There is no dispute  that  some  information
     about individuals who  have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
     authorities is kept by a variety  of  organisations  in  Turkey,  which
     includes systems such as GBTS, border control  information,  Nufus  and
     judicial records to which we have  already  referred.  There  are  also
     records on individuals kept in local police and Jandarma  stations  and
     by the local Mukhtar. This information would appear to be  in  part  on
     computer and in part in documentary form. We also accept that  MIT  and
     the anti-terrorist police would have and be able to  access  a  further
     computerised system or systems that common sense suggests will  include
     information about individuals of actual or potential concern  to  them.
     It will comprise information  generated by themselves  from  their  own
     activities and possibly  information  collected  from  other  available
     information systems.

 74. It is difficult to assess, on the evidence  presently  before  us,  the
     precise extent  that  this  information  is  maintained  on  a  central
     computer system. Mr Kanat's  evidence  offers  the  extreme  view  that
     effectively all  information  of  the  most  detailed  nature  gathered
     anywhere  about  potentially  millions  of  individuals  are  kept  and
     maintained by KIHBI. In our judgment, his evidence and sourcing did not
     sustain that proposition and the evidence as a whole falls  well  short
     of establishing that.

 75. We accept that the Turkish authorities do in general seek  and  collate
     quite detailed information  about  people  they  considered  to  be  of
     adverse interest to them. That information will be at its  greatest  in
     the area where they lived, and particularly so if they lived in any  of
     the areas of conflict in the south and east of Turkey that were covered
     by the former state of emergency. That after all is where  the  Turkish
     state focused its efforts and resources  in  combating  separatism  and
     where a wide range of first hand material of widely varying degrees  of
     materiality would be obtained and assessed. It is also where there  may
     be personal recollections by  members  of  the  security  forces  about
     particular individuals and their circumstances. Such information may be
     in part computerised and in part documentary.

 76. We accept that  some  of  that  information  will  be  transferred  for
     inclusion in other record systems as relevant. It is likely  that  some
     will be passed on, possibly to KIHBI, for use by the anti terror police
     and MIT to  supplement  their  own  information.  This  would,  in  out
     judgement, be reasonably likely to include detentions  of  persons  who
     were considered to be of material significance by the  security  forces
     even if they were thereafter released without judicial involvement.  We
     do not consider that the data collected by the anti terror  police  and
     MIT would be reasonably likely to  be  directly  accessible  to  people
     outside those services, by reason of the need to maintain security, its
     overall sensitivity, and its inherent illegality.

 77. However whether the records  are  transferred  to  a  central  computer
     system  or  not,  and  whether  they  are  maintained  locally   in   a
     computerised form that might be accessible elsewhere in Turkey or  not,
     we accept that if a person is detained either  in  the  airport  police
     station after arrival or subsequently  elsewhere  in  Turkey,  and  the
     circumstances justify it, some further inquiry beyond  the  information
     in the GBTS could be made of the authorities in his  local  area  about
     him. Also, if the circumstances so justify, an enquiry could be made of
     the anti terror police or MIT to see if an individual  is  of  material
     interest to them.

 78. On this basis, we consider that the starting point in any enquiry  into
     risk on return should normally begin, not with the  airport  on  return
     but with whether the claimant would be at any real risk of  persecution
     or a breach of Article 3 in his home  area  as  a  consequence  of  his
     material history there. If the answer to that is "no", then  the  claim
     cannot normally succeed, unless of course the risk arises  from  or  is
     aggravated by other factors, such as his material activities abroad  or
     in other parts of Turkey.  Any  real  risk  would  arise  only  from  a
     person's material history, to borrow Mr Grieves' expression,  and  this
     history will in most normal circumstances be at its most  extensive  in
     the individual's home area. If on the other hand  the  answer  to  that
     question is "yes", then the separate question  of  internal  relocation
     elsewhere in Turkey (and the question of risk  of  return  to  Istanbul
     airport which turns on similar principles) has to be considered on  the
     basis of whether there are particular factors in the home area creating
     greater risk of ill-treatment there, that would not give  rise  to  the
     same degree of risk at the airport or elsewhere.  We  shall  return  to
     this subject later.

In what circumstances is there a real  risk  that  a  Returnee  to  Istanbul
Airport will be placed  in  the  non-routine  investigation  stream  and  be
subject to detailed questioning?
 79. The procedure facing returnees at  Istanbul  Airport  (which  is  where
     returnees are sent by the UK Government) is that on  arrival  a  person
     must present himself to an immigration control  booth  staffed  by  the
     border police. There is a computer  terminal  at  each  booth  and  the
     details of each person are keyed in by the border  policeman  from  the
     travel documents. Dependant on the view taken by the border  policeman,
     the returnee will either be allowed to  proceed  through  the  terminal
     without further ado, or will  be  transferred  to  the  police  station
     attached to the Airport for further questioning, which  will  typically
     take between 6 to 9 hours. Our view of the present evidence,  and  this
     reflects the long established jurisprudence of the  Tribunal,  is  that
     there is no real  risk  during  this  period  of  questioning  of  ill-
     treatment  crossing  the  high   threshold   required   to   constitute
     persecution or a breach of  Article  3.  However  if  as  a  result  of
     information derived from such questioning or from any further enquiries
     undertaken by them, the  police  decide  to  transfer  a  returnee  for
     further enquiries by the anti-terror police or possibly by MIT, it will
     be during this third phase of the process that the prospect of material
     ill-treatment arises. The CIPU report at 6.242 states the risk in these
     terms.
           "At the anti-terrorist unit of the  police,  the  suspect  being
           subjected to torture or mistreatment cannot be excluded".

 80. That torture "cannot be excluded" is not the same as "real  risk",  but
     we shall consider this issue later. At  all  events,  the  question  of
     whether and why a returnee will be stopped in the first instance at the
     immigration booth and sent for more detailed questioning at the airport
     police station is potentially significant and must be answered.

 81. If a returnee is a draft evader he will be stopped at  the  immigration
     booth when the GBTS reveals this information. He will be transferred to
     the airport police station and the military will be informed so that he
     can be collected by them. It is  again  well-established  jurisprudence
     that  draft  evaders  as  such  will  not  qualify  for   international
     protection as a consequence of their treatment on and after return.

 82. As to other returnees, we conclude there  is  no  good  reason  on  the
     evidence before us, in answering this general question to  depart  from
     the general thrust of the conclusions of the Tribunal in  paragraph  42
     of A (Turkey), which we have already quoted.  Thus  if  a  returnee  is
     travelling on a one-way emergency travel document (and no failed asylum
     seeker will be returned to Turkey by  the  British  government  without
     appropriate travel documentation), or if there  is  no  border  control
     record of a legal departure from Turkey, then  there  is  a  reasonable
     likelihood that he will be identifiable as a failed asylum  seeker  and
     could be sent to the airport police station for further  investigation.
     This  is  so  stated  in  the  CIPU  report  at  6.242.  It  does   not
     automatically follow that this would happen. For example it may be that
     when the emergency travel documents were issued by the Turkish  Embassy
     in London, some preliminary enquiries would  have  been  made  and  the
     Turkish authorities would be satisfied that the returnee is no interest
     to them. However there is a real risk of transfer.

 83.  Additionally,  even  when  the  returnee  is  travelling  on  his  own
     legitimate passport with a proper Turkish exit stamp, if  there  is  an
     entry on the databases available at the passport booth, which comprises
     the GBTS and the  border  control  information,  that  is  sufficiently
     significant to warrant further inquiries, there is again  a  reasonable
     likelihood that the returnee  will  be  transferred  for  such  further
     enquiries to the airport police station. Again it is not automatic.  We
     note in this context the specific example quoted to us by Mr  Kanat  of
     the expatriate Turk from Dsseldorf returning in 2003 for a holiday  in
     Turkey,  whose  record  at  the  immigration  control  booth  showed  a
     detention on 21 March 1991 because of Newroz activities in  Elazig.  In
     that case, he was waved through  without  being  referred  for  further
     questioning. We consider that the mere fact of some such entry  on  the
     database will not necessarily incur further questioning  unless  it  is
     considered significant.

If a person faces non-routine investigation what should he  be  expected  to
say when questioned and what further information is reasonably likely to  be
accessed in this process?
 84. The CIPU Report at 6.242 describes the nature of the questioning at the
     airport police station as mostly involving:
           "Establishment or checking personal details; reasons and  period
           of exit from Turkey; reason for the asylum application;  reasons
           for any refusal of the asylum application; any  criminal  record
           and past record at home  and  abroad  including  drug  offences;
           possible contact with illegal organisations abroad. However,  if
           there are no suspicions, as a rule after an average of  6  to  9
           hours they are released."

 85. Clearly further  information  may  arise  from  the  questioning  of  a
     returnee by the police  in  the  airport  police  station.  Mr  Grieves
     submitted  that  a  person  should  not  be  expected  to  lie  to  the
     authorities during  questioning  in  order  to  avoid  persecution.  Ms
     Giovannetti in her written reply stated the  Home  Office  position  as
     follows.
           "The Secretary of State accepts that an individual detained  and
           transferred to the airport police station would be  interrogated
           and that it is reasonably likely that further  checks  would  be
           carried  out.   However,  the  nature   and   extent   of   such
           interrogation and checks is likely to be related to  the  reason
           that the individual was stopped.  So, for example, a person  who
           does not have valid documents is  likely  to  be  questioned  in
           order to establish his identity. An individual who is thought to
           have left on false documents is likely to  be  questioned  about
           how and from whom he obtained them.
           The  Secretary  of  State  does  not  suggest  (and  never   has
           suggested) that Adjudicators should simply proceed on the  basis
           that individual can lie about his background and  circumstances.
           The right approach is to assess what questions are likely to  be
           asked of the individual and what his responses are likely to be.
           "

 86. We agree with the approach described by Ms Giovannetti. It will be  for
     an Adjudicator in each case to assess what questions are likely  to  be
     asked and how a returnee would respond without being required  to  lie.
     The examples given by Ms Giovannetti above are examples only. Where and
     whether the questioning goes beyond the ambit of questioning  described
     above, depends upon the circumstances of each case.

 87. We have already dealt  with  the  separate  question  of  what  further
     information is reasonably likely to be accessed by the  police  at  the
     airport  police  station  when   considering   the   accessibility   of
     information. As we have said, the evidence before us does  not  suggest
     in our view that any additional information  system  will  be  directly
     available at the police station beyond the GBTS and the border  control
     records. We consider however that  if  unresolved  doubts  remain  from
     questioning the returnee it is reasonably likely that further enquiries
     will  be  made  as  appropriate  in  the  circumstances  and  any   new
     information arising as a result will be assessed on its merits.

Does the Guidance of the Tribunal in A (Turkey) require review in the  light
of subsequent developments?
 88. It has been put to us that there have been three material  developments
     affecting the assessment of  risk  on  return  since  A  (Turkey)  that
     require evaluation.


     Al Qaeda

 89. The first, raised by Mr Grieves, is the Al  Qaeda  sponsored  terrorist
     attacks in Istanbul in November  2003  raised  the  state  of  security
     awareness and alertness in Turkey. We do not however  agree  that  this
     has materially changed  the  overall  security  situation.  Turkey  has
     always had particular difficulties with terrorism of various  kinds  to
     which it has vigorously responded. The emergence of Al Qaeda  pre-dated
     A (Turkey). There is no real evidence beyond speculation that the  bomb
     attacks of November 2003 have added significantly the to  the  priority
     given by the Turkish government to combating terrorism  within  Turkey,
     which has been a feature of that country's politics over many years.


     Ending of PKK Ceasefire

 90. The second matter, also raised by Mr Grieves,  is  the  ending  of  the
     PKK's unilateral ceasefire in the summer  of  2004  with  a  consequent
     increase in violence and deaths in parts of southeast Turkey. We accept
     the evidence, to which  we  were  referred  by  Mr  Grieves,  that  the
     violence has escalated, though it is not anywhere near the levels  seen
     at the peak of the conflict.  Indeed,  the  PKK  ceasefire  was  always
     unilateral, and the Turkish authorities  continued  operations  against
     the PKK during it. In general terms  however,  the  escalation  of  the
     violence reinforces our view, to which we shall return when considering
     internal relocation, that  the  risk  to  a  Kurdish  returnee  of  ill
     treatment by the authorities will be greater if his home area is in  an
     area of conflict in Turkey than it would be elsewhere. We have  already
     described how the record keeping about an individual would  be  at  its
     greatest in his home area. Additional factors increasing risk in a home
     area within the areas of conflict include  for  example,  the  evidence
     that some of the ill-treatment carried out by the security forces there
     was designed  to  intimidate  local  Kurdish  populations  from  giving
     assistance to PKK fighters, and in some areas  to  depopulate  villages
     altogether to deny the PKK  the  opportunity  for  support  from  local
     communities. Also a risk of ill-treatment arises from  people  who  are
     perceived as "ne'er-do-wells" being questioned  about  local  terrorist
     attacks. The same considerations would not apply in areas where the PKK
     is not active and the risk of ill-treatment  would  be  correspondingly
     reduced. Thus the escalation of violence is a factor in assessing  risk
     in the areas where violence occurs.


     EU Reports for 2004

 91. The third development to which we were referred is the  publication  on
     the first day of the hearing of this appeal, on 6th  October  2004,  of
     the EC Recommendation on Turkey's accession to  the  EU  and  its  2004
     Regular Report. A (Turkey) dealt  only  with  the  2003  Report.  These
     documents are of  material  relevance,  and  in  some  respects  reveal
     information, which is not dealt with in  the  April  2004  CIPU  -  for
     example the CPT report in March 2004 and the Fact  Finding  Mission  in
     September 2004. The regular and detailed assessments by  the  EU  about
     candidate states for membership, including an analysis of the  progress
     made in removing obstacles to membership, have been very helpful to the
     Tribunal in its jurisprudence on other candidate countries. They  will,
     we  expect,  be  so  increasingly  in  respect  of  Turkey,  where  its
     traditionally poor record on  human  rights  is  a  major  obstacle  to
     membership,  which  the  Turkish  Government  recognises  and   appears
     committed to addressing. We do not accept Mr  Grieves  submission  that
     the present assessment is to some extent skewed by a "carrot and stick"
     approach by the EU to Turkey. The report appears to  us  to  be  firmly
     based in fact. Indeed  the  credibility  of  the  Commission  would  be
     undermined were it not so.

 92. The EU documents taken as a whole show that considerable  progress  has
     been made in addressing human rights issues in  Turkey  since  the  new
     government took power in 2002 and lifted the state  of  emergency,  but
     there is still further need for improvement.

 93. Page 2 of  the  Report  refers  to  the  "substantial  legislative  and
     institutional convergence  in  Turkey  towards  European  standards  in
     particular after the 2002 elections".  The report refers  in  the  same
     paragraph to changes to the judicial system and the  abolition  of  the
     State Security Courts. Turkey recognises the primacy  of  international
     and European law. The death penalty has been abolished. Those sentenced
     for expressing non-violent  opinion  have  been  released.  Fundamental
     freedoms of expression and assembly have been extended. Cultural rights
     for the Kurds have started to be recognised. The state of emergency has
     been lifted everywhere. The process of normalisation has begun  in  the
     South East.

 94. On page 6 of the report, under the heading Reinforcing  and  Supporting
     the Reform Process with Turkey, a number of important points are  made,
     which can be used in the future to measure the  progress  made  towards
     meeting human rights targets.
           "... the policy of zero  tolerance  towards  torture  should  be
           implemented through determined efforts  on  all  levels  of  the
           Turkish state to eradicate remaining instances of  torture.  ...
           the need  to  consolidate  and  broaden  political  reform  also
           applies to the normalisation and development of the situation in
           the South East  including  ...  initiatives  to  facilitate  the
           return of displaced people and to allow for  full  enjoyment  of
           rights and freedoms by the Kurds".

 95. The Conclusions of the Report are set out at page 7.  Sub  paragraph  2
     refers to the strong efforts undertaken  by  Turkey  to  ensure  proper
     implementation of the reforms.

 96. In Part 2 of the Introduction at page 8 reference is made to  the  2004
     Programme for Turkey. The programme focuses on the various  priorities,
     which include Justice and Home Affairs under which moves will  be  made
     towards a judicial  system  under  which  convictions  are  secured  on
     evidence rather than on the extraction of confessions.

 97. The Report describes the developments since the Helsinki conference  in
     December  1999. At page 17 it is said that  "...  considerable  efforts
     have been  made  to  strengthen  the  fight  against  torture  and  ill
     treatment, in particular through abolishing incommunicado detention and
     improving the rules for pre trial detention, access  to  a  lawyer  and
     medical examinations. - The authorities have adopted a  zero  tolerance
     policy towards torture. - Although torture  is  no  longer  systematic,
     numerous cases of ill treatment including  torture  still  continue  to
     occur and further efforts will be required to eradicate such practice".



 98. In September 2004 a new Penal Code was  adopted.  The  Code  introduces
     modern European standards (page 24). At page 29 it is said that the new
     Penal Code will have positive effects on a number of areas  related  to
     human rights particularly women's rights, discrimination and torture.

 99. At pages 33 and 34 a  series  of  measures  are  described  which  have
     improved civil and political rights.
        a. since May 2004 the death penalty has been abolished
        b. most of the legislative and administrative framework required to
           combat torture and ill treatment has been in  place  since  2002
           when the government announced a zero  tolerance  policy  against
           torture
        c. pre trial detention procedures have been brought into line  with
           European standards
        d. the rights of detainees have been strengthened
        e. the new Penal Code increases the sentences for  perpetrators  of
           torture
        f. in April 04 a circular was issued for law enforcement  officials
           to avoid methods that may engender allegations of ill  treatment
           of detainees
        g.  in  October  03  a  circular  was  issued  instructing   public
           prosecutors to investigate personally allegations of torture and
           ill treatment.

100. The report states, at page 34, that "The Government's  policy  of  zero
     tolerance and its serious efforts to implement the legislative  reforms
     have led to a decline in instances of torture. In the first six  months
     of 2004 the Turkish Human Rights Association  received  692  complaints
     related to torture, a 29% decrease on the first six months of 2003.  Of
     the total human rights violations claims received by the  Human  Rights
     Presidency between January and  June  2004,  a  significant  proportion
     related to "torture and ill treatment" indicating  that  such  practice
     remains a problem.

101. In March 2004 a report was published by the European Committee for  the
     Prevention of Torture and Ill Treatment following field visits  to  the
     South and South East  of  Turkey.  The  report  notes  "a  considerable
     improvement in detention facilities and in the treatment of  people  in
     custody. The use of torture methods such as suspension by the arms  and
     electric shocks is now very rare, although in some police  headquarters
     such methods were reported. Less detectable methods of torture and  ill
     treatment still occur". (first paragraph page 35).

102. A project is currently underway to train 2500 doctors who work  in  the
     western part of Turkey. The training programme is  in  accordance  with
     the  Forensic  Medicine  Institution's   "Manual   on   the   Effective
     Investigation and Documentation of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman  or
     Degrading Treatment". (page 35 paragraph 3)

103. The fifth paragraph on the  same  page  refers  to  there  still  being
     reports of arbitrary  detentions,  disappearances,  abductions  and  at
     least one alleged extra judicial killing. The final paragraph  on  page
     35 states that the Commission  undertook  a  fact  finding  mission  in
     September 2004 to carry out a further check on the situation vis a  vis
     torture  and  ill  treatment  in  Turkey.  "The  mission  enabled   the
     Commission to confirm that the Government  is  seriously  pursuing  its
     policy of zero tolerance in the fight against torture; however numerous
     cases of ill treatment including torture still continue  to  occur  and
     further efforts will be required to eradicate such practices".

104. Reference is made at  page  49  paragraph  6  to  a  greater  tolerance
     towards the Kurdish language and the expression of Kurdish  culture  in
     its different forms. The Newroz celebrations were authorised  and  only
     minor incidents were reported.

105. At page 50, second paragraph, it is said  that  the  situation  in  the
     south and south east of the country has continued to improve  gradually
     since 1999 both in terms of security and the enjoyment  of  fundamental
     freedoms. Reference is made in the fourth  paragraph  to  the  security
     threat increasing since  the  Kongra  Gel  announced  the  end  of  the
     ceasefire                 in                 June                 2004.



106. We have considered this new evidence as a whole in the context  of  the
     submissions by both Mr Grieves and Ms  Giovannetti,  and  the  evidence
     generally. We conclude that the Turkish Government has made since  1999
     and particularly since 2002, and is continuing to make  year  on  year,
     serious, sustained and determined efforts to address its  traditionally
     poor human rights record in support of its determination  to  become  a
     member of  the  European  Union.  Of  particular  significance  is  the
     government's adoption of a zero tolerance policy  towards  torture  and
     the structural and legislative initiatives  undertaken  to  carry  this
     into effect.  Of importance to Kurds in particular is the acceptance of
     non-violent  expressions  of  their  culture  and  language   and   the
     authorisation of Newroz celebrations. Where Kurdish individuals have in
     the past experienced difficulties for involvement in  such  activities,
     they would now be less likely to attract the  same  level  of  risk  in
     relation to their past record or future activities.

107. However the key issue is the extent to which torture is still  used  by
     the security forces, notwithstanding the Government's  policy  of  zero
     tolerance. In essence the risk of torture is what creates the  need  in
     appropriate Turkish cases  for  international  protection.  We  invited
     specific submissions from the representatives on  two  aspects  of  the
     report.

108. The first was what we should understand by the  conclusion  in  the  EU
     documents that torture "is no longer systematic". On this  point  there
     was agreement between Mr Grieves and Ms  Giovannetti  that  this  meant
     that torture was not now approved  of  and  tolerated  at  the  highest
     political level.  With this we agree.

109. The second aspect on  which  we  invited  further  submissions  was  in
     relation to the observations in the EU documents  about  the  level  of
     incidence of torture on  the  ground,  and  whether  the  reference  to
     torture outside detention centres reflected an increase in torture with
     a shift of practice, or whether there was now a greater willingness  by
     victims to report torture. Mr Grieves has argued that the evidence as a
     whole shows that torture is still used on the  ground  as  a  pervasive
     technique in investigations, securing  confessions,  and  in  order  to
     intimidate. Ms Giovannetti argued that overall reports of torture  have
     declined by 29% in  the  last  year  and  that  this  was  significant.
     Moreover there was some evidence to show that the risk of  torture  was
     uneven across the country, with the implementation of Government policy
     being more effective in areas outside the south east, and  less  so  in
     the south east.

110. Looking at the evidence as a whole in  the  light  of  the  submissions
     made, we  accept  that  the  statistics  demonstrate  some  significant
     reduction in reported incidents as the Government's policies  begin  to
     bite. There is also some suggestion that the use of  torture  may  have
     shifted to other less formally recorded places and is  less  detectable
     by physical manifestations, though this practice has often in the  past
     been a feature of cases coming to us. There is also the likelihood that
     examples of torture are in this new and more  open  climate  of  debate
     about human rights in Turkey, as described by Mr Kanat, more likely  to
     result in complaints now than in the past. Our assessment is  that  the
     Turkish Government is taking the necessary action  in  legislative  and
     structural terms to address the problem and has made its zero tolerance
     policy towards torture clear. However the use of torture  is  long  and
     deep-seated in the security forces and it will take time, and continued
     and determined, effort to bring it under control in practice.  It  will
     require the strong  and  public  demonstration  of  the  punishment  of
     abusive officials, to bring and end to  the  climate  of  impunity  for
     torturers. It is in our view therefore premature on the evidence before
     us  to  conclude  that  the  long  established  view  of  the  Tribunal
     concerning the potential risk of torture in detention, as described  in
     A (Turkey) has yet been overtaken by material changes in the  behaviour
     of the security forces on the ground. The present evidence does not  in
     our view establish either that there is no  longer  any  real  risk  of
     torture in detention at all, or that there are now "torture free" areas
     in Turkey. However there are strong pressures for change emanating from
     the Turkish Government  and  its  actions,  and  these  questions  will
     require review as further evidence  becomes  available.  For  the  time
     being as in the past, the risk in each case must be assessed on its own
     merits from the individual's own history and the relevant risk  factors
     as described in paragraphs 46 and 47 of A (Turkey).

111. In saying this, we emphasise that many of the individual  risk  factors
     described in A (Turkey) comprise in  themselves  a  broad  spectrum  of
     variable  potential  risk  that  requires  careful  evaluation  on  the
     specific facts of each appeal as a whole. The factors  described  in  A
     (Turkey) were not intended as a simplistic checklist and should not  be
     used as  such.  Thus,  not  all  "detentions"  will  be  of  comparable
     significance in assessing risk.  For  example,  in  the  light  of  the
     positive developments in Turkey in recent years, described above, there
     could be a considerable difference between the  potential  significance
     when evaluating present risk to a person who say was  rounded  up  with
     many others in the course  of  Kurdish  Nevroz  celebrations  and  held
     overnight before being released without charge, and a  person  who  was
     ill-treated along with others in his village in implementation  of  the
     clearance programme in the Southeast on the one hand, and a person  who
     was specifically and individually targeted  and  detained  for  reasons
     inherent in his personal history and seriously ill treated over a  more
     protracted period on the other hand. This comparison illustrates why we
     caution against a too simplistic approach to "headline" factors.

Should  an  individual  (and  his  family)  be  expected  to  live   without
registration with the local Mukhtar in order to avoid persecution?
112. The factual evidence before  the  Tribunal  from  Mr  Kanat  about  the
     practicalities of a person failing to register with the  local  Mukhtar
     when moving to a new area has not been disputed by Ms Giovannetti. Such
     registration is in legal terms compulsory and on registration a  person
     will receive a certificate of residence. This certificate will have  to
     be produced by that individual whenever he seeks to do a wide range  of
     things in Turkey that engage the state and in some respects the private
     sector. Thus he will need a certificate of residence in order to  vote,
     get married, register the birth of a child, send  children  to  school,
     obtain or renew a passport, access private or public education,  obtain
     a driving licence, renew an ID card (which must be done at least  every
     ten  years),  access  public  health  care,  access   Social   Security
     assistance, become a member of a political party, obtain  a  government
     job and in some cases private employment, and obtain a  cheque-book  or
     secure credit or loans.

113. Some objective evidence, and indeed our own experience in many  of  the
     cases that come before us, suggests that a large number  of  people  in
     Turkey do not in fact register with their local Mukhtar, at least for a
     time. No doubt, if such an individual were caught the authorities would
     undertake a security check on him. Mr Grieves argued that the viability
     of internal relocation should not depend upon a person having  to  live
     without appropriate registration in  the  new  area  and  that  such  a
     requirement would constitute undue harshness, given the wide  range  of
     important matters from which a person would be excluded if he could not
     produce a certificate of residence.

114. Ms Giovannetti stated the  Appellant's  position  on  this  subject  as
     follows.
           "The Secretary of State does not suggest  that,  as  in  general
           proposition, individuals should be expected  to  relocate  to  a
           different area and  simply  fail  to  register  with  the  local
           Mukhtar. They may be cases where an Adjudicator is  entitled  to
           find that there is no reasonable  likelihood  of  an  individual
           needing to register in the foreseeable future.  However  in  the
           vast  majority  of  cases  the  issue  will  be   whether   such
           registration would be reasonably likely to lead to persecution."

115. We can see that a young,  fit,  unmarried  person,  seeking  unofficial
     employment in a big city, may not feel the need to  register  with  his
     local Mukhtar, at least at the outset. Nevertheless, given the range of
     basic activities for which a certificate of  residence  is  needed,  we
     conclude that it would in most normal circumstances be unduly harsh  to
     expect a person  to  live  without  appropriate  registration  for  any
     material time as a requirement  for  avoiding  persecution.  We  stress
     however that this finding does not necessarily preclude  the  viability
     of internal relocation, for the reasons described below.

Is there an internal relocation option for a person who is at real  risk  of
persecution by the authorities in his or her home area?
116. We have already touched  upon  this  issue  in  some  of  our  previous
     observations.  We have indicated that the proper  course  in  assessing
     risk on return is normally to decide first whether an individual has  a
     well founded fear of persecution in his home area  based  upon  a  case
     sensitive assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis of  the
     risk factors described in A (Turkey). It is  however  implicit  in  our
     conclusions so far that the risk  to  a  specific  individual  in  most
     circumstances will be at its highest in his home area for a variety  of
     reasons, and particularly if it is located in the areas of conflict  in
     the south and east of Turkey. Conversely the differential nature of the
     risk outside that area may be sufficient to mean  that  the  individual
     would not be at real risk of persecution by the state or  its  agencies
     elsewhere in Turkey, even if they were made aware of the thrust of  the
     information maintained in his home area by  telephone  or  fax  enquiry
     from the airport police station or elsewhere, or by a  transfer  of  at
     least some of the information to a new home area on  registration  with
     the local Mukhtar there.

117. Some information about an individual is not  reasonably  likely  to  be
     apparent to anyone other than a few individuals in his home  area.  For
     example, a specific gendarme might have it in for an individual whom he
     considers to be a local "ne'er-do-well" but against whom  there  is  no
     specific information. Also it is implausible, in the current climate of
     zero tolerance for torture that an official would  wish  to  record  or
     transfer information that could potentially lead to his prosecution for
     a criminal offence.

118. In general terms however we consider  that  one  should  proceed,  when
     assessing the viability of internal relocation, on the  basis  that  an
     individual's material history will in broad terms become known  to  the
     authorities at the airport and in his new area when he settles,  either
     through registration with the local Mukhtar  or  if  he  comes  to  the
     attention for any reason of the police there. The issue is whether that
     record would be reasonably likely to lead to  persecution  outside  his
     home area.

119. We have already identified some examples of the circumstances in  which
     a person may have experienced serious  ill-treatment  in  the  past  in
     areas of Turkey where the PKK was or  now  is  active,  but  would  not
     necessarily be at similar risk of such treatment  elsewhere  in  Turkey
     where it is not, and where a different view of  his  history  could  be
     taken. They include examples of general intimidation by the authorities
     of the Kurdish population to discourage support  for  the  PKK,  or  to
     clear whole villages.  The  evidence  is  that  anything  between  some
     hundreds of thousands to some millions (depending on whose figures  one
     uses) may have been displaced within Turkey as a consequence  of  this.
     However outside the areas of PKK activity there will not  be  the  same
     perceived need to undertake such intimidation  or  clearances  and  the
     authorities within the receiving areas will be  aware  of  the  tactics
     that led to this  mass  migration,  and  will  be  able  to  assess  an
     individual's record in the light of it. Similarly,  a  person  who  was
     included on Mr Dil's list of local "ne'er-do-wells", against whom there
     was no evidence of PKK involvement, but  who  ran  the  risk  of  being
     detained for questioning whenever  an  PKK  incident  occurred  in  his
     vicinity, would not be at a similar risk in another area where the  PKK
     was not active and where such incidents were much less likely to occur.
     These are just some examples of why  differential  risk  can  arise  in
     different areas of Turkey.

120. In saying this, we have full regard, as invited by Mr Grieves,  to  the
     current guidance of UNHCR, which, so far as we have been informed, does
     not appear to have changed since the publication of its  last  official
     general report in May 2001.  Nothing we have said is in our view in any
     material contradiction to this guidance. It states
           "Kurds and members of Christian minorities  from  the  southeast
           Turkey do  have  an  internal  flight  alternative  outside  the
           region....... unless the case in  question  is  of  a  prominent
           nature or is perceived  by  the  authorities  to  have  real  or
           alleged linked with the  PKK  or  other  main  Kurdish  parties.
           UNHCR considers that the group most  likely  to  be  exposed  to
           harassment/prosecution/persecution are Kurds suspected of  being
           connected with or sympathisers of the PKK....
           In the context of internal flight "it is essential to  find  out
           if Turkish asylum seekers if  returned  would  be  suspected  of
           connection to or sympathy with  the  PKK.   In  this  case  they
           should not be considered as having been able to avail themselves
           of an internal flight alternative"...
           in the UNHCR's perspective, if persecution emanates  from  state
           authorities then there is  no  internal  flight  alternative  or
           relocation.  The situation may look  different  with  regard  to
           village guards or people persecuted by non-state agents."


Assessment of the specific appeal

121. These are our general conclusions on the generic issues  raised  before
     us. As indicated earlier we have not  referred  specifically  to  every
     submission made during the four day hearing, or every one of  the  many
     hundreds of pages of documentary evidence. We have however taken it all
     into account in our assessment.

122. In applying our general assessment to the  Adjudicator's  determination
     in this specific appeal, we have followed the guidance of the Court  of
     Appeal in Subesh & Others [2004] EWCA  Civ  56  concerning  the  proper
     approach  to  be  taken  by  the  Tribunal  to  challenges  against  an
     Adjudicator's findings in appeals arising under our  old  jurisdiction,
     which was not limited to errors of law. In paragraph 43, Laws LJ stated
     it as follows.
           "In every case the Appellant assumes the burden of showing  that
           the judgment appealed from is wrong. The burden  so  assumed  is
           not the burden of proof normally carried by a claimant in  first
           instance proceedings  where  there  are  factual  disputes.   An
           Appellant, if he is to succeed, must persuade the  appeal  court
           or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts  from
           that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there  are
           objective grounds upon which the court ought to conclude that  a
           different view is  the  right  one.  The  divide  between  these
           positions is not caught by the  supposed  difference  between  a
           perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case  the  appeal
           court disagrees with the court below,  and  indeed  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the court of appeal might prefer different  view  (perhaps
           on marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process
           of reasoning and the application of the relevant law, require it
           to adopt a  different  view.   The  burden  which  an  Appellant
           assumes is to show  that  the  case  falls  within  this  latter
           category."

123. There are two specific challenges  by  the  Appellant  in  the  amended
     grounds of appeal to the determination as we have described earlier.

124. The first is that the Adjudicator identified  no  material  capable  of
     supporting the conclusion that brief detentions of the  sort  described
     by the  Respondent  would  be  recorded  on  computerised  records  and
     revealed by checks at the airport.

125. As we have indicated in our  generic  conclusions,  detentions  by  the
     security forces, followed by release  without  charge  or  other  court
     intervention will not be recorded on the GBTS, though the  Respondent's
     status as a draft evader will be so  recorded.  He  will  therefore  be
     detained on arrival as a draft evader and transferred  to  the  airport
     police station. Additionally, it will be apparent  from  his  emergency
     travel documents and from the fact he left Turkey illegally, that he is
     likely to be a failed asylum seeker. There is therefore  likely  to  be
     some further questioning about his history. The issues arising are what
     will  emerge  from  this  and  what  risk  will  attach  to  him  as  a
     consequence. In this context, the second ground of appeal is  that  the
     Adjudicator failed to give adequate consideration to the issue of risk,
     even if checks at the airport  showed  that  the  Respondent  had  been
     detained twice 5 years earlier in the circumstances described.

126. In this appeal, there is a four year gap so far as the authorities  are
     concerned in the Respondent's history, which they would logically  seek
     to fill. He will be able to establish that he came to the  UK  in  2001
     but the last official record of his residence will be in his village in
     Karamanmaris in 1997. We do not know how the military became  aware  of
     his presence in Istanbul but they knew his name when they came for him.
     By then he had been a draft  evader  for  several  years  and  one  may
     reasonably presume that the military came for  him  approximately  when
     they had knowledge of where he was. An obvious concern,  when  a  young
     man disappears from a village in Karamanmaris in  1997,  without  trace
     and for some years, is whether he had joined the PKK  in  that  period.
     The airport police in 2004 would in  our  view  ask  questions  of  the
     Respondent to fill the time gap in his record following his leaving his
     village. In so doing we think it likely that they would make  enquiries
     of the authorities in the last area where he was  registered.  At  that
     point his recorded history there would be revealed. It is  likely  that
     this would include at least the October 1997 detention  at  the  police
     station, some information about his family in the village, which  would
     embrace  the  2  cousins  convicted  with  life  sentences  for   their
     activities in the PKK,  and  the  "problems"  caused  by  the  family's
     resistance to the order to evacuate the village, including his  uncle's
     experiences. We doubt that the  unofficial,  intimidatory  and  plainly
     illegal detention in the mountains by the military of the  young  males
     of the village in December 1997 would have  been  recorded,  though  we
     cannot say that the Adjudicator was necessarily in error in  concluding
     that it would.

127. Therefore with regard to the first ground of appeal, we hold  that  the
     Adjudicator was entitled to proceed on the basis that the  Respondent's
     material history would become known to the authorities at  the  airport
     in the course of their enquiries. We turn  then  to  the  Adjudicator's
     assessment of risk and the second ground of appeal.

128. We would first observe that ground 2 does not do full  justice  to  the
     Adjudicator's findings of fact. It is true that  paragraph  19  of  the
     determination is not as detailed as might be desirable, particularly in
     relation to the Adjudicator's conclusion that "I am satisfied that [the
     Respondent] has been detained and questioned on suspicion of  assisting
     the PKK." However it must be read in the context of  the  determination
     as a whole and the full findings of fact. This included the facts  that
     numerous members of the Respondent's family lived in a  small  village,
     two of whom had received life sentences for  activities  for  the  PKK.
     Moreover, the Respondent had in fact on his own  evidence  provided  at
     least low level help to the PKK. Can the Adjudicator therefore be  said
     in the light of the guidance of  A (Turkey) and the terms of Subesh  be
     said to have erred in her risk assessment to  the  point  that  we  are
     "required to adopt a different view?"

129. We consider this to be a marginal case and it  may  be  that  we  would
     have adopted a different conclusion ourselves. We however  accept  that
     the Adjudicator did, in the course of her determination, reach findings
     of fact that reveal a number of potential risk factors, and she reached
     her overall conclusion to allow the appeal  in  the  context  of  those
     findings. She was assisted in her conclusions by hearing oral  evidence
     both from the Respondent and from one of his relatives, which  we  have
     not. The relevant risk factors supporting the Adjudicator's  conclusion
     in favour of the Respondent can be summarised as:
           1. He is an Alevi Kurd from Karamanmaris,  within  the  area  of
              conflict.
           2. He and his immediate family did provide food for the PKK.
           3. He experienced a detention,  with  others,  in  1997,  during
              which in a police station he suffered  serious  torture  over
              several days and was questioned about  involvement  with  the
              PKK.
           4. He was again detained, with  others,  in  December  1997  and
              questioned about his uncle and was told to  give  information
              about his whereabouts.
           5. Two cousins from his village had received life  sentences  in
              1995 as PKK fighters, which may have focused the authorities'
              adverse attention on the Respondent's family and village.
           6.  Other  family  members  in  the  village  also   experienced
              difficulties with the authorities. The village was subject to
              an order to evacuate which some villagers, including a number
              of members of the Respondent's family, resisted.
           7. His disappearance from the village without trace would  raise
              questions about what he did  thereafter,  especially  in  the
              period between December 1997 and his  coming  to  the  UK  in
              2001, and enhance suspicions of a PKK connection.
           8. He is a draft evader.

130. Having  said  that,  we  also  note  that  the  Respondent's  only  two
     detentions occurred within the ambit of a clearance decision in respect
     of his  village.  He  was  not  personally  specifically  targeted  for
     questioning but was taken along with all the  males/young  men  in  the
     village. The first detention was in a police station  and  he  and  the
     others were all questioned about PKK involvement  and  denied  it.  The
     second "detention" was unofficial in that it did  not  occur  within  a
     police station but in the mountains and was brief. It was intimidatory,
     especially within the context  of  the  curfew  being  imposed  on  the
     village, as revealed by the press reports at the time.  The  Respondent
     was questioned about the whereabouts of his uncle. There is no evidence
     that  the  authorities  had  any  specific  information   linking   the
     Respondent personally to the PKK as a consequence of his  own  actions.
     There was no indication prior to  the  events  of  late  1997  that  he
     personally suffered any material difficulties as a consequence  of  the
     arrest and conviction of his two cousins. The Respondent was then able,
     after leaving the village, to live in Istanbul for four  years  without
     difficulties albeit under a false name. No doubt  some  inquiries  were
     made about him in his village when he first left, as  they  would  have
     been made of any young man who left the  village  in  southeast  Turkey
     without registering elsewhere. However there is no evidence that he was
     actually sought by the authorities, other than as a  draft  evader.  It
     was the military, who came for him in Istanbul and for conscription. It
     was not the police, seeking him for any other purpose, though  by  this
     time his identity and whereabouts were known  to  the  authorities.  He
     left Istanbul because he did not wish to be taken for conscription.  He
     has had no political involvement in the UK. Any risk to  him  would  be
     greater in his home area in Karamanmaris, where he and his family would
     be seen as troublemakers.

131. This alternative view of the evidence is why we consider this to  be  a
     marginal case. However we accept that the Adjudicator was  entitled  to
     take the view she did on the evidence and to conclude there would be  a
     real risk on return of material ill-treatment, both in  his  home  area
     and elsewhere, including the airport on arrival. The  possibility  that
     we might have taken a different view does not render her  determination
     unsustainable within the terms of Subesh.

132. Accordingly, we dismiss this appeal.


Summary of Generic Conclusions

133.  The  following  is  a  summary  of  our  main  conclusions   in   this
     determination.
           1. The evidence of Mr Aydin (paragraph 32) accurately  describes
              the defined and limited ambit of the computerised GBT system.
              It  comprises  only  outstanding  arrest  warrants,  previous
              arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,  possible   draft
              evasion, refusal to perform military service and tax arrears.
              "Arrests"  as  comprised  in  the  GBTS  require  some  court
              intervention, and must be distinguished from "detentions"  by
              the security forces followed by release without  charge.  The
              GBTS  is  fairly  widely  accessible  and  is  in  particular
              available to the border police at booths in Istanbul airport,
              and elsewhere in Turkey to the security forces.
           2. In addition, there is border control information collated  by
              the national police (Department for Foreigners,  Borders  and
              Asylum) recording  past  legal  arrivals  and  departures  of
              Turkish citizens, and  information  about  people  prohibited
              from entering Turkey as a result of their activities  abroad,
              collated by MIT.
           3. The Judicial Record Directorate  keeps  judicial  records  on
              sentences served by convicted persons,  separate  from  GBTS.
              The system is known as "Adli Sicil." It is unlikely that this
              system would be directly  accessible  at  border  control  in
              addition to the information in the GBTS.
           4. The Nufus  registration  system  comprises  details  of  age,
              residence, marriage, death, parents' and children's  details,
              and religious status. It may also include arrest warrants and
              if  any  of  the  people  listed  have   been   stripped   of
              nationality.  There  is  no  evidence  that  it  is  directly
              available at border control.
           5. If a person is held for questioning  either  in  the  airport
              police station after arrival  or  subsequently  elsewhere  in
              Turkey and the situation justifies it, then  some  additional
              inquiry could be made of the authorities in  his  local  area
              about him, where more extensive records may  be  kept  either
              manually or  on  computer.  Also,  if  the  circumstances  so
              justify, an enquiry could be made of the anti  terror  police
              or MIT to see if an individual is  of  material  interest  to
              them.
           6. If there is a material entry in the GBTS  or  in  the  border
              control information, or if a returnee is travelling on a one-
              way emergency travel document, then  there  is  a  reasonable
              likelihood that he will be identifiable as  a  failed  asylum
              seeker and could be sent to the airport  police  station  for
              further investigation.
           7. It will be for an Adjudicator in each  case  to  assess  what
              questions are likely to be asked  during  such  investigation
              and how a returnee would respond without  being  required  to
              lie. The ambit of the likely  questioning  depends  upon  the
              circumstances of each case.
           8. The escalation of the violence following the  ending  of  the
              PKK ceasefire reinforces our view that the risk to a  Kurdish
              returnee of ill treatment by the authorities may  be  greater
              if his home area is in an area of conflict in Turkey than  it
              would be elsewhere, for the reasons described  in  paragraphs
              90 and 116.
           9. The Turkish Government is taking action  in  legislative  and
              structural terms to address the human  rights  problems  that
              present a serious obstacle to its membership of  the  EU.  It
              has made its zero tolerance  policy  towards  torture  clear.
              However the use of torture is long  and  deep-seated  in  the
              security forces and it  will  take  time  and  continued  and
              determined effort to bring it under control in  practice.  It
              is premature to conclude that the long  established  view  of
              the Tribunal concerning the  potential  risk  of  torture  in
              detention as per A (Turkey) requires material revision on the
              present evidence. However the situation will  require  review
              as further evidence becomes available. For the time being  as
              in the past, each case must be assessed  on  its  own  merits
              from the individual's  own  history  and  the  relevant  risk
              factors as described in paragraph 46 of A (Turkey).
          10. Many of the individual risk factors described in  A  (Turkey)
              comprise in themselves a broad spectrum of variable potential
              risk that requires careful evaluation on the  specific  facts
              of each appeal  as  a  whole.  The  factors  described  in  A
              (Turkey) were not intended  as  a  simplistic  checklist  and
              should not be used as such.
          11. A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving  his  home  area  and
              seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not feel the
              need to register with the local  Mukhtar,  at  least  at  the
              outset. Many do  not.  However,  given  the  range  of  basic
              activities for which a certificate of  residence  is  needed,
              and which depend upon such registration, we conclude that  it
              would in most normal circumstances be unduly harsh to  expect
              a person to live without  appropriate  registration  for  any
              material time, as a  requirement  for  avoiding  persecution.
              This does not necessarily preclude the viability of  internal
              relocation for the  reasons  described  in  paragraph  133.13
              below.
          12. The proper course in assessing the risk  for  a  returnee  is
              normally to decide first whether he has a well  founded  fear
              of persecution in his home area based upon a  case  sensitive
              assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis of  the
              risk factors described in A (Turkey). If he does not then  he
              is unlikely to be at any real risk anywhere in Turkey.
          13. The risk to a specific individual in most circumstances  will
              be at its highest in his home area for a variety of  reasons,
              and particularly if it is located in the areas of conflict in
              the south and east of  Turkey.  Conversely  the  differential
              nature of the risk outside that area  may  be  sufficient  to
              mean that the  individual  would  not  be  at  real  risk  of
              persecution by the state or its agencies elsewhere in Turkey,
              even if they were made aware of the thrust of the information
              maintained in his home area by telephone or fax enquiry  from
              the airport police station or elsewhere, or by a transfer  of
              at least some of the  information  to  a  new  home  area  on
              registration  with  the   local   Mukhtar   there.   Internal
              relocation may well therefore be viable, notwithstanding  the
              need for registration in the new area. The issue  is  whether
              any individual's material history would be reasonably  likely
              to lead to persecution outside his home area.
          14. This determination  updates  and  replaces  the  7  decisions
              listed below, in the light of further evidence and  argument,
              and now comprises the Tribunal's current country guidance  on
              the issues described.
        1. HO (National Records) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00038.
        2. SA (GBTS records) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00177.
        3. LT (Internal flight -  Registration  system)  Turkey  CG  [2004]
           UKIAT 00175.
        4. AG (GBTS, "tab" and other records) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00168.
        5. KK (GBTS - Other  information  systems  -  McDowall)  Turkey  CG
           [2004] UKIAT 00177
        6. MS (GBTS information at borders) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00192.
        7. CE (KK confirmed -  McDowall  report)  Turkey  CG  UKIAT  [2004]
           00233.




                                                             Spencer Batiste



                                  Vice-President



                                        Approved for electronic transmission
