

                                     MA (Fresh evidence) Sri Lanka *
[2004] UKIAT 00161
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                       Date of Hearing: 20th & 21st May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              21st June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                His Honour Judge N Huskinson (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Ms N Finch, instructed by Irving and Co
For the Respondent:          Ms J Anderson, instructed by the Treasury
                 Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  in  1975.   He
     entered the United Kingdom in August  2002  and  claimed  asylum  upon
     arrival.  His claim was rejected  and  his  asylum  and  human  rights
     appeals were dismissed by the Adjudicator,  Mr  G  D  Thompson,  in  a
     determination promulgated on 9th July 2003.

  2. This was scarcely surprising as the Adjudicator had heard the evidence
     of the Appellant to the effect that the story he told in his  original
     claim, in his SEF statement and in his interview,  was  untrue.   This
     untrue story had not been withdrawn  in  the  ordinary  or  additional
     grounds of appeal before the Adjudicator.  It was to the  effect  that
     he had been helping the LTTE through supplying food to them  with  his
     family, that he had been arrested and tortured by the army and made to
     identify an LTTE member who had committed suicide to avoid arrest.  He
     had escaped through bribery, but realised that the LTTE  knew  he  had
     identified one of its members and would try  to  shoot  him  for  that
     betrayal.  As a result of the peace agreement, the LTTE  were  roaming
     the country, looking for those who had betrayed them.  In  support  of
     his claim, he produced numerous photographs and letters, including one
     from the village headman, confirming some of what  the  Appellant  had
     said, and one from the Red Cross confirming  his  arrest  and  release
     after severe torture, bearing the stamp of the magistrate who was  the
     chairman of the Red Cross branch  concerned,  with  the  right  rubber
     stamp and on properly headed notepaper.  He agreed  in  evidence  that
     his mother had got the documents to help his claim;  she  had  pleaded
     for the letter from the Red Cross to help  stop  him  being  deported;
     the contents of the letter from the village headman and the Red  Cross
     were untrue.

  3. Some weeks before  his  appeal  to  the  Adjudicator  was  heard,  the
     Appellant changed his story and it was notified to  the  Secretary  of
     State.  He had joined the LTTE in 1989, and after training he had been
     involved in fighting.  He was severely  traumatised  as  a  result  of
     heavy fighting in the early  1990s  and  spent  a  year  recuperating.
     Later, he became a sentry,  in  charge  of  a  local  group.   He  was
     wounded, and the ebb and flow of the war caused him to move about.  In
     1997, he was put in charge of an LTTE group and  led  a  group  of  45
     fighters in LTTE advances in 1998-9.  After the start of peace  talks,
     he was sent to an army controlled area where he undertook intelligence
     work and propaganda for the LTTE.  He felt himself in danger from  the
     army, and had had enough of fighting after nine years but thought that
     the LTTE would punish him for leaving it. He obtained a  passport  and
     although he had difficulties leaving at the airport where  the  police
     questioned him suspiciously about the LTTE, he reached Singapore where
     he was  given  a  new  passport,  French  identification  and  another
     document.  He feared both the Sri Lankan authorities and the LTTE.  He
     supported this story with more photographs, a video, a medical  report
     which was consistent with the injuries he said he had received in  the
     fighting, and a report from Dr Good on conditions in Sri Lanka,  which
     said that nothing in the second story was inconsistent with  what  had
     happened and was happening in Sri Lanka.  Dr  Good  thought  that  the
     Appellant would be very well  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
     especially in the army and would be well known  in  his  neighbourhood
     for having been in the LTTE.  It confirmed  what  the  Appellant  said
     about the attitude of the LTTE towards those who had left  it  without
     permission.

  4. The Appellant explained that he had changed his story because  he  had
     received better legal advice from  different  solicitors.   The  first
     story was what he had been advised to say by his agent  who  told  him
     that he should not say that he had been a member of the LTTE,  because
     it was a proscribed organisation in this country.  He had not  himself
     been involved in any of the terrorist activities  of  the  LTTE  which
     were carried out by a special unit.

  5. The Adjudicator regarded the fact that the second story was a detailed
     and  complex  story  as  no  guide  to  its  truthfulness  since   the
     Appellant's first and untrue  story  had  also  been  a  detailed  and
     complex one, supported by false documents.  He was prepared to  go  to
     some lengths to tell a false story.  The changing circumstances in Sri
     Lanka as the peace process developed had  caused  him  to  change  his
     story to one which gave  him  a  better  chance  of  staying,  as  his
     prospects were considerably reduced under his first story.

  6. The Adjudicator also found  implausible  other  parts  of  the  second
     story:  the circumstances in which he said that he would be blamed for
     the death or disappearance of two LTTE men in Colombo, the event which
     he said precipitated his departure;  his fear that he was being looked
     at suspiciously by Army officers who he alleged  had  seen  him  at  a
     peace negotiation in 1991 when  he  was  just  sixteen.   The  medical
     report was seen as neutral  as  between  the  truthfulness  of  either
     account or other possibilities and the photographs were    not  proved
     reasonably likely to be genuine.   The  fact  that  the  second  story
     exposed the Appellant to a risk of exclusion was not persuasive as  to
     its genuineness.

  7. The Adjudicator concluded in paragraph 61:

           "In conclusion, I find that the appellant is  not  credible  and
           that both his first and second stories  are  completely  untrue.
           In the words of the Tribunal in Dasdemir  HX/00957)  (when  they
           applied Karanakaran, Court of Appeal, 25.2000) I comprehensively
           disbelieve the appellant and I make  it  clear  that  I  see  no
           reasonable likelihood of truth in  any  evidence  which  he  has
           given relating to the material issues in this case  and  that  I
           have found all such evidence to be incredible to the extent that
           I am not prepared to consider it at all.   I  completely  reject
           it.  It follows that he cannot prove his case.  In  view  of  my
           credibility findings it is unnecessary for me  to  consider  the
           question of 'Exclusion' from Convention protection."


  8. He thought that the Appellant would face  no  difficulties  on  return
     because of his scarring and continued:

           "I conclude that, in possession of a temporary  travel  document
           from the Sri Lankan High Commission in London, he  would  simply
           be  waved  through  the  airport  controls,  as  the  background
           evidence and  Tribunal  decisions  indicate  is  the  case  with
           returned asylum seekers who do not have particular risk  factors
           attached to them.  Because  of  my  complete  rejection  of  his
           credibility I also totally reject his evidence of his having had
           difficulties at the airport on leaving Sri Lanka.  The result of
           my credibility finding is that I conclude that he has not proved
           to the lower standard of proof a genuine 1951 Convention fear of
           persecution which is objectively well-founded."

  9. After the appeal was dismissed, the Appellant sought leave  to  appeal
     on two grounds.  The first was that the Adjudicator had failed to  set
     his criticisms of the Appellant's  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
     background evidence and had also relied on his own  experience  rather
     than  the  cultural  background  when  assessing  the  credibility  of
     supporting material.  Second, it was said that the Adjudicator had not
     put to the Appellant questions which would have enabled him to  answer
     issues of concern  to  the  Adjudicator  which  he  took  against  the
     Appellant.  There was a third ground of appeal so-called but it was no
     more than an application to call fresh evidence to support the  second
     story, on the ground that the Adjudicator and Tribunal were part of  a
     continuing appeal process.  This fresh evidence was to come from three
     witnesses:  one had known the Appellant in the LTTE and had Indefinite
     Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom, another also knew the Appellant
     to have been in the LTTE through his brother whom he would identify in
     the photographs and the third was to  deal  with  the  origin  of  the
     photographs.  The reason given for the calling of the  first  two  was
     given as follows:

           "These witnesses were not  called  at  the  hearing  before  the
           Adjudicator as the question  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  a
           member of the LTTE had  not  been  put  into  question  and  his
           solicitors believed that the detail  given  in  the  Appellant's
           witness statement and the photographs and video he was  able  to
           produce were sufficient to meet the burden of proof  which  fell
           on him."

 10. Leave to appeal was refused on the ground that  the  Appellant  was  a
     liar and there was no reason why he should be allowed to call  further
     evidence in support of his second story which had been disbelieved  in
     a careful determination.  It  was  contended  in  an  application  for
     statutory review that the Tribunal had erred in its  approach  to  the
     reception of fresh evidence.  The duty  of  anxious  scrutiny  coupled
     with the  role  of  the  Tribunal  as  part  of  a  continuing  asylum
     determination process required the Tribunal  to  admit  the  evidence.
     The reason now given for the absence of the  third  witness  was  that
     there had been no reason to suppose that the probative  value  of  the
     photographs would be  doubted.   Statutory  review  was  granted,  not
     because of  the  merits  of  the  case  but  because  of  "some  other
     compelling reason", namely the need for the Tribunal to give  guidance
     about the reception of fresh evidence when dealing with a jurisdiction
     based on error of law.

 11. By the time the appeal came on to be heard, further fresh evidence was
     sought to be adduced:  a further witness from Sri Lanka who  knew  the
     Appellant there, a Sunday Times journalist of  distinction,  Ms  Marie
     Colvin, who had met the Appellant in Sri Lanka,  a  further  statement
     from the Appellant himself describing how he had met this  journalist,
     further photographs, and updated country background material.  The key
     feature of Ms Colvin's evidence was that she had met the Appellant  in
     April 2001 when on an assignment to meet the LTTE leader and her guide
     and bodyguard to meet him had  been  the  Appellant.  Leave  was  also
     sought to amend the grounds of appeal by adding the claim  that  there
     was an error of law by a mistake of fact because it was clear from the
     evidence of Ms Colvin that the Appellant was a   member of the LTTE.


The framework for the decision


 12. The effect of the grant of statutory review  was  to  grant  leave  to
     appeal to the Tribunal.  The  admission  of  evidence  which  was  not
     before the Adjudicator is governed by  Rule  21  of  the  2003  Rules.
     Written notice is required of the evidence and an explanation  of  why
     it was not submitted to the Adjudicator. Rule 48 is not the basis upon
     which evidence not before the Adjudicator becomes material  which  the
     Tribunal can examine;  it dispenses  with  any  requirement  that  the
     material is admissible according to the rules of  evidence  applicable
     in a court of law, but that does  not  deal  with  the  issue  of  the
     admissibility of evidence not before the Adjudicator.

 13. The approach to the reception of evidence which  was  not  before  the
     Adjudicator has been considered by the  Tribunal  and  the  principles
     governing its admission have recently been set out in E v SSHD  [2004]
     EWCA Civ 49.  Although that case was concerned with the 2000 Rules and
     the way in which the Tribunal  should  deal  with  evidence  submitted
     after it had reached its decision,  when  deciding  whether  to  grant
     permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  or  to  rehear  the  case
     itself, the principles are of relevance  more  widely.   There  is  no
     reason to adopt a different approach to the grant of leave  to  appeal
     from Adjudicators to the Tribunal, or as between the  grant  of  leave
     and the actual decision on the substantive appeal.  It would  also  be
     particularly strange if there were a difference  of  approach  in  the
     ways in which the Tribunal considered fresh evidence when dealing with
     an appeal which it reheard itself, or when hearing one remitted by the
     Court of Appeal or one which it had granted leave to be heard  in  the
     usual way.

 14. The principles in E are set out  in  paragraph  92,  and  the  Ladd  v
     Marshall principles are summarised in paragraph 23(ii):

           "92.  In relation to the role of the IAT, we have concluded:

                 (i)   The Tribunal  remains  seized  of  the  appeal,  and
                       therefore able to take account of  new  evidence,  up
                       until  the  time  when  the  decision  was   formally
                       notified to the parties;

                 (ii)  following the decision, where it was considering the
                       application for leave to appeal to this Court, it had
                       a discretion to direct a rehearing;  this  power  was
                       not dependent on its finding an arguable error of law
                       in its decision;

                 (iii) however, in exercising such discretion the principle
                       of finality  would  be  important.   To  justify  re-
                       opening the case, the IAT would normally need  to  be
                       satisfied that there was a risk of serious injustice,
                       because of something which  had  gone  wrong  at  the
                       hearing, or some important evidence  which  had  been
                       overlooked; and in considering whether to  admit  new
                       evidence, it should be  guided  by  Ladd  v  Marshall
                       principles, subject to any exceptional factors.

           23(ii)      New evidence  will  normally  be  admitted  only  in
                 accordance with 'Ladd v Marshall principles'  (see  Ladd  v
                 Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489), applied with  some  additional
                 flexibility under the CPR  (see  Hertfordshire  Investments
                 Ltd v Bubb  [2000]  1  WLR  2318,  2325;  White  Book  para
                 52.11.2). The Ladd v Marshall principles are,  in  summary:
                 first, that the fresh evidence could not have been obtained
                 with reasonable diligence for use at the  trial;  secondly,
                 that if given, it probably  would  have  had  an  important
                 influence  on  the  result;  and,  thirdly,  that   it   is
                 apparently    credible     although     not     necessarily
                 incontrovertible. As a general  rule,  the  fact  that  the
                 failure to adduce the evidence  was  that  of  the  party's
                 legal advisers provides no excuse: see  Al-Mehdawi  v  Home
                 Secretary [1990] 1AC 876."
 15. The Court of Appeal pointed out that  it  was  not  dealing  with  the
     current jurisdiction of the Tribunal which is limited  to  hearing  an
     appeal on a point of law.  However, we see no reason why  the  general
     principles governing the reception of evidence which  was  not  before
     the Adjudicator should be different. There is no reason why the  first
     and third principles should be changed.  The application of the second
     principle will be different.  When applied in the context of an appeal
     on the ground of error of fact or law, the fresh evidence  has  to  be
     such that it would probably have had an  important  influence  on  the
     result of the factual or legal conclusions of the  Adjudicator.   When
     applied in the context of  error  of  law  alone,  the  test  for  the
     relevance of fresh evidence which could and should  have  been  before
     the Adjudicator cannot now be that it assists a challenge  to  factual
     conclusions  such  as   credibility   findings   or   other   personal
     circumstances which are very much matters for  the  Adjudicator.   The
     application of the second principle now requires that the evidence  be
     relevant to showing that the Adjudicator made an error of  law,  which
     probably had an important influence on the result.

 16. It would not normally be possible to show  by  evidence  which  should
     have been before the Adjudicator but had not  been  produced  to  him,
     that he had made an error of law.  (Even less so would it normally  be
     possible that evidence related to subsequent events,  or  which  could
     not have been before the Adjudicator  with  due  diligence  for  other
     reasons, could show an error of law in his decision.)  Of course there
     may be exceptional factors in an asylum or human  rights  case,  which
     mean that evidence  which  could  and  should  have  been  before  the
     Adjudicator can be admitted on appeal.

 17. This case illustrates the principles.  Miss Finch  for  the  Appellant
     sought to  introduce  fresh  evidence;   this  is  a  case  where  the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited to an error of law;   she  accepted
     that the evidence had to be of relevance by showing an error  of  law,
     as a result of E.  She said that it was relevant because it showed  an
     error of fact of such a nature as to constitute an error of law in the
     way identified in E, paragraph 66.  It would not however  be  possible
     to say that it was relevant as showing an error of fact, short  of  an
     error of law.  It could not be argued that  a  material  consideration
     has been ignored when that consists of material which  was  never  put
     before the Adjudicator,  whether  or  not  it  could  with  reasonable
     diligence have been introduced before him, unless it falls within  the
     category defined in E or other exceptional circumstances applied.

 18. There is however an  important  qualification  which  applies  in  the
     asylum and human rights field to the admission of fresh evidence which
     could not have been before the Adjudicator, and it has  an  impact  on
     the application of the Ladd v  Marshall  principles  to  such  claims.
     This is seen in section 77(3) and (4) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
     Act 1999, which permitted the Tribunal and Adjudicator  to  take  into
     account any evidence relevant to the appeal on  asylum  or  Article  3
     human rights grounds, including evidence about matters  arising  after
     the date of decision.  It was the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  SK
     [2002] UKIAT 05613* which explained that the reference  to  Article  3
     was not intended to be a limitation.  Of course, that did  not  remove
     the obligations in relation to evidence which could  and  should  have
     been before the Adjudicator to show why it had not  been  adduced  and
     could not have been adduced with reasonable diligence, and that it was
     relevant and apparently credible.

 19. There is an equivalent provision in the Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002, section 85(4) in respect of Adjudicators, and section
     102 in respect of the Tribunal, which is  expressed  in  wider  terms.
     Section 102 says:


           "(2)  In reaching their decision on an appeal under section  101
                 the Tribunal may consider evidence about any  matter  which
                 they  think  relevant  to   the   adjudicator's   decision,
                 including evidence which concerns a  matter  arising  after
                 the adjudicator's decision.


           (3)   But where the appeal under section 82 was against  refusal
                 of  entry  clearance  or  refusal  of  a   certificate   of
                 entitlement -


                 (a)   subsection (2) shall not apply, and
                 (b)   the Tribunal  may  consider  only  the  circumstances
                       appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse.

           (4)   In remitting an appeal to an adjudicator under  subsection
                 (1)(c) the Tribunal may, in particular -


                 (a)   require the adjudicator to determine  the  appeal  in
                       accordance with directions of the Tribunal;
                 (b)   require the adjudicator to take  additional  evidence
                       with a view to the appeal  being  determined  by  the
                       Tribunal."

 20. This provision has to be read with the limitation  of  the  ground  of
     appeal in section  101  to  a  point  of  law.   The  provisions  need
     therefore to be read in this way.  The fact that the right  of  appeal
     is limited to an error of law means that  the  same  principle,  which
     limits the reception of evidence which  could  and  should  have  been
     before the Adjudicator, continues to apply with the added  restriction
     that it must also be relevant to showing that there was  an  error  of
     law.  There is no simple right to  introduce  any  evidence  of  fact,
     whenever obtainable, given the restriction on the ground of appeal.

 21. However, there is a need to look  at  evidence  of  subsequent  events
     frequently in these cases and to ensure that the decision is  made  on
     current material  in  relation  to  country  conditions  and  personal
     circumstances.  This was recognised a while ago in Ravichandran v SSHD
     [1996] Imm AR 97. The Tribunal discussed this in  D  (Croatia)  [2004]
     UKIAT 00032* in paragraphs 41 and 42:

           "41.  The Court of Appeal in Ravichandran v SSHD [1996]  Imm  AR
                 97, considered the different provisions of the Asylum  and
                 Immigration Appeals Act 1993 which  had  no  such  express
                 provisions dealing with the time at which matters  had  to
                 be considered.  However, in relation  to  asylum  appeals,
                 where the  issue  is  whether  removal  would  breach  the
                 Refugee Convention and having regard to the obvious policy
                 sense in enabling the appellate bodies  to  consider  what
                 may be post-Adjudicator  circumstances  changing  more  or
                 less favourably to any party,  the  Court  concluded  that
                 asylum matters had to be considered as at the date of  the
                 hearing.

           42.   It has been the general practice of the Tribunal over  the
                 years to consider evidence  and  to  reach  conclusions  in
                 asylum and human rights cases in the light of the  material
                 before it as to the current  circumstances,  whether  of  a
                 personal nature or relating to the  way  in  which  country
                 circumstances bear upon the appeal.  This is different from
                 but related to its power to consider evidence  which  could
                 have been but was  not  put  before  the  Adjudicator.   It
                 includes material which by its nature could not  have  been
                 before the  Adjudicator.   Commonly  it  will  include  the
                 latest country information but it can also include evidence
                 of individual changes in circumstance, whether of  marriage
                 or children or medical  condition.   It  can  also  include
                 evidence which  could  and  should  have  been  before  the
                 Adjudicator."


 22. The Tribunal in D continued in paragraphs 43, 44 and 46:

           "43.  Sometimes this evidence will reinforce a ground of appeal;
                   at  other  times  it  will  support  opposition  to   it.
                 Sometimes a ground of appeal may be  good  in  itself,  but
                 will have become insufficient to lead to the  appeal  being
                 allowed, because the error now has no significance  in  the
                 light of new circumstances,  and  a  remittal  for  further
                 consideration would inevitably lead  to  the  same  result.
                 This   jurisdiction   is   not    usually    controversial.
                 Conversely,  where  the  appeal  grounds  are  insufficient
                 themselves to lead to the allowing of an appeal, but  where
                 circumstances have changed such that the original  decision
                 of the Adjudicator cannot now stand, the Tribunal's general
                 practice has been to allow the appeal.  It  can  work  both
                 ways as between the Secretary of State and a claimant.   Mr
                 Malik did not suggest that we had  no  power  to  allow  an
                 appeal on that basis.


           44.   This makes sense of the  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether
                 removal would be a breach of the  Refugee  Convention  and,
                 although the human rights  grounds  in  the  1999  Act  (by
                 contrast with section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act),  focus  on
                 the decision of the Secretary of State rather than  on  the
                 fact of removal as being the cause of a breach of the ECHR,
                  it  is  plain  that  the  Tribunal  has  to  look  to  the
                 consequences of the implementation of the decision  anyway.
                 Under  each  Convention,  the  question  of  a  breach   or
                 entitlement  is  not  based  on  past  events  but  on   an
                 assessment  of  current  risk  upon  the  assumed  removal.
                 Indeed the suspension of removals pending determination  of
                 appeals enables and its purpose in part is  to  enable  the
                 determination of risk on removal to be judged  against  the
                 most up-to-date material.  That also has to  operate  even-
                 handedly as between  the  Claimant  and  the  Secretary  of
                 State;   it  could  not  be  right  for  decisions  on  the
                 Conventions to be made on the latest  material  only  where
                 that assists the claim.


           46.   We consider therefore that the key to whether the Tribunal
                 can consider the later material at the appeal and  consider
                 the Tribunal's earlier assessment of it, is the simple fact
                 that it has the appeal before it, rather  than  whether  or
                 not an Appellant succeeds on a ground of appeal,  a  ground
                 which may be wholly unrelated to  the  new  material.   The
                 alternative  approach   would   introduce   a   degree   of
                 arbitrariness into  the  decision  making  process  at  the
                 appellate stage, with the ability to hear the new  material
                 depending on whether or not it  was  thought,  for  example
                 that the reasoning of an Adjudicator  had  been  adequately
                 expressed on what might be a wholly unrelated point.   Once
                 permission is granted, the appeal is before  the  Tribunal;
                 the grounds have to be  considered  along  with  any  other
                 material  relevant to a decision on the appeal.  The appeal
                 has to be dealt with in the light of the current  material,
                 including for example, factual material about the claimant.
                  As we have set out above, the question of breach of either
                 Convention, risk on  removal  and  entitlement  to  refugee
                 status are looking to the future;  it would scarcely  be  a
                 rational system if such a decision in the Tribunal, for  or
                 against a claimant or Secretary of  State,  turned  on  the
                 existence of  an  unrelated  error,  say,  in  adequacy  of
                 reasoning by the Adjudicator."


 23. Those principles which now apply to immigration  decisions  generally,
     except  those  relating  to  entry  clearance   or   certificates   of
     entitlement, show how in this public law area, it is necessary to look
     at material which could not have been before the Adjudicator.   It  is
     material which shows what the current personal position is, where that
     is relevant, and the current country circumstances are, where they are
     relevant, but it would not usually permit factual material current  at
     the date of the Adjudicator's determination to be admitted, unless  it
     both satisfied the Ladd v  Marshall  test  and  was  relevant  to  the
     demonstration of an error of law.

 24. There is an additional significance,  in  this  context,  of  evidence
     which should have been before  the  Adjudicator  in  that  it  may  be
     difficult to make sense of the change  in  circumstance,  personal  or
     country, about which evidence is being  received  unless  evidence  is
     also admitted as to the earlier position, even though it ought to have
     been, but was not, before the Adjudicator.  Of  course,  it  will  not
     assist its apparent credibility that  it  was  not.   Such  additional
     evidence may also assist in deciding whether a decision which has been
     found to be erroneous in law should be  remitted  for  hearing  to  an
     Adjudicator or dealt with in the Tribunal.  That is an illustration of
     the circumstances in  which  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  test  is  applied
     differently in this area.  This is not intended to  be  an  exhaustive
     statement of instances where the  interests  of  justice  may  require
     evidence to be admitted which does not satisfy  the  Ladd  v  Marshall
     test.

 25. Accordingly, we considered the fresh evidence which Miss Finch  sought
     to adduce within that framework, a framework  which  also  applies  to
     applications for leave to appeal to the Tribunal.


The fresh evidence


 26. We heard oral evidence from Ms Colvin, and from  two  witnesses  whose
     statements explained that they had known the Appellant to be a  member
     of the LTTE.  We also heard from the Appellant himself.  The  evidence
     of Ms  Colvin  was  heard  in  full  because  of  the  limits  on  her
     availability, she had no written statement  and  it  would  have  been
     difficult, given the nature of her evidence, to  assess  its  apparent
     credibility, in the sense of reliability without either oral  evidence
     or a very careful written statement.  There were also  some  documents
     related to her meeting the Appellant, how contact was  established  in
     this country and about  her  assignment  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  cross-
     examination of the other witnesses including the Appellant was limited
     to the questions which arise under Ladd v Marshall, as  to  when  they
     were available and known to the Appellant and as to why they  had  not
     been called before the  Adjudicator.   They  were  not  cross-examined
     about the  substance  of  their  evidence.   We  also  had  a  written
     statement from a third  Sri  Lankan  who  claimed  also  to  know  the
     Appellant as an LTTE  fighter  but  who  was  not  available  on  this
     occasion.  There was also updated country material from the  Secretary
     of State to be given by a witness and from Dr Good for the Appellant.

 27. The substance of Ms Colvin's  evidence  was  that  the  normally  very
     secretive LTTE leader in early 2001 wanted to declare a  major  change
     of policy in the civil war and to do so through an interview with her;
      he selected  her  because  of  her  reputation  as  a  journalist  of
     integrity.  The attitude of the Sri Lanka  Government  to  journalists
     meeting  Prabakharan  meant  that  it  would  have  to   be   arranged
     clandestinely.  In April 2001, she was taken  to  a  rendezvous  point
     where an armed group of eight or so, of which the Appellant was one of
     two leaders, met her and escorted her  through  the  Sri  Lankan  army
     lines to the camp where she met Prabakharan.  The journey took some 30
     hours, half of which were on foot, and about 16 to 20 of which were in
     daylight.  There were occasions when she spoke to  the  Appellant  who
     had some broken English, sometimes they had to sit around waiting till
     the passage was clear and at other times they walked in  single  file.
     She did not allow anyone to use her satellite phone.

 28. She also saw him two or three times at the camp where she was for  two
     weeks. He was sometimes in the company of very senior  LTTE  fighters.
     She took no photographs and did not  ask  his  name.   She  had  never
     referred to him in letters or in  the  articles  written  later.   She
     assessed him as being an officer although that was not  a  term  which
     could be applied readily to the members of an irregular body  such  as
     the LTTE.  He appeared to be a senior in the ranks. He was  in  charge
     of a unit sent directly by the leader to escort a journalist  to  whom
     he wished to make an important announcement and whom  he  had  chosen.
     She was told that he had been especially selected to escort  her.   He
     appeared to be a guard and a fighter who was  quite  senior.   He  was
     deferred to by some other fighters.

 29. When she left, she was  not  taken  by  LTTE  fighters  but  by  Tamil
     civilians who put her in contact with a Roman  Catholic  priest;   she
     chose to return that way. It was on the return that she  was  ambushed
     by government forces.

 30. She was contacted by solicitors in this country who asked whether  she
     knew the Appellant and who then sent her photographs  from  which  she
     recognised the Appellant  as  the  one  who  had  led  her  escort  to
     Prabakharan.  She recognised him again straightaway when she  saw  him
     at the Tribunal building with two other Tamils, though he was sideways
     on, she went up to him and shook his hand  and  his  face  lit  up  in
     response.  She was absolutely certain that the Appellant was  the  man
     who had escorted her.

 31. The next two witnesses were Sri Lankan.  SI produced a statement dated
     24th July 2003, shortly after the appeal was dismissed;   he  produced
     another one in March 2004.  He was granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain
     in 2001.  His brother was in the LTTE and SI  had  met  the  Appellant
     through the brother three or four times between  1996  and  1999.   He
     suggested that the Appellant held a senior position because he  had  a
     vehicle, a motorbike and at other  times  a  pick-up  truck,  and  his
     brother said that the Appellant held a responsible position.   He  did
     not know what that position might have been because  his  brother  did
     not say, nor did he know whether that included being a bodyguard.   He
     did not say  what  section  the  Appellant  was  in.   He  produced  a
     photograph of his brother with the Appellant and SI's  family.   About
     two years ago, the Appellant had telephoned him because he had  met  a
     mutual friend;  he wanted to call SI as a  witness  in  his  case,  to
     which SI agreed but the Appellant did not say anything much about  it.
     About six or seven months ago, SI had spoken to  a  solicitor  but  he
     could not really remember the gap.  SI had spoken to his brother since
     SI had come to the United Kingdom and had told him that he had met the
     Appellant. His parents had told the brother, on home on leave from the
     LTTE, that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom.  In the  light  of
     the fears expressed by the Appellant that the LTTE would see him as  a
     traitor and would seek to have revenge upon him,  SI  was  asked  what
     reaction there had been to the knowledge that the Appellant was in the
     United Kingdom and that SI had been asked to help him with  his  case.
     There was no reaction to the discovery  that  he  was  in  the  United
     Kingdom other than that he asked how SI had met the Appellant, but the
     conversation broke off because the brother moved around,  even  though
     the call was placed at a communication centre when the brother was  on
     leave;  he did not tell his brother that he was helping the  Appellant
     and the brother had not been told that the photograph  of  the  family
     with the  brother  and  the  Appellant  had  been  sent  to  help  the
     Appellant.  The photograph had been asked for before SI had spoken  to
     the Appellant in the United Kingdom, as he wanted a family photograph.

 32. KM made a  statement  in  May  2004  when  the  other  witness  proved
     unavailable. He had been granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain  in  June
     2003.  He had been in the LTTE for five years and had been punished by
     them for two years for trying to leave them;  he was made to cook  for
     them.  After escaping from them he went to  an  army  controlled  area
     where the army arrested him on a number of occasions, tortured him and
     eventually he escaped.  He had met the Appellant in 1995 in a camp and
     knew that he held positions of responsibility.  After KM  was  injured
     in fighting he was taken to a camp to recover where the Appellant  was
     in charge of political duties (a suggestion also made by SI).  He knew
     that he had a prominent position.  He also carried out some plans  but
     he did not know what those plans were.  He had last seen  him  in  Sri
     Lanka in 1997.

 33. He was initially  unable  to  remember  when  he  had  first  met  the
     Appellant in the United Kingdom, but then said that it  was  in  2003.
     They had met in a bus as KM was going to sign on in Hounslow.  He said
     that it was about two or three months after  he  had  arrived  in  the
     United Kingdom which was 24th May 2003, probably June.   He  said  how
     frightened he was of the LTTE because they were now infiltrating  army
     controlled areas in disguise and  were  harassing  his  older  brother
     threatening to kill KM.  They never pardoned those who worked  against
     them.

 34. The Appellant gave evidence about the preparation of his  case  before
     the Adjudicator and how he met the witnesses.  After he had  made  his
     first and untrue statement, he had changed  solicitors  to  Winstanley
     Burgess where his case was dealt with by Mr Burgess who advised him to
     get two witnesses to support his case.  The Appellant  had  tried  but
     one refused to help;  later he said that he had asked a  lady.   After
     that he had given up.  He then met TA in the temple after he had  lost
     at the Adjudicator hearing;  he had just seen him there; this was  the
     witness who was unable to attend.  SI said that he would help  but  it
     appears that this too was after the Adjudicator hearing.

 35. In cross-examination, he was very vague about when  this  meeting  had
     taken place, whether winter or summer,  but  also  said  that  it  was
     shortly after his case before the Adjudicator was lost;  the statement
     is dated shortly afterwards. When reminded that he had  said  that  he
     first met SI in  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  appeal  before  the
     Adjudicator was lost, but that SI had said that they had met here  two
     years ago, he said that that was right but it was only  at  the  later
     stage that the had asked for his help;  that is also not what  SI  had
     said.  He was then vague about when they had met at an earlier  stage,
     before saying that he had not asked him to help at that earlier  stage
     because SI had not been in the LTTE.  Mr Burgess had wanted  witnesses
     who had been in the LTTE, although the  Appellant's  reasons  for  his
     first and untrue story had been that there was a risk of exclusion  if
     they said that they were LTTE members.  He only thought that SI  would
     be useful and  asked  him  to  help  after  he  had  lost  before  the
     Adjudicator.  He had gone everywhere where there were Tamils trying to
     find someone who  knew  him.   There  had  been  difficulties  because
     Winstanley Burgess were closing down at around the time of his appeal.

 36. He had meet KM six or so months ago in December 2003, but it  appeared
     that he had asked for his specific help about one month ago.  When  he
     was asked about the evidence given by KM that they had met in June  or
     July 2003, he said that  he  could  not  remember  the  month  or  the
     weather.  He said that KM had not really been a friend in Sri Lanka.

 37. The Appellant said that he had told Mr Burgess  about  Ms  Colvin  two
     weeks before that case;  though he had  initially  said  that  it  was
     after he had lost before the Adjudicator.  He had not thought  of  her
     until then because he had only been  thinking  of  LTTE  members.   Mr
     Burgess could not find her address.  Irving's, his current solicitors,
     were not told by Mr Burgess;  it was  the  Appellant  who  told  them.
     They made contact through the Sunday Times.

The application of the Ladd v Marshall tests

 38. We now turn to consider the  Ladd  v  Marshall  test.   Miss  Anderson
     pointed out that Ms Colvin had seen the photographs of  the  Appellant
     before meeting him. That was not a persuasive point on the test we are
     considering, although she is right that identification evidence from a
     careful and honest witness can still be mistaken and three  years  had
     passed since the two had  met.   She  also  pointed  to  a  number  of
     discrepancies between what Ms Colvin said about her journey  with  the
     Appellant and what he said about it in a statement produced before  he
     heard her evidence:  she said that she had been escorted by  civilians
     on her return, saw no one on the inward journey, did  not  let  anyone
     use her satellite phone and did not talk to the Appellant on it.   His
     statement  contradicted  each  of  those  matters  and  the  first  in
     particular was a very different version. Those are  points  which  are
     relevant to identification and memory.

 39. We accept that her evidence is at least apparently  credible  for  the
     purposes of the Ladd v Marshall test and said so  at  the  hearing  in
     order to advance submissions.  She was plainly honest and there was no
     dispute about that.  She was  tested  about  the  reliability  of  her
     memory and the accuracy of her identification;  it was suggested  that
     she had been sympathetic to the  LTTE  position.   To  our  mind,  not
     merely was she an honest witness, but  she  was  a  very  careful  and
     thoughtful witness who did her best to be objective and accurate.  She
     was open about what she could not remember clearly but this assignment
     was a very important one and the loss of an eye through  it  gave  her
     every cause to remember it.  She pointed out that the Appellant was  a
     lighter skinned and larger man  than  most  Tamils,  which  helped  to
     distinguish him, and in any  event  her  journalistic  experience  had
     enabled her to acquire a good memory  for  faces  including  those  of
     different races.  The differences between what she said and what is in
     the Appellant's recent statement were not explored with him in  cross-
     examination, because that was not appropriate at this stage. They  may
     show the fragility of the memory of either or both;  they  may  go  to
     accuracy of identification.

 40. We also indicated that we considered that the evidence  of  Ms  Colvin
     passed the test in Ladd v  Marshall  as  to  availability  before  the
     hearing in these  unusual  circumstances.   It  is  unlikely  that  if
     Winstanley Burgess had been informed of this witness that  they  would
     not have taken the obvious step of trying to make contact through  the
     Sunday Times, so problems in this respect are down  to  the  Appellant
     and not his advisers.  But it would be far  from  obvious  that,  even
     with the change of story, an asylum seeker should  seek  out  and  put
     reliance on a very well known journalist who might well  not  remember
     him and if she did, might  very  well  not  have  been  interested  in
     spending the time and effort required to  provide  evidence.   He  was
     fortunate that in fact she both remembered him  and  was  prepared  to
     give evidence, which she saw as a duty.  We can well  understand  that
     he would concentrate his endeavours on the  Tamil  community,  turning
     only to her as a last resort.  Even if he had told the truth from  the
     outset, and had thereby given himself more time in  which  he  or  his
     solicitors could approach Ms Colvin, it  is  understandable  that  she
     would be seen as a last and unlikely chance, of uncertain availability
     or willingness to attend an Adjudicator hearing.

 41. Having said that, it will be a very unusual case in  which  a  witness
     whose identity is known and who is traceable can pass that part of the
     test in Ladd v Marshall, because an appellant should  obtain  all  the
     evidence he needs to put his case to the Adjudicator.   It  would  not
     normally be sufficient to pass the test that the late recognition that
     the first story was untrue deprived an appellant of the time needed to
     put a second story in order, supported  by  witnesses.   There  was  a
     suggestion that Mr Burgess had advised that  two  witnesses  were  all
     that was necessary.  He may or may not have done but  both  knew  that
     the Appellant was completing changing  his  story,  was  admitting  to
     making  a  false  claim  backed  up  by  false   documents.    It   is
     inconceivable that, save in  circumstances  as  exceptional  as  this,
     someone who knows that his credibility is  going  to  be  under  close
     scrutiny can ignore potential witnesses and seek to bring them in only
     when the case has been lost, seeking a remittal  so  that  that  fresh
     evidence can be heard.

 42. The view we  formed  in  relation  to  the  other  witnesses  is  less
     important in the light of that.  We do not  accept  that  SI  was  not
     available with reasonable diligence.  The Appellant knew that  he  was
     in England, had been in contact with him and  could  have  sought  his
     help and told Winstanley Burgess of  the  assistance  which  he  could
     offer.  He did not do so. Part  of  his  reluctance  to  use  him  was
     because he could not give the right sort of assistance in relation  to
     the first story and he wanted stronger evidence  in  relation  to  the
     second.  But these tactical calculations, and the impact of the change
     of story, do not suffice to show that SI was not available.

 43. Although there is some consistency  in  SI's  evidence  with  what  Ms
     Colvin had to say, his evidence did not relate to that assignment, was
     very vague about what the Appellant had done in the LTTE, and was  not
     really credible in relation  to  the  brother's  reaction  or  to  the
     obtaining of the family photograph with the brother and the Appellant,
     so fortuitously.  There were many occasions in his evidence  when  the
     witness was unable to recall things about the conversations  with  his
     family and the provision of the photograph, and  the  contact  between
     the Appellant and SI.  It was  surprising  that  the  brother  had  so
     little reaction to the discovery that the Appellant was in England  in
     view of the fear which those who have left the LTTE claim to  have  of
     it, and that the family of an LTTE member  of  some  seniority  should
     help so willingly someone who had only met the witness  a  few  times.
     It is a remarkable stroke of fortune that the family photograph  which
     was taken before there had been any contact with  the  Appellant,  and
     which was asked  for  as  a  family  photograph,  should  include  the
     Appellant, who was little known to SI  and  who  was  fortuitously  in
     contact with him in the United  Kingdom;   all  the  more  so  as  the
     brother was reluctant to have his photograph taken anyway according to
     SI.  The Appellant's evidence about how they  met  and  what  happened
     also contradicted SI's in a  number  of  ways.   Notwithstanding  that
     there is some general consistency at a very broad level with  what  Ms
     Colvin had to say, we did not  find  this  witness  to  be  apparently
     credible.

 44. KM was not available at the time of the Adjudicator  hearing.   It  is
     not necessarily the case that that means that the evidence passes that
     aspect of the Ladd v Marshall test where it  is  evidence  of  a  type
     which can be provided by others who can be  obtained  with  reasonable
     diligence.  However, although the Appellant seems to have  had  better
     fortune in finding witnesses after he lost  than  before,  we  do  not
     accept the suggestion by  Miss  Anderson  that  other  witnesses  were
     available with reasonable diligence in this case.   TA  seemed,  after
     the  evidence  of  the  Appellant,  to  have  been  found  after   the
     Adjudicator hearing, by chance in the  temple  although  he  had  been
     asking around if anyone knew him and so could assist.  It is obviously
     possible for chances to arise in that way and it is not too much of  a
     coincidence.

 45. KM's evidence about the Appellant was vague, put him  in  a  political
     role but was emphatic that he occupied  positions  of  responsibility.
     It was at odds with that given by the Appellant as to when they met in
     the United Kingdom.  It does have some consistency with what Ms Colvin
     said at a very general level and he was a more credible  witness  than
     SI.  We were unimpressed by his evidence and would not regard it alone
     as  sufficiently  cogent,  consistent  and  reliable   to   pass   the
     requirement for apparent credibility.

 46. Miss Finch said  that  it  was  difficult  to  rely  on  the  apparent
     credibility of TA who had not given oral evidence.  We do  not  accept
     that it is always necessary for someone to give oral evidence for  his
     evidence to have apparent credibility but the statement is very  short
     and is silent as to how he came to be asked to give evidence after the
     Adjudicator hearing.  If evidence is sought to be  adduced  after  the
     hearing, it is necessary for evidence to deal with the question of why
     it had not been  procured  earlier  so  as  to  be  available  to  the
     Adjudicator.  The statement says that  TA  knew  the  Appellant  as  a
     member of the LTTE, as he himself had been, between 1990 and 1999.  He
     had obtained ILR in 2001.  He describes the Appellant, using the  same
     language that  the  other  witnesses  did,  as  holding  positions  of
     responsibility and being a senior member.  The Appellant  had  been  a
     bodyguard or holding some  other  responsible  role.   There  is  very
     little detail about what he might have been doing, even though TA says
     that he used to see him sometimes three or four times  a  day  between
     1993 to 1996.  Again by itself, we would not regard it  as  sufficient
     to be apparently credible.

 47. What we do accept, taking the evidence in the round, is that there  is
     apparently credible evidence which supports the Appellant's  claim  to
     have been an active service member  of  the  LTTE  in  2001,  who  was
     trusted by the leadership with important tasks even  though  they  may
     not have  required  someone  of  a  high  rank.   There  are  no  real
     equivalents in an irregular group such as the LTTE to  what  might  be
     senior NCOs or junior to middle ranking officers in  a  regular  army.
     But it would seem from Ms Colvin's  evidence  that  it  is  apparently
     credible that he held more than a low level position.


Error of law


 48. Miss Finch correctly submitted that, because the case came within  the
     2002 Act, this evidence had to show that there had been  an  error  of
     law in order for it to be relevant.  It is not the same as  background
     evidence or evidence  as  to  the  current  personal  position  of  an
     appellant.  The error of law which she submitted  it  showed  was  the
     error explained in E as an error of fact.  The broad requirements  for
     an error of fact to  constitute  an  error  of  law  are  set  out  in
     paragraph 66 of the judgment.

           "In our view, the time has now come to accept that a mistake  of
           fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate head  of  challenge
           in an appeal on a point of law,  at  least  in  those  statutory
           contexts where the parties share an interest in co-operating  to
           achieve the correct result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly  such  an
           area.  Without seeking to lay down a precise code, the  ordinary
           requirements for a finding of unfairness are apparent  from  the
           above analysis of CICB.  First, there must have been  a  mistake
           as  to  an  existing  fact,  including  a  mistake  as  to   the
           availability of evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly,  the
           fact or evidence must have been 'established', in the sense that
           it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable.   Thirdly,  the
           appellant (or his advisers) must not have been  responsible  for
           the mistake.  Fourthly, the mistake must have played a  material
           (not necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."


 49. Miss Finch relied also on paragraph 63:

           "In our view, the CICB case points the way to a separate  ground
           of review, based on the principle of fairness.  It is true  that
           Lord  Slynn  distinguished  between  'ignorance  of  fact'   and
           'unfairness' as grounds of review.  However, we doubt  if  there
           is a real distinction.  The decision turned, not  on  issues  of
           fault or lack of fault on either side;  it was  sufficient  that
           'objectively'  there   was   unfairness.    On   analysis,   the
           'unfairness' arose from the combination of five factors:


           i)    An erroneous impression created by a  mistake  as  to,  or
                 ignorance of, a relevant fact (the availability of reliable
                 evidence to support her case);
           ii)    The  fact  was  'established',  in  the  sense  that,  if
                 attention had been drawn to the point, the correct position
                 could  have  been  shown  by  objective  and  uncontentious
                 evidence;
           iii)  The claimant could not fairly be held responsible for  the
                 error;
           iv)   Although there was no duty on the  Board  itself,  or  the
                 police, to do the claimant's work of proving her case,  all
                 the participants had a shared interest in  co-operating  to
                 achieve the correct result;
           v)    The mistaken impression played  a  material  part  in  the
                 reasoning."


 50. Miss Finch submitted that each  requirement  was  satisfied  and  Miss
     Anderson contended that none were.  The mistake of fact was said to be
     that whereas the Appellant was in fact an active member of the LTTE, a
     middle ranking officer, the Adjudicator had concluded that  there  was
     nothing about his story which could be  believed.   The  precise  fact
     said to be mistaken varied a little but that gives its essence.  We do
     not accept Miss Anderson's submission on the  first  requirement  that
     this could not  by  its  nature  be  a  mistake  of  fact  within  the
     contemplation of the Court of Appeal in E.  True it is, that it  is  a
     point which goes to undermine the Adjudicator's credibility assessment
     but that is not  of  itself  an  answer  if  the  relevant  tests  are
     satisfied.  It is a  problem  for  the  Appellant  that  the  asserted
     mistaken fact is so ill-defined and the concept of the  middle-ranking
     officer in the LTTE is not  an  easy  one  to  show  applies  to  this
     Appellant.  The apparently credible material from Ms Colvin shows only
     that he was an experienced, trusted and active member of the LTTE  who
     had some authority over other men.

 51. We do not consider that there was  any  mistake  of  fact  as  to  the
     availability of evidence in the sense required by E, in the  Appellant
     not knowing of the  willingness  or  ability  of  Ms  Colvin  to  give
     evidence.  The type of  mistake  referred  to  there  was  as  to  the
     existence of evidence which was  already  available.   Otherwise  this
     type of mistake would simply provide a substitute test for those which
     the Court of Appeal referred to in E relating to fresh evidence.  Miss
     Finch did not argue that mistake applied either  but  we  consider  it
     necessary to cover it.

 52. The first requirement is very closely linked to  the  second  in  this
     case.  We have said so far that there is apparently credible  evidence
     as to a mistake of fact by the Adjudicator, though  it  is  not  well-
     defined.  But the fact  or  evidence  has  to  be  "uncontentious  and
     objectively verifiable".  Miss Finch argued that such was the  quality
     of Ms Colvin's evidence, backed up by the evidence of other witnesses,
     that it had been established that the Appellant was  a  middle-ranking
     member of the LTTE. We do not accept that argument.  First, that point
     cannot be established by the mere conclusion that evidence  meets  the
     "apparent credibility" test  for  its  reception  as  fresh  evidence.
     Second, there is  a  dispute  about  how  accurate  and  reliable  the
     identification evidence is and what if anything can be  inferred  from
     it.  We do not accept the submission that we  are  in  a  position  to
     decide that issue, let alone to decide it to the  level  at  which  it
     could be described  as  "uncontentious  and  objectively  verifiable".
     That test is not one which can be satisfied by  the  Tribunal  hearing
     contentious evidence and then ruling upon it.  It would be  very  rare
     that disputed evidence could meet that requirement;  it could only  do
     so where the basis of the dispute was frivolous, vexatious or abusive,
     a mere irresponsible refusal to accept the obvious, such  as  claiming
     that a document of faultless credentials must be  a  forgery  and  the
     product of a plot.  That is not  the  position  here.   There  was  no
     dispute as to the honesty or integrity of Ms Colvin and we  found  her
     evidence to be "apparently credible" including our assessment  of  her
     reliability and accuracy.  But it was some way from the test in E,  of
     being "uncontentious" showing an "objectively verifiable"  mistake  of
     fact.  Miss Anderson's points about the time which  has  elapsed,  the
     stress of the events, the circumstances  under  which  they  met,  the
     differences in what the Appellant says about the events from what  she
     says and the general difficulties of identification evidence  are  not
     irresponsible and have some foundation.  We do not see how the need to
     form a view about the veracity or reliability of  a  witness  can  fit
     with the test save in the most exceptional circumstances.

 53. There is a particular problem which would arise if the test  could  be
     met by hearing disputed oral evidence.  The accuracy  and  reliability
     of Ms Colvin's evidence cannot be finally ruled upon  without  hearing
     the full evidence of the Appellant,  whose  truthfulness  is  in  some
     doubt, and supporting witnesses.  The fact that the Appellant might be
     a liar could cast doubt in its turn upon the accuracy of the  evidence
     of Ms Colvin.  The Tribunal could not hear the full case in  order  to
     decide whether the evidence showed a mistake of fact  which  satisfied
     the second test, yet in practical terms that is what it would have  to
     do if Miss Finch's approach were right.  That shows to our minds  that
     the test can only be satisfied by evidence which meets  the  stringent
     requirements by being  genuinely  uncontentious,  being  the  sort  of
     evidence which would lead anyone to say that of course a  mistake  had
     been made, and a mistake as  to  a  clearly  identifiable  fact.   The
     difficulties faced by asylum seekers  in  obtaining  evidence  do  not
     diminish the stringency of this particular requirement.

 54. Thirdly, it was said that the Claimant could not be  held  responsible
     for the error;  this was because he had done what  he  could  to  find
     evidence to support his case and there were  difficulties  in  finding
     witnesses who were  willing  to  say  that  they  were  members  of  a
     proscribed organisation;  he had explained what he had  done  and  the
     decisions about calling witnesses.  Mr Burgess could perhaps have done
     more, and the Appellant should not  suffer  for  any  failings  there.
     This submission is wrong.  The Appellant is very largely to blame  for
     the problem.  The mistake  on  the  Adjudicator's  part,  if  it  were
     established to be one, arose because the Appellant destroyed  his  own
     credibility by telling lies and backing his lies with false documents,
     and then changing his story in a way which seemed to  meet  what  were
     known to be changing circumstances in Sri Lanka.  If there were a lack
     of effort from Mr Burgess, as to which there is no evidence, that also
     prevents reliance upon this  error  of  law.   It  was  said,  in  the
     application to admit new evidence, that  he  had  said  that  no  more
     evidence was required which also does not help the  Appellant.   There
     is little clear evidence as to  what  contacts  the  Appellant  sought
     among the Tamil community in the United Kingdom.

 55. Fourth, it was said by  Miss  Finch  that  this  fact  would  cause  a
     complete re-examination of the credibility and risk  elements  of  the
     case.  If true that it was the Appellant who escorted Ms Colvin,  that
     does not go to any other aspect of his case, which now relies in  part
     upon his departure from the LTTE without their consent and which would
     cause him to be regarded as a deserter. Nonetheless,  it  would  be  a
     factor of sufficient significance that it could fairly  be  said  that
     the absence of belief that he had been active in  the  LTTE  played  a
     material though not necessarily decisive  part  in  the  Adjudicator's
     reasoning.  If the other tests had been satisfied we would  have  held
     that there had been an error of law and  remitted  the  matter  to  an
     Adjudicator.

 56. That evidence which passes the Ladd v Marshall tests does not show the
     error of law contended for.

 57. Miss Finch pointed out that in its discussion in E  of  R  v  CICB  ex
     parte A, the Court had referred  to  the  shared  interest  which  the
     parties and the Board had in reaching the correct result.   That  also
     applied to this area, especially with the duty  of  anxious  scrutiny,
     even though the process was essentially  adversarial.  This  duty  was
     borne out by paragraph 197 of the UNHCR Handbook, which refers to  the
     shared duty to ascertain the facts and the obligation which may lie on
     the "examiner" to produce evidence to assist  a  claimant.   Accepting
     that there is a duty on the parties in an asylum case  to  co-operate,
     and that there is a duty of anxious scrutiny upon the  Tribunal,  Miss
     Finch's submission is not advanced.  There is no duty on the Secretary
     of State to find witnesses, least of all witnesses  whom  he  has  not
     been asked to find.  The content of the duty to  co-operate  does  not
     extend that far and it was not clear how any such  duty  if  fulfilled
     could have  assisted  the  Appellant  anyway.   He  breached  his  own
     obligation to co-operate by telling and maintaining  lies.   It  is  a
     completely  different  situation  from  the  one  in  CICB  where  the
     obligation was referred  to  in  the  context  of  the  production  of
     relevant material which was already in existence and in the possession
     of one party which would benefit the other.

 58. In this area, however, the question naturally arises as to how the new
     information, which if true could affect the Appellant's case in  quite
     a significant way, making a  material  but  not  necessarily  decisive
     difference to it, could  ever  be  taken  into  account,  or  whether,
     notwithstanding it, the Appellant would be returned to  Sri  Lanka  on
     what might be a false basis.

 59. Miss Finch pointed to the difficulties created by section 96(1)(b)  or
     (c) of the 2002 Act, section 96(2) being inapplicable.   That  section
     provides for certification of a claim so that it may not  be  appealed
     where the claim was made to delay removal and with no other legitimate
     purpose.  Miss Finch was concerned that the effect of  this  would  be
     that the Appellant, facing the difficulties which asylum seekers  face
     in obtaining  evidence  with  their  education,  legal,  language  and
     cultural difficulties, would  be  unable  to  undo  injustice  and  to
     achieve a fair result.  The predecessor provision  was  considered  in
     Balamurali and Sandhu v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1806.   Balamurali  shows
     that even where one purpose of the fresh claim is to delay removal, it
     may nonetheless have a legitimate purpose such as identifying a change
     in law or circumstances; it would  be  material  but  not  necessarily
     decisive that what was now being said could have been said earlier.  A
     legitimate purpose would be  to  draw  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
     attention material that was not reasonably available earlier.

 60. Paragraph 346 of the Immigration Rules was also said to  constitute  a
     limitation which meant that it would be unwise  to  suppose  that  the
     Appellant could make a fresh claim based on the evidence of Ms Colvin.
      The "claim advanced in the representations" has to  be  "sufficiently
     different from the earlier claim that there is a  realistic  prospect"
     that the asylum claim will be made out.  In  reaching  that  decision,
     the SSHD disregards the insignificant,  the  incredible  or  "material
     available" to the applicant when the previous application was  refused
     or when any appeal was determined.   Logically  consideration  of  the
     test in the Rules precedes the application of section 96(1).

 61. The Courts have considered the way in which  the  Secretary  of  State
     ought to consider  fresh  claims  under  the  Rules  on  a  number  of
     occasions.  Miss Finch suggested that R v SSHD ex parte Onibiyo [1996]
     2 All ER 901 focused on relevant changes of circumstances, which would
     not apply here, but is the basis  of  paragraph  346.   But,  as  Miss
     Anderson showed, that case is far from the last  word  in  this  area.
     The relevant change of circumstances does not have to be  a  different
     basis of persecution but can be an intensification in  the  degree  of
     ill treatment from the same source;  R v SSHD  ex  parte  Ravichandran
     (No 2) [1996] Imm AR48, Dyson J.  More importantly for these purposes,
     SSHD v Boybeyi 1997 Imm AR  491,  Court  of  Appeal,  showed  that  "a
     realistic prospect that a favourable view could be taken  of  the  new
     claim" on  appeal  could  be  demonstrated  by  fresh  evidence  which
     satisfied the  Ladd  v  Marshall  tests.   The  Secretary  of  State's
     decision in those matters was subject to judicial review.  In R v SSHD
     ex parte Senkoy [2001] EWCA Civ 328, fresh evidence as to the  general
     prospects of Kurdish  asylum  seekers  being  tortured  on  return  to
     Turkey, which satisfied the Ladd v Marshall tests  was  held  to  have
     ignored wrongly by the Secretary of State.

 62. We do not say that, in the light of our  decision,  the  Secretary  of
     State is bound to regard this Appellant as having a fresh claim within
     the Rules, but he cannot simply dismiss  the  fresh  evidence  on  the
     basis that it reinforces a claim which  has  already  been  dismissed.
     The Secretary of State is bound to look under the Rules,  at  evidence
     which satisfies the Ladd v Marshall tests.  Miss  Anderson,  appearing
     for the Secretary of State, asserted that that  was  his  approach  to
     paragraph 346.  We have  held  Ms  Colvin's  evidence  does  so;   the
     Secretary of State may decide that KM's does as well when  taken  with
     Ms Colvin's.  He will have to consider his reaction to it, which  will
     be judicially reviewable.  It may  or  may  not  affect  his  ultimate
     decision on the claim.  The more stringent the requirements on appeal,
     the more ready the Secretary of State will  need  to  be  to  consider
     fresh evidence as creating a fresh claim.

 63. It might be thought that in a case where evidence satisfies the Ladd v
     Marshall test, it is more productive of delays to have  the  Secretary
     of  State  consider  its  quality  and  effect,  perhaps  leading   to
     judicially reviewable decisions, than to legislate  so  that  the  IAT
     could consider the impact of the fresh evidence, but that is the clear
     effect of the legislation and its clear  policy  is  to  restrict  the
     number of attempts that  an  Appellant  may  make  to  have  his  case
     reviewed on differing and improving evidence  before  the   successive
     appellate stages.

 64. There is nothing in  this  result,  however,  which  is  intrinsically
     unfair or which prevents anxious scrutiny being given to a claim.

 65. That leaves only the disposal grounds of appeal to  consider.   We  do
     not think that there is anything in them.

 66. There are a number of criticisms  of  the  Adjudicator's  approach  to
     credibility.  He did not fail to see the evidence in the light of  the
     background circumstances;  the Appellant had told two stories each  of
     which could fit into background condition, but those  conditions  were
     also and legitimately seen by the Adjudicator as causing  the  change;
     paragraphs 54-57.  His appraisal did  not  involve  any  inappropriate
     cultural assumptions;  none  have  been  shown.   He  simply  did  not
     believe the Appellant for sound reasons which he gave.  His  sceptical
     approach (paragraph 59) to the photographs  is  rationally  explained,
     and follows Tanveer Ahmed*.  Given the false documents  the  Appellant
     admitted producing, his reaction is scarcely surprising.  His comments
     about the arms are perfectly proper in relation  to  a  country  where
     armed conflicted has been so prevalent, and reflect the fact that,  as
     so little of  what  the  Appellant  says  was  credible,  it  was  not
     difficult to explain why little corroborative weight could  be  placed
     on what he produced.

 67. Miss Finch also said  that  fundamental  aspects  of  the  credibility
     dispute  were  not  put  to  the  Appellant.   This  is  fundamentally
     misconceived.  First, credibility was obviously at issue in almost all
     respects. He had completely changed his story.  There was no Secretary
     of State concession that the Appellant was in the LTTE;  Ms  Chapman's
     cross-examination is reported quite fully and her submission was  that
     it was difficult to  believe  anything  he  said.   Second,  in  those
     circumstances, it is for the advocate and witness to address fully the
     issues which  affect  credibility.   They  cannot  assume  that  where
     credibility is the obvious issue, that matters or  factors  which  are
     not put in cross-examination or by the  Adjudicator  are  accepted  as
     true.  This has been addressed by the Court of Appeal in Maheshwaran v
     SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 173 paragraphs 4 and 5, and more recently by Lord
     Carloway in the Outer House of the Court of  Sessions  in  Koca,  22nd
     November 2002, paragraph 34-36.  It is neither realistic nor necessary
     for a fair hearing for every point of  concern  from  the  Adjudicator
     where credibility is at issue, to be expressly put.  It is a matter of
     judgement whether to omit to do so  is  unfair,  or  to  do  so  risks
     appearing to cross-examine.  On balance the larger points  are  better
     put;  if they are not obvious points, they should be put  in  an  open
     and neutral way, not at too great a length.

 68. It is very difficult to see how it can be contended, even if factually
     correct that he did not do so, that the Adjudicator should  have  made
     it clear that he doubted the Appellant's membership  of  the  LTTE  or
     active service  within  it.   It  was  an  obvious  central  issue  on
     credibility.  The Adjudicator was not obliged to ask  more  about  the
     provenance of the photographs or uniforms;   he  could  form  his  own
     view.  The idea that the Adjudicator reached conclusions, not  on  the
     case put by the Secretary of State, but on his own case, which he  did
     not put, is nonsense.   The  Appellant's  credibility  was  the  major
     issue;  the Secretary of State submitted that  nothing  the  Appellant
     said should be believed.

 69. The Adjudicator was entitled to accept that submission, even if he did
     so in part for doubts on aspects which were not  expressly  canvassed.
     The Appellant should have realised that, given his  change  of  story,
     every aspect had to be fully covered.

 70. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.  It is starred for what we  say
     about fresh evidence.










                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


