
H-MOH-V3

|                           |        |AA (Adjournment -provenance |
|                           |        |of fresh evidence)          |
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00109                       |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|On 29 March 2004                                                  |
|Prepared 29 March 2004                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                  |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:
For the Appellant:           Miss S Crane of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr I  J  French,  who  dismissed  his
      appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds  against  the  decision
      made on 22 February  2001  giving  removal  directions  following  the
      refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  28  September  2000
      concealed in a lorry.  He claimed asylum on entry.  The appellant  was
      required to attend an interview on 22 January 2001 but  he  failed  to
      attend.  His application was refused both on its merits  and  on  non-
      compliance grounds for the  reasons  set  out  in  a  letter  dated  1
      February 2001.   At  a  hearing  on  23  August  2001  an  Adjudicator
      determined  that  the  refusal  on  non-compliance  grounds  was   not
      sustainable and the appeal was adjourned to  give  the  Respondent  an
      opportunity to interview  the  Appellant.   There  were  a  number  of
      subsequent hearings but still the Appellant was not interviewed.  On 7
      June 2002 it was submitted that the appeal  should  be  allowed  under
      Rule 33 of the Procedure Rules 2000  or  alternatively  listed  for  a
      substantive hearing.  The appeal was eventually listed for hearing  on
      7 November 2002.  The delay between August 2001 and November 2002  was
      wholly unnecessary.  The appeal should have  been  determined  on  its
      merits when initially listed in accordance with the directions in  Ali
      Haddad (00/HX/00926*).

3.    The Adjudicator summarised the basis of the  Appellant's  account  as
      follows.  He comes from a village known as Qalai Qazi near the town of
      Chardah, some 30 to 40 kilometres west of Kabul.  His father had  been
      a member of the Ittihad-i-Islami party which the Appellant  joined  in
      1984.  The party was opposed to  the  Russians,  then  the  Najibullah
      regime, the Shias and ultimately the Taliban.  The area in  which  the
      Appellant lived was mainly Shia.  He had a garage  business  in  Kabul
      where he employed two or three people.  He went to the business daily.

4.    After the Taliban gained control in 1996  he  experienced  continuous
      persecution and  harassment.   He  was  regularly  stopped  and  asked
      questions about his religion and why he did not grow a beard.  In June
      1998 he was driving home from work when he was  stopped  and  his  car
      searched.  The Taliban who stopped him  found  some  audio  tapes  and
      demanded to know  why  he  was  listening  to  music.   There  was  an
      argument.  He was arrested and detained in  prison  for  three  months
      during which time he was severely ill-treated, receiving knife  wounds
      to his right hand and both legs.   His  release  was  secured  by  his
      cousin paying a bribe of US$3,000 to the Taliban.  He returned to  his
      business but remained in fear of the authorities.

5.    In August 2000 the Taliban received information that he was  actively
      involved with the Ittihad-i-Islami and in possession of weapons at his
      home.  He was at work when his home was raided by armed members of the
      Taliban.  They did  not  find  any  weapons  but  they  did  find  the
      Appellant's membership cards and photographs of other members  of  the
      party.  The Appellant was told that he had to report  to  the  Taliban
      authorities.  He was afraid and decided to leave.  He went to hide  at
      an uncle's home temporarily.  He felt he had no choice  but  to  leave
      Afghanistan and he paid an  agent  US$11,000  to  make  the  necessary
      arrangements.

6.    He left Afghanistan on  13  September  2000  travelling  by  foot  to
      Tajikistan where he remained for two days.  He then travelled  to  one
      unknown country by car and then to another where he remained  for  two
      days.  He travelled by lorry to the  United  Kingdom  arriving  on  28
      September 2000.  His claim was that he could not return to Afghanistan
      because he feared the Taliban authorities.

7.    In his oral evidence before the Adjudicator he said that  before  the
      Taliban were in power he had been associated with the Ittihad-i-Islami
      which was fighting against Shias.  When the Taliban came to power they
      finished off the Shias but they were now back in power and he  was  in
      fear of them.  If they caught him, he would be  hanged.   He  had  not
      previously mentioned his fear of the Shias as  then  the  Taliban  had
      been in power but they no longer  existed  as  such.   The  Ittihad-i-
      Islami was a large party and had some members in the government.   The
      Appellant was asked if he feared returning to his own area or to Kabul
      and also asked why he could not go  to  an  area  where  there  was  a
      Pashtun majority.  He said that he could not do that  as  he  did  not
      know where his land was or where he was brought up.

8.    The Adjudicator reviewed the evidence.  He noted that there were some
      discrepancies between the oral evidence and the written statements  as
      to whether or not the Taliban had found membership cards belonging  to
      the Appellant.  The Adjudicator regarded these discrepancies as minor.
       He was satisfied that the Appellant was a Pashtun who  had  lived  to
      the west of Kabul and had a business in Kabul itself.  He had  been  a
      member of a group opposed to the Taliban.  The basis of his claim  was
      the treatment he feared  from  the  Taliban.   His  evidence  made  no
      mention of any fear of another  group  until  the  statement  prepared
      immediately before the hearing and in his oral evidence at the hearing
      itself.  Although he confirmed he had been afraid of  the  Taliban  he
      said that he had to flee to avoid the Shias.  The Adjudicator did  not
      accept that evidence.  He found that the Appellant had been  a  member
      of a group which joined in the loose alliance opposed to  the  Taliban
      under the title of the Northern Alliance or United Front.

9.    The Adjudicator accepted that there were  reports  of  some  Pashtuns
      suffering difficulties at the hands  of  other  groups  following  the
      change of regime but he did not find that this would be the  case  for
      the Appellant.  Even if he had not wanted to return to his own village
      west of Kabul, he had long-standing connections in Kabul  itself  even
      if his business was no longer there.  Looking at the situation in  the
      round, the Adjudicator  did  not  find  that  if  the  Appellant  were
      returned to Kabul he would now face a real risk of persecution  or  of
      treatment contrary to Article 3 which  passed  the  minimal  level  of
      severity necessary for the Article to have effect.

10.   The Adjudicator found that the appellant's actual  fear  was  of  the
      Taliban regime.  That fear had now been removed and his  alleged  fear
      of Shia groups had been raised at the last minute  in  an  attempt  to
      bolster his claim.  The appeal was dismissed on both asylum and  human
      rights grounds.  Unfortunately the Adjudicator's determination was not
      signed until 4 June 2003 even though he had prepared it on 13 November
      2002 a matter of days after the hearing.  The Adjudicator has endorsed
      on the determination that this delay was caused as the file  was  lost
      in transit following dictation of his determination but the  file  was
      subsequently recovered.

11.   In the grounds of appeal it is asserted that fresh  evidence  is  now
      available to support the  Appellant's  contention  that  he  has  good
      reason to fear the Shias.  The grounds refer to  a  newspaper  article
      and other documents.  It is  contended  that  this  evidence  was  not
      available at the date of hearing and that  if  this  new  evidence  is
      accepted it would mean that the Appellant's life would be in danger if
      returned to Afghanistan due to his  activities  as  a  member  of  the
      Ittihad-i-Islami party  (the  Islamic  Unity  Party).   Permission  to
      appeal was granted by the Vice President in a  determination  dated  6
      August 2003 and issued to the parties on 26 August 2003.

12.   The Vice President directed that the originals of the  new  documents
      should be sent without delay to the Respondent in order that he  might
      examine them and if he chose authenticate  them.   He  indicated  that
      before deciding whether or not to admit  the  documents  the  Tribunal
      would wish to know  how  and  when  they  came  into  the  appellant's
      possession.  He directed that a statement from  him  should  be  filed
      with a copy being sent to the Respondent no later than  fourteen  days
      before the hearing.  The Appellant's representatives failed to  comply
      with these directions.  Copies of the documents were enclosed  in  his
      bundle served on this authority on 24 March 2004 and on the Presenting
      Officers' Unit although a copy did not  reach  Mr  Parker  before  the
      hearing.  A brief witness statement was faxed to this authority on the
      morning of the hearing.

13.   Miss Crane accepted that there had been a failure to comply with  the
      directions.  She argued that there should be an  adjournment  so  that
      the originals could be considered by  the  Respondent.   She  accepted
      that there was no proper explanation for the failure  to  comply  with
      directions but argued it would be in  the  interests  of  justice  for
      these documents to be properly  considered.   Mr  Parker  opposed  the
      adjournment rightly pointing out that permission had been  granted  in
      August 2003 but nothing had been done until the last minute.

14.   The Tribunal refused the application for an adjournment.  The  appeal
      is based on an assertion that there are further documents relevant  to
      the appeal.  The appellant's representatives have been  in  possession
      of these documents since July 2003.  The Vice President when  granting
      permission made clear directions that the originals should be sent  to
      the respondent without delay.  The  words  "without  delay"  are  even
      printed in bold on the grant of permission but  still  no  notice  has
      been taken of  this  direction.   He  also  directed  that  a  witness
      statement should be filed not later than fourteen days before the date
      of the hearing to explain how and when these documents came  into  the
      Appellant's  possession.   The  statement  was  not   prepared   until
      effectively the date of the hearing.  There is no proper basis for  an
      adjournment.  The Tribunal is not satisfied that the refusal to  grant
      an adjournment would prevent the just disposal of this  appeal:   Rule
      40 of the 2003 Procedure Rules. However, as copies  of  the  documents
      were annexed to the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  are
      enclosed in the bundle of documents submitted to the Tribunal, we  are
      satisfied in the particular circumstances  of  this  appeal  that  the
      proper course would be for the documents to be admitted in evidence.

15.   Miss Crane submitted that the documents  showed  that  the  Appellant
      would be of interest to the authorities.  She relied in particular  on
      a newspaper article which described the Appellant as wanted and  to  a
      further document purportedly showing that there was an arrest  warrant
      for the Appellant.  She also produced three  photographs  showing  the
      Appellant in a group of armed men.  There was also  an  identity  card
      and a letter from the Islamic Unity Party.  She submitted  that  these
      documents confirmed that the authorities had a continuing interest  in
      the Appellant.  There would be a real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
      treatment contrary to Article 3 on  return.   She  conceded  that  the
      Appellant no longer had any fear of the Taliban but was at  risk  from
      both the authorities and from Shias.

16.   Mr Parker submitted that the Appellant's witness statement about  the
      documents was very scant.  The Appellant had telephoned his wife after
      his appeal before the Adjudicator had been refused.  She told him that
      the government had spread the news that  he  should  be  arrested  and
      killed.   She had documents or papers  in  relation  to  his  possible
      arrest.  He told his wife that all the  documents  she  had  collected
      should be sent to him.  He had not known about these documents  before
      he made this telephone call.  His  wife  gave  the  documents  to  her
      brother who went to Pakistan and posted them to the United Kingdom.

17.   At the hearing two stamped envelopes were produced.  One  was  posted
      from Peshawar in May 2003.  The  other  bears  Afghan  stamps  and  is
      postmarked at  Kabul  dated  either  May  or  June  2003.   Mr  Parker
      submitted that no inferences  could  be  drawn  from  the  Appellant's
      identity card which appeared  to  show  his  status  as  single.   The
      newspaper article could not be treated  as  reliable.   There  was  no
      indication of what the newspaper was nor the date of issue,  save  for
      the date 1381 in the heading which would correspond to year 2002.   It
      was not clear from the photographs which one was the Appellant.  There
      was no evidence when the photographs were taken or where.  The  letter
      from the Islamic Union referred to "according to our  information...".
      There was no information as to the provenance of this  document.   The
      document purporting to be an arrest warrant appeared to be an internal
      document.  It would be surprising if  an  original  document  of  this
      nature would come into the possession of the Appellant's  family.   He
      submitted that the further documents produced were  not  reliable  and
      did not undermine the Adjudicator's findings.

18.   Miss Crane submitted in reply that it should not be held against  the
      Appellant that his appeal had been inadequately prepared.  He had  now
      managed to obtain documentary evidence  to  support  his  claim.   The
      issue was whether the documents were  authentic.   The  Appellant  was
      expressing a fear of a party  involved  in  the  interim  transitional
      government.  He would not be able to look  to  those  authorities  for
      protection.

19.   The only explanation the Tribunal have for the late receipt of  these
      documents is that when the Appellant telephoned  his  wife  after  his
      appeal was dismissed by the Adjudicator, he was  then  told  that  the
      government had spread news that he would be arrested  and  that  there
      were documents relating to his possible arrest.  It is said  that  the
      Appellant told his wife that those documents should be  sent  to  him.
      They were given to his brother who posted them from  Pakistan.   There
      is no further evidence apart from the documents themselves to  explain
      what they are, where they came from or how they came  into  possession
      of members of the Appellant's family.

20.   There is nothing particular contentious about the document purporting
      to be an identity card.  Mr Parker pointed out  that  it  records  the
      Appellant as single whereas he is married.  It could be that with  the
      upheavals in Afghanistan he did not have his identity card updated  in
      the place provided on the relevant page of the  card.   Two  envelopes
      have been produced showing that something was received  by  post  from
      Pakistan and from Afghanistan but the  envelopes  are  of  no  further
      evidential value.  There are also three  photographs  which  show  the
      Appellant with a number of armed men.  There was no  information  when
      these photographs were taken or where.  Obviously they must have  been
      taken before the Appellant left Afghanistan when his fear was  of  the
      Taliban.  They have no relevance to his present asserted fear.

21.   The Appellant seeks to rely on a newspaper  article.   As  translated
      this reads as follows:

             'Announancment
             To all the beloved of the country are  informed  that  anyone,
             who knows about Abdullah son of Abdul Karim cast 'Alozai'; who
             is an active  member  of  the  Islamic  Union.   Anyone   with
             information about  his  temporary  or  permanent  where  about
             should report to the Sixth Regional Police  Station.  You  can
             claim a reward from the station or from the state.  And  doing
             so you will fulfil loyalty to humanity.'

      The original document produced is half a page only. There is  nothing
      to indicate what this newspaper is or when it was published  save  for
      the date of 1381.  In the absence of any further evidence  about  this
      newspaper article, the Tribunal are not satisfied that  there  is  any
      reasonable degree of likelihood that  it  is  a  genuine  or  reliable
      document.  Anyone familiar with this jurisdiction knows how easy it is
      to obtain evidence of this nature which is manufactured to  support  a
      claim for asylum.  On the basis of the information  available  to  the
      Tribunal,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  rejecting  this  document  as
      unreliable.

  22. We now consider the letter from the Islamic Union.   This  letter  as
      translated reads as follows:-

             'Dear Brother Abdullah Alozai
             May there be peace upon you and goodwill to the Almighty.
             Dear brother, as we know that you are a very active member  of
             our  Organisation  of  Islamic   Union.   According   to   our
             information we would like to inform you that the Hazb-e-Whadat
             Shia have decided either to arrest  you  in  any  case  or  to
             possibly kill you under any circumstances. You are warned that
             you should not returned back to Afghanistan as your life is in
             danger in this place and there is no peace. Therefore  we  are
             requesting you should stay away from Afghanistan  and  do  not
             attempt to come back.'

      There is no address on the document.  Even as translated it refers to
      "according to our information".  The lack of any evidence  about  the
      provenance of this document leads us to the view  that  there  is  no
      reasonable degree of likelihood that any reliance can  be  placed  on
      its contents.  The final document adduced is the  document  which  is
      said to indicate that the Appellant is  wanted  by  the  authorities.
      This appears to be an internal document. As translated this reads  as
      follows:


             'To respectable sixth Regional Security Office!
             Rajab Ali son of Raza Ali resident of  Pull-e-Surrukah,  Sixth
             District has made this complaint against Abdullah son of Abdul
             Karim Alozai.  As written in his statement that  he  has  been
             jailed and severely hurt by him, during  the  previous  regime
             when he was in the power.   The  victim  made  his  appearance
             before the ministry and the  ministry  has  issued  an  arrest
             warrant against him so he should  be  prosecuted  against  the
             charges and to provide justice.  The  complainant is an active
             member of the Hazb-e-Whadat  and justice should be provided to
             him.'

      There is no explanation how this came  into  the  possession  of  the
      Appellant's family.  The Tribunal are not satisfied that there is  any
      reasonable degree of likelihood that this document is genuine.

23.   In summary the Tribunal are not satisfied that any of  the  documents
      produced, save perhaps the identity card which has no material bearing
      on the appeal, are reliable documents  on  which  any  weight  can  be
      placed.  They do not provide any adequate basis  for  undermining  the
      Adjudicator's  findings  and  conclusions.   He  accepted   that   the
      Appellant's fears had been of the Taliban.  Following  the  change  of
      regime the Appellant no longer had a well-founded fear of  persecution
      in his home area or in Kabul.  He found that the  Appellant's  alleged
      fear of Shia groups had been raised at the last minute in  an  attempt
      to bolster his claim. In the judgment of the  Tribunal  the  documents
      belatedly produced before us are a further attempt  to  manufacture  a
      specious claim for asylum.

24.   In summary the Adjudicator's findings and conclusions  were  properly
      open to him for the reasons he gave.  The  further  evidence  produced
      does not cast any doubt on the correctness of his conclusions.

25.   It follows that this appeal is dismissed.






                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



