

VS (Registration on Relocation) Ukraine CG [2004] UKIAT 00242

           IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing:  11 August  2004
                                               Date Signed:  11 August  2004

                  Date Determination Notified:         01 September     2004




                                   Before:




                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)

                        Mr J Perkins (Vice-President)


                               Mrs E Hurst JP



Between

            Appellant
                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

      Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Mr S Jaisri, instructed by Messrs  Bart  Williams  &
Co
For the Respondent:   Ms T Hart, Presenting Officer.


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ukraine, appeals, with permission,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T R P Hollingworth,  dismissing
     his appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 14  February  2001
     to issue removal directions and refuse asylum.

  2. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. He lived in  Ivano-
     Frankovsk, in West Ukraine and was a qualified engineer  with  his  own
     business. He was a member of the congregation  of  a  local   Ukrainian
     Orthodox Christian Church. He did not hold any particular office in the
     Church but assisted the local priest by for example driving  him  about
     from time to time. He said there was an ongoing conflict  in  the  area
     between the Orthodox Christians and the Greek Catholics, who formed the
     majority of the local population. His problems  allegedly  began  on  5
     March 2000.  He heard noises outside his church.  He  went  outside  to
     investigate and  found  himself  embroiled  in  a  fight.  He  suffered
     concussion and cuts and bruises and required hospitalisation for twelve
     days. The Appellant then received threatening telephone  calls  telling
     him  not  to  persist  with  any  complaints  against  his   attackers.
     Nevertheless the matter was reported to the police, who made  inquiries
     but there were  no  arrests.  Thereafter  he  suffered  harassment  and
     intimidation from the Greek Catholics, which he reported to the police,
     who failed to take the complaints seriously. The second incident was on
     15 October 2000 in Mikulichia, a village some 50 km from his  home.  He
     went to arrange for the use of  the  Church  in  that  village  by  the
     Orthodox Christians the following Sunday.  Afterwards he was beaten  up
     in the churchyard by Greek Catholic members of that congregation.   His
     car was vandalised and personal belongings including his and his wife's
     passports were stolen. He was hospitalised again. On  17  October  2000
     his shop was looted. He did not consider that he could live  safely  in
     Ukraine  as  he  could  not  relocate  elsewhere  due  to  registration
     requirements.  He came to the UK on 3 December 2000, with his wife  and
     daughter, and applied for asylum two days later.

  3. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was an  Orthodox  Christian
     and married man with one child, who was the owner of a business. He was
     not involved in politics and his involvement with his  Orthodox  Church
     was at low level, limited to regular attendance and essentially driving
     his local priest around.  The Adjudicator accepted that  the  Appellant
     was the subject of an attack on 5 March 2000, but did  not  accept  his
     account of this attack. His evidence about how he became  involved  was
     unclear.  It would appear to  be  purely  by  chance  rather  than  any
     targeting.  The medical evidence  provided  in  support  of  his  claim
     showed no more than the Appellant attended a local medical centre.   It
     made no mention of hospitalisation  or  of  any  treatment  beyond  the
     provision of painkillers.  There is no mention of  any  appointment  to
     see a specialist. Thereafter the Appellant continued with his  business
     until  October  2000,  without  any  further  serious  incidents.   The
     Adjudicator considered there was no  objective  evidence  of  religious
     violence or persecution involving the  Orthodox  Church  or  the  Greek
     Catholic Church.  He concluded that if the Appellant had complained  to
     the police they would have investigated the matter, especially if there
     were witnesses.

  4. The Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's claim  that  he  had  received
     threatening telephone calls, given the vagueness of the evidence  about
     them and the Appellant's evasiveness when questioned. At all events  at
     no attempt was made to carry out any threats between March and  October
     2000.  The Adjudicator rejected  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
     account of the attack on 15 October 2000 and its  seriousness.  He  did
     not consider that the Appellant  would  have  been  targeted  by  Greek
     Catholics 50  km  away  from  his  home.  There  was  also  a  material
     inconsistency between his various accounts. In his statement  of  April
     2002 he complained about lack of police support when  he  was  able  to
     identify the culprits. Yet at the hearing he said that he did not  know
     who his attackers were. The Adjudicator  concluded  that  there  was  a
     sufficiency of protection available for the Appellant in his home area.
      If as he latterly maintained he did not know who his attackers were in
     the October incident, the lack of arrests did not imply that the police
     were  uninterested.  The  Adjudicator  rejected  the   claim   of   the
     vandalisation of the Appellant's shop because there was no evidence  of
     any report to the police  and  no  evidence  about  when  the  incident
     occurred and how the damage was caused.  It was implausible that if the
     police had been involved in investigating the attack on 15 October, the
     Respondent would not have mentioned to them this attack on his shop  as
     well. The Adjudicator did not accept either that  the  Appellant's  and
     his wife's passports were stolen or his later claim that the police had
     recovered  them  but  refused  to  return  them.  His  reason  was  the
     unsatisfactory and confused evidence given by the Appellant about this.

  5. In reaching his conclusions the Adjudicator gave weight to a report  by
     Dr Chenciner dealing with obstacles facing potential returnees  to  the
     Ukraine in the  light  of  the  residential  registration  system  that
     replaced the previous propiska system in November 2001.  However, as an
     alternative finding, the Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
     account of the confiscation of the passports was not credible and there
     was no reason why the Appellant and his  family  could  not  return  to
     Ukraine and relocate elsewhere.  The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  the
     Appellant had sold his business before coming to the UK  and  used  the
     proceeds to travel here, which he did for economic reasons.

  6. The grounds of appeal made a variety  of  specific  challenges  to  the
     various elements  of  the  determination  but  at  the  outset  of  the
     proceedings before us, both representatives agreed that the Adjudicator
     had not, in  his  adverse  credibility  findings  concerning  the  core
     elements of the claim, adequately dealt with the substantial volume  of
     corroborative  material  before  him.   This  showed  that  there  were
     difficulties between the Orthodox Church and the Greek Catholic  Church
     in West Ukraine, where the Greek Catholics formed  a  majority  of  the
     population, particularly about the use of church  buildings.   It  gave
     support for the Appellant's claim that he had attended  at  the  Church
     used by the Greek Catholics in Mikulichia and had told the local  Greek
     Catholic priest that the Orthodox Church would be using  that  building
     the following week rather than  him.   It  showed  that  some  violence
     ensued. There was medical evidence both from the Ukraine and the UK  to
     show that the Appellant had suffered more  serious  injuries  than  the
     Adjudicator was prepared to accept. Both representatives and  therefore
     agreed further that if the core  claim  were  to  be  material  to  the
     outcome of the appeal, then the matter would have to  be  remitted  for
     hearing afresh by another Adjudicator.

  7. However the Adjudicator's adverse credibility  finding  concerning  the
     retention by the police of the Appellant's and  his  wife's  passports,
     and his conclusion that there was a viable internal  relocation  option
     that would not be unduly harsh, were  distinct  issues  that  were  not
     contradicted  by  the  specific   corroborative   material   and   were
     potentially dispositive of  the  appeal.   The  appeal  before  us  was
     therefore essentially concerned with these matters and it proceeded  on
     the basis of taking the core claim at its strongest.

  8. Mr Jaisri relied upon the report by Dr  Chenciner,  which  showed  that
     although the old propiska system of registration, it had been  replaced
     by a similar system that required a person moving to a new area to  de-
     register with the police in his old area and to  re-register  with  the
     police in the new  area.  Having  a  passport  was  also  an  important
     requirement.  There was extensive  corruption  in  the  Ukraine,  which
     would provide difficulties for the Appellant in moving elsewhere.   The
     test of undue harshness would be met by the  level  of  corruption  the
     Appellant  would  have  to  address.  The  cost  of  bribery  could  be
     substantial.

  9. In response, Ms Hart submitted that the CIPU report  showed  there  was
     freedom of movement  in  Ukraine  that  was  respected  in  theory  and
     practice.  Registration was required to move to another area, but there
     was no reason why the Appellant and his family  could  not  obtain  the
     necessary consents. He was of no adverse interest to the police in  his
     home area.  His problems were with individuals from  another  religion.
     The police would have no reason to object to his moving, and if he  was
     a source of potential difficulties with the local Greek Catholics, they
     might well be pleased to see him move elsewhere, where this  would  not
     be a problem.  He would relocate outside West Ukraine,  where  Orthodox
     Christians would be the substantial majority.  There would be no reason
     why the authorities in the new area should object to his living  there.
     The Adjudicator was justified in concluding that the Appellant and  his
     wife had retained their own passports. In any  event,  the  Appellant's
     own evidence from a lawyer in Ivano-Frankivsk, showed that  a  lost  or
     withdrawn passport could be replaced by attending at the police  office
     and filling in an application form. Dr Chenciner had not identified  in
     his report any specific reason why the Appellant  would  be  unable  to
     complete the registration requirements for living in another area.  The
     Appellant was an educated engineer who  would  find  it  easy  to  find
     employment. He would be a welcome addition to a new area.

 10. We have carefully considered these submissions. First  with  regard  to
     the passports, we  can  see  no  error  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions  in  paragraph  49  of  the  determination  that   it   was
     implausible in the context of the Appellant's evidence that the  police
     would have withdrawn his passports and driving documents. There was  no
     good reason for their wanting to do so, and if they had recovered these
     documents after they were stolen, they would not have so  informed  the
     Appellant if they did not want him to have them back, if he  wanted  to
     get them.  As we have indicated, there is nothing  in  the  documentary
     evidence to undermine the sustainability  of  this  conclusion  by  the
     Adjudicator.  Nevertheless, even if the Appellant's account  were  true
     and for some  reason  the  police  had  withheld  his  and  his  wife's
     passports and is no good reason why he  could  not  attend  the  police
     station and apply to have them back or to have new ones,  and  no  good
     reason why the police would refuse to oblige, subject  perhaps  to  the
     payment of a small bribe, of which we shall say more later.

 11. Next with regard to registration  requirements  on  moving  to  another
     area, it is clear from reading the CIPU report in conjunction  with  Dr
     Chenciner's report  and its appendices, that although  the  old  Soviet
     propiska system has officially been  abolished  in  Ukraine,  something
     very similar to it is still in place. Moreover the registration is  not
     computer based at a national level but depends upon local records.  The
     need for  registration  relates  essentially  to  accessing  to  public
     services, but apparently many Ukrainians live without due  registration
     and pay a small bribe to their local police to avoid problems.

 12. The Appellant, in order to move to another area and comply with the  de
     facto legal requirements, will have to de-register with the  police  in
     his old home area and re-register in the new area. However Dr Chenciner
     has not provided any reason in his report specific to the Appellant why
     he could not do  this.   Mr  Jaisri  has  suggested  that  the  endemic
     corruption in Ukraine referred by Dr Chenciner would prevent  him  from
     doing so in that he would  have  to  pay  bribes.   He  pointed  us  to
     evidence in the CIPU  report  that  the  prosecutor  general  had  been
     accused of taking a bribe of $100,000 and sought to imply that  bribery
     was at unrealistic levels for someone like the Appellant to be able  to
     afford and there was no clear evidence of how much would be involved as
     there is no real prospect of obtaining clear evidence about the  levels
     of bribery at various levels in a society where bribery is endemic.

 13. However that submission is neither correct  in  principle,  nor  is  it
     supported by Dr Chenciner's report. In principle  in  societies,  where
     officials expect some payment to do the jobs they are  supposed  to  by
     virtue of their  office  to  supplement  their  incomes,  it  would  be
     counterproductive for them to demand bribes in  everyday  matters  that
     ordinary people could not  afford.  The  example  in  the  CIPU  report
     concerning the large bribe allegedly paid  to  the  prosecutor  general
     appeared to relate to a Mafia chieftain seeking to  evade  prosecution.
     That is a very  different  matter  from  an  ordinary  citizen  seeking
     permission to move from one area to another when there is  no  specific
     reason to object to it.  We  do  not  accept  Mr  Jaisri's  unsupported
     assertion that the levels  of  bribe  required  would  be  a  practical
     hindrance to satisfying  the  necessary  registration  requirements  to
     relocate outside West Ukraine.  Dr  Chenciner  refers  to  a  study  on
     corruption that indicated a bribe of $200 might normally be required to
     obtain such registration, though this is bound  to  be  speculative  to
     some extent.  We do not consider that the need for registration or  the
     cost involved if bribes are required are sufficient to prevent internal
     relocation or to make it unduly harsh, especially when contrasted  with
     the cost of using an agent to come to the UK.

 14. Indeed on the specific facts of  this  appeal,  we  consider  that  the
     police in the Appellant's home area might well be happy to see  him  go
     and would be supportive of a  move.   He  was  himself  of  no  adverse
     interest to them. He had not committed any crime.  However  insofar  as
     he attracted hostility from local Greek Catholics, his  departure  from
     the area would remove a source of potential friction.  Outside the area
     of  West  Ukraine,  the  majority  of  the  population  would  be   co-
     religionists of the Appellant. There would be no objection to having  a
     well-educated man like the Appellant come to join them. He would make a
     valuable member of another Orthodox congregation.  Indeed, if  he  were
     to run into any local bureaucratic difficulties, it would be reasonable
     to expect the Orthodox Church to offer him some assistance, for example
     if he needed an address in a new area in which to register.  After  all
     the need to move arose out  of  his  activities  for  the  Church.  The
     payment of small bribes are it seems a normal part of everyday life  in
     Ukraine. The Appellant is a trained engineer and had his own  business.
     He would  be  much  more  able  than  most  Ukrainians  to  afford  the
     relatively small sums required to  effect  internal  relocation  within
     Ukraine, especially when compared to the cost of smuggling himself, his
     wife and his daughter to the UK.

 15. Accordingly we can see no error of law in the Adjudicator's  conclusion
     that the Appellant and his family have  a  viable  internal  relocation
     option within Ukraine and that it would not be unduly harsh  to  expect
     him and his family to use it rather than seek international protection.

 16. Accordingly, for the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.



                                                             Spencer Batiste
                                                            (Vice President)

                                        Approved for electronic transmission

