
Heard at: Field House | | | |
|On 13 July 2004            |        |MD (14 years not            |
|                           |        |disproportionate) Bangladesh|
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00208          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......29th July 2004.......                                       |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr T A Jones                                                      |
|Ms S S Ramsumair  JP                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Before us, the appellant, herein after as  "the  Secretary  of  State",  was
represented by Ms J Donnelly, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,  and
the respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", was represented by Mr M  Schwenk
of Counsel, instructed by David Gray & Co, Solicitors.

The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on 30  June  1959  and
so is now 45 years old.  In a determination as promulgated on 6 August  2003
the Adjudicator, Mr W C Coates, allowed his appeal against the  decision  of
the Secretary of State that removal was not contrary  to  his  rights  under
the European Convention on Human Rights.  It is against that  decision  that
the Secretary of State appeals.

The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 31  March  1990.
He did not leave when his permission to be in the United Kingdom came to  an
end.  He overstayed and started work.  On 5 February,  1996  he  married  at
Liverpool Registry Office.  He and his wife had taken  part  in  an  Islamic
marriage ceremony a few weeks before at a Mosque in Liverpool.  On 28  March
1996 the appellant applied for permission to remain on  the  basis  of  that
marriage.  This was the first contact he had with the  respondent  after  he
had entered the country in 1990.

On 2 January 1997 the claimant was told that his application to stay on  the
basis of his marriage was unsuccessful and he was issued with  a  Notice  of
Intention to deport.  He appealed against that notice  and  the  appeal  was
dismissed on 26 June 1997.  He applied for permission to appeal further  and
that permission was refused by the Tribunal on 24 November 1997.  There  are
parts of  his  chronology  that  we  find  very  significant.   Firstly  the
claimant lived in the United Kingdom without permission and  without  making
any attempt to regularise his position for some five and  a  half  years  or
thereabouts.   When  he  did  try  and  regularise  his  position   he   was
unsuccessful.  Just over nine months after he made his application  to  stay
on the basis of his marriage he was given notice of  a  decision  to  deport
him.  He appealed that decision unsuccessfully and  was  told  about  eleven
months after he had made his application  that  he  could  not  appeal  that
decision  any  further.   As  Ms  Donnelly  quite  rightly  pointed  out  in
submissions to us the claimant knew then and had known ever  since  that  he
had no right to be in the United Kingdom.

The claimant's wife was born in Bangladesh.   On  20  July,  1999,  that  is
about three and a half years after the  claimant  applied  to  stay  in  the
United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his  marriage  to  her,  she  became  a
naturalised British citizen.  The claimant's wife has a  daughter,  Sabrina,
who was born on 15 October 1991.  On 1 February 1997 the first  daughter  of
the marriage, Sarmina was born.  Another daughter,  Amina  was  born  on  17
January 1998 and a third daughter of the marriage, Nasrin, was  born  on  13
January 2001.

The claimant relied on an extra-regulatory  policy  developed  by  the  Home
Office known as DP5/96.   Extraordinarily,  given  its  importance  to  this
case, neither party has produced a copy of this  policy  document.   It  was
before the Adjudicator, and we have seen, a Home Office news release,  dated
1 March 1999.  This entitled "Immigrant families who have lived  in  the  UK
for seven years will be allowed to stay".  It  continues  "The  Home  Office
changed the time limit under which immigrant families  with  young  children
can be forcibly removed from the country."  The news release  then  set  out
in a quotation from the Home Office Immigration Minister, Mr M  O'Brien,  in
which he acknowledged  the  problems  facing  a  child  who  had  spent  his
formative years in the United Kingdom being uprooted to a different part  of
the world.  It explained that the government was "changing  the  time  limit
from ten to seven years for families  with  young  children  who  have  been
unable to establish a claim to remain".  It  is  plain  from  correspondence
that this affected the Home Office policy  document  DP5/96,  although  that
had itself been incorporated into a Policy Modification and announced by  Mr
O'Brien on 24 February 1999.   According  to  a  footnote  in  Butterworth's
Immigration Law Service at page D188 a  letter  dated  19  April  1999  from
Immigration Service Headquarters explained that the  concession  applies  to
all enforcement cases including cases where only one parent  is  subject  to
removal either by deportation or as an illegal entrant.   However  the  full
text of the policy modification  made  it  plain  that  each  date  must  be
decided on its own merits.  It says: "For the purposes  of  proceeding  with
enforcement action in the case involving a child,  the  general  presumption
is that we would not usually proceed it with  enforcement  action  in  cases
where a child was born here... however, there may be circumstances in  which
it is considered that enforcement action is still appropriate,  despite  the
lengthy residence of the  child,  ..."   It  then  lists  examples  of  such
circumstances and lists factors that are generally relevant.   It  is  quite
clearly not the case  that  there  is  an  unequivocal  policy  of  allowing
families to remain when children have been in the United Kingdom  for  seven
years or more.

The Adjudicator does not appear to have  been  shown  a  full  copy  of  the
policy statement.  He did consider very carefully the written  answer  of  a
minister that features in the news release.  The  Adjudicator  decided  that
the child Sabrina was a child of the family.  She had  been  in  the  United
Kingdom for more than seven years and, following the  case  of  Abdi  [1996]
Imm  148,  the  respondent's  decision  was  unlawful  because  he  was  not
following his own policy.

The Adjudicator  further  found  as  a  fact  that,  in  the  event  of  the
claimant's deportation, he could not apply for  entry  clearance  for  three
years.  The Adjudicator then went on  to  say  that  removing  the  claimant
pursuant  to  a  Deportation  Order,  if  one  were   made,   would   be   a
disproportionate interference with the appellant's "family  right  to  life"
(sic).

The Adjudicator decided that the claimant's step  daughter  was  within  the
scope of the policy.

The Adjudicator went onto find there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
children relocating to Bangladesh with their parents.  He  was  particularly
concerned about their prospects and standard of living  in  a  country  that
they have never visited.

The  Adjudicator  was  not  impressed  by  concerns  expressed   about   the
claimant's wife's health.  It was  expected  that  she  would  need  thyroid
surgery.  We have been told, and accept, that surgery has now  taken  place.
The Adjudicator  regarded  "these  illnesses  as  routine"  and  found  that
removal would not be disproportionate on medical grounds alone.

The Adjudicator  was  very  critical  of  delay  by  the  Home  Office.   He
acknowledged that the claimant remained in the United Kingdom for six  years
without approaching the authorities but also noted that  it  took  the  Home
Office some 4 years before deciding in January 2002 that the claimant  could
not take advantage of the policy because he was relying  on  the  length  of
residence of a step child and a further year for the Home  Office  to  start
the relevant process.  The Adjudicator said that the claimant should not  be
disadvantaged by the Home Office's delay.

Paragraph 2 of the grounds of  appeal  complain  that  the  Adjudicator  was
wrong to find that step children  were  within  the  scope  of  the  policy.
Paragraph 3 complains that the Adjudicator was wrong to decide the  case  as
if a Deportation Order would be made.  There was no evidence that  that  was
the intention of the Secretary of State.  Paragraph 4 complains  that  there
were not  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family  going  to  Bangladesh.
Paragraph 5  complains  the  Adjudicator  had  insufficient  regard  to  the
claimant's "lack of candour".

The adjudicator was clearly, and rightly, very concerned  with  the  welfare
of  the  claimant's  children.   Their   welfare   is   a   very   important
consideration but it is not  the  only  one.   We  do  not  agree  with  the
Adjudicator's comments at paragraph 80 of the determination  that  making  a
deportation order and so  preventing  (or,  more  correctly,  making  highly
unlikely)  readmission  for  three  years  would   be   a   disproportionate
interference with the claimant's private and family life.  Children are  not
a trump card that defeat an intention to make  a  Deportation  Order,  still
less whose presence in the United Kingdom make removal  disproportionate  to
the proper purpose of enforcing  immigration  control.   However  before  us
Miss Donnelly unequivocally undertook on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
that, in the event of the appeal being allowed, there would be  no  question
of the Secretary of State making a Deportation Order until the claimant  had
had time to remove with dignity voluntarily.   In  the  circumstances  there
was no need to consider point three.

The parties also agreed that the Adjudicator was wrong to decide,  following
Abdi, that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  unlawful.   This  is  an
appeal under Section 65(1) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.   Only
certain grounds of appeal are permissible in the case of an  appeal  brought
under Section 65(1).  An appeal can only be brought on the grounds that  the
decision complained of was the result of racial discrimination or in  breach
of human rights.  Abdi  concerned  an  Adjudicator's  powers  under  Section
19(1)(a)(i) and enabled Adjudicators  in  certain  circumstances  to  decide
that a decision was not in accordance with the law.  It has  no  application
in this appeal.  This point was explained particularly clearly  by  Mr  P  R
Lane VP in [2003] UKIAT 00083 A (Jamaica).

However Mr Schwenk submitted that the policy  was  still  relevant  for  the
purposes of a consideration of Article 8.  The Secretary of State could  not
argue that removal was necessary in a democratic society when the  Secretary
of State decided that removal  of  children  who  had  been  in  the  United
Kingdom for more than seven years was wrong.  As far as it  goes  we  see  a
great deal of merit in that submission but we find does not go far enough.

Mr  Schwenk  also  submitted  that   we   should   consider   the   family's
circumstances at  the  date  of  decision  and  the  claimant's  own  eldest
daughter had now been in the United Kingdom for seven years.

As indicated above we find that there are flaws in  Mr  Schwenk's  argument.
Firstly, the policy does not say what Mr Schwenk wants it  to  say.   It  is
not the case that removal is  forbidden  when  children  have  been  in  the
United Kingdom for more than seven years.  There presence is something  that
the Secretary of State must consider but that is not the same as  saying  he
can only conclude that removal is wrong.  Secondly there is no intention  to
remove the  claimant's  children.   They  are,  or  appear  to  be,  British
nationals.  A policy designed to help the  children  of  immigrant  families
does not necessarily assist the British children  of  an  immigrant  father.
There is a very important difference  in  their  circumstances.   Where  the
mother and children are British Nationals the  immigrant  father  can  apply
from outside the United Kingdom to join the members of his family  that  are
settled within the United Kingdom.  That does not apply in the  case  of  an
immigrant family where, for example, the wife and children  have  no  status
in the United Kingdom and the father cannot apply under the  rules  to  join
them.

We do agree with  Mr  Schwenk,  and  the  adjudicator,  that  it  is  wholly
unrealistic to think of the claimant's children leaving the  United  Kingdom
and going to Bangladesh.  That is expecting too much  of  young  people  who
are settled in the United Kingdom.

We can see  no  argument  against  a  finding  that  refusing  the  claimant
permission to remain in the United  Kingdom  is  an  interference  with  his
private and family life.  His family cannot  be  expected  to  join  him  in
Bangladesh.  If he is not given permission  to  remain,  the  decision  will
split the family.

We do not accept that it was open to the Adjudicator to  find  that  such  a
decision would be  disproportionate  to  the  proper  purpose  of  enforcing
immigration control.  We do not accept that the claimant's long  sojourn  in
the United Kingdom has been caused by inappropriate delay by  the  Secretary
of State.  The first irregular  five  years  were  caused  by  the  claimant
"going to ground".  It is not suggested that he  acted  covertly  but  in  a
free and open  society,  such  as  that  presently  enjoyed  in  the  United
Kingdom, people who choose to remain  unlawfully  stand  a  good  chance  of
going undetected.  That  does  not  legitimise  their  stay  in  the  United
Kingdom.  It is up to them to  introduce  themselves  to  the  Secretary  of
State and ask for permission to remain, which is exactly what this  claimant
eventually did.  We find it significant that the claimant  was  unsuccessful
when he applied to stay.  It went further than that.  He was told  expressly
that he had no permission to remain and was told that a  decision  had  been
made to make him the subject of a Deportation Order.  We do not  agree  with
the Adjudicator that the claimant's situation was somehow  improved  by  the
Secretary of State not making a deportation order.  The  fact  is  that  the
claimant knew that he did not  have  permission  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom.  The fact that he chose to write letters asking to remain  did  not
entitle him to remain.  The fact that the Secretary  of  State  is  slow  to
make a deportation order cannot be used  by  the  claimant  to  enhance  his
case.

We bear in mind that it is unfair to people who do not remain in the  United
Kingdom without permission, even when that is what they would  like  to  do,
to  see  people  who  choose  to  remain  without   permission   prospering.
Immigration  control  raises  policy  considerations  that  go  beyond   any
particular claimant.

It is quite clear to us that this is not  a  case  where  the  Secretary  of
State had to conclude that the  claimant  should  be  permitted  to  remain.
Rather this is a case where the claimant's removal  is  clearly  within  the
Secretary of State's discretion.  The decision is  not  disproportionate  to
the proper purpose of enforcing immigration control.

In the circumstances, we allow the appeal.
                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                                13 July 2004
                                        APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION
