

MT (Credibility assessment flawed - Virjon B applied) Syria [2004 UKIAT
00307


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


Date of hearing: 27 October 2004
Date signed: 28 October 2004
Date determination notified: 25/11/2004


                                   Before:

                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                             Mr J A Blair-Gould
                              Mr M J Griffiths

Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid of counsel, instructed by  Hammersmith
                       & Fulham Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Smith, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Syria,  appeals  with  permission  against
    the determination of an  adjudicator  (Mr  N  P  Dickson),  sitting  in
    Bradford, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal on  both  asylum
    and human rights grounds against  the  respondent's  decision  to  give
    directions for his removal from United Kingdom as  an  illegal  entrant
    after refusing an application for asylum made by him.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  November  2001.   He
    applied for asylum later the same day.  The grounds on which he did  so
    were that prior to his departure  from  Syria,  he  was  a  mathematics
    teacher at a  school.   He  was  also  a  sympathiser  of  the  Islamic
    Liberation Party, and distributed books and leaflets on behalf  of  the
    party.  He fled from Syria when he heard the two of his associates  had
    been arrested, and that members of the security forces had come to  his
    home looking for him.  He applied for asylum on  the  grounds  that  he
    would still be at risk of persecution for the same reason if he were to
    be returned to Syria.

3.     In  his  determination,  the  adjudicator  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence  in  all  material  respects.   He  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence that he may at one time have worked as a teacher in a  school,
    but rejected the remainder of his evidence.  It was on that basis  that
    he dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

4.    At paragraph 38 of his determination, the adjudicator stated:

         "In evidence the Appellant said that  he  had  contacted  the  SHRC
         [Syrian Human Rights Committee] through the internet  and  obtained
         the documents from the Moslem Brotherhood after  he  contacted  his
         brothers.  In view of my findings on the Appellant's credibility, I
         give no weight to these documents.   With  regard  to  the  claimed
         court proceedings dated 25th July 2000, I do not  accept  that  the
         Appellant  would  be  in  prison  for  three  years  and  fined   a
         substantial sum for leaving his work without permission.   Even  if
         this document was  genuine,  the  judgment  discloses  that  it  is
         possible to appeal  against  a  decision,  although  the  Appellant
         claimed in paragraph 15 of his statement that it was  not  possible
         to appeal against this decision.  After looking at all the evidence
         in the round,  I  am  not  prepared  to  place  reliance  on  these
         documents and I take into account the guidance in the  starred  IAT
         determination of Tanveer Ahmed.  The Appellant has not  established
         a well founded fear of persecution and in reaching my  decision,  I
         take into account not only  the  history  of  the  matter  and  the
         situation at the date of the decision  but  also  the  question  of
         persecution if he were to be returned" (emphasis added).

5.    Mr Smith,  who  appeared  before  us  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    acknowledged that in light of the judgment of Mr Justice Forbes in  the
    High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division, Administrative Court  in
    R v Special Adjudicator, ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469,  he  would
    be unable to resist a remittal of the appeal for rehearing  by  another
    adjudicator.  He was  plainly  right  to  do  so.   Mr  Al-Rashid,  who
    appeared for the appellant, confirmed that he  was  content  with  that
    proposal.

6.    With respect to the adjudicator, we are bound to say that  he  clearly
    erred in law in arriving at his assessment of the weight to be attached
    to the  documentary  evidence  referred  to  at  paragraph  38  of  his
    determination.  He fell into the same trap as  that  identified  by  Mr
    Justice Forbes in his judgment in ex parte Virjon  B,  particularly  at
    paragraphs 19 to 23 (inclusive) in the following terms:

         "19.     In this particular case, the Adjudicator  dealt  with  the
         linked questions of credibility and the medical evidence as follows
         (I quote from paragraph 24 of the written determination);


             "I find that  there  is  little  corroborating  evidence  from
             Albania about the appellant's wife's rape.   The  evidence  of
             both the appellant and his wife was that they went to see  the
             public investigator who was afraid to help  them  because  she
             feared for her job and for her  life  and  therefore  referred
             them to a gynaecologist.  Even if the  gynaecologist  was  not
             willing to write a report stating that  the  appellant's  wife
             had been raped they could surely have gone to  another  doctor
             and told him that she had been raped without  mentioning  that
             the attackers were police officers.  I find the appellant  and
             his wife both knew about the importance of medical evidence in
             this regard.  The report produced by the appellant's wife  and
             the gynaecologist only referred to facial  injuries.   I  find
             that these could have been caused by any incident or  even  an
             accident.  The medical reports of Dr Rich, Dr  George  and  Dr
             Varley refer to the clinical  depression  and  post  traumatic
             stress disorder of both applicants  resulting  from  the  rape
             incident.  However, these reports were based upon the evidence
             which  the  appellant  and  his  wife  gave  the  doctors.   I
             therefore attach little weight to the reports bearing in  mind
             that I have found both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  be
             without credibility".


         20.      Miss Chapman [counsel for the claimant] submitted that  it
         was clear from that paragraph that the Adjudicator had fallen  into
         error in two main respects.  First, the Adjudicator had dealt  with
         credibility in advance of a consideration of the  medical  evidence
         of  Dr  George  and  Dr  Varley  and  had  then  used  the  adverse
         credibility findings in order to reject that medical evidence, that
         being an incorrect approach to the issue  of  credibility;  see  ex
         parte Ahmed and Ademaj.  Second, if  the  medical  evidence  of  Dr
         George and Dr Varley was to be dismissed, it should not  have  been
         dismissed as it was, namely on a peremptory and  unreasoned  basis.
         In order to reject that  evidence,  the  Adjudicator  had  to  give
         sensible and comprehensible reasons for doing so.


         21.      I find both submissions are well founded.  It is clear  to
         me that the Adjudicator used her adverse  findings  of  credibility
         with regard to the claimant and his wife as the  means  whereby  to
         reject the important and significant evidence of Dr George  and  Dr
         Varley.  That was putting the cart before the horse.  The  evidence
         of Dr George and Dr Varley was strongly corroborative of the  truth
         of the account given by the claimant and his wife about the serious
         rape that was suffered by the wife.  It was therefore necessary for
         the Adjudicator to take that evidence into account as part  of  her
         consideration of all the evidence, before coming to any  conclusion
         as to the credibility of the claimant and his wife.


         22.      In my judgment, the Adjudicator thereby fell into error in
         her approach to the evidence when considering  the  credibility  of
         the claimant and his wife.  Furthermore, the Adjudicator also  fell
         into error in failing to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
         evidence of Dr George and Dr Varley.  The only reason given was the
         adverse finding as to the credibility of the claimant and his  wife
         but, as I have already said, that finding was itself flawed because
         it had been reached by the Adjudicator as a result of her error  in
         her approach to the evidence.  It  would  have  been  open  to  the
         Adjudicator to reject this important medical evidence, but only  on
         a properly reasoned basis  and  no  such  reasoned  basis  was  put
         forward.  To the extent that any reason was given, the  reason  was
         itself a result  of  an  error  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the
         Adjudicator to the evidence, the error  being  that  which  I  have
         already explained.


         23.      Accordingly, I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
         Adjudicator's adverse finding as to the credibility of the claimant
         and his wife cannot stand.  The Adjudicator failed to evaluate  the
         evidence properly and approached it in the  wrong  way.   She  also
         rejected an important body of medical evidence  which  corroborated
         the truth of the claimant's assertions, without giving  any  proper
         reasons for doing so.  Accordingly,  and  for  those  reasons,  the
         application succeeds.  I should add that, although I have indicated
         doubts as to the substance of the  other  grounds  raised  by  Miss
         Chapman, for the reasons already given, I do not consider  that  it
         would be appropriate to  express  any  concluded  view  as  to  the
         criticisms made of the Adjudicator's approach to those matters".

7.    In stating at paragraph 38  of  his  determination,  "In  view  of  my
    findings on the Appellant's credibility, I  give  no  weight  to  these
    documents", the adjudicator was plainly, in the  words  of  Mr  Justice
    Forbes, "putting the cart before the horse".  We did give consideration
    as to whether his subsequent reference in the same paragraph to  "After
    looking at all the evidence in the round, I am not  prepared  to  place
    reliance on these documents" was sufficient to show that in arriving at
    his assessment,  the  adjudicator  had  in  fact  applied  the  correct
    approach.  However, Mr Smith expressly confirmed that this was  not  an
    argument which he was seeking to advance before us, and it is  not  one
    which would have persuaded us in any event.   The  damage  had  already
    been done by that stage, and we are satisfied  that  the  adjudicator's
    subsequent reference to "looking at all the evidence in around" was not
    sufficient to repair it.

8.    For the sake of completeness, we record  that  even  if  we  had  been
    persuaded to the contrary on that point, the  adjudicator's  conclusion
    that he was unable to place any reliance on the documents  in  question
    is not one which we would have regarded as sustainable  in  any  event.
    On the face of it, the documents appeared to be authentic, and  one  at
    least of them emanated from an apparently reliable source,  namely  the
    Syrian Human Rights Committee.  Whilst it was of  course  open  to  the
    adjudicator to conclude, if so minded, that  he  was  not  prepared  to
    place any reliance on them, it was nevertheless necessary  for  him  to
    give proper, intelligible and adequate reasons  for  arriving  at  that
    conclusion.

9.    Paragraph 38 of his determination contains no such  reasons.   A  bald
    reference to the starred determination  of  this  Tribunal  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] INLR 345  was
    plainly insufficient  for  that  purpose.   Accordingly,  had  it  been
    necessary for us to do so,  we  would  have  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellant on that point as well.

10.   This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is  remitted  for
    a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than Mr N P Dickson.

Signed

L V Waumsley

Vice President


Approved for electronic distribution
