

                                  HD (Prison - Record of Proceedings)
    Iran [2004] UKIAT 00209                                              | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                       Date:  11th June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              30th July 2004

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice-President)

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussein, instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Giltrow, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Miss  J
     E Perrett, promulgated on 16th July 2001.  The Appellant is an Iranian
     who was refused asylum on 10th  March  2001.   His  asylum  and  human
     rights appeal was dismissed.  The Adjudicator summarised his  case  as
     follows:

           "In summary, the Appellant's case is that while undertaking  his
           military service  with  Sepah,  the  security  and  intelligence
           service in Iran, he was asked by a friend who he had known  from
           university to issue a  certificate  showing  the  completion  of
           military service.  He agreed.  The friend was later arrested and
           gave the Appellant's name as the  person  who  had  secured  the
           completion document.  The friend was discovered to be  a  member
           of the Mojahedin, (the MEK).  Another  friend  learnt  that  the
           Appellant would be  implicated  and  he  was  advised  to  leave
           immediately.  He fled there and then and went into  hiding.   He
           made arrangements to leave the country.  He fears return  as  he
           would be immediately arrested, tortured and possibly killed."

  2. The Adjudicator accepted that he had  undertaken  compulsory  military
     service in Sepah, the Revolutionary Guards Corps, where he  worked  as
     part of the  administrative  process  dealing  with  applications  for
     certificates of c0mpleted military service.  This  system  was  widely
     abused.  The Adjudicator also accepted that he had wrongly issued such
     a certificate to an old university friend in order to help that friend
     obtain a passport and also that the Appellant may have:

           "... failed to complete his military service by a  month  or  so
           and possibly be suspected of inappropriate dealing  in  military
           completion certificates.  The Appellant was  not  aware  of  the
           penalty for the latter.  The background  documentation  suggests
           that the penalty for the former is a spell of imprisonment or  a
           fine.


           I therefore need consider what would happen if returned to Iran.
            I  accept  he  would  probably  be  questioned  on  arrival  in
           connection  with  his  military  service  and  his  unauthorised
           departure from the country.  I consider that any  penalty  would
           be as a result of prosecution rather than persecution."


  3. The Adjudicator also accepted that he might be  questioned  about  the
     improper issuing of military service completion certificates and  that
     he could receive a term of imprisonment or a  fine.   The  Adjudicator
     did not accept as credible that the friend  in  question  to  whom  he
     supplied the certificate was in the  Mojahedin,  a  group  of  Marxist
     Islamists who are treated extremely severely  in  Iran,  or  that  the
     Appellant was suspected of involvement  with  them.   She  accordingly
     rejected the asylum claim.

  4. She then turned to the human rights claim.  It was said that he  would
     be killed because he was implicated in the activities of the Mojahedin
     or that any term of imprisonment  would  be  harsh  and  degrading  in
     Iranian prison conditions and that he would not receive a fair  trial.
     The Adjudicator said:

           "I have considered the background documentation with  regard  to
           the treatment afforded to those returning to Iran.   I  consider
           it likely given his age, the Appellant would be questioned about
           his military service, his departure and  possibly  the  improper
           issuing of military completion certificates.  It could  be  that
           he would receive a term of imprisonment  or  fine.   The  prison
           conditions are described in the US Department  report  as  harsh
           and overcrowded.  The offences however are of a relatively minor
           nature and it is possible will not  attract  imprisonment.   The
           situation is easing in Iran and while the  authorities  attitude
           to human rights is far from  ideal,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
           Appellant has failed to show a real risk of treatment such as to
           engage either articles 2 or 3."

  5. The Appellant appealed to the IAT, (Chairman HH Judge Slinger),  which
     on 8th January 2002 dismissed  his  appeal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
     attacked the adverse credibility findings and the  conclusion  reached
     by the  Adjudicator  as  to  treatment  and  prison  conditions.   The
     Tribunal accepted that her  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  not
     suspected of being either a Mojahedin member or implicated in  it  was
     justified.  However, it criticised certain aspects of what it took  to
     be the Adjudicator's approach to the Appellant's risk of  imprisonment
     and ill treatment but concluded  nonetheless  that  ill  treatment  in
     breach of Article 3 was a risk faced by political prisoners  and  that
     was not how the Appellant would be seen.

  6. The Court of Appeal granted permission to appeal on the sole issue  as
     to:

           "Whether, in view of the evidence as to the use  of  torture  in
           Iranian prisons, there is a risk at an appropriate level of this
           applicant, with his history as found by  the  adjudicator  being
           tortured in the (accepted) likelihood of his being in prison."

  7. By consent, the Tribunal decision was quashed on 11th June 2002 but no
     judgment was given.  The case took far  too  long  to  come  on  again
     before the Tribunal.  When it did, the Appellant decided to pursue all
     his grounds including those which Buxton LJ, in granting permission to
     appeal on the one issue identified, ruled not  to  be  arguable.   The
     more Mr Hussein for the Appellant pursued those  points,  the  sounder
     the conclusion of Buxton LJ appeared.  We can deal briefly with them.

  8. Mr Hussein abandoned the contention that the Adjudicator had erred  in
     doubting the Appellant's credibility because the Appellant's views  on
     freedom and democracy  were  far  removed  from  the  Islamic  Marxist
     ideology of the Mojahedin.  It had been alleged by the Appellant  that
     his own views were those of the Mojahedin  in  his  witness  statement
     although that was not borne out by the  Adjudicator's  description  of
     him, his dress, his western outlook and western lifestyle aspirations.

  9. Ground 1(a) rather assumes as correct, namely that the  friend  was  a
     Mojahedin, what in fact the  Appellant  had  to  show  and  which  the
     Adjudicator  was  unwilling  to  accept.   The   Appellant's   witness
     statement in paragraph  3  appeared  to  suggest  that  he  knew  this
     friend's outlook and agreed with it; it did not suggest  that  he  was
     unaware that the friend was a member of  the  Mojahedin.   A  contrary
     picture is given as to when he knew this friend was in the  Mojahedin,
     in his answer in interview  at  A.6.   The  Appellant's  evidence  was
     internally contradictory as to what  he  knew  about  that  and  when.
     However,  given  the  acceptance  of  the  contradiction  between  the
     Appellant's views and those of the Mojahedin, it is difficult  to  see
     that the Adjudicator was not wholly  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
     story that the information that the friend was in the  Mojahedin  came
     from another friend who was a filing clerk who saw certain  papers  in
     the course of his duty, was improbable and that  the  claim  that  the
     Appellant did not know of his friend's views, was implausible  in  the
     light of his asserted knowledge of that friend's views.

 10. Ground 1(d) denies that certain  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
     story existed about who suggested that the passport  be  obtained  for
     the friend.  The answer at A.6  of  the  interview  is  criticised  as
     saying that the arrest took place at the passport office;  but this is
     in the witness  statement  as  well.   "The  other  occasion"  in  the
     Adjudicator's decision letter could  easily  refer  to  oral  evidence
     given to the Adjudicator.

 11. Ground 1(c) deals with corroboration and the Adjudicator's comment  as
     to its absence in fact as to membership of the Mojahedin.  Although it
     is true that there was no corroboration, that is not a sound basis, we
     accept, for the drawing of adverse inferences because of the secretive
     nature of  the  Mojahedin.   But  there  are  very  many  and  soundly
     expressed reasons for rejecting the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
     claim that that friend was in the Mojahedin and there is no basis  for
     upsetting the Adjudicator's determination in that respect.  It is  not
     an important point in the determination.

 12. We make two additional comments.  First,  sound  credibility  findings
     cannot be upset by a few points of detailed criticism, let  alone  any
     which assume for their very force that the Adjudicator is wrong.

 13. Second, Mr Hussein said that he  was  hampered  in  dealing  with  the
     Adjudicator's comments about the evidence, which may, as the  Tribunal
     pointed out, have related to evidence given orally before her, by  not
     having the Record of Proceedings and being  unable  to  see  what  was
     said.  If an Appellant wishes  to  say  that  an  Adjudicator  had  no
     evidence, written or oral, to the effect set out by the Adjudicator or
     had no evidence to support inferences which the Adjudicator  drew,  it
     is not for the Record of Proceedings to be produced through  which  an
     Appellant can then trawl for evidence.  It is  for  the  Appellant  to
     produce evidence, perhaps in the form of the advocate's notes in order
     to show that something was not said or was misrecorded.  A Home Office
     Presenting Officer's notes may be relevant to  rebut  such  a  factual
     contention.  The Record of Proceedings is  not  a  primary  evidential
     source for Appellants.

 14.  We  now  turn  to  the  substantive  grounds.    Ground  2  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in concluding that the Appellant might be prosecuted
     but not persecuted for his actions, as argued shaded into the claim in
     Ground 3 that the Adjudicator had failed to ask herself  the  relevant
     questions.  Those  were  whether  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
     Appellant would be imprisoned and a real risk that in prison he  would
     be treated in a way which breached Article 3.  We point out  that  the
     question of the risk of a breach of Article 3 has to be determined  on
     the basis of the Adjudicator's findings of fact and not on  the  basis
     of the conclusions of the IAT in the  determination  of  HHJ  Slinger,
     which proceeds more on an assumption that the Appellant might well  be
     imprisoned but for non political offences.

 15. The Adjudicator recognised that  the  Appellant  would  be  questioned
     about military service, his  departure  and  possibly  about  improper
     completion of military service certificates.  He could, but might not,
     receive imprisonment or a fine for these  relatively  minor  offences.
     Those are all perfectly sound conclusions.

 16. We now turn the background evidence on the risk of  ill  treatment  in
     prison in breach of Article 3.  The Appellant referred us to page 2/15
     of the USSD Report for 2003 which referred to the execution in 2003 of
     two political activists associated with an outlawed party and  to  the
     torture of other opposition party activists.  There had been  killings
     and  disappearances  of  activist,   investigative   journalists   and
     dissidents.

 17. Page 3 of that Report said:


           "There were numerous credible reports that  security  forces  and
           prison personnel continued to torture  detainees  and  prisoners.
           Some prison facilities,  including  Tehran's  Evin  prison,  were
           notorious for the cruel and prolonged acts of  torture  inflicted
           upon political  opponents  of  the  Government.   Common  methods
           included suspension for  long  periods  in  contorted  positions,
           burning with cigarettes, sleep deprivation, and most  frequently,
           severe and repeated beatings with cables or other instruments  on
           the back and on the soles of the feet.  Prisoners  also  reported
           beatings about the ears, inducing partial or  complete  deafness,
           and  punching  in  the  eyes,  leading  to  partial  or  complete
           blindness.


           Prison conditions in the country were poor.  Some prisoners  were
           held in solitary confinement or denied adequate food  or  medical
           care to force confessions.  After  its  February  visit,  the  UN
           Working Group on Arbitrary  Detentions  reported  that  'for  the
           first time since its establishment, [the Working Group] has  been
           confronted  with  a  strategy  of  widespread  use  of   solitary
           confinement for its own sake and not for traditional disciplinary
           purposes.'  The Working Group described Sector 209 of Evin Prison
           as a 'prison within a  prison',  designed  for  the  'systematic,
           large-scale use of absolute solitary confinement, frequently  for
           long periods'."

 17. The US State Department Report also referred to  much  of  the  prison
     abuse occurring in unofficial detention  centres  run  by  the  secret
     service and the military, and to significant overcrowding  and  unrest
     in prisons.

 18. In 2003 UN human rights officials had visited a number of  prisons  in
     Iran including Evin and had interviewed 140 "ordinary  prisoners"  and
     some of the political prisoners they had asked to see.


           "The Working Group described the  authorities'  co-operation  as
           'on  the  whole  positive',  although  it  noted  problems  with
           fulfilment of follow-up requests  generated  by  the  visit  and
           disappointment  over  arrests  carried  out  after  the  Group's
           departure.   Following his November visit to  the  country,  the
           UNSR for the Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of
           Opinion and Expression noted that his delegation met with almost
           40 dissidents, both in and out of prison."  US State  Department
           Report, p4.

      We note that the severe problems which do involve a breach of  Article
      3 relate  to  political  activists  and  political  dissenters.   This
      distinction is borne out by other material.  The CIPU Report of  April
      2004 in part reflects the US State Department material and  emphasises
      prison problems of overcrowding, risk of disturbances and the  way  in
      which drug related offences dominate the prisoner numbers.  It  refers
      to the spread of HIV/Aids in prison.

 19. At paragraph 5.57 the CIPU Report says:

           "The first UN human rights monitors to  visit  the  country  for
           seven years said on 26 February 2003 that Iranians suffer large-
           scale arbitrary detentions and some prisons operate outside  the
           control of the judicial system.  Although the head of the  five-
           member team examining arbitrary detentions said the  authorities
           had cooperated fully with its requests, he raised concerns about
           unaccountable prisons, detainees being held  without  access  to
           legal defence, violations of freedom  of  expression  and  other
           abuses. "

     It is to be noted that there is nothing about the UN finding  evidence
     of torture, let alone torture in ordinary prisons or  treatment  which
     breaches Article 3 ECHR.

 20. Also of relevance to the way in which the offences might be  seen  was
     paragraph 5.60 of the CIPU Report:

           "The penalty for draft avoidance in  peacetime  is  an  extra  6
           months - 2 years service, and in wartime up to  10  years  extra
           service or punishment at the discretion of the convicting judge.
            However, new  provisions  on  buying  exemption  from  military
           service and dealing with desertion cases are said to  have  been
           enacted recently, extending  previous  practices,  although  not
           sanctioned by Khamenei.  Time still  to  be  served  and  prison
           sentences imposed for desertion may now be bought off. "

     To our mind this shows that non completion  of  military  service  and
     improper dealing in military service completion certificates  are  not
     seen as either political offences or as serious offences.

 22. Mr  Hussein  referred  us  to  the  Amnesty  International  Report  on
     conditions in 2002.  This dealt with arbitrary arrest, unfair  trials,
     torture and judicial sentences of death and flogging in order to  curb
     expressions  of  dissent  by  students,  academics  and   journalists.
     However reliable that picture and other  references  by  Human  Rights
     Watch support it, nothing in that material suggests that the Appellant
     would, if imprisoned, face torture or treatment which breached Article
     3 in view of the  nature  of  the  offences  for  which  he  might  be
     sentenced.

 23. In reality the  background  material  shows  that  there  is  a  clear
     distinction between political and non political offences in the way in
     which the offenders are treated, and ordinary offender  conditions  do
     not involve a real risk of  torture  or  breach  of  Article  3.   The
     offences which the Appellant might be questioned about or suspected of
     committing are neither serious nor political.

 24. The Adjudicator found  that  he  would  be  questioned  and  might  be
     prosecuted and might be imprisoned but not that he would be.  But even
     if he were at a real risk of imprisonment, it is clear that  there  is
     no real risk of ill treatment.  In any event, viewed as  a  cumulative
     sequence of risk, it is nowhere near establishing a  real  risk  of  a
     breach of Article 3.

 25. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say
     about prison conditions in Iran and the Record of Proceedings.










                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


