
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |RS (Well Founded Fear -     |
|                           |        |LTTE- Exceptional Case?) Sri|
|                           |        |Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00163    |
|On 5 April 2004            |        |                            |
|Dictated 5 April 2004                                             |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......26th May 2004..........                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun, Vice President                                      |
|Mr P S Aujla                                                      |
|Mrs L R Schmitt                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation
For the appellant:     Mr P Costello, Counsel instructed by Tony Purton,
                       Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sri  Lanka,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Dr  A  A  Majid)
      dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent  made  on
      30 January 2003 to refuse him leave to enter and asylum.

2.    The appellant's immigration history is that he left Sri Lanka  airport
      with the help of an agent on 30 July 1997 or 1998 and travelled to the
      Ukraine where he spent  a  week  or  two.   He  then  claims  to  have
      travelled by road to Germany where he claimed asylum under arrest.  He
      claims to have been refused asylum in Germany and after six months  at
      a camp was taken by another agent by road through France  and  claimed
      asylum at Dover upon arrival on 6 January 1999.

3.    The basis of his claim is that in 1994 he  became  involved  with  the
      LTTE, distributing leaflets and attending meetings.  In 1995 he worked
      for them  full  time  recruiting  members,  helping  the  injured  and
      collecting and providing food.  He did not join the LTTE military  due
      to his health.  He claims that after the army took control  of  Jaffna
      he stayed in the area collecting information about other Tamil  groups
      and army movements which he would pass to the LTTE.  In the early part
      of July 1997 the army raided his house, harassing his father.   On  25
      July 1997 he fled the area and was arrested by the army on his way  to
      Vavuniya.  The army detained him for six months during which time they
      ill-treated, beat and tortured him.  During an attack  on  the  prison
      camp by the LTTE on 9 January 1998, he managed to escape and re-joined
      the LTTE in Vanni.  Despite their demands he continued  to  refuse  to
      join the LTTE military but he helped the LTTE by digging bunkers.   He
      fled from the LTTE in July 1998 and contacted his  uncle  in  Vavuniya
      who arranged with the help of an agent for him to leave the country.

4.    The appellant  fears  persecution  from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
      because of his membership of the LTTE and also fears the LTTE  because
      he claimed to have left the organisation without gaining permission.

5.    The Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  persecuted.   He
      accepted that the appellant was detained in the army camp  from  which
      he escaped.  However, having reviewed all of  the  objective  evidence
      before him, the Adjudicator was not persuaded that a person  with  the
      appellant's profile was likely to face  persecution  contrary  to  the
      1951 Convention or the 1950 European Convention if he is  returned  to
      Sri Lanka.

6.    The grounds of appeal argued that the Adjudicator failed to  make  any
      finding as to whether the appellant was  an  exceptional  case  within
      Jeyachandran.  In particular they argued that  as  the  appellant  had
      escaped from custody,  it  could  mean  that  he  was  wanted  by  the
      authorities.  It was also argued in the grounds that  the  Adjudicator
      did not apply the test as set out by the Court of Appeal in  the  case
      of Selvaratnam, that is

           "whether the case of the appellant is an exceptional case  as  a
           person likely to be of interest to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
           and so likely to be detained, it being conceded that once he  is
           detained, there is a substantial risk of persecution."

      It was further argued in the grounds that the  Adjudicator  placed  no
      weight on the evidence set out in the current objective evidence  that
      once a person is detained by the authorities, he is at danger of being
      tortured.  That the Adjudicator had not given any weight or sufficient
      weight to the  most  current  objective  evidence  that  violence  was
      continuing in Sri Lanka, that the LTTE had pulled  out  of  the  peace
      talks and had refused requests to return.   Leave  to  appeal  to  the
      Tribunal was granted on these grounds.

7.    Leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was  refused  in  respect  of  the
      argument that  the  Adjudicator  at  no  stage  of  the  determination
      addressed the issue or made a finding regarding the  appellant's  fear
      of persecution by the LTTE if returned to Sri Lanka.  Counsel  renewed
      his application for leave to be granted on this issue and the Tribunal
      granted permission  because  indeed  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      address this issue or make any finding in respect of it.

8.    Counsel argued that, in his opinion, the appellant is  an  exceptional
      case because of his lengthy detention and credible escape.  Should the
      appellant ever come before the authorities again his  previous  arrest
      will come to light.

9.    Counsel argued that on his return to the  airport  in  Sri  Lanka  the
      appellant will be questioned by the authorities if  he  is  not  waved
      through.  He will be asked routine questions such as why he  left  Sri
      Lanka and whether he was arrested and detained by the  authorities  in
      the past.  The appellant will be obliged to tell the truth and that is
      when his previous arrest and detention will come to  light.   It  will
      then be open to the authorities whether  to  detain  him  properly  or
      return him to army barracks.  It is at this stage that  the  appellant
      will then be persecuted for his past involvement with the LTTE and for
      escaping from army custody.  It is the combination  of  these  factors
      that makes the appellant an exceptional case and brings him within the
      Jeyachandran and Selvaratnam exception.

10.   Having been granted permission to argue the fact that the  Adjudicator
      failed to make any finding  on  the  appellant's  fear  of  the  LTTE,
      counsel however was of the view that  this  part  of  the  appellant's
      claim could not  succeed.   This  was  because  of  the  High  Court's
      decision in Oppilamani.  The High Court stated at paragraph 44 that it
      could not be said without background information  that  there  was  an
      insufficiency of state protection against risk of ill-treatment by the
      LTTE.

11.   Mr Saville agreed that the  Adjudicator  did  not  make  reference  to
      Jeyachandran or Selvaratnam.  Notwithstanding this he  said  that  the
      Adjudicator would have reached the same outcome had he had  regard  to
      the test in Selvaratnam and to Jeyachandran.

12.   Mr Saville said that the issue is not whether the appellant will  face
      questioning as to why he left Sri Lanka, but whether there is the real
      risk of the authorities taking interest in him  and  taking  him  into
      custody.  He referred us to the case of S in  which  the  Tribunal  at
      paragraph 12 held that there was no valid reason  why,  as  a  general
      proposition, all escapees should now be at risk,  especially  if  they
      were in detention only as a consequence of low  level  activities  for
      the LTTE in the past, and their records will reflect this.

13.   Mr Saville argued that the appellant's detention  was  six  years  ago
      and took place  during  the  conflict.   Although  the  appellant  was
      detained on suspicion  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE,  by  his  own
      evidence, his activities were at a low level.  He  did  not  make  any
      confession to the authorities as Selvaratnam had done.  He  said  that
      the army took his photograph and fingerprints.  In the case of  P  the
      Tribunal held at paragraph 15 that there was no evidence that the  Sri
      Lankan  army  maintained  computerised  or  manual  records  of  those
      detained by them, especially if the circumstances suggested  that  the
      detention was not carried out  in  accordance  with  lawful  practice.
      There was also no evidence that the  Sri  Lankan  army  provided  that
      information to the CID.  In the  light  of  P  Mr  Saville  said  that
      evidence of the appellant's arrest by the army would not be  with  the
      CID authorities at the airport.   Therefore  the  absence  of  such  a
      record will not increase the risk of ill-treatment of  the  appellant.
      Even if the authorities at the airport become aware that the appellant
      escaped, the fact is that the escape occurred at the peak of the civil
      war and therefore he would not now be of interest to the authorities.

14.   As regards the appellant's fear of the LTTE, Mr  Saville  referred  us
      to Oppilamani.  The High Court in Oppilamani had been  referred  to  a
      report from the Human Rights Watch of 7 August 2003 referring  to  the
      killing a police inspector by unidentified perpetrators  on  18  March
      2003.  The High Court found that the situation relating to the  police
      officer was markedly different to that of  Oppilamani,  accepting  the
      accuracy and truth of her account.  In spite  of  what  the  objective
      material had to say about the killing of  the  police  inspector,  the
      High Court came to the conclusion that no Adjudicator,  and  which  by
      reference Mr Saville also said included Tribunal,  could  properly  on
      the basis of the information before the High Court conclude that there
      was an insufficiency of state protection.

15.   In the light of Oppilamani Mr Saville said that it has been  far  from
      proved that there will be a real risk of persecution of the  appellant
      by the LTTE.  The appellant refused to fight for them during the civil
      war.  He would not be at risk from the LTTE even in LTTE areas.

16.   In reply counsel submitted that it would be dangerous to  interpret  S
      as saying that all escapees  are  not  at  risk  of  persecution.  The
      Tribunal did say that each case  must  turn  on  its  own  facts.  The
      Tribunal considered the fact that the army was prepared to  release  S
      on payment of the customary bribe.  Had  they  any  real  interest  in
      holding him, they would not have  released him even on  payment  of  a
      bribe.  Counsel said that the case of V was different because V failed
      to report to the authorities following his release on bail.   He  said
      that P was also different from this case in that P  was  detained  for
      three days  whereas  this  appellant  was  detained  for  six  months,
      received horrific torture and escaped after the LTTE attacked the army
      camp.  It is a combination of these facts that will put the  appellant
      at risk of detention and ill-treatment.

17.   The Tribunal then reserved its determination in order to consider  all
      the evidence.

18.   There are  two  issues  before  the  Tribunal.   Firstly  whether  the
      appellant is an exceptional  case  within  Jeyachandran.     Secondly,
      whether he has a well-founded fear of persecution from the LTTE.

19.   We will take the second  issue  first.   In  the  light  of  the  High
      Court's decision in Oppilamani, we are of the view that  counsel  took
      the right approach in conceding that the appellant's fear of the  LTTE
      could not succeed.
20.   We now look at whether the appellant is  an  exceptional  case  within
      Jeyachandran, having escaped from army custody. The test as to whether
      an appellant is an exceptional case is as stated in Selvaratnam;  that
      is whether a person is an exceptional as a  person  likely  to  be  of
      interest to the authorities and so likely to  be  detained,  it  being
      conceded that, once he is detained, there is  a  substantial  risk  of
      persecution.

21.   The appellant's arrest and detention  occurred  in  1997,  some  seven
      years ago.  His detention lasted until 9 January 1998, a period of six
      months.  He managed to escape following an attack by the LTTE  on  the
      army camp where he was being held.  His escape occurred some six years
      ago.  His arrest, detention and  escape  all  took  place  during  the
      period of the civil  war.   If  the  appellant  became  a  wanted  man
      following his escape, we do not  believe  that  in  the  circumstances
      currently prevailing in Sri Lanka that he is a wanted man today.

22.   However, we have no evidence that following his escape  the  appellant
      became a wanted man. We have no evidence from the appellant  that  the
      authorities took active steps to  pursue  him  or  evidence  that  the
      authorities have a record of people such as the appellant, who escaped
      as a result of attacks on army detention camps by the LTTE.

23.   The  appellant  said  that  the  army  took  photographs  of  him  and
      fingerprinted him. There is no objective evidence  to  say  that  such
      records are transferred to the authorities at the airport. We rely  on
      the case of P in which the Tribunal held that there  was  no  evidence
      that the Sri Lankan army maintain computerised or  manual  records  of
      those detained by them and  no  evidence  that  the  Sri  Lankan  army
      provides that information to the CID.  We therefore doubt  that  there
      would be a record of the appellant's arrest and detention  and  escape
      from an army camp.  According to the objective evidence, on arrival in
      Sri Lanka it is the computerised police records  that  are  consulted.
      As the appellant did not come into contact  with  the  police,  it  is
      reasonable to say that the police will not have  any  record  of  him.
      Therefore there is no reason why the appellant  should  not  be  waved
      through the airport on his arrival in Sri Lanka.

24.   Counsel argued that the appellant, following routine  questions,  will
      convict himself by answering  truthfully  that  he  was  arrested  and
      detained in the past and escaped.  Whilst we  do  not  find  that  the
      decision in S holds that all escapees would not  now  be  at  risk  of
      persecution, we nevertheless adopt the reasoning in S  to  the  effect
      that because the appellant was detained on account of  his  low  level
      activities for the LTTE,  there  is  no  valid  reason  why  his  past
      circumstances  should  put  him  at  risk  in  the  future.   By   the
      appellant's own evidence he was not a combatant.  He was fleeing  from
      his area in Jaffna on his way to Vavuniya when he was arrested by  the
      army.  It was accepted by the Adjudicator  that  he  was  ill-treated,
      beaten and tortured.  Whilst we do not condone  the  ill-treatment  he
      was subjected to, the ill-treatment occurred during the period of  the
      civil war.  He did not claim to have made a confession as was the case
      in Selvaratnam.  We accept that he was detained for six months, longer
      than P was, and was not released on the payment of the customary bribe
      as was the case in S.  Nevertheless, the circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka
      have changed significantly.  There is no reason  for  this  appellant,
      given his particular circumstances, to be at risk  of  persecution  by
      the authorities on his return to Sri Lanka.

25.   We find on the evidence that the appellant's particular  circumstances
      do not make him an exceptional case.  Applying the test in Selvaratnam
      we do not find that this appellant is likely to be of interest to  the
      authorities on account of his past were he to be removed to Sri Lanka.
       Had the Adjudicator looked at Jeyachandran and applied  the  test  in
      Selvaratnam, we find that he would have come to the  same  conclusion,
      which is that there is no reasonable likelihood  that  this  appellant
      will be at risk of persecution in breach of the 1951 Convention or ill-
      treatment in breach of the 1950 Convention.  Accordingly,  his  appeal
      is dismissed.


                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
