
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |AM (Inability to make entry |
|                           |        |clearance application)      |
|                           |        |Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00276  |
|On 26 July 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....30th September 2004....                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr P R Lane (Vice President)                                      |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For the appellant:           Ms  S  Kudhail,  Solicitor,  of  O'Keeffe,
Solicitors
For  the  respondent:           Mr  C  Buckley,  Senior   Home   Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen   of   Somalia,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mrs  Linda  Freestone,  sitting  at
      Stratford, in which she dismissed on asylum and human  rights  grounds
      the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to  give
      directions for the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

2.    Permission to appeal to the Tribunal was refused by  a  Vice-President
      but that decision was reversed under section 101 of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, by Collins J.    The  terms  of  that
      reversal are as follows:

      "The [appellant] arrived in the United Kingdom in  August  1999.    He
      claimed asylum in November 1999 but was not  interviewed  until  March
      2002.   Following subsequent refusal, his appeal was not  heard  until
      November 2003.    It is accepted that he has married and has a  family
      life here, albeit the marriage took place when his immigration  status
      was precarious.  Having regard to the undoubted problems in getting an
      Entry Clearance from Somalia and the fact that (as I am told) his wife
      is a refugee, her inability to return  with  him  is  a  factor  which
      should have been but does not seem to have (at  least  not  expressly)
      taken into account".

3.    The following facts  are  not  in  dispute.    The  appellant  married
      Ismahan Dahir Ali on 25 June 2001.    This was  at  a  time  when  his
      immigration status was precarious. It preceded by some 18  months  the
      respondent's decision to give directions for the  appellant's  removal
      from the United Kingdom.

4.    The appellant's wife is also from Somalia.    The  respondent  granted
      her refugee status on 26 March 1996.   She is now a British citizen.

5.    The issue in this case is  whether  the  Adjudicator  was  correct  to
      conclude that it would not be a disproportionate interference with the
      appellant's family life with his wife in the United Kingdom to require
      the appellant to leave this  country  and  make  an  application  from
      outside it for entry clearance to join his wife as her spouse.

6.    All that  the  Adjudicator  had  to  say  about  this  matter  in  her
      determination is as follows:

      "49.  Although there will be difficulties for the appellant to  return
           to Somalia and apply to obtain leave to  enter  from  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer in the normal way I do  not  find  that  these
           difficulties are insurmountable obstacles".

7.       Mr Buckley did not seek to deny that the Adjudicator was  wrong  to
      conclude (at least impliedly)  that  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
      currently stationed in Somalia, who  would  be  able  to  process  the
      appellant's entry clearance  application  from  within  that  country.
      Indeed, the United Kingdom has not had diplomatic staff  stationed  in
      Somalia for a considerable period of time.

8.    Mr Buckley, however, submitted that  the  appellant  could  return  to
      Somalia and there obtain a Somali passport, which he could then use to
      enter Kenya.   Once there, the appellant could apply  to  the  British
      High Commission in Nairobi for entry clearance to join his wife.

9.    Even if that were not possible, however,  Mr  Buckley  submitted  that
      the appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  with  an  unmeritorious
      claim for asylum and had married, notwithstanding that his  status  in
      this country was precarious.   Both he and his wife knew  this  to  be
      so, at the date of the marriage in 2001.   Accordingly, it  could  not
      be said to be unreasonable for the Secretary of State, in pursuance of
      immigration control, to require the  appellant  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom, even if that had the effect  of  separating  him  permanently
      from his wife.

  10. The  Tribunal  considers  that  Mr  Buckley's  second  submission,  if
      adopted, would effectively undercut the Court of Appeal  judgments  in
      Mahmood [2001]  1  WLR  840.    Although  at  paragraph  65  of  those
      judgments, Phillips MR held that the possibility that a  claimant  may
      not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  rules  relating  to
      entry clearance was not a sufficient reason to exempt him  from  those
      requirements, the logic of Mr Buckley's alternative submission is that
      the importance of immigration  control  is  such  that  the  appellant
      should be removed in circumstances where he could not in practice even
      make an application for entry clearance to re-join his wife. This is a
      very different proposition from saying that a person must apply in the
      normal way from abroad and take  his  chance  that  he  might  not  be
      successful under the Rules. It is true, as Mr Buckley said,  that  the
      appellant has never had a legitimate reason to be in this country. But
      the same was true of the claimant in Mahmood (see paragraph 4  of  the
      judgments) and yet the Court nevertheless  proceeded  to  analyse  the
      case by reference to whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      family life being continued between the  claimant  and  his  wife  and
      children, if effect were given to  the  decision  that  he  should  be
      removed from the United Kingdom.


11.     The Tribunal therefore turns to the first submission of Mr  Buckley,
      as recorded at paragraph 8 above. Although the test of  whether  there
      are "insurmountable obstacles" was applied by the Court of  Appeal  in
      Mahmood in relation to the question of whether family  life  could  be
      carried on abroad, the Tribunal considers that the it also has a  part
      to  play  in  determining  whether  it  would  in   circumstances   be
      disproportionate to require the appellant to comply with the  ordinary
      provisions of the Immigration Rules  by  making  an  application  from
      abroad.

12.   In the present case, the  respondent  does  not  seek  to  resist  the
      submission on behalf of the appellant that  there  are  insurmountable
      obstacles in the way of him and his wife seeking to  carry  on  family
      life in Somalia.   Are there, then, insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's making an entry clearance application from Kenya?

13.   On the  evidence  before  us,  the  Tribunal  finds  that  there  are.
      First, the evidence is far from showing that there is at  the  present
      time any functioning system in Somalia, whereby  the  appellant  could
      obtain the passport which he needs to enter Kenya.    In his letter of
      14 July 2004, the Kenyan High Commissioner in London confirms that, in
      order to enter Kenya, a person must  be  in  "possession  of  a  valid
      passport and a visa (where required).   They must also  be  returnable
      to their country of residence".  The appellant lacks any passport.

14.   Paragraph 6.78 of the April 2004 CIPU Report on  Somalia  states  that
      most Somalis requiring a passport or other form of ID   "arrange  such
      documentation informally".   Identity  papers  and  passports  can  be
      obtained for payment in the markets of most towns in  Somalia  and  in
      Djibouti and Nairobi (Kenya)".  Mr Buckley quite rightly did  not  try
      to suggest that the appellant could be  expected  to  enter  Kenya  by
      availing himself  of  such  "informal"  documentation.    Instead,  Mr
      Buckley relied upon the following passage from the same paragraph:

      "In September 2002 it was reported that  a  new  Passport  Office  had
      been  opened  by  the  TNG  [Transitional  National   Government]   in
      Mogadishu".

15.   The source  for  this  information  is  the  UN  Office  for  the  Co-
      Ordination of Humanitarian Affairs,  Integrated  Regional  Information
      Network (IRIN) and, in particular, what appears to be  an  article  or
      press  release  entitled  "Passport  Office  opened"  published  on  4
      September 2002.

16.   The wording of the sentence from paragraph 6.78 just quoted  makes  it
      plain that IRIN itself does not appear to  have  direct  knowledge  of
      whether a new Passport Office was in reality  opened  by  the  TNG  in
      2002.   We do not know what the source is of the report  in  question.
      Given the uncertain state of affairs in Mogadishu (as acknowledged  in
      the CIPU report) and the fact that the TNG's mandate expired in August
      in 2003, (although the  National  Salvation  Council  is  recorded  at
      paragraph 4.57 of the  CIPU  report  as  having  signed  a  memorandum
      understanding acknowledging the continuance of the TNG), the  Tribunal
      considers that there must be significant doubt whether  the  appellant
      would in practice today to be able to obtain from the TNG in Mogadishu
      a passport which would be acceptable to the Kenyan government.

17.   Even if he could, however, he would face a  further  serious  problem.
      On 25 November 2003 the British High Commission in  Nairobi  wrote  to
      the Refugee Legal Centre to say that, as  a  result  of  the  security
      situation in Kenya, no new applications for entry clearance were being
      accepted by the High Commission "at this moment in time".    There  is
      no evidence before the Tribunal to show that the High  Commission  has
      again begun accepting such applications.   Accordingly,  even  if  the
      appellant were able to enter Kenya, it does not appear on the evidence
      before us that he would be able to pursue his  application  for  entry
      clearance.

18.   It was not submitted on behalf of the respondent  that  the  appellant
      could make an entry clearance application from some other country.

19.   In conclusion, the Tribunal finds  that  there  are,  in  the  present
      case, insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's  making  an  entry
      clearance application from outside the United Kingdom.    In  all  the
      circumstances, it would be a disproportionate  interference  with  his
      right to respect for family life under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  to
      require him to leave this country.   Although  the  appellant  had  no
      legitimate reason to enter the United Kingdom, there is no  suggestion
      that  his  marriage  to  his  wife  is  other  than   genuine.     The
      requirements of immigration control are  not  served  by  requiring  a
      person in the position of  this  appellant  to  go  to  a  country  or
      countries  where  he  would  not  have  any  prospect  of  making   an
      application to an Entry Clearance Officer for leave to enter,  whether
      by reference to the Rules or to the ECHR, or to both.

20.   This appeal is accordingly allowed.



                                                   P R Lane
                                                   Vice President

Approved for electronic promulgation

