
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |  |                                                      |
|                  |  |VD (Trafficking) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00115        |

|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |                |                  |
|Heard on:         |4th May 2004          |                |                  |
|Date typed:       |4th May 2004                                             |
|Date promulgated: |26th May 2004                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MR. P. R. LANE (VICE PRESIDENT)                                             |
|MS. D. K. GILL   (VICE PRESIDENT)                                           |
|MISS J. GRIMMETT                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. V. Prais, of  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service
                          (IAS).
For the Respondent:          Mr. G. Phillips, Senior Home Office  Presenting
                          Officer.

1.    The Appellant (a national of Albania, whose date  of  birth  has  been
     given variously as 3rd  May  1974  (according  to  the  completed  form
     ICD.1989 04/03 and the witness statement dated 10th May 2003)  and  5th
     March 1974 (according to the  Notice  of  appeal)  has  appealed,  with
     leave, against the determination of Ms. C. A. Parker,  an  Adjudicator,
     who (following a hearing  on  10th  September  2003  at  Taylor  House)
     dismissed  her  appeal  under  section  82(1)   of   the   Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act)  on  asylum  and  human
     rights grounds against the Respondent's decision of 10th  May  2003  to
     refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 17th  April  2003.  She
     claimed asylum on arrival. In the "Reasons for  refusal"  letter  dated
     7th May 2003, the Respondent certified that her asylum and human rights
     claims were ones to which section 94(3) of the 2002 Act applies and  he
     further certified that he was not satisfied that her asylum  and  human
     rights claims were not clearly unfounded. The certification meant  that
     the provisions of section 94(2) applied, so that the Appellant did  not
     have an in-country right of appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.
     The Appellant was removed on 10th July 2003 to Tirana in  Albania  (and
     not Poland, as stated at paragraph 5 of the Determination). The  Notice
     of appeal was lodged on her behalf by the IAS on 11th August 2003.

3.    This Determination is being reported because in it we consider:

      (a)   whether it is reasonably likely  that  an  individual  would  be
           trafficked in Albania.

            Our consideration of this issue is set out at  paragraphs  15(a)
           to (g) below.

      (b)   whether there is in general  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
           women who may be at risk of being trafficked.


            Our consideration of this issue is set out  at  paragraphs  16.1
           to 16.3 below.


      (c)   the Tribunal's reasoning in [2003] UKIAT 00023 K (Albania)  (see
           paragraphs 17.1 to 17.3 below).

4.    The basis of the Appellant's  asylum  and  human  rights  claims:  The
     Appellant's claim centres around a blood feud and  the  trafficking  of
     women in Albania. The blood feud arose after her father had killed  one
     Gezim Faruku who was a member of the  Kolaj  clan  and  who,  with  two
     associates, had earlier threatened the Appellant and demanded that  she
     remove the names of a number of families from the electoral list in the
     run-up to the 1997 elections. Mr. Faruku had also tried to rape her  on
     another occasion.  Her father was subsequently arrested  in  connection
     with the death of Mr. Faruku and sentenced to 18  years'  imprisonment.
     Mr. Faruku's death triggered the blood feud. Most  of  the  Appellant's
     cousins and uncles have been killed. Mr. Faruku's nephew has threatened
     to kill all of the Appellant's family  "according  to  tradition".  The
     Appellant last spoke to her sister on 28th November  2002.  Her  sister
     has since disappeared. The Appellant believes that her sister may  have
     been forced into prostitution. The  Appellant  was  kidnapped  on  11th
     February 2003 by two people, who took her by car in  the  direction  of
     Macedonia. She was taken to a hotel on the border, where she  was  held
     with three other girls. On 23rd March 2003, she was  introduced  to  an
     older man who proposed marriage to her. She pleaded ill-health  and  he
     left her. She was then raped by one of the kidnappers,  who  said  that
     she had lost them a lot of money. She later escaped by climbing out  of
     a second floor bathroom window and descending down a  drain  pipe.  Her
     cousin then arranged an agent to bring her to the United Kingdom.

5.1   The Adjudicator's Determination: The Adjudicator did not  accept  that
     the Appellant had a genuine subjective fear on  account  of  the  blood
     feud. The Adjudicator also rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  that  her
     sister had disappeared  or  been  murdered.  Although  the  Adjudicator
     appeared to accept that a number of the Appellant's male relatives were
     killed  and  her  father  was  serving  a  long  prison  sentence,  she
     considered that, if members of the Kolaj clan were intent upon  killing
     the Appellant, they would  have  done  so  during  the  six  years  she
     remained in Albania. Furthermore, she considered that state  protection
     would be available  to  the  Appellant.  She  found  that  it  was  not
     reasonably likely that the Appellant would face persecution  on  return
     on account of the blood feud. These findings have not been challenged.

5.2   With regard to the Appellant's claim to be  at  risk  of  trafficking,
     the Adjudicator noted that this was a problem in Albania  but  she  did
     not consider it  reasonably  likely  that  this  would  happen  to  the
     Appellant. She also noted that the authorities in Albania are  keen  to
     take measures to  address  trafficking  and  she  considered  that  the
     Appellant would be able to avail herself of state protection. These are
     the findings which are challenged in the grounds of application.

6.    The grounds of application assert:

      (a)   that the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to  identify  the  objective
           evidence upon which she relied in making her findings as to  the
           Appellant's fear of being trafficked. It is  asserted  that  the
           objective evidence shows that trafficked women are not  afforded
           "adequate sufficiency of protection" and  that  the  police  are
           tacitly involved in the trafficking of women.

      (b)   that the Adjudicator had failed to have regard to the case of  K
           (Albania)  [2003]  UKIAT  00023,  where  (it  is  asserted)  the
           Tribunal had found that sufficient protection is  not  available
           to trafficked women in Albania.

7.    At the hearing before us, it transpired that  the  IAS  had  not  been
     able to make contact with the Appellant for some considerable  time   -
     i.e. from before her departure from the  United  Kingdom.  We  enquired
     whether, in the circumstances, the  IAS  were  instructed  to  continue
     representing the Appellant. Ms. Prais informed us that she felt able to
     make submissions to us, as clients held at Oakington  detention  centre
     (where the Appellant was held prior to  her  departure)  are  generally
     informed that the IAS would continue to  act  unless  instructions  are
     received to the contrary. On this basis, we heard  submissions  on  the
     Appellant's behalf.

8.    Documents: We list here the documents to which we  were  referred  and
     which we have considered in this appeal:

      Documents delivered on the Appellant's behalf:

      (a)   The IAS Research  Analysis  dated  13th  April  2004,  entitled:
           "Albania: Trafficking, Blood Feuds".
      (b)   The Determination of  the  Tribunal  in  [2003]  UKIAT  00023  K
           (Albania).
       (c)    The  European   Commission's   "Albania:   Stabilisation   and
           Association Report 2004" dated 30th March 2004.
      (d)   A joint UNICEF, UNOHCHR, OSCE-ODIHR report dated November  2003,
           entitled: "2003 Update on Situation and Responses to Trafficking
           in Human Beings in Albania, Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Bulgaria,
           Croatia, The Former Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia,  Moldova,
           Serbia and Montenegro, including the United Nations Administered
           Province of Kosovo, and Romania". We have before us  an  extract
           of this report (pages 1 to 52 thereof).
      (e)   The report of the U.S. Department  of  State  on  Albania  dated
           11th June 2003, entitled: "Trafficking of Persons Report".
      (f)   An  undated  report  by  Anti-Slavery  International,  entitled:
           "Trafficking world-wide and in Albania". This report appears  to
           have been produced in 2003.
      (g)   The U.S. Department of State Country Report on Human  Rights  in
           Albania for 2003, dated 25th February 2004.
      (h)   The U.S. Department of State Country Report on Human  Rights  in
           Albania for 2002, dated 31st March 2003. We have  before  us  an
           extract of this report - i.e.  the  section  on  women  and  the
           trafficking of persons.
      (i)   The CIPU Report dated  October  2003.  We  have  before  us  the
           following extracts of this report: paragraphs 6.42 to  6.55  and
           paragraphs 6.108 to 6.121.
      (j)   An article published on the "Guardian Unlimited"  Website  which
           is dated 5th November  2003  and  which  is  entitled:  "Janie's
           secret".

      We also have a "Schedule of Essential Reading",  which  sets  out  key
     passages from the documents we have referred to above.

      Document delivered on the Respondent's behalf:

      (k)   The CIPU report on Albania dated October 2003.

9.1   Ms. Prais informed us that it was not the Appellant's case that, as  a
     young woman in Albania, she would be at risk of being trafficked - i.e.
     the Appellant was not basing her asylum and human rights claims on  the
     general risk women in Albania face of being trafficked. Nor is  it  the
     Appellant's case that  any  surviving  male  relatives  would  wish  to
     subject her to trafficking. Indeed, on the  evidence  accepted  by  the
     Adjudicator, there was no reason to suppose that this would happen. The
     Appellant's case is that, as she has already  been  trafficked  in  the
     past, she would be at real risk of being trafficked again and she would
     have difficulties  receiving  sufficient  protection  and  shelter.  In
     response to our enquiry as to whether there was any  information  about
     the men or the group responsible for abducting the Appellant, Ms. Prais
     referred us to paragraphs 12 to 15 of the Appellant's  statement  dated
     10th May 2003. The Appellant was kidnapped by two men and taken  to  an
     hotel at the border where she was kept with other girls  from  Moldova.
     She was told by one girl who was also being held that the girls were to
     be sold to old men for marriage.

9.2   Ms. Prais referred us to the objective material, which  we  deal  with
     below. She accepted that the Albanian authorities are  making  efforts,
     including passing relevant legislation, to address the problem of women
     being trafficked in Albania. However,  in  her  submission,  the  steps
     taken were inadequate. She submitted that any protection which would be
     available  to  the  Appellant  would  be  insufficient.  The  objective
     evidence also shows  that  the  police  are  tacitly  involved  in  the
     trafficking of women. Women who are  trafficked  are  also  subject  to
     significant stigmatisation from their families and  society,  according
     to paragraph 6.119 of the CIPU report.

10.   In response, Mr. Phillips  submitted  that  the  Albanian  authorities
     have been successful in combating the problem of women  trafficking  in
     Albania. Mr. Phillips referred us to paragraphs 6.110 to 6.120  of  the
     CIPU report and submitted that the Adjudicator's finding that there  is
     no real risk that the Appellant would be trafficked is sustainable.

11.   Ms. Prais accepted that the Albanian authorities were making  efforts.
     The point is that such steps as have been taken are inadequate.

12.   We reserved our determination.

      Determination and reasons

13.   We have decided to dismiss this appeal. We now give  our  reasons  for
     doing so.

14.   Albania is both a source and a transit country for the trafficking  of
     women. Paragraph 6.108 of  the  CIPU  Report  describes  Albania  as  a
     "significant  point  of  origin".   According   to   the   Anti-Slavery
     International  Report  (page  77  of  the  Appellant's   bundle),   the
     trafficking of women and children became a major issue in Albanian from
     the 1990s, reaching its peak in the mid to late-1990s. Section  6.f  of
     the 2003 USSD report of Albania gives a fair summary of the problem  of
     trafficking in  Albania,  the  Government's  response  to  it  and  the
     existence of corruption within the police which adds to the problem. We
     quote extracts from Section 6.f:

      f. Trafficking in Persons

      The law criminalizes trafficking in  persons  and  provides  penalties
        for traffickers;  however,  trafficking  in  persons,  particularly
        women and children,  remained  a  problem.  Police  corruption  and
        involvement in trafficking was a problem.

      A  2001  Criminal  Code  amendment  introduced  specific  articles  on
        trafficking  that  set  the  following  penalties:  Trafficking  in
        persons (5 to  15  years  in  prison);  trafficking  of  women  for
        prostitution (7 to 15 years in prison); and trafficking  in  minors
        (15 to 20 years in prison). The lack of prosecution of  traffickers
        remained a problem; however, police and prosecutors claimed to have
        dismantled 28 trafficking groups during the year.  Traffickers  who
        were arrested often were released because of insufficient evidence,
        and, if prosecuted, they often were charged for  lesser  crimes  or
        were given less than the minimum sentence for trafficking.

      In September, a regional  anti-trafficking  sweep  called  Mirage  II,
        resulted  in  125  arrests  for  various  forms   of   trafficking,
        prostitution, and smuggling.

      The absence of a witness protection program impeded  the  Government's
        ability   to    build    strong    cases    against    traffickers,
        ......................... Victims often did not identify themselves
        as trafficked persons and were unwilling to testify due to fear  of
        retribution  from  traffickers  and   distrust   of   the   police.
        Cooperation between  the  police  and  prosecutors  remained  weak.
        During the year, the Government established an Organized Crime Task
        Force to handle high profile  and  sensitive  organized  crime  and
        trafficking  cases.   Through   the   Task   Force   training   and
        international technical assistance, police and prosecutors received
        training for better coordination to gather evidence,  solve  cases,
        and convict criminals.

      .............. the number of  Albanians  and  third-country  nationals
        subjected   to   trafficking   to   other   countries    decreased.
        ....................

      ........................ Trafficked Albanians increasingly  fell  into
        the 12 to 18-year-old age group. Roma and Egyptian communities were
        particularly   vulnerable   due   to   poverty   and    illiteracy.
        .....................

      ...................... Both Albanian and foreign women  trafficked  by
        Albanian organized crime networks were abused, tortured, and raped.



      Due to the poor economic  situation,  men  and  women  from  organized
        criminal groups lured many women and young girls from all over  the
        country by promising them jobs  in  Italy  and  Greece.  Some  men,
        primarily in the north of the country, also married women and girls
        under false pretenses [sic] and took them  abroad  as  prostitutes.
        Other forms of recruitment included promises of marriage, and, to a
        lesser extent, the selling of  victims  to  traffickers  by  family
        members or neighbors or kidnapping, including from orphanages.

      The police often were involved directly or indirectly in  trafficking.
        Few police  officers,  and  no  other  government  officials,  were
        prosecuted for trafficking during the year. Lawyers and judges were
        also manipulated and bribed, permitting traffickers  to  buy  their
        way out of punishment if arrested. During the year, the Ministry of
        Public Order's Anti-Trafficking Unit within the Organized Crime Sub-
        Directorate and the Office  of  Internal  Control  paid  particular
        attention to police involvement in human trafficking; the Office of
        Internal Control investigated 266 cases of  police  involvement  in
        all  forms  of  trafficking.  Many  of  these  cases  resulted   in
        suspensions or dismissals, and a growing number of police officials
        implicated in trafficking cases faced arrest and prosecution.

      In December,  police  arrested  several  servicemen  on  suspicion  of
        raping and trafficking a 16-year-old girl. .....................

      Police treatment of trafficked women continued to improve  during  the
        year. Most police stopped treating trafficked  women  as  criminals
        rather than victims  and  routinely  referred  them  to  local  and
        international NGOs for assistance. Foreign women who were  detained
        at times lacked translation services or were not given a choice  of
        lawyers.

      Victims of trafficking often  faced  significant  stigmatization  from
        their families and society. Several NGOs were active in  addressing
        victims' needs. The IOM operated a reintegration center  in  Tirana
        that provided counseling [sic] and medical services, job  training,
        and some legal assistance. The IOM also cooperated with the OSCE to
        relocate outside of the country those victims whose safety  was  at
        risk. In July, the Government opened a shelter outside  Tirana  for
        trafficking victims, offering assistance ranging from psychological
        counseling [sic] to medical treatment. With the assistance  of  the
        IOM, the Government processed 15 repatriation cases during the year
        and 13 of these women were returned  to  their  home  countries  by
        year's end. Government services available  to  trafficking  victims
        remained limited.

      The Vlora Anti-Trafficking Center,  which  opened  in  2001,  had  nto
        [sic] become fully operational, although, in September, it was used
        as a command post for Mirage II. In December, the Government signed
        a memorandum of understanding with Greece, Germany,  and  Italy  to
        turn the Vlora Anti-Trafficking Center  into  a  fully  operational
        tool in the fight against all forms of illegal trafficking from and
        through the country. National and international  NGOs  carried  out
        most of the country's trafficking awareness campaigns

15.   Having given this general picture,  we  now  consider  whether  it  is
     reasonably likely that a particular individual would become a victim of
     trafficking. The mere fact  that  trafficking  is  a  problem  of  some
     concern for Albania does not mean that it is reasonably likely  that  a
     particular  individual  would  be  at  risk  of  being  trafficked.  In
     determining  whether  it  is  reasonably  likely  that   a   particular
     individual would be at risk of  being  trafficked,  we  considered  the
     following evidence:

      (a)   First, we considered the  evidence  as  to  overall  numbers  of
        victims. The  UNICEF/UNOHCHR/OSCE/ODIHR  report  (page  55  of  the
        Appellant's  bundle)  states  that  the  number   of   victims   of
        trafficking from Albania is  unknown.  In  2001,  official  sources
        indicated that 100,000 Albanian women and girls were trafficked  to
        Western European and other Balkan countries over the  previous  ten
        years. However, a year later, another official document stated that
        about 6,000 Albanian women and girls had been trafficked abroad for
        sexual exploitation. According to footnote 73 on  page  55  of  the
        Appellant's bundle, the second figure has been quoted by Vera Lesko
        in their report entitled: "Girls  and  Trafficking:  Research  into
        Trafficking in Human Beings for the year 2002". The figure given in
        this report is, in turn,  obtained  from  a  Report  of  the  Anti-
        Trafficking Unit of the Ministry of Public Order. It is  not  clear
        what period this figure of 6,000 relates to but its placing in  the
        report would suggest that it relates to the same 10-year period.

      (b)   The fact that there is such a disparity in the numbers given  in
        the UNICEF/UNOHCHR/OSCE/ODIHR report of the total number of victims
        is a reflection of the difficulty in obtaining reliable statistics.
        We are mindful of this difficulty, but we also note that  the  U.S.
        Department of State "Trafficking in Persons Report" (page 73 of the
        Appellant's bundle)  states  that  the  Ministry  of  Public  Order
        completed a "significant study" indicating  that  more  than  5,000
        Albanian women and girls were trafficked into prostitution  in  the
        last decade. It is reasonable to infer  that  the  statistics  upon
        which this estimate of "more than 5,000" is  based  show  that  the
        total figure is less than 6,000 - otherwise, the report would refer
        to an estimate of "more than 6,000". We therefore  proceed  on  the
        basis that the statistics on which this estimate is based show that
        the total figure is less than 6,000 over a  ten-year  period.  This
        equates to a figure of less than 600 victims  per  year.  When  one
        allows for the fact that this 10-year period  spans  the  mid-1990s
        when the problem of trafficking is said to have peaked, the current
        total yearly number falls further. We are  of  the  view  that  the
        description of the report of the Ministry of  Pubic  Order  in  the
        U.S. Department of State report as a "significant  study"  suggests
        that appropriate weight can be given to the numbers  given  in  the
        Ministry of Justice Report, albeit that we are  mindful  that  even
        this figure may be an under-representation of the problem.

      (c)   The parties before us endeavoured to draw our attention  to  the
        size of the "at-risk" population - i.e. the numbers of  women/girls
        who are potentially at risk of being  trafficked.   There  were  no
        such figures available in the documents before  us.  Our  attention
        was however drawn to the total population of  Albanian,  which  the
        CIPU report gives as  3.09  million  (paragraph  2.1  of  the  CIPU
        report).

      (d)   Paragraphs 6.110 and 6.111 give an idea  of  those  persons  who
        are potentially at  risk  of  being  trafficked.  These  paragraphs
        state:

      6.110 Trafficked Albanians increasingly fell into the 14- to  17-year-
              old age group; according to the AHRG, 25 percent of  Albanian
              trafficking victims were minors. Italian  census  figures  in
              2000 showed that there were more  than  900  children  (girls
              ages 14 to 18) who worked as prostitutes in Italy. The  press
              reported several cases involving minors who were  victims  of
              trafficking throughout the year.  Such  children  often  were
              bought from families and in a few cases kidnapped. The Centre
              for the Protection of Children's Rights (CRCA) reported  that
              more than 2,000 children between the ages of 13 and  18  were
              involved in prostitution rings.

      6.111 Due to the poor economic situation, many women and  young  girls
              from  all  over  the  country  -  particularly  Berat,  Fier,
              Lushnje, Shkoder, and Vlora -were lured by men and women from
              organised criminal groups who promised them jobs in Italy and
              Greece. Some men, primarily in the north of the country, also
              married women and girls under false pretences and  took  them
              abroad as prostitutes. Other forms  of  recruitment  included
              promises of marriage, and to a lesser extent, the selling  of
              victims to traffickers  by  family  members,  or  kidnapping,
              including from orphanages.

      (our emphasis)

      (e)   The following points  emerge  from  these  paragraphs.  Firstly,
        victims are increasingly 14 to 17-year-olds. Secondly, we  have  an
        idea of the methods employed by groups involved in  trafficking  to
        gain their victims. The  picture  is  that  potential  victims  are
        largely lured by promises of jobs abroad. Some  men,  primarily  in
        the north, also married women and girls under false  pretences  and
        then took the women or girls abroad as prostitutes. Both  of  these
        methods of "recruitment" suggest that the victim  is  tricked  into
        giving her consent to being taken away. The selling of  victims  to
        traffickers by family members, or kidnapping, is said to occur  "to
        a lesser extent".

      (f)   We are of the view that the figures we have referred to in  sub-
        paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above do not show that it is reasonably
        likely that any particular individual is  at  real  risk  of  being
        trafficked in Albania. Young girls are more likely to be  at  risk,
        but this does not mean that even they are reasonably likely  to  be
        at risk. Furthermore, as the CIPU report states, the main method of
        recruitment involves some consent being given by the victim, albeit
        that such  consent  is  obtained  by  trickery.  If  an  individual
        claimant does not allow herself  to  be  tricked  into  giving  her
        consent to being taken away, then  the  risk  of  being  trafficked
        becomes very remote or speculative. Accordingly, we are of the view
        that, absent particular features in a case (such as,  for  example,
        where a claimant's family members  have  sold  the  claimant  to  a
        trafficker or where, on credible evidence, it is accepted  that  an
        individual who has already been trafficked is at real risk of being
        pursued by the same group on return), it is not  reasonably  likely
        that an individual Albanian girl or woman would be at risk of being
        trafficked, even if the individual falls within the 14- to 17-year-
        old age group.

      (g)   It is often asserted on behalf of claimants that the  fact  that
        an individual has already been abducted and trafficked in the  past
        means that it is reasonably likely that the individual would  again
        be abducted and trafficked. To the extent that  this  assertion  is
        based on  the  general  risk  of  abduction  for  the  purposes  of
        trafficking, we are satisfied that there is no real  risk  that  an
        individual would be re-abducted simply  because  she  was  abducted
        previously. The position might be different if, for example,  there
        is credible evidence that  the  group  responsible  for  the  first
        abduction have shown an interest in  the  individual's  whereabouts
        since she left their captivity or are found credibly to  have  some
        interest to pursue the individual.

16.1  Insofar as the issue of sufficiency of  protection  is  concerned,  we
     accept that there is evidence of police corruption  and  complicity  in
     trafficking. Section 6.f of the USSD Report for 2003, as  well  as  the
     other documents in the Appellant's bundle, show that  the  police  were
     often involved directly or  indirectly  in  trafficking  and  that  few
     police officers (and no other government officials) were prosecuted for
     trafficking during 2003. Further, Section 6.f of the USSD Report states
     also that lawyers and judges were manipulated  and  bribed,  permitting
     traffickers to buy their way out of punishment, if  arrested.  It  also
     states that there  is  a  lack  of  prosecution  of  traffickers;  that
     traffickers  who  were  arrested  were  often   released   because   of
     insufficient evidence and, if  prosecuted,  often  charged  for  lesser
     crimes or given less than the minimum sentence  for  trafficking;  and,
     that  the  absence  of  a  witness  protection  programme  impedes  the
     Government's ability to prosecute appropriately. However, we also noted
     that Section 6.f of the 2003 USSD Report refers to:

      -     the 2001 amendment to the Criminal Code;
      -     that, during the year 2003, the Ministry of Public Order's Anti-
        Trafficking Unit within the Organised Crime Sub-Directorate and  the
        Office of Internal  Control  paid  particular  attention  to  police
        involvement in human trafficking;
      -     that the Office of Internal Control investigated  266  cases  of
        police involvement in all forms of trafficking. Many of these  cases
        resulted in suspensions or  dismissals,  and  a  growing  number  of
        police officials implicated in trafficking cases  faced  arrest  and
        prosecution.
      -     In December, police arrested several servicemen on suspicion  of
        raping and trafficking a 16-year-old girl.

16.2  We acknowledge that victims  of  trafficking  often  face  significant
     stigmatisation  from  their  families  and   society.    The   Albanian
     Government has  taken  some  steps  to  help  trafficked  victims.  For
     example, the Vlora Anti-Trafficking Center was opened in 2001, although
     it has not become fully operational. In December 2003,  the  Government
     signed a memorandum of understanding with Greece, Germany, and Italy to
     turn the Vlora Anti-Trafficking Center into a fully operational tool in
     the fight against all forms of illegal trafficking from and through the
     country.  Whilst  we  accept  that  government  services  available  to
     trafficked victims  remained  limited,  several  NGOs  were  active  in
     addressing victims' needs. We noted that:

      -      The  IOM  operated  a  reintegration  centre  in  Tirana  which
        provided counselling and medical services, job  training,  and  some
        legal assistance; and
      -     In July, the Government opened  a  shelter  outside  Tirana  for
        trafficking victims, offering assistance ranging from  psychological
        counselling to medical treatment.

16.3  The Anti-Slavery International report  (page  78  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle) states that the number of victims is reported  to  have  fallen
     recently due, in part, to "aggressive government policy", including the
     stricter  policing of the coast between  Albania  and  Italy.  Although
     this report attributes the fall in the number of victims to "aggressive
     government policy", other reports  refer  to  steps  being  inadequate,
     whilst acknowledging that steps are being taken by the government.  For
     example the USSD Department of State "Trafficking  in  Persons  Report"
     (page 73 of the Appellant's bundle) refers to inadequate conviction and
     sentencing  rates,  with  most  defendants  released  due  to  lack  of
     evidence, or ultimately charged with lesser crimes. On the other  hand,
     the Joint UNICEF/UNOHCR/OSCE/ODIHR report (page 53 of  the  Appellant's
     bundle) refers to "remarkable progress" having been made  in  combating
     trafficking. We conclude, from the totality of the evidence before  us,
     that the "remarkable progress" made by the Albanian authorities has  to
     be seen against the backdrop of the  situation  which  existed  in  the
     1990s - in other words, the progress is remarkable  when  seen  against
     the very bad situation which then existed. Whilst we  accept  that  the
     present situation is capable of further improvement, we are  satisfied,
     on the totality of the evidence before us, that there is in  general  a
     sufficiency of protection against trafficking in Albania.

17.1  In [2003] 00023 K (Albania), the claimant had been sold by her  family
     to a man for a substantial sum of money. In that case, the Tribunal was
     satisfied that  this  man  was  "a  criminal  thug  who  will  be  much
     displeased at having  been  deprived  of  his  investment  (namely  the
     appellant) for which he paid  a  substantial  sum  to  the  appellant's
     family" (see paragraph 9  of  the  Determination  in  that  case).  The
     Tribunal concluded that, if the claimant returned to Albania,  the  man
     would pursue her and would subject her to Article 3 ill-treatment.  The
     Tribunal also found of particular significance the passages in the  CPU
     Report regarding the "kanun" (see paragraph 12 of the Determination  in
     that case). At paragraph 10 of the Determination, the  Tribunal  quoted
     from paragraph  6.50  of  the  CIPU  Report  dated  April  2003,  which
     describes the "kanun" as follows:

            Many men, especially those from the north eastern  part  of  the
        country, still follow the traditional code known as the 'kanun',  in
        which women are considered and treated as chattel. Under the  kanun,
        a woman's duty is to serve her husband, and to be subordinate to him
        in all matters............. The kanun "law" which is not  recognised
        by the Albanian Government, also states that  it  is  acceptable  to
        kidnap young women for brides. This practice continues in some areas
        of the north east.

17.2  It should also be noted that, in that particular  case,  the  claimant
      was from the north eastern part of Albania and  that  her  family  had
      sold her to the man in question ostensibly for marriage but in reality
      so that he could sell her on for prostitution. The  claimant  and  the
      man in question had taken the first steps towards  marriage  but  they
      were never legally married (see paragraph 3 of the Determination).  It
      is evident, from the Tribunal's reliance on the "kanun"  as  being  of
      "particular  significance"  that  the  Tribunal  considered  that  her
      situation was analogous to that of a married woman (i.e. married to  a
      trafficker) and that the "kanun law" would apply to her.

17.3   Accordingly,  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  [2003]  UKIAT  00023   K
      (Albania) turned on the particular facts of that case and  should  not
      be relied upon in support of the proposition that, in  general  terms,
      there is a real risk that  a  particular  individual  would  become  a
      victim of  trafficking  or  that  there  is  in  general  insufficient
      protection for trafficked victims.

18.1  Turning now to the facts of the instant appeal, we have already  given
      our reasons above for concluding that it is not reasonably likely that
      a particular individual is at risk of abduction  or  re-abduction.  We
      note  that  the  Appellant  was  abducted  by  a  group  involved   in
      trafficking. The fact  that  the  group  was  an  organised  group  is
      evidenced by the fact that the Appellant was taken to an  hotel  where
      three other girls were being held. The Appellant was not sold  by  her
      family to  a  trafficker.  There  is  therefore  no  question  of  any
      remaining members of  her  family  handing  her  over  to  her  former
      abductors. Furthermore, the fact that she had not  been  sold  to  her
      former abductors also distinguishes this case from the claimant in the
      [2003] UKIAT 00023 K (Albania) case. We  recognise  that  one  of  the
      Appellant's captors had told her that her refusal to marry a  man  who
      had been brought to her had cost them US Dollars 6,000  (paragraph  14
      of the Appellant's statement dated 10th May 2003). However, this  does
      not mean the group would pursue her. It might have been  otherwise  if
      they had "bought" her in the first place. Given that the Appellant did
      not know the two men who had abducted her  (see  paragraph  2  of  her
      statement), there is no reason to suppose that she would  come  across
      them and/or their associates again, even if she were to return to  her
      home area of Burrel. Accordingly, there is nothing in the  Appellant's
      circumstances or the circumstances relating to her previous  abduction
      which have a material  bearing on any risk of  re-abduction  now.  The
      risk she faces of being abducted is the general risk faced by  females
      in Albania.

18.2  It must be noted that the Appellant was nearly 28 years old  when  she
      was abducted by the traffickers. Given what we  have  said  about  the
      much younger age group  which  is  increasingly  the  main  source  of
      interest to traffickers, what happened to  the  Appellant  has  to  be
      viewed as an unusual occurrence, and not one which shows that women of
      her age are at real risk. Given that she is now 30 years old, the risk
      of any such abduction must be even less.

18.3  The Appellant's male  relatives  have  been  killed,  except  for  the
      cousin she referred to in paragraph 15  of  her  statement.  It  would
      appear, from page A22 of the statutory appeal bundle, that this cousin
      is male. We do not know whether the Appellant would be  able  to  live
      with this cousin. We therefore acknowledge that the Appellant would in
      all likelihood be living as a lone  female  without  male  protection.
      However, there is nothing in the  objective  evidence  which  suggests
      that lone females are at greater risk of  abduction.  In  all  of  the
      circumstances, we are satisfied that the risk of the  Appellant  being
      re-abducted by traffickers is  remote,  and  falls  below  that  of  a
      reasonable likelihood. There can be no guarantees but we are satisfied
      that the risk  does  not  reach  the  low  standard  of  a  reasonable
      likelihood.

18.4  We acknowledge that the  objective  evidence  shows  that  victims  of
      trafficking are "often  subject  to  significant  stigmatisation  from
      their families and society". However, we are not  satisfied  that  any
      such stigmatisation would amount to persecution or treatment in breach
      of Article 3.

18.5  Given our  conclusions  above,  the  internal  flight  option  is  not
      relevant. However, if the Appellant wished to avoid  any  problems  in
      Burrel, it is open to her to live  somewhere  else,  such  as  Tirana,
      where she would be safe and where it would not be unduly harsh for her
      to live.

19.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that the  Adjudicator's
     findings that the Appellant is not reasonably likely to be subjected to
     treatment amounting to persecution or in breach  of  her  rights  under
     Article 3 of the ECHR in Albania is safe, and is fully  sustainable  on
     the evidence.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.





Ms. D. K. GILL
VICE PRESIDENT                               Date: 18th May 2004
