
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |MA (Out of time permission  |
|                           |        |application - Removal)      |
|                           |        |Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00216                       |
|On:  9 July 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......4th Aug 2004.........                                      |
|Decision reserved                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr A E Armitage                                                   |
|Mr B D Yates                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant was not represented before  us  and  the  Secretary  of
      State was represented  by  Mr  J  Jones,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan of  Pashtun  ethnicity  who
      was born on 5 January 1975 in northern Afghanistan. He arrived in the
      United Kingdom on 3 April 2003 illegally and claimed  asylum  on  the
      following day.  Following submission of a statement of evidence  form
      his application was refused for the reasons set out in a letter dated
      19 May 2003.  On 21 May 2003 the Secretary of State issued directions
      for his removal from the United Kingdom as an illegal  entrant  after
      refusal of his asylum application.  He appealed against that decision
      on both asylum and human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 8
      August 2003 by Mrs C M Hawden-Beal, an  Adjudicator.   The  appellant
      did not attend at the hearing and was  not  represented  before  her.
      Neither  was       the  respondent  represented.    The   Adjudicator
      dismissed  the  appeal  briefly  summarising  the   nature   of   the
      appellant's claim at paragraphs 8  to  11  of  her  determination  as
      follows:

      "8.   The appellant's claim may be briefly summarised as follows.  At
           the beginning of 2003 his father was shot and killed by a man he
           traded sheep with. This man never paid  the  appellant's  father
           for the sheep.  The appellant found out about  this  and  got  a
           message to his father's killer that he wanted  payment  for  the
           sheep.  His father's killer was a member of the Hazara tribe and
           the appellant's family are Pashtun.


      9.    The appellant said that if the money did  not  arrive,  it  was
           tribal  custom  for  him  to  avenge  himself  on  his  father's
           murderer. In response, the murderer sent his  brother  a  former
           Mujaheddin commander, now part of the present government to kill
           the  appellant  and  his  brothers.    Having   surrounded   the
           appellant's home and opened fire, they found that the  appellant
           [sic] were not at home but were in the mountains  tending  their
           sheep. The appellant claims  that  they  badly  assaulted  their
           mother instead. He said that his mother was told that they would
           be back to kill the appellant and his brothers.


      10.   A neighbour told the appellant what had happened and said  that
           his mother was at his uncle's home.  The appellant went there to
           see if his mother was alright and stayed there for  12  days  in
           hiding until he could arrange to flee having  decided  that  his
           life was in danger if he stayed in Afghanistan.   The  appellant
           said he did not report the attack to the authorities because the
           Hazaras  are  now  part  of  the  government  and  none  of  the
           authorities would be interested in protecting a Pashtun.


      11.   The appellant claims that there is nowhere safe in  Afghanistan
           for Pashtuns and he fears  being  linked  erroneously  with  the
           Taliban, having been arrested by them three and a half years ago
           because he had grown his hair long and  shaved  off  his  beard.
           The appellant claims he used the  money  held  by  his  father's
           partner and relatives to pay an agent $16,000 to take him out of
           Afghanistan, via Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Bulgaria,  Hungary  and
           Greece to the United Kingdom arriving on 3 April 2003."


3.    The Adjudicator then summarised the reasons  for  refusal  letter  at
      paragraph 12 of the determination as follows:

           "The detailed reasons for the respondent's decision are set  out
           in a Home Office letter dated 19  May  2003.   Inter  alia,  the
           respondent rejected the asylum claim because there are areas  of
           Afghanistan where Pashtuns are not in a minority and  where  the
           appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to   relocate;   the
           appellant has failed to show that he will be persecuted  in  the
           future because of his political opinion; there  are  authorities
           in Kabul to whom the appellant could turn to protection [sic] if
           the need arose; the harm that the appellant would  face  at  the
           hands of the Hazara does not constitute persecution and  finally
           the  claim  was  rejected  because  of  discrepancies   in   the
           appellant's claim seriously undermines  his  credibility  [sic].
           The respondent also considered the appellant's claim  under  the
           1950 Human Rights Convention but has rejected it because he  was
           satisfied that there is no risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
           tortured or subjected to degrading treatment in  Afghanistan  or
           that his right to a private and family life would be breached if
           returned there."


4.    The Adjudicator noted that the notice  of  appeal  was  expressed  in
      general terms only and did not address any of the matters  raised  in
      the refusal letter and  that  nothing  else  of  relevance  had  been
      submitted thereafter. She concluded on the evidence before  her  that
      she was satisfied that the assertions, analyses  and  conclusions  in
      the respondent's refusal letter were valid and reasonable and reached
      similar conclusions on that evidence for like reasons.

5.    The Adjudicator's determination was promulgated on 3 September  2003
      so that the last date for applying for permission to appeal under the
      provisions of the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules
      2003 was 19 September 2003.   No application for permission to appeal
      was received within the prescribed time and  we  have  learned  today
      that  the  appellant  was  removed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      Afghanistan on 20 October 2003.  This information first  came  as  a
      result of making enquiries of his representative on record when there
      was no appearance before the Tribunal.  It resulted  in  a  facsimile
      letter  of  today's  date  being  sent  at  3.16p.m.  in  which   his
      representatives asked us to note that the respondents deported  their
      above-named client in November 2003  without  waiting  to  receive  a
      decision from  the  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  application  for
      permission to appeal.  Mr Jones then made enquiries as to the removal
      of the appellant and subsequently informed us that  he  had  actually
      been removed on 20 October 2003 according to information given to him
      by the caseworker who had been concerned with the file.  He could not
      now, however, say whether this removal was with the  consent  of  the
      appellant or a forced removal until the relevant file, which was  now
      in storage, could be recovered and inspected.

6.    By a strange coincidence the application for permission to appeal  is
      dated 20 October 2003 and it was received by  post  by  the  Tribunal
      with an accompanying letter from the present representatives  of  the
      same date.  The date stamp for receipt on that letter  is  not  clear
      but what is quite clear is that the application  for  permission  was
      not received by the Tribunal  until  after  the  appellant  had  been
      removed from this country.  The appeal proceedings  are  governed  by
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appeal to  the
      Adjudicator was under Section 82(1) of that Act  and  Section  104(1)
      provides that such an appeal is pending during the  period  beginning
      when it is instituted and  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,
      withdrawn or abandoned.   Section 104(2) provides as follows:

           "An appeal under Section 82(1) is not finally determined for the
           purposes  of  sub-section  1(b)  while  a  further   appeal   or
           application under Section 101(2) -


           (a)   has been instituted and is  not  yet  finally  determined,
                 withdrawn or abandoned, or


           (b)   may be brought (ignoring the possibility of an appeal  out
                 of time with permission).


7.    Section 104(4) provides:

           "An appeal under Section 82(1) shall be treated as abandoned  if
           the appellant -


           (a)   is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
                 or


           (b)   leaves the United Kingdom.


8.    It is clear that at the time the appellant was removed on 20 October
      2003 there was no pending appeal under Section 104 of the  2002  Act.
      It cannot therefore be argued that his removal was  not  lawful  and,
      whether voluntary or forced, in our view Section 104(4)  applies  and
      the appeal is  statutorily  abandoned  from  the  point  in  time  of
      removal. Although this could not have been known either to  the  Vice
      President who dealt with the late  application  or  probably  to  the
      solicitors who  submitted  it,  by  the  time  that  application  for
      permission to appeal was received in the Tribunal office  the  appeal
      had already been abandoned by virtue of Section 104(4) so that  there
      was no jurisdiction in the Tribunal to consider the application.   In
      our judgment dicta in past judgments of the Administrative  Court  to
      the effect  that  unlawful  removal  will  not  result  in  statutory
      abandonment  under  earlier   similar   legislative   provisions   is
      irrelevant to the present appeal  since,  even  if  involuntary,  the
      removal was lawful at the time it was effected.

9.    It follows that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear this  appeal
      and it must be dismissed on grounds of prior abandonment.

10.   If we were wrong in this view, however, it would make  no  difference
      to the final outcome notwithstanding that permission  to  appeal  was
      granted out of time under the  Procedure  Rules.   In  granting  such
      permission the Vice President concerned said this:

           "At the hearing before the Adjudicator on 8 August  2003,  there
           was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  claimant.  The
           Adjudicator therefore determined the appeal on the documents.


           It is asserted  in  the  grounds  that  the  claimant  had  been
           dispersed by NASS and that, as a consequence, the Refugee  legal
           Centre at Dover were unable to represent him on account  of  the
           distance.


           I have noted that, as long ago as 25 June 2003, the RLC informed
           the Immigration Appellate Authority that the Claimant had  moved
           to Birmingham and that they (the RLC) were  attempting  to  find
           representation for the claimant in his local area. The  claimant
           therefore had  ample  time  to  obtain  representation  for  his
           hearing on 8 August 2003. The notice of hearing for the hearing
           on 8 August 2003 was sent to the claimant  at  his  address  in
           Birmingham, as notified in the RLC's letter  of  25  June  2003.
           The claimant was  therefore  duly  served  with  the  notice  of
           hearing.


           The explanation for the claimant's absence  at  the  hearing  at
           paragraph 4 of the grounds  lacks  credibility,  and  I  do  not
           accept it.  I am not persuaded that the claimant should have one
           more opportunity for an oral hearing before an adjudicator.


           However, permission to appeal to the Tribunal is granted  solely
           on the ground that the  Adjudicator  does  not  appear  to  have
           carried out any independent assessment of the claimant's  claim.
           She seems to have simply adopted the assertions in  the  refusal
           letter. She did not refer to any objective evidence and did  not
           make any findings of fact.


           The claimant should  not,  however,  overestimate  the  task  he
           faces, given that he would be returned to Kabul  and  given  the
           security situation in Kabul."


11.   It is certainly arguable  that  the  Adjudicator's  determination  is
      sustainable given the failure of the appellant to appear or  to  file
      any  additional  evidence  to  that  which  was  already  before  the
      Adjudicator.  It is clear from the terms of her decision that she did
      consider that evidence and we  see  no  error  in  principle  in  her
      disposing of the appeal on the basis that she agrees with and  adopts
      the reasoning of the Secretary of State as set  out  in  his  refusal
      letter.

12.   But if we were wrong in this view, taking the appellant's case at its
      highest and assuming in his favour that he is for the purposes of the
      appeal a member of a particular social group, namely his  family,  it
      might be that he would be able to make out  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution or, at any rate, of treatment in breach of his  protected
      Article 3 human rights in his home area.  That, however, would  avail
      him nothing if there are other areas of his own country to  which  he
      could safely and reasonably move.  He  will  have  been  returned  to
      Kabul and there is a considerable body of Tribunal  jurisprudence  to
      the effect that Kabul is under effective government control and is to
      be regarded as a safe haven in Afghanistan, offering a sufficiency of
      protection even if his return became known and  those  he  claims  to
      fear in his home region at some considerable remove became  aware  of
      his return.  There is no  evidence  that  such  relocation  would  be
      unduly harsh and we see no basis on such evidence as is before us  on
      which the appellant could succeed in  his  appeal  either  under  the
      Refugee Convention or under Article 3 of the European Convention.

13.   On whatever basis it is approached, therefore, there is  no  prospect
      that  the  appellant  can  succeed  before  us  even  if   there   is
      jurisdiction for us to hear the appeal.

14.   For the above reasons, this appeal is dismissed.



                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President


