
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |FM (IFA-Mixed               |
|                           |        |Marriage-Albanian-Ashkaelian|
|                           |        |) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT    |
|                           |        |00081                       |
|On 14 April 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein - Vice President                                 |
|Dr A U Chaudhry                                                   |
|Mrs J Holt                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Canter, Counsel instructed by Punatar & Co,
                       Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  has
      been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs Margaret M Shanahan) who  allowed
      the respondent's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.    The Vice President Mr A Jordan in granting permission,  understandably
      had difficulty in following the reasoning within paragraph  1  of  the
      ground of appeal which Ms Holmes accepted could have been expressed in
      better terms, but related to the fact that  although  the  Adjudicator
      had regard to the objective  evidence  dealing  with  ethnic  minority
      groups and mixed marriages in Kosovo, she  had  failed  to  appreciate
      that the appellant's wife was not wholly Ashkaelian and indeed was  of
      mixed ethnicity in that her parents were each of  mixed  Albanian  and
      Ashkaelian ancestry.

3.    Ms Holmes recognised that although due  to  the  confusing  manner  in
      which ground 1 was expressed,  the  Vice  President  had  not  granted
      permission in relation to it, she urged us to bear  these  matters  in
      mind in terms of our consideration of the remainder  of  the  grounds,
      upon which permission was granted.

4.    The grounds contend that on the matter of  sufficiency  of  protection
      the Adjudicator failed to follow, as she should,  the  guidelines  set
      out in Horvath [2000] IAR552 and cite as an example the failure of the
      Adjudicator to address whether the authorities  in  Kosovo  were  both
      unwilling  and  unable  to  offer  the  respondent  a  sufficiency  of
      protection.  Alternatively, in finding that  the  respondent  and  his
      family would be  subject  to  persecution  in  their  home  area,  the
      Adjudicator failed to consider whether they would be subjected to  the
      same treatment elsewhere in Kosovo.

5.    The grounds further contend that the Adjudicator  failed  to  consider
      whether the respondent and his family would be identifiable as  people
      with Ashkaelian connections elsewhere in Kosovo and that on the matter
      of internal relocation, the  Adjudicator  erred  by  failing  to  have
      regard to the principles as set out in Robinson [1997] IAR568.

6.    We have decided to allow the appeal.

7.    The respondent  is  an  ethnic  Albanian.   He  married  his  wife  in
      September 1998 against the wishes of both families.  Ms Holmes is  not
      entirely correct in maintaining that the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      appreciate the mixed ethnicity of the respondent's wife as indeed this
      is noted at paragraph 9(a) of her determination.

8.    The respondent described to the  Adjudicator  the  discrimination  and
      difficulties he faced because of his  Albanian  ethnicity  whilst  the
      Serbs were in power and the  problems  that  he  and  his  wife  faced
      because of their mixed marriage.

9.    Mr Canter indeed opened his submissions by  reminding  us  that  there
      had been no challenge within the grounds of  appeal  to  the  positive
      credibility findings of the Adjudicator.

10.   The respondent's account as accepted by the Adjudicator, was  that  in
      June 2002 he was arrested and detained for ten  days  because  he  was
      seen giving a lift to two Ashkaelia men and a Serb man and because his
      wife's parents were believed to be collaborators and he  was  seen  in
      the same light.  The respondent was accused of collaborating.   During
      this period he was subjected to ill treatment and torture.   Following
      the respondent's release on 10 June 2002 he was required to report  to
      the TMK offices each day and attempted  to  report  his  treatment  to
      KFOR.  He was told that he had to report these matters to TMK.  It was
      the respondent's account that on 25 June  2002  he  had  attempted  to
      report such matters but was further detained by them until  1  October
      2002 and whilst detained was again ill-treated and tortured.

11.   The Adjudicator records that upon release  the  respondent  found  his
      family to be in a poor state.  His wife  had  delivered  their  second
      child. She had been refused treatment at the hospital because she  was
      Ashkaelia and had to rely on a local Ashkaelia nurse  to  deliver  the
      child.  This resulted in the  child  having  a  dislocated  hip  which
      needed treatment for which the respondent had to pay privately because
      of the local hospital's refusal to afford treatment.

12.   The respondent claimed that in fear that he would  be  detained  again
      and because of the treatment of his family and his concerns for  their
      welfare and safety, he arranged to travel to Albania and then paid  an
      agent who brought them to the United Kingdom.

13.   Under the sub-heading "Objective Material"  the  Adjudicator,  between
      paragraphs 18 to 25 of her determination, made reference to aspects of
      the objective evidence and at paragraph 18 acknowledged:

           "that  the   security   situation   in   Kosovo   has   improved
           significantly since UNIMIK and KFOR have  been  responsible  for
           the supervision of the Kosovan state.  The figures  for  violent
           crime have dropped significantly over the past two years and  as
           the conflict recedes the overall crime pattern is considered  to
           be more akin to the kind of pattern  seen  in  other  countries.
           Although ethnically motivated attacks have considerably  reduced
           most attacks on Serbs and other minorities had  been  ethnically
           motivated."

14.   The Adjudicator considered that the  human  rights  issues  in  Kosovo
      related to the position of ethnic minorities who had been targeted  by
      ethnic  Albanian  extremists.   She  recognised  that   the   security
      situation of ethnic minorities had "improved considerably in the  past
      two years and the international community is trying to  encourage  the
      gradual return and re-integration of ethnic minority refugees who fled
      Kosovo".

15.   At paragraph 20 of her determination the Adjudicator recognised that

           "most minority communities experienced a significant decrease in
           ethnically motivated violence in their local areas but that many
           continued to face isolation and  severe  restrictions  on  their
           freedom of movement."

16.   At paragraph 21, the  Adjudicator  recorded  that  there  had  been  a
      number of initiatives to  seek  to  improve  the  position  of  ethnic
      minorities.  They were represented in the Government, both at Assembly
      and Municipal level and there were policies  to  promote  proportional
      representation in the Judiciary, the police and the civil service.

17.   The Adjudicator noted that the process on the return of refugees  from
      ethnic minorities had commenced and was supported by Albanian  leaders
      and the UN.  Progress was slow and there had been setbacks.

18.   It is noteworthy  that  at  paragraph  23  of  her  determination  the
      Adjudicator recorded that there had been notable improvements  in  the
      security and freedom of movement situation for the Roma, Ashkaelia and
      Egyptian communities in the  past  year.   The  situation  had  varied
      according to perceptions of  the  majority  population,  locality  and
      language issues.  There had been no murders in the community in  2002,
      although the potential  for  violence  remained  and  there  had  been
      several instances of assault, arson and bomb attacks on Roma property.

19.   At paragraph 24 of her determination the Adjudicator  noted  (although
      at no stage within her consideration of the  objective  material  does
      she source the material upon which she relied) that:

           "People in mixed marriages with people  from  ethnic  minorities
           may face the same difficulties as those  groups.   Unlike  other
           minority groups mixed families  are  unable  to  resort  to  the
           relative safety of mono-ethnic enclaves and may be excluded from
           more communities."

20.   The Adjudicator's findings and  conclusions  can  be  found  within  a
      single  paragraph  27.   The  Adjudicator  accepted  the  respondent's
      account of the incident in June 2002 to which we have above referred.

21.    Interestingly,  in  recognising  that  "the  situation  has   changed
      significantly", the Adjudicator remained satisfied "from the objective
      evidence" that the respondent was at risk  "because  of  a  number  of
      factors".  The Adjudicator listed these factors as:

      i)    the respondent's marriage to a woman of mixed ethnicity.

      Iii)  the respondent's rejection by his  own  community  as  a  result
           because he was seen as a collaborator  in  view  of  his  wife's
           parents' history.


      iii)  the respondent had been seen to give a lift to  two  Ashkaelians
           and one Serbian "and this compounded the perception that he is a
           collaborator".


      iv)   the respondent was unable to live with either the Ashkaelian  or
           Albanian community "in his own area" because of the history.

22.   We find it regrettable that the  Adjudicator,  having  concluded  that
      the respondent had established a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
      his  home  area,  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration   to   the
      possibility as to whether there was a different part of the country to
      which it would not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  respondent  to
      relocate.  Such a consideration was implicit in the very concept of an
      internal flight alternative and of relocation.  Regrettably  all  that
      the Adjudicator had to say about the matter was as follows:

           "I have considered relocation but am satisfied that  because  of
           his mixed marriage it would be extremely difficult  for  him  to
           integrate into either community elsewhere."
23.   As Ms Holmes rightly  submitted  these  findings  could  but  only  be
      regarded as "very superficial".  No reasons  had  been  provided.   No
      consideration had been given to the question that  if  the  respondent
      and his wife chose to relocate in another part of  the  country  there
      was no apparent  reason  as  to  why  the  respondent's  wife's  mixed
      ethnicity should become known outside of the couple's local area.

24.   As we have earlier mentioned,  the  Adjudicator  not  only  failed  to
      identify the sourcing of the objective material upon which she  relied
      but failed to correlate her assessment of the background  material  to
      her conclusion that the respondent would be at  risk  on  return,  and
      could not safely relocated with his wife elsewhere in Kosovo and avail
      himself of the protection  of  the  Kosovan  authorities  should  such
      protection be required.

25.    It  was  notable  that  Mr  Canter  accepted  that  the  difficulties
      experienced by the respondent and his  wife  were  wholly  limited  to
      their home town,  although  he  maintained  it  was  the  respondent's
      account that upon being detained by the TMK a photograph was shown  to
      him depicting the lift that the respondent had offered  two  Ashkaelia
      men and a Serbian in June 2002 and that the TMK would hold records  of
      his subsequent detention.

  26. It was significant that as Mr Canter's submissions developed it became
      apparent that what we describe as the June 2002 incident was  not  the
      plank upon which he sought to rely  in  inviting  us  to  dismiss  the
      Secretary of State's appeal.  Indeed at our request he clarified to us
      that the crux of this appeal was whether there was a  real  risk  that
      the  respondent's  "mixed  marriage"  to  a  wife  of  half-Ashkaelian
      ethnicity would become known were he to relocate to an area of  Kosovo
      outside their  home  district  and  related  to  this  the  associated
      questions of whether such relocation would be unduly harsh.


  27.   He maintained that the TMK, on the basis of the  objective  material
      before us, was the Albanian abbreviation for  "KPC",  that  being  the
      Kosovo Protection Corps and by implication  they  were  the  presiding
      authority within the respondent's hometown to whom KFOR  had  referred
      the respondent.  The TMK in turn  held  a  record  of  the  respondent
      containing a photograph as above described and it followed that  there
      was not a sufficiency of protection available to the respondent.

  28.  It was noteworthy, that  as  Mr  Canter  clarified,  such  difficulty
      related to an inability to provide the respondent and his wife with  a
      sufficiency of protection in their home  village,  but  he  maintained
      that it would t be unduly harsh for this respondent, married to a half-
      Ashkaelia wife, should they be "forced to relocate elsewhere in Kosovo
      because of difficulties in relation  to  education,  health,  risk  of
      random attack, poor living conditions and other related matters.

29.   We were not persuaded by Mr Canter's submissions in  this  regard  and
      it is noteworthy, that notwithstanding that Mr Canter was defending  a
      determination by an  Adjudicator  who  had  allowed  the  respondent's
      appeal, he submitted to us in the alternative, that  if  we  were  not
      persuaded by his submissions we should  find  that  the  Adjudicator's
      determination:

           "does not fully address the issues in relation to  the  entirety
           of the account.  The facts that are found in  the  consideration
           and findings section of  the  determination,  do  not  give  you
           enough basis upon which to make a finding  that  this  appellant
           would not be at risk.  Indeed the  expert  report  of  Mr  James
           Korivalas, specifically commissioned for  the  appeal,  has  not
           been considered by the Adjudicator at  all.   Therefore  this  a
           case to be remitted."

30.   We would agree with Mr Canter to the  extent  that  the  Adjudicator's
      failure to consider and assess the ramifications of the report  of  an
      expert prepared specifically for this respondent is a further  example
      as to the unsatisfactory nature and lack of adequate reasoning  within
      the Adjudicator's determination.

31.   We would agree however with Ms Holmes, who in  strongly  opposing  the
      notion of remittal, notwithstanding the  obvious  defects  within  the
      Adjudicator's determination, rightly submitted that they were  defects
      which the Tribunal could and  should  cure  such  as  to  reverse  the
      Adjudicator's decision and allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

32.   The CIPU Country Report of October 2003 at K.6.38 and 39 refer to  the
      action  of  the  authorities  to  improve  the  position   of   ethnic
      minorities.  Indeed these are matters to which  the  Adjudicator  made
      partial reference within her determination.

33.   At paragraph K.6.66 the Ashkaelia are described as  Albanian  speaking
      who have historically associated  themselves  with  Albanians,  living
      close to that community although Albanians treat them as separate from
      the Albanian community.  It is recorded at paragraph K.6.67 that at  a
      local  community  levels  Albanians  do  not  generally  perceive  the
      differences between Roma  Ashlaelian  Egyptians  who  are  more  often
      regarded as one group.  However the report continues that improvements
      in the security and  freedom  of  movement  for  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and
      Egyptians continued to improve throughout Kosovo during 2002  and  the
      improvement in the security situation for these groups  was  reflected
      in the crime statistics.  There had been progress with the spontaneous
      and facilitated return of RAE  to  some  locations  with  about  1,200
      returning during 2002.

34.   The report refers in turn to a report of the UN  Security  Council  of
      17 July 2002 in which the Secretary General observed  "Over  the  past
      few months a climate has been created that, for the first  time  since
      the arrival of UNIMIK, appeared conducive  to  promoting  inter-ethnic
      return". This reflected an increasing  interest  and  commitment  from
      UNIMIK  and  the  international  community  to  actively  address  the
      situation of minorities and return as a matter of priority.  There had
      been recognition at a political level of the  need  to  encourage  the
      return process.  It is recorded at paragraph K.6.49 that an  estimated
      2,668  minority  returns  took  place  in  2002  of  which  46%   were
      Roma/Ashkaeli/Egyptians.  Although progress was  slow  and  there  had
      been some setbacks, it is recorded at paragraph  K.6.51  that  in  the
      opinion of Amnesty International in their May 2003  report  there  had
      been "marked improvements in the security  conditions  for  minorities
      since July 1999 and in particular, a  measurable  decline  in  violent
      attacks on their lives and property".

35.   Ms Holmes rightly drew our attention to paragraph  K.6.64  in  support
      of her submission there was no reason as to why  the  half  Ashkaelian
      ancestry of the respondent's wife should become known outside of their
      home area.  Reference is made to:

           "Ethnic identification as Roma, Ashkaelia or  Egyptian  ...  not
           necessarily  determined  by  easily  discernable   or   distinct
           characteristics or cultural traits, but rather by a  process  of
           self-identification.   It  is  not  uncommon   in   Kosovo   for
           individuals to change their ethnic self-identification depending
           on the pressures of local circumstances, especially when  it  is
           necessary in order to distance themselves from other  groups  to
           avoid negative associations."

36.   Mr Canter had submitted that although the Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      take account of Mr Koravalas' report he asked us to bear in  mind  the
      observation that:

           "Should your client choose to relocate to another part of Kosovo
           he would be required to register at the local  municipal  office
           ...  There is a chance  that  registering  with  a  municipality
           would expose  the  fact  that  your  client  is  married  to  an
           Ashkaelian."

37.   With respect to Mr Canter and indeed the expert, we  remind  ourselves
      that the respondent is not of Ashkaelian ethnicity.  His  wife  is  of
      half-Ashkaelian ethnicity. She is also half Albanian.  The  respondent
      is Albanian and will therefore  be  in  the  same  position  as  other
      Albanians upon return to Kosovo.

38.   Ms Holmes rightly pointed out, that it was entirely a matter  for  the
      respondent and his wife as to where they chose to live within  Kosovo.
      The couple would be returned to Pristina.  Whether they stayed in that
      area would be entirely a matter for  them.   The  experiences  of  the
      respondent as accepted by the Adjudicator were linked  to  allegations
      of collaboration within the respondent's  home  area.   Such  concerns
      would not impact upon the respondent elsewhere within  Kosovo.   There
      was no reason as to why outside the respondent's home area his  wife's
      half Ashkaelian ethnicity would be discovered.  It was, as  Ms  Holmes
      rightly pointed out, largely in the respondent's wife's control and as
      the objective material made  clear,  in  all  other  respects,  ethnic
      identification as an Ashkaelian was not easily discernible and  relied
      largely on a process of self-identification.

39.   The respondent is Albanian.  His wife is half Albanian.  They bear  an
      Albanian name.  Their language is Albanian.  There is no reason at all
      therefore why the respondent and his wife should be at risk outside of
      their home are.

40.   It is apparent to us from  our  own  consideration  of  the  objective
      material, that the TMK are not  mentioned  as  part  of  the  security
      forces in Kosovo.  They have no security role whatsoever.  Indeed  the
      objective material as contained in the CIPU report reveals

           "Policing in Kosovo is  undertaken  by  a  combination  of  KFOR
           troops, UNIMIK civilian police and local Kosovo  police  service
           officers.  There are approximately 27,000 KFOR personnel in  the
           province.  The UNIMIK police of whom there were 4,274 in service
           in October 2002 have assumed full  responsibility  for  criminal
           investigations throughout the province though  they  still  rely
           upon KFOR support. As of January 2003 5,200 KPS officers were in
           service with continuing efforts being made to increase the level
           of representation from  ethnic  minority  communities  currently
           standing at 15%, of which 6% were from  ethnic  minority  groups
           other than the Serbs.  Further, the figures  for  violent  crime
           dropped significantly over the past years and  as  the  days  of
           conflict recede the overall crime pattern that  has  emerged  in
           Kosovo are considered by UNIMIK police to be becoming more  akin
           to the kind of crime pattern seen in other countries.  There has
           been a continued reduction in ethnically motivated crime."

41.   At paragraph K.5.29 it is recorded that  with  the  improved  security
      position; KFOR has continued the  process  of  "unfixing"  its  static
      checkpoints.  By  the  beginning  of  2003  KFOR  had  only  30  fixed
      checkpoints remaining throughout Kosovo.

42.   In the circumstances of the respondent, Ms  Holmes  therefore  rightly
      submitted, that notwithstanding that the appellant's  account  of  his
      past experiences had been accepted by the Adjudicator, he  could  have
      sought the  assistance  of,  for  example,  the  UNIMIK  police.   The
      Adjudicator therefore  erred  in  concluding  that  a  sufficiency  of
      protection was not available to the respondent and his wife either  in
      his own home area or indeed elsewhere.

43.    The  Adjudicator  recognised  in  her  assessment  of  the  objective
      material,  that  instances  of   violence   against   minorities   had
      significantly decreased since the period following the conflict with a
      notable improvement in the security situation which Ms Holmes  rightly
      observed "continued year on year".  Indeed the CIPU report notes  that
      this improvement  certainly  continued  in  2002  and  although  there
      remained a low background level of inter-ethnic violence, most  crimes
      were now considered to be economically motivated.

44.   Although not raised in submissions by either representative,  we  have
      borne in mind that the only risk to the respondent is that he might be
      recognised by a person who knew him from  his  village  who  would  be
      motivated to cause difficulties for him.  We do not consider that that
      risk is sufficient to constitute a real  risk  of  persecution  or  of
      serious ill treatment.  We conclude that there is an  internal  flight
      option available to  this  respondent  and  his  wife,  not  least  to
      Pristina.

45.   That leaves the question  of  undue  harshness.   Notwithstanding  the
      difficulties to which Mr Canter referred  us,  they  are  difficulties
      shared by many people in Kosovo and it  does  not  mean  per  se  that
      persons such as the respondent and his wife could not return to Kosovo
      now, in the changed circumstances, not least following the ejection of
      the Serbian authorities.
46.   In concluding our  assessment,  we  cannot  ignore  the  reference  to
      registration to which Mr Koravalas referred in  his  report  and  upon
      which  Mr  Canter  relied.   As  we  have  already  pointed  out,  the
      respondent is Albanian.  He is not of mixed ethnicity.  In Rexhepi the
      Tribunal concluded that the objective evidence showed that in  dealing
      with officialdom it would  not  be  necessary  for  persons  of  mixed
      ethnicity to reveal such a fact.

47.   On the facts of this appeal there is no reason  for  the  respondent's
      "mixed marriage" to a half Ashkaelian wife to  become  apparent  after
      relocation. Although it is clear the respondent, much as  others  have
      done, may well face difficulties on return such as those described  by
      Mr Canter, we do not think on  the  reasoning  provided,  that  it  is
      sustainable to  conclude  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      respondent and his wife to relocate elsewhere within Kosovo.

48.   As the grounds  of  appeal  rightly  submit,  the  Adjudicator  simply
      failed to adequately consider if at all whether there was  sufficiency
      of protection in place in accordance with the guidelines  set  out  in
      Horvath.  We do not find that the respondent would be marked out as  a
      person of a mixed marriage because of his wife's mixed ethnicity.

49.   As we have above referred. there is now a  multi-ethnic  police  force
      established in an attempt  to  foster  better  relations  between  the
      divided communities.  It is in our view not merely willingness but  an
      ability to provide the required  sufficiency  of  protection.  To  the
      extent that there are remaining tensions we do not find it would cause
      such fear, anguish or inferiority as would amount to a breach  of  the
      respondent's human rights on his return.

  50. We  disagree  with  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  on  the  objective
      material that the  respondent  would  be  particularly  vulnerable  to
      persecution on account of his mixed marriage and past experiences.  We
      do not believe that any difficulties he may encounter would amount  to
      persecution or would involve a breach of his human rights.


51    The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore allowed and the  decision
      of the Adjudicator is reversed.


                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice President
