
ar
       AN (ELF-RC - low level members - risk) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00300


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of Hearing : 6 May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           9th November 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                               Mr G H Getlevog




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives: Mr E. Waheed of Counsel, instructed by   Ziades  Solicitors
for the appellant; Mr J Morris, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
respondent.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant  is  a  national  of  Eritrea.  She  appeals  against  a
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T.P. Thorne, dismissing her appeal
      against a decision refusing her leave to enter following a refusal  to
      grant asylum.

2.    The Adjudicator  found that the appellant was a  national  of  Eritrea
      and that she had been a low level member of the   Eritrean  Liberation
      Front- Revolutionary Council (ELF-RC) in Ethiopia and later in  Sudan.
       However, he did not consider her role within  this  organisation  had
      ever led to her coming to the adverse attention of the authorities  in
      Eritrea or was likely to in the future.  On the Adjudicator's  reading
      of the background evidence, only those who had been  responsible  "for
      anything that could be interpreted as terrorism or violence"  would be
      likely to come to the adverse attention of the authorities. There  was
      no reason to believe that her membership of the  ELF-RC within the  UK
      would change the position.

3.    The  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      concluding that only those ELF-RC members  involved  in  terrorism  or
      violence would be of adverse interest  to  the  authorities.  Had  the
      Adjudicator taken proper account of background evidence other than the
      CIPU Report, he would have recognised that "the authorities persecuted
      any  person  who  voiced  anti-government  views,  regardless  of  the
      position held by the individual or  even  if  the  activities  of  the
      individual are considered low level."

4.    In granting permission to appeal the Tribunal identified as  an  issue
      the correction by CIPU to entries relating to ELF-RC.

5.    In amplifying the grounds Mr Waheed highlighted the terms  of  current
      UNHCR advice, which noted that

             "Human Rights violations continue to be reported, inter  alia,
             with regard to the  treatment of opposition  political  groups
             and movements, freedom of expression, arbitrary detention  and
             detention  conditions  (including  reports  of  torture,  ill-
             treatment and forced labour) and treatment  of  draft  evaders
             and deserters"


      and that:

             "Against this background, it appears that the  deportees  from
             Malta to Eritrea  may  have  faced  persecution  owing  to  an
             imputed political opinion, conscientious  objection  or  other
             reasons. It cannot be excluded  that  future  deportees  would
             face similar risk."

7.    Given that the appellant's husband was also involved with the   ELF-RC
      and had been the main subject of police attention, the Adjudicator was
      wrong, argued Mr Waheed, to assimilate her  position  to  that  of  an
      ordinary low-level ELF-RC member.

8.    Although not raised as such in the grounds of appeal,  it  is  salient
      first of all to note  that  we  see  no  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment that the appellant was a national of Eritrea. The appellant
      continued to maintain that she does not identify as Eritrean and  that
      she is convinced  the  Eritrean  authorities  would  not  accord   her
      Eritrean nationality.  However, the appellant had an  Eritrean  father
      and was thereby entitled to Eritrean nationality upon application. The
      Court of Appeal  in Tecle [2003] and  the  Tribunal  in  L  (Ethiopia)
      [20032] UKIAT 00016, did not accept  that  there  would  be  any  real
      obstacle to such a person having her  or   his  nationality  confirmed
      upon application. The Adjudicator correctly relied  upon  and  applied
      the principles set out in L (Ethiopia).

9.    In this case  the Secretary of State has  specified  Eritrea  as   the
      country  of  removal.  The  Adjudicator  was  also  entirely  correct,
      therefore, to confine his assessment of the appellant's  asylum  claim
      to whether she faced a real  risk  of  serious  harm  upon  return  to
      Eritrea.

10.   In respect of the CIPU correction of an earlier  entry,  dealing  with
      the ELF-RC, neither party was able to pinpoint when it  was  made  but
      were able to confirm that the  April 2002  Report  (which  was  before
      the  Adjudicator)  represented  the  corrected  version.   Both   also
      confirmed that the latest CIPU Report for April 2004  was  in  broadly
      similar terms to the April 2003 Report. The relevant passages  in  the
      latest Report were as follows:

           '6.87 In 1987 the EPLF,  uniting  with  an  Eritrean  Liberation
                 Front (ELF) action, agreed a policy objective of creating a
                 multi-party  democratic  system  in  a  future  independent
                 state. At independence in  1991 when  the  victorious  EPLF
                 formed the  Provisional Government of Eritrea, there was no
                 reconciliation between the ruling EPLF and the ELF  rivals.
                 However, ELF members were allowed to return to  Eritrea  at
                 intervals on condition that they renounced opposition to  a
                 government  of union, prior to  the  official  creation  of
                 opposition parties due for 1998 (interrupted  by  war  with
                 Ethiopia).


           6.88   Some  ELF   members  complied,  such  as   the   Eritrean
                 Liberation  Front-Unified  Organisation   (ELF-UO),   whose
                 leaders were given government and military  posts.  Others,
                 such at the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council
                 (ELF-RC), remained in opposition -  many  launching  a  new
                 armed struggle from bases in Sudan, others engaging  solely
                 in political opposition in exile.


           6.89  There were unconfirmed reports in 2002 that the government
                 continued  to  detain  numerous  members   of   the   armed
                 opposition group ELF.


           6.90   The organisation is still  active  in  exile,  mainly  in
                 Sudan and  Ethiopia  and  the   government's  reaction   to
                 returning members of ELF  or  ELF-RC  will  depend  on  the
                 position   held  in  the  organisations  and  the  type  of
                 activity undertaken.  These who had  been  responsible  for
                 anything that could be interpreted as terrorism or violence
                 may be likely to come to the attention of the authorities.


           6.91 ELF members have  been  encouraged  by  the  government  to
                 return  to  Eritrea   and   have   apparently   not   faced
                 repercussions for their past activities. All of those  that
                 have  returned  are  thought  to  have  renounced   further
                 opposition activities   in  favour  of  unity  through  the
                 EPLF/PFDJ.


           6.92  Although the  ELF  are  quiet  and  are  seen  as  largely
                 irrelevant in Eritrea, it is believed that there may  still
                 be some active members of  the  ELF  factions  in  Eritrea,
                 especially on the   Sudanese border or in the  north of the
                 country.  They do not openly conduct opposition  activities
                 and a view was expressed in Eritrea to the UK  fact-finding
                 mission in November 2002 that many  Eritreans feel that the
                 various branches around the world exist only to make  money
                 for themselves.


           6.93  ELF-RC withdrew from the Eritrean National Alliance  (ENA)
                 an  opposition  umbrella  group,  formally  the   AENF,  in
                 October 2002, to protest the  ENA's alleged willingness  to
                 allow foreign forces to exert pressure  on  its  operations
                 including on matters  dealing  with  the  election  of  its
                 leadership.'


11.   As regards the submission that  the  Adjudicator  wrongly  assimilated
      the appellant's position to  that  of  an  ordinary  low-level  ELF-RC
      member, we are not persuaded that this was an error on his  part.  The
      Adjudicator noted that the appellant's  evidence was that she and  her
      husband worked  for  the   ELF  in  Ethiopia  where  they  distributed
      posters, that they were arrested by the authorities in Ethiopia in May
      2000, that the authorities originally came only  for  the  appellant's
      husband and that the appellant was only arrested because  she  pleaded
      that she could be arrested with him. The Adjudicator  also  noted  her
      evidence about her husband's adverse experiences  in  the  Sudan.   He
      then found:

             'I accept her evidence that their role within the organisation
              was to distribute leaflets and posters with her husband.

             I  do  not,  however,  accept  that  her   role   within   the
             organisation ever lead  (sic)  her  to  come  to  the  adverse
             attention  of the authorities  in Eritrea or is likely  to  be
             in the future.


             I conclude that the appellant  would be at no risk if she were
             removed to Eritrea now. The objective evidence makes  it clear
             that persons in the position of the appellant (as on  her  own
             evidence) would not now be of  any  adverse  interest  to  the
             authorities.'

12.   It is clear from the above that in  describing  the  appellant's  role
      within the  ELF-RC  the  Adjudicator  was  prepared  to  approach  the
      appellant's case on the basis of her own evidence. He did not  dispute
      that she and her husband had met with difficulties at the hands of the
      authorities in both  Ethiopia and  Sudan.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not
      consider that this history demonstrated that he was a high  level   or
      prominent activist. Given that their difficulties were limited to  two
      experiences of arrest  (one in Ethiopia, one in Sudan) we see  nothing
      unsustainable about this assessment. The appellant and  her  husband's
      activities  on  behalf  of  the   ELF-RC  were  largely  confined   to
      distributing  posters.  This  may  have  caused  the  authorities   in
      Ethiopia in May 2000 to arrest the appellant's husband and  then  her.
      His teaching  work  may  have  caused  the   Sudanese  authorities  to
      arrest her husband on suspicion of being an Eritrean spy. However, the
      Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that their activities  throughout
      were  low  level.  Furthermore,  the  essential  issue  was  how   the
      appellant's role in the  ELF-RC (even assuming they know  or  come  to
      know of it) would be perceived by the authorities in Eritrea.

13.   We next turn to Mr Waheed's submission that the Adjudicator  erred  in
      concluding that low level members/supporters of the  ELF-RC would  not
      be at risk on return to Eritrea.

14.   The Adjudicator stated that he took account of the appellant's  bundle
      and the  CIPU April 2003 Assessment. The two  main  sources  he  cited
      from were the  CIPU Assessment and US State Department  Report,  March
      2003.

15.   We have already set out the text of the April 2003  Assessment.

16.   The US State Department report   (March 2003) contains the following:


            'The Government's poor human rights  record  worsened,  and  it
            continued to commit serious abuses.  Citizens did not have  the
            ability  to  change  their  government,  which  was  controlled
            completely by the PFDJ.  There were some reports, difficult  to
            confirm, that the police occasionally resorted to  torture  and
            physical   beatings   of   prisoners,    particularly    during
            interrogations, and police severely mistreated  army  deserters
            and draft evaders.


            The transitional Penal Code prohibits torture;  however,  there
            were  some  unconfirmed  reports  that  the  police  at   least
            occasionally  resorted  to  torture  and  physical  beating  of
            prisoners, particularly during interrogations. During the year,
            the police severely mistreated  and  beat  army  deserters  and
            draft  evaders.   The  police  subjected  deserters  and  draft
            evaders to various military disciplinary actions that  included
            prolonged sun exposure in temperatures of  up  to  113  degrees
            Fahrenheit or the tying of the  hands  and  feet  for  extended
            periods of time.'

17.   Given that the CIPU Assessment deals more specifically than any  major
      report with the position of  ELF-RC  members,  we  consider  that  the
      Adjudicator cannot be criticised for  relying heavily on  it  for  his
      conclusions that this appellant would not  be  at  risk.  She  had  no
      specific position in the ELF-RC. She had no history of being  involved
      in violence or terrorist activities. If  the  authorities  in  Eritrea
      knew from their own source of her  past  activities  in  Ethiopia  and
      Sudan,  they  would  also  know  that  it  was  largely  confined   to
      educational work, such as distributing posters.

18.   Mr Waheed, however, considers that other  sources  paint  a  different
      picture. They indicate, he maintains, that  opposition  party  members
      generally face a real risk of serious harm and do so in the context of
      a government which is becoming more and more repressive.

19.   We would accept that the objective evidence does indicate a  worsening
      of the government's human rights record.  So much is  clear  from  the
      latest  US State Department reports. These  highlight  persecution  of
      prisoners;  deserters  and  draft  evaders,  arbitrary   arrests   and
      detentions; detention without charge of an unknown number  of  persons
      because of political opinion;  severe restriction of freedom of speech
      and  freedom  of  the  press  and  limited  freedom  of  assembly  and
      association;  and reports of politically motivated disappearances.  At
      page 3 of the 2004 Report it was noted:

             'There  were  reports  of   numerous   politically   motivated
             detentions  of  those  who  were  seen  as  critical  of   the
             government, many of whom remained in  prison  at  year's  end.
             Many were perceived to have ties to  political  dissidents  or
             were believed to have spoken against government activities.


             In  addition  to  the  high  profile  arrest  in  2001,    the
             government arrested at  least  eight  additional  individuals,
             many of  them  with  known  or  suspected  ties  to  political
             dissidents, and  detained  them  without  charge  and  without
             access  to  visitors  at  year's  end.  There  were   numerous
             unconfirmed reports that the number of such  persons  detained
             may be several hundred.'

20.   There is no specific mention of the ELF-RC in the 2004 Report, but  on
      page 4 it is noted:

             'There were reports that the   government  continued  to  hold
             numerous members of the ELF, as armed  opposition  group  that
             fought against Ethiopia during the struggle for independence.'

21.   Before the Tribunal there was also a copy of the  January  2004  Human
      Rights Watch  report  on  Eritrea  which  stated  that   "Eritrea  has
      remained a police state in which dissent is ruthlessly suppressed  and
      non-governmental political, civic and social institutions are  largely
      forbidden to function." This report goes on to state:

             'Arbitrary arrests and prolonged  imprisonment  without  trial
             have not been limited to political leaders and the press.  The
             government detained two hundred and fifty  refugees  who  fled
             Eritrea but were involuntarily repatriated from Malta in  late
             2002.  They were still being held in  incommunicado  detention
             at the end of 2002.'

22.   The Amnesty International  Report of May 2003 covered similar  ground,
      noting inter alia that:

             'Hundreds of political detainees detained  in  previous  years
             remained held in secret without charge or trial.


             ...


             Hundreds, possibly thousands, of  government   opponents  were
             alleged to be still secretly detained. Some had  been  members
             of the former Ethiopian administration and surrendered in 1991
             or had been abducted from  Addis Ababa and handed over to  the
             new Eritrean government.  Others were captured ELF  opposition
             fighters or  suspected  supporters,  or  government   critics,
             including some long-serving EPLF commanders or  members.  Some
             appeared to be prisoners of conscience.'

23.   Finally, there is the UNHCR June 2004  Position  statement.  We  shall
      not recount  this in detail  since it largely draws on sources already
      referred to. However, its conclusion in full notes that:

             'Based on various reports, it appears that  the  human  rights
             situation in Eritrea has seriously deteriorated  in  the  past
             two years. Human rights violations continue  to  be  reported,
             inter  alia,  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  opposition
             political groups and movement, freedom of expression,  freedom
             of religion,  arbitrary  detention  and  detention  conditions
             (including  reports  of   torture,  ill-treatment  and  forced
             labour) and treatment of draft evaders/deserters.


             Against this background, it appears that deportees  from Malta
             to Eritrea may have faced persecution,  owing  to  an  imputed
             political opinion, conscientious objection or  other  reasons.
             It cannot be excluded  that  other   deportees  would  face  a
             similar risk.
             ...

             In the light  of  the  above,  UNHCR  recommends  that  asylum
             claims submitted by Eritrean asylum seekers should  undergo  a
             careful assessment to determine their  need  of  international
             protection. It is also recommended that  states  refrain  from
             all forced returns of rejected asylum seekers to  Eritrea  and
             grant them complementary forms of  protection  instead,  until
             further notice.  This position will be reviewed in the  second
             half of 2004.'

24.   The Adjudicator did not have all of these materials  before  him,  but
      he did have  the US State  Department  Report  for  March  2003  which
      highlighted a worsening of human rights  abuses  and  active  concerns
      about the treatment of political dissidents.

25.   In undertaking an assessment of background materials of this kind,  it
      is imperative that we bear in mind when assessing whether there  is  a
      real risk  to  persons  in  a  general  category  (such  as  political
      oppositionists or members and supporters of ELF-RC) the principles set
      out by the case in Harari [2004] EWCA Civ  807.  In particular we need
      to bear in mind the need for evidence of systemic abuses.

26.   It is very true that the evidence detailed by Mr Waheed  identifies  a
      significant  level  of  persecutory  treatment   by   the    Ethiopian
      authorities  of political dissidents. However, it does not identify  a
      consistent pattern of gross, flagrant  or  mass  violations  of  human
      rights. Although it demonstrates that hundreds, possibly thousands  of
      political dissidents have met with repression, things do not appear to
      have reached the stage where political opposition members per se  face
      a real risk of serious harm. Even  though  government  repression  has
      not been wholly confined to  prominent  political   oppositionists,  a
      significant number  of  the  incidents  underlying  the   concerns  of
      Amnesty International  and  other  human  rights   organisations  have
      involved  prominent  oppositionists.  Examples  are  the   arrest   in
      September 2001 of eleven senior  PFDH and National  Assembly  members,
      the  2002 arrests of relatives of the previously detained "G-15" group
      of diplomats who were recalled from their posts.   In  December  2002,
      the wife of a former Minister of Foreign Affairs and a member  of  the
      G-15, Petros Solomon, was reportedly  arrested  and  detained  without
      charge as she returned to the country after living abroad for  several
      years.  The examples given of arrests of journalists included the case
      of Akililu Solomon who had submitted articles to the Voice of  America
      relating to reports of soldiers who died in  the  war  with  Ethiopia;
      Seyouin Tsehaye, former director of the    state  television  service;
      Fessaye Yohannes, a reporter and playwright;  and Dawit  Habtemichael,
      an assistant  editor  and  science  teacher.    Amnesty  International
      includes among prisoners  of  conscience  in  Eritrea,  Mahmoud  Ahmed
      Sherriffo, former Vice President;  Haili Woldestensae, former  Foreign
      Minister 'detained for leading the post-war calls for  democratisation
      and  human  rights  reforms';  Idriss  Aba'ere,  a  severely  disabled
      liberation war veteran,  writer  and  Minister  of  Labour  department
      leader;  Miriam  Hages,  director  of  cinemas;   Tesfaye  Gebreab,  a
      director in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;  Ali  Muhammed  Saleh,  a
      former diplomat working in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ibrahim
      Siraj, a former director of a maternity clinic.

27.   Given the lack  of   evidence   showing  that  members  of  opposition
      political groups are systematically targeted,  we  consider  that  the
      Adjudicator was quite entitled to  take  as  his  criteria  the   CIPU
      approach to the risk facing ELF or ELF-RC  members  of  seeing  it  as
      dependent on the position held in   the organisation and the  type  of
      activity undertaken. The CIPU assessment  that  those  ELF  or  ELF-RC
      members  or  supporters  likely  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities were confined  to  those  who  had  been  responsible  for
      "anything that could be interpreted as  terrorism  or  violence"  also
      dovetailed with  mention made in the  2004 US State Department  Report
      on p. 4 that:

             "An unknown number of persons suspected  of  association  with
             the  Ethiopian Mengistu regime,  Islamic  elements  considered
             radical, or  suspected  terrorist  organisations  continue  to
             remain in detention without charge,  some  of  who  have  been
             detained for more than  nine years.'

28.   Mr  Waheed's  further  submission  was  that  even  if  the  objective
      evidence  dealing  specifically  with  the  treatment   of   political
      oppositionists was not sufficiently compelling to cover the case of  a
      low-level  ELF-RC member or supporter, there was an added risk  factor
      attaching simply to the mere fact of being a returnee.  The   crux  of
      this submission was the  June 2004  UNHCR  report  of  the  late  2002
      forced deportations from  Malta  of  approximately   two  hundred  and
      twenty individuals who (in UNHCR's words) "may have faced  persecution
      owing to an imputed  political  opinion,  conscientious  objection  or
      there reasons."

29.   However, in the  first place we would  observe  that  UNHCR  does  not
      consider the case of these returnees from  Malta  establishes  a  real
      risk for all returnees. The  way it is put in the report is that  such
      persons "may" have faced persecution and that "[i]t cannot be excluded
      that further deportees would faced a similar risk"  (emphasis  added).
      Secondly, although UNHCR  recommends  that  states  refrain  from  all
      forced returns of  rejected  asylum   seekers  to  Eritrea  ..  "until
      further notice", it falls short of stating that all returnees  face  a
      real risk of serious harm. Indeed it calls for a careful assessment of
      individual cases.  Thirdly, it is  now  nearly  two  years  since  the
      deportations in question occurred  and  subsequent  reports  have  not
      noted any similar targeting of returnees  either  from  Malta  or  any
      other country. Further, the Amnesty International  Report dated 26 May
      2004 noted that amongst the Maltese returnees  women, children and the
       elderly had been released shortly after arrival.
30.   Albeit the Adjudicator did not address UNHCR concerns about  the  2002
      Maltese deportations, the materials before him had  highlighted  them.
      Even were we persuaded he failed to take them into account, we do  not
      consider that these significantly add to the risks that would  face  a
      person in the position of the appellant.

31.   We are conscious of the fact that the Maltese deportations  were  seen
      to add to the  risk factors facing a female national  of  Eritrea  who
      was a draft evader in a case chaired by the President MA (Female Draft
      Evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098 paragraphs 24 and 236.  However,
      the instant case does not concern someone who is  a  draft  evader  or
      deserter. Furthermore, that case was heard in April  2004  before  new
      country reports for 2004  had  been  made  available.    As  explained
      above, we consider that the  lack  of  any  evidence  from  any  other
      country has become more significant as time has moved on.

32.   Mr Waheed also sought to rely on the  August 13, 2003 letter from  the
       Vice  Chairman  of  the   Eritrean  Democratic  Youth  Union   (EDYU)
      affiliated to the ELF-RC which stated that :

             'ELF-RC members are still  the  targets  of  the   dictatorial
             regime in  Eritrea regardless  of  their  rank  or  degree  of
             contribution to our struggle. More so  after  the  regime  has
             become increasingly to voice of  opposition  and  is  cracking
             down on the dissidents within its ranks.'

33.   However the Adjudicator considered this same letter -  see  paragraphs
      31 and 100 - and we see no reason to depart from  his  own  assessment
      that mere membership of this organisation in the UK  would  not  cause
      adverse interest from the  Eritrean authorities on return. Insofar  as
      the letter argues that mere membership of ELF-RC causes  targeting  by
      the authorities on return, we consider that the Adjudicator was  right
      to base his assessment on the  more  widely  sourced  and  independent
      background reports.

34.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.



                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT







-----------------------
      1


