
KH
|Heard at: Field House      | |                                    |
|On:  5 July 2004           | |MH (Deliberate delay: effect on     |
|                           | |credibility) Somalia [2004] UKIAT   |
|                           | |00199                               |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           08.07.2004                                      |
|Issued:            20th July 2004                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr JG Freeman (vice-president)                                    |
|Ms JA Endersby                                                    |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |appellant                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr C Onwuegbu, solicitor, Develmi & Co
For the respondent:     Mr D W Saville


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is an appeal by a citizen  of  Somalia  from  the  decision  of  an
   adjudicator, Mr G F Denson sitting at Taylor House on 20 November  2003.
   Permission was given in the following terms:

   I do not consider that the Adjudicator erred  in  refusing  to  adjourn.
   There had already been two previous adjournments,  the  first  of  these
   because the claimant was ill.  On 6 November 2003, the  claimant  failed
   to produce evidence to confirm her claim to be unable to attend  due  to
   illness.
   However, it is arguable that at paragraph  21  the  Adjudicator  wrongly
   deduced that the absence of the claimant  (and  her  witnesses)  was  in
   itself a reason to conclude that her account was untrue.

2. At paragraph 23 of the adjudicator's  decision,  he  agreed  in  general
   terms with the conclusions of the refusal letter; but  his  decision  to
   reject the claimant's case turns on what he said at paragraph 21:

   I am at a disadvantage as I have not been able to hear  direct  evidence
   from the  appellant  nor  the  witnesses  who  purportedly  support  her
   contentions that she is from a minority tribe within Somalia.  I am  not
   able to satisfy myself as to her credibility nor  whether  she  rebutted
   the statements contained in the Secretary of State's refusal letter.  It
   is therefore very difficult to come to the conclusion that the appellant
   is a person whose word can be relied upon.  The  appellant's  story  has
   not been tested under cross-examination.


3. If it had been a question of the claimant's simply failing to appear  on
   one occasion, then a negative credibility finding  of  that  kind  would
   certainly not have been justified. However, the  history  of  this  case
   went further than that, and the adjudicator quite rightly sets it out in
   some detail  at  paragraphs  8  to  11,  having  first  noted  that  the
   appellant's solicitors had  returned  a  reply  to  directions,  on  the
   strength of which the substantive hearing was set for 12 August 2003.

    8. On 12 August 2003 neither the appellant, her representatives nor the
       two other witnesses attended the hearing.  A phone call was received
       from the representatives indicating the  appellant  was  ill  and  a
       letter would be faxed to the Court confirming this.   A  letter  was
       duly faxed stating the appellant would not be attending the  hearing
       as her representatives received a telephone  call  from  her  friend
       yesterday afternoon that she was in hospital.  They further went  on
       to state that they aimed to provide medical evidence within the next
       seven days.  The appellant's  appeal  was  duly  adjourned  until  9
       October 2003.
    9. On 7 October 2003 the appellant's solicitors supplied a copy of  the
       relevant appeal bundle (this having not been supplied  in  readiness
       for the earlier hearing of 12 August 2003 despite directions  to  do
       so).  Such bundle contained witness statements in  relation  to  two
       further witnesses the appellant wished to call.  An  application  by
       the respondent for an adjournment was made in  order  to  check  the
       veracity of the two witness statements against  files  held  by  the
       respondent and the matter was adjourned to 6 November 2003.
   10. On 6 November 2003 the appellant  again  failed  to  attend  due  to
       illness.  A request for an adjournment was made on the basis that  a
       medical certificate would be produced within seven days however,  to
       date no medical certificate has been produced by or on behalf of the
       appellant.  The matter was then adjourned to the  hearing  of  today
       namely 20 November 2003.
   11. At the hearing today the appellant again failed to appear,  nor  did
       her witnesses. No medical evidence whatsoever was produced  and  the
       relevant request for an adjournment as indicated above was refused.


4. It will be noted that, although one of the three  previous  adjournments
   in this case was at the request of the Home  Office,  that  request  was
   caused by the late filing, contrary to directions,  of  the  appellant's
   bundle including  witness  statements.   The  appellant's  explanations,
   through Mr Onwuegbu, for these  three  adjournments,  and  the  failures
   which each of them involved on her part, and that of her solicitors were
   as follows. So far as the  failure  to  provide  a  medical  certificate
   within seven days, as undertaken by the solicitors  on  12  August,  was
   concerned, the appellant had never provided such a  certificate  to  her
   solicitors.

5. So far as the failure to file witness statements as directed (originally
   with the notice of hearing sent out  on  5  June)  for  the  hearing  of
   12 August was concerned, this was said  to  have  been  caused  by  the
   appellant being in hospital.  We asked Mr Onwuegbu  if  there  were  any
   medical evidence of that stay in hospital, and were told there was none.



6. So far as the failure to provide medical  evidence  of  the  appellant's
   illness on 6 November is concerned, (again, as undertaken, within  seven
   days), once again such evidence had not been provided by  the  appellant
   to her solicitors.  It was, of  course,  the  solicitors'  duty,  having
   given their own undertaking on two occasions to produce medical evidence
   justifying the adjournment, at the very least to give  some  explanation
   to the adjudicator at the hearing why that could not have been done.

7. However, as it turns out, the explanation, such as it is, which we  have
   now been given shows that this appellant was personally responsible  for
   what the adjudicator was well entitled to regard as a  series  of  quite
   unexplained and inexcusable attempts, successful until the last occasion
   before him, to delay the process of justice in this case.  In our  view,
   the adjudicator was well justified in making  the  negative  credibility
   finding he did at paragraph 21 on that basis. Adjudicators may in future
   wish to consider whether they  should  grant  adjournments  for  medical
   reasons without seeing medical evidence, by fax if necessary.

8. No basis has  been  put  forward  on  which  the  appeal  could  succeed
   independently of the claimant's credibility; except, it is said, for her
   tribal origins in the Bandhabow clan of the Mogadishu Benadiri  or  Reer
   Hamar.  Those origins were not specifically accepted by the Home Office;
   so that point too depends on the claimant's credibility.  It is  however
   suggested  that  the  adjudicator  should  have  taken  account  of  the
   background evidence in rejecting that part of the case as  well  as  her
   individual history.

9. The relevant points were taken in the refusal letter at paragraphs 7 and
   10.  At paragraph  7,  the  Home  Office  refused  to  accept  that  the
   claimant's brother-in-law could have sold his house in Mogadishu  as  he
   claimed.  At paragraph 10, they refused  to  accept  that  the  claimant
   would have stayed as long as she did in Mogadishu.   Those  points  were
   accepted by the adjudicator, but have been challenged  by  Mr  Onwuegbu,
   with reference to the background  evidence  contained  in  the  Minority
   Groups Report (compiled by the Joint  British,  Danish  and  Netherlands
   Fact Finding Mission of September 2000).

10. The relevant evidence appears at paragraph 7.4, where  an  estimate  is
   given that over 70% of the Reer Hamar  in  Mogadishu  had  fled  Somalia
   during the civil war.   Elders are quoted as saying that some were  left
   in Mogadishu; but they could not say how many.   However,  looking  more
   closely at the refusal letter, paragraph 10 does not so  much  challenge
   the fact that the appellant as a Reer Hamar should still  have  been  in
   Mogadishu at the end of her stay in Somalia; but why, in  the  light  of
   her individual history of serious persecution  of  her  personally,  she
   should have remained there.

11. Paragraph 7 challenges not only how her brother-in-law had been able to
   stay as long as he did, but how he could actually have managed  to  sell
   his house.  The appellant's explanation on that point (there is none  on
   the first) comes in paragraph 5 of her statement of 7 October 2003 where
   she says, "Other people from larger clans conducted the sale  for  him".
   That may amount to slightly more than what the adjudicator describes  at
   paragraph 23 as a bland denial of the Home Office case; but  it  remains
   the case that it is not, in the adjudicator's  words,  "controverted  by
   ... any substantive evidence to the contrary".  There is  evidence  that
   some Benadiri remained in Mogadishu (certainly less than  30%  from  the
   evidence reviewed at 10; but there is nothing there to show  how  many);
   but there is nothing to show they were able to find a market  for  their
   houses, with or without the help of larger clans; or to explain why this
   claimant, on her history, was able to leave in a manner which  permitted
   such arrangements to be made.

12. The adjudicator's  conclusion,  as  we  have  already  said,  was  well
   justified on the history of the case.  Although he  might  perhaps  have
   dealt with that case itself in slightly more detail, the way in which he
   did so is not shaken by anything to which we have been referred  in  the
   background evidence, and the appeal is dismissed.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman

                                      (approved for electronic distribution)

