
Heard at Field House | |AM (Really serious consequences) Serbia and
Montenegro) [2004] UKIAT 00135  | |
|On 23rd April 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|26th May 2004                                                     |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr R Chalkley (Vice President)                                    |
|Mr J Perkins (Vice President)                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before  us  the  Appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of   State"   was
represented by Mr M Davidson, a senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,  and
the  Respondent,  hereinafter  "the  Claimant",  was  represented  by  Mr  W
McGivern of counsel instructed by White Ryland, solicitors.

The Claimant is a citizen of the Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia.   He  was
born on 5th July 1975 and so is now 28 years old.  He comes from Serbia  and
is a member of the  Roma  community.   In  a  determination  promulgated  in
October 2002 the Adjudicator, Ms  M Colvin,  dismissed  his  appeal  against
the decision of the Secretary of State that he was not entitled  to  refugee
status and that removing him from the United Kingdom  was  not  contrary  to
his  rights  under  the  European  Convention   on   Human   Rights.    That
determination was criticised because the Adjudicator had not considered  the
implications of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   The
appeal was remitted to Ms Colvin for her to consider  Article  8.   She  did
that in a determination promulgated on 13th November 2003  and  allowed  the
Claimant's appeal. It is against that decision that the Secretary  of  State
now appeals.

The Secretary of State has not considered Article 8.  It  follows  that  the
Adjudicator was the primary decision maker concerning  that  aspect  of  the
case.
The Adjudicator made clear and important findings of fact in paragraphs  12,
13 and 14 of her determination.  At paragraph 12 she said:-
  "I fully accepted that the Appellant had serious  medical  needs  when  I
  made the recommendation in my previous determination that  the  Appellant
  be  allowed  to  receive  the  recommended  psychiatric  support   before
  returning to Serbia.  The medical evidence  before  me  at  this  hearing
  confirms that this is still the case.   He  is  now  receiving  cognitive
  behavioural therapy and I have no reason to  doubt  the  opinion  of  his
  therapist that a return to Serbia at the present  time  would  be  highly
  detrimental to his mental health.  At the same time, I  accept  that  the
  background material shows that there are serious difficulties in the Roma
  accessing medical care in Serbia.  This is partly due to Roma not  having
  "green cards" but it is also to do with active discrimination on the part
  of some doctors who refuse to treat Roma people."

The Adjudicator considered herself bound by the decision  of  the  Court  of
Appeal in the case of Razgar v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 840 and  explained  that
she understood Razgar to mean "that Article 8 can be relied upon  where  the
degree of harm in the receiving  country  is  sufficiently  serious  to  the
physical and moral integrity of the  person."   The  Adjudicator  said  that
this is not a case "where the principle in Blessing Edore  and  SSHD  [2003]
EWCA Civ.716 applied."  We take this to mean that  the  Adjudicator  had  to
make up her  own  mind  on  the  question  of  proportionality  because  the
Secretary of State had not considered the point.   The  Adjudicator  decided
that removing the Claimant would be an interference with  his  rights  under
Article 8(1) and that it would be disproportionate to the proper purpose  of
maintaining immigration control.

Mr McGivern asked us to adjourn the appeal.  He wanted to  serve  an  up-to-
date  medical  report  on  the  Claimant's  condition.   We   refused   that
application.  The Appellant's solicitors were told by  a  letter  dated  6th
February 2004 that permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   Mr  McGivern
could not explain why medical evidence had not been sought as soon  as  that
notice was received.  Further, Mr McGivern could  not  show  any  reason  to
suspect that the Claimant was in a significantly worse condition  than  when
he appeared before the Adjudicator who had  already  made  quite  favourable
findings of fact about his condition.  The Claimant suffers from an  ongoing
medical  condition.   Short  of  having  the  doctor  examine  the   patient
immediately before a hearing and  give  oral  evidence  about  his  findings
there would always be some point in waiting  for  further  medical  evidence
but that did not mean that an adjournment would always be necessary for  the
appeal to be justly determined.  Bearing in mind all these  things  and  the
fact that it was for the Secretary of State to show that  the  determination
was unsound we saw no merit in adjourning the hearing.

We have before us, and accept as truthful, a letter dated 13  February  2004
from D N A Baloach, a consultant psychiatrist, who  described  the  claimant
as a "pleasant but deeply troubled young man" who had been attending an  out
patient's clinic run by Mr Jim Wills.

A further difficulty arose because Mr Davidson thought he had  been  granted
permission to appeal on grounds 7 and 8 of the  Grounds  of  Appeal  but  Mr
McGivern did not know of these grounds until shortly before the hearing  and
we did not know of them until Mr Davidson informed us.  After  reading  them
carefully this did not cause any problem.  Ground 8  is  purely  formal  and
adds nothing of substance.  Ground 7,  properly  understood,  complained  in
effect, if not in its language, that the  Adjudicator  had  not  followed  M
(Croatia)*.  Mr McGivern, properly and sensibly, accepted that M  (Croatia)*
set out the approach the Adjudicator should have  adopted  when  considering
proportionality.  He was prepared to deal with that point.  Although he  was
taken by surprise there was nothing unfair in allowing Mr Davidson to  argue
the Grounds of Appeal without adjourning the hearing.
Unlike the adjudicator we have the assistance of the case known as  00024  M
(Croatia)* [2004] UKIAT 00024, which  had  not  been  promulgated  when  the
adjudicator decided the appeal. There the  Tribunal  considered  the  proper
approach of Adjudicators and indeed the Tribunal itself  when  dealing  with
Article 8 cases.  At paragraph 25 the Tribunal explained the approach to  be
taken by an Adjudicator  where  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  made  a
decision.  Ouseley J said:
  "we consider, however, that in the light of the authorities to  which  we
  have referred that where a decision on proportionality has not been taken
  by the Secretary of State as here, the Adjudicator is  obliged  to  reach
  his own conclusion on whether removal  would  be  disproportionate.   The
  first approach has to be followed.  The  Tribunal,  if  dealing  with  an
  appeal on a point of  law,  is  only  entitled  to  interfere  with  that
  decision if it is unreasonable, or fails to follow the  guidance  of  the
  Tribunal or higher  authority.   The  ability  to  reach  an  independent
  conclusion does not belong to each appellate body in turn."
This paragraph has to be read with paragraph 28 which says:
  "the starting point should be that if in the  circumstances  the  removal
  could reasonably  be  regarded  as  proportionate,  whether  or  not  the
  Secretary of State has actually said so or applied his mind to the issue,
  it is lawful.  The Tribunal and Adjudicators should regard  Shala,  Edore
  and Djali as providing clear exemplification of the  limits  of  what  is
  lawful and proportionate.  They should normally hold that a  decision  to
  remove is unlawful only when  the  disproportion  is  so  great  that  no
  reasonable Secretary  of  State  could  remove  in  those  circumstances.
  However, where the Secretary of State, e.g. through a consistent decision
  making pattern or through decisions in relation to members  of  the  same
  family, has clearly shown where within the range of reasonable  responses
  his own assessment  would  lie,  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  assess
  proportionality by reference to a wider range of possible responses  than
  he in fact uses.  It would otherwise have to be a truly exceptional case,
  identified and reasoned, which would  justify  the  conclusion  that  the
  removal decision was unlawful by reference to an assessment that  removal
  was within the range of reasonable assessments  of  proportionality.   We
  cannot think of one at present; it is simply that we cannot rule it  out.
  This decision is starred for what we have to say about proportionality."

Of course the Adjudicator is not  to  be  criticised  for  not  following  M
(Croatia)*.  As stated above M (Croatia)* had not  been  reported  when  the
Adjudicator  decided  the  case  that  is  the  subject  of   this   appeal.
Nevertheless, the Adjudicator's approach should  have  been  to  have  asked
herself if the consequences of  removal  were  so  disproportionate  to  the
proper purpose of immigration  control  "that  no  reasonable  Secretary  of
State could remove in those circumstances".   If  the  Adjudicator  did  ask
herself  that  question  and  then   decide,   reasonably,   that   it   was
disproportionate the Tribunal cannot interfere.  If the Adjudicator did  not
ask herself that question, or if she did ask the  question  but  reached  an
answer that no reasonable Adjudicator could have reached, then the  decision
is unsound and the Tribunal must correct it.

We consider now  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   Ground  1  complains  that  the
Adjudicator did not decide the case in the light of the  circumstances  that
existed when she made her decision.  This ground is supported  by  reference
to the case of S and K* [2002] UKIAT 05613.  We agree that  the  Adjudicator
should have decided the case on the basis of the facts that existed  at  the
date of decision.

Ground 2 complains that the Adjudicator  considered  herself  bound  by  the
decision in Razgar and SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ. 840 but failed to  provide  any
supporting reasons why she preferred the approach in Razgar to the  approach
set out by the Court of Appeal in Ullah v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ.  1856.   It
is the Secretary of State's contention that Ullah permitted  removal  unless
a person could show that the consequences of removal were so severe that  it
was contrary to Article 3 to require him to leave the United Kingdom.   When
the Adjudicator first decided the case she was not persuaded that  it  would
be contrary to Article 3 to remove the claimant.

Mr Davidson and Mr McGivern made submissions on the law.

Before the decision of the Master of the Rolls in Ullah and Do  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department  [2002]  EWCA  Civ.1856,  decided  on  16th
December 2003, there was uncertainty about the  circumstances,  if  any,  in
which a person could rely on the provisions of the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights to support an argument that he could not be  removed  from  the
United Kingdom to a territory  where  he  risked  treatment  that  would  be
contrary to the European Convention on Human  Rights,  if  it  applied.   At
risk of demeaning  the  judgment  of  the  Master  of  the  Rolls  by  over-
simplifying it, Ullah and Do  decided  that  it  was  not  contrary  to  the
European Convention on Human Rights to return a person to  a  country  where
his rights were at  risk  unless  he  faced  ill-treatment  so  severe  that
removal resulted in a real risk  to  his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the
European Convention.

It is against this background  of  concern  about  the  extent  to  which  a
person's rights cross national borders that the Court of Appeal decided  the
case of Razgar on 19th June 2003.  There,  Dyson  LJ  drew  attention  to  a
distinction between a person's rights under Article  8  (if  any)  being  at
risk by reason of conditions in the country to which he is returned  and  to
his rights being at risk by reason of his removal.  In the case  of  a  risk
existing by reason of his return then, unless  it  was  so  severe  that  it
engaged Article 3, it would not be an impediment to his removal.  Except  in
the case of Article 3 the European Convention does  not  oblige  the  United
Kingdom to protect people outside its jurisdiction from conduct  that  would
be an interference with Article  8  if  it  took  place  within  the  United
Kingdom.

In Razgar the  Court  of  Appeal  recognised  the  position  could  be  more
complicated where a sick person was being treated  in  the  United  Kingdom.
His removal to a country where treatment would be  much  less  effective  or
possibly not available at all could cause a medical problem that  was  being
treated in the United Kingdom to be exacerbated so that once  the  treatment
stopped and the person was outside the United Kingdom  his  health  declined
to the point that there was an interference  with  his  private  and  family
life.  Circumstances supporting such an argument are by no means unusual  in
the case of people receiving treatment for mental ill-health in  the  United
Kingdom which would not be available to them in the event of  their  removal
although, as the Court of Appeal noted in Djali v IAT [2003] EWCA Civ.  1371
there is no obvious reason why the principle identified in Razgar should  be
limited to cases of mental ill-health.  The point of distinction is that  it
is the removal of the person from the United  Kingdom,  and  therefore  from
the treatment that he was enjoying, rather than conditions  in  the  country
to which he was returned,  that  caused  the  interference  with  Article  8
rights.

However it is important to  realise  that  Razgar  recognised  that  a  mere
decline in health was not sufficient to engage the protection of Article  8.
 This would only occur where there was  a  sufficiently  adverse  effect  on
physical and mental integrity (paragraph 23).  It is also important to  note
that Razgar also recognised that it is not sufficient for  an  Appellant  to
show that his rights under Article 8(1) are at risk.  There is Article  8(2)
to consider (paragraph 25).  The  proper  approach  to  proportionality  has
already been considered.
It was Mr McGivern's  core  point  that  the  Adjudicator  had  to  consider
Article 8 because the Secretary of State had not and, in the  light  of  the
medical evidence, the Adjudicator was entitled to  find  that  a  reasonable
Secretary of State could  have  found  it  disproportionate  to  the  proper
purpose of immigration control to remove the Appellant.   The  Adjudicator's
conclusion that the Appellant's "return to Serbia at the present time  would
be highly detrimental to his mental health" was supported by  proper  expert
evidence before her and has not been the subject  of  any  challenge  before
us.  However we must make some effort to  understand  what  the  Adjudicator
meant  when  she  said  that  returning  the  claimant  would   be   "highly
detrimental to his mental health".   There  was  before  the  Adjudicator  a
report from  Dr  Hisham  Ramy  dated  15  September  2003.  Dr  Ramey  is  a
consultant psychiatrist who  practises  from  the  Pagoda  Community  Mental
Health Centre in Maidstone.  Dr Ramy recorded the Appellant  complaining  of
"flashback phenomena and  hypervigilance  symptoms  but  not  depressive  or
suicidal features."  He concluded that  the  Appellant  has  Post  Traumatic
Stress Disorder and
  "is very likely to be extremely anxious during the process [of presenting
  his appeal] with exaggeration of his PTSD symptoms.  I think this has  to
  be taken into consideration as it will lead to  a  deterioration  in  his
  mental health."
Appended to Dr Ramy's report there  is  a  letter  from  a  general  medical
practitioner  dated  16  September  2003  saying  that  the  Appellant   has
medication and it concludes:
  "I have no doubt that removal from the UK  would  be  detrimental  to  Mr
  Mullai's physical and mental health.  He  appears  to  benefit  from  the
  current therapy and is unlikely that a  new  country  would  be  able  to
  provide the same medication and therapy particularly if he were relocated
  to Serbia."
We have seen the report of Dr  Sally  Braithwaite  dated  9th  August  2002.
This too was before the Adjudicator.  Dr Braithwaite concludes:
  "I feel it is advisable that Mr Mullai continues  to  receive  outpatient
  psychiatric support for his Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and for him to
  receive medication as detailed above with psychological input."
There is also an optimistic but qualified report  dated  20th  October  2003
from Mr Jim Willis who is an appropriately  qualified  accredited  cognitive
behavioural psychotherapist.  He concludes
   "subject to continuation of  therapy,  applied  consistently,  with  mood
   management and with ongoing interpreting services, Mr Mullai is likely to
   experience a significant improvement in  his  current  distress.   He  is
   likely to require a further minimum of  twelve  to  fifteen  sessions  to
   evaluate therapy outcome." Mr Willis concluded "I also believe  a  return
   to his place of origin at present would  be  highly  detrimental  to  his
   mental health and his ability to "process" the traumatic event."

There is also an expert's report from James Korovilas is a  Senior  Lecturer
in Economics and Faculty Research Fellow at the University of  the  West  of
England at Bristol.  He talks about the high degree of  discrimination  that
the Appellant is likely to experience  in  the  Serbian  healthcare  system.
This is a point the Adjudicator has accepted.  However the same report  goes
on to  say  that  anti-depressant  drugs  are  generally  available  in  the
Presheva region but they are invariably imported and very expensive.

It is the foregoing medical evidence that the Adjudicator had in  mind  when
she accepted the therapist's opinion that removing the  Appellant  would  be
"highly detrimental to his mental health".
The case of Razgar was considered at length by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
case of Djali v Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  [2003]  RWCA  Civ.1371.   This
decision expressly recognised that Razgar had to be followed.   However  the
Court of Appeal in Djali emphasised that a high test  had  to  be  satisfied
before Article 8(1) was engaged.  Simon Brown  LJ  summarised  the  position
thus at paragraph 16:

  "Razgar establishes that, in cases of this sort, an Article 8(1) claim is
  capable of being engaged only  if  there  are  "substantial  grounds  for
  believing that the Claimant would face a real risk" of "serious  harm  to
  [her] mental health caused or materially contributed to by the difference
  between the treatment and support that she is enjoying in  the  deporting
  country and that which  would  be  available  to  her  in  the  receiving
  country" (Razgar, paragraph 22), that harm constituting  "a  sufficiently
  adverse effect on physical and moral integrity, and not merely on health"
  as to engage Article 8 (Razgar, paragraph 23)".

The court then decided at paragraph 17 that in the case of  Djali  it  would
be:
  "quite impossible  to  characterise  the  effect  of  that  upon  her  as
  constituting "serious harm to her mental health" such as  to  damage  her
  "physical and mental integrity so as to engage Article  8.   At  most  it
  would amount to this: return to Kosovo would imperil her prospects  of  a
  better recovery."
At paragraph 30 of  its  judgment  the  Court  of  Appeal  referred  to  the
decision of "N v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ.1369 where at  paragraph  42  Laws  LJ
expressed some concern about the decision in  Razgar.   He  emphasised  that
the decision in N was not inconsistent with it.  N  made  it  plain  that  a
high test has to be satisfied before Article 3 prevents a  person's  removal
on the grounds of ill-health.

It is plain to us that, properly  understood,  Razgar  requires  removal  to
have serious consequences on a person's health before  removal  is  contrary
to  Article  8  and  "serious  consequences"  in  this  context  should   be
understood not as a medical practitioner might use the  phrase  but  as  the
courts understand it in the jurisprudence concerning removal of sick  people
and the European Convention on Human Rights.  Whilst we entirely  understand
the Adjudicator's description of the consequences of removing the  Appellant
as being "highly detrimental to his mental health" in  the  sense  that  the
therapist used the phrase  we  do  not  accept  that  it  was  open  to  the
Adjudicator to find that there was a real risk of  removal  being  seriously
detrimental within the meaning of Razgar.  To that extent, and with  respect
to the Adjudicator who is doing her best in a very  difficult  area  of  law
where the Secretary of State had not bothered to send anybody to  help  her,
she fell into error.

It is our first finding that the Adjudicator ought  not  to  have  concluded
that there was an interference with the Appellant's  protected  private  and
family life. Although a cognitive behavioural  psychotherapist  referred  to
the claimant's removal being "highly detrimental to his  mental  health"  in
fact the medical evidence did  not  support  a  finding  that  removal  from
treatment in the United Kingdom would cause "a sufficiently  adverse  effect
on physical and moral integrity, and not merely  on  health"  as  to  engage
Article 8.

However, even if there was it is quite plain to  us  that  this  is  a  case
where the  Secretary  of  State  could  have  found  removal  proportionate.
Following the case of M (Croatia)* considered  above  it  must  follow  from
this that the Adjudicator ought to have dismissed the appeal.

In the circumstances we allow the appeal of the Secretary of State.

                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                                 12 May 2004
