
SS (Adjudicators differing on family members) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT00039




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing: 3rd February 2003
                                                Date determination notified:
                                                               05 March 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                               Mr S L Batiste
                                Mr M L James

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

For the Appellant:           Ms C Bayati, instructed by M K Sri & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal from an Adjudicator,  Mr  Andrew  Jordan,  in  a
      human rights appeal given in a determination promulgated  on  15th
      November 2002.  He dismissed the Appellant's human rights claim.

   2. The Appellant is a Tamil citizen of Sri  Lanka,  born  in  January
      1967, who arrived by plane in the United Kingdom from  Colombo  on
      14th March 1999 with no travel documents  and  claimed  asylum  on
      arrival.  On 12th April 2000 the immigration officer  refused  her
      leave to enter and proposed that she be removed to Sri Lanka.  Her
      asylum appeal was heard on 15th August 2000 by an Adjudicator, Mrs
      Symons JP, who in a determination  promulgated  on  5th  September
      2000 dismissed her asylum claim.

   3. Mrs Symons did not find the Appellant  or  her  story  of  arrest,
      detention and beating to be credible.  She had given evidence that
      one of her brothers, who had left  Colombo with her and  had  made
      an asylum claim,  had been detained and released  with  her.   Mrs
      Symons found a number of inconsistencies  in  her  evidence  about
      that which added to her doubts about the Appellant's credibility.

   4. On 30th June 2000, another Adjudicator, Mr J F W  Phillips,  heard
      the appeal of her brother Balarmanan against the  refusal  of  his
      asylum claim by the Secretary of State on 3rd April 2000.  He  had
      arrived in the United Kingdom with the  Appellant  on  14th  March
      1999.  Mr Phillips allowed the asylum appeal  in  a  determination
      sent on 14th August 2000.  He described how he had  been  arrested
      by the Sri Lankan army in October 1998, detained for one week  and
      severely beaten during questioning on one day.  He was also beaten
      by PLOTE. The essence of the Respondent's case  in  the  brother's
      appeal was not so much to take  issue  with  his  credibility  but
      rather to say that he was not at a real risk of  persecution  were
      he to be returned.  Mr Phillips found the brother to be  generally
      credible, said that there had been no  real  cross-examination  on
      credibility and found that there was a reasonable likelihood  that
      what the brother had told him was  true.   Mr  Phillips  concluded
      that  the  brother's  detention  and  mistreatment   amounted   to
      persecution for a Convention reason and concluded that there was a
      real  risk  that,  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  he   would   be
      interrogated on return, that that interrogation might lead to more
      rigorous questioning and to potential  ill-treatment  which  might
      reveal his LTTE connections.  Accordingly, he  concluded  that  to
      return the brother to Sri Lanka would be in breach of  the  Geneva
      Convention.  There was no appeal by the Secretary of State against
      the decision in respect of Balarmanan.

   5. M K Sri and Co were acting for both Appellants. However,  on  11th
      September 2000 after the determination of  her  brother's  appeal,
      this Appellant sought leave to appeal from  the  determination  of
      Mrs Symons.  Various  grounds  were  raised  covering  some  seven
      pages.   The  grounds  complained  about  the  absence  of  weight
      attached to scarring, the alleged disregard of objective  evidence
      and the finding that the Appellant did not  have  a  well  founded
      fear of persecution in the north  of  Sri  Lanka.   Permission  to
      appeal was refused by the Tribunal in a determination notified  on
      29th September 2000.  There were no subsequent proceedings.   None
      of the grounds of appeal referred to the decision in her brother's
      appeal by Mr Phillips, which would already have been received by M
      K Sri and Co.

   6. Neither the brother no the sister gave evidence  in  each  other's
      asylum appeals, even though at the time when the  sister's  appeal
      was being heard, the brother's appeal and his evidence in  it  had
      already been heard, though the  determination  had  not  yet  been
      received.  Her appeal was heard the day after the determination in
      her brother's appeal was promulgated, but the determination  would
      not yet have been available.  At no stage did either of them  seek
      the linking of the cases. The brother did not seek the adjournment
      of his appeal so that it could be dealt with at the same  time  as
      his sister's.  She made no application in that respect either.

   7. Subsequently, this Appellant sought  leave  to  remain  under  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 in a letter of 12th January 2002.  This  was
      refused by a notice dated 17th  January  2002  and  the  Appellant
      appealed under section 65(1) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      1999 on 24th January 2002.  It is this appeal which was  heard  by
      the Adjudicator, Mr Jordan, in November 2002.

   8. Her  main  claim  was  based  on  Article  3  which  had  a  close
      relationship to the case which she had failed to make in  relation
      to persecution.  She did, however, rely upon the success that  her
      brother had had.  She also relied under Article 8  upon  the  fact
      that she had three brothers in the United  Kingdom.   One  is  the
      brother who was granted asylum on appeal by Mr  Phillips,  another
      had been in the United Kingdom for ten years  and  had  originally
      been granted ELR which had led later  to  a  grant  of  indefinite
      leave to remain.  A third brother in the United Kingdom since 1996
      had had his asylum claim refused and was awaiting the result of  a
      human rights claim from the Home Officer.  Her mother  and  sister
      were in Canada; her only relatives in Sri Lanka were LTTE members.

   9. The Tribunal gave guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702* as to
      how an Adjudicator hearing a human rights appeal  should  approach
      the findings of fact made by an earlier Adjudicator in the related
      asylum appeal by the  same  Appellant.   The  Adjudicator  rightly
      concluded that the guidelines were relevant to the decision  which
      he had to make.  We set out those guidelines from paragraphs 39-42
      of the determination.


           "(1)  The first Adjudicator's determination should always be
                 the starting-point.  It is the authoritative assessment
                 of the Appellant's status at the time it was made.   In
                 principal issues such  as  whether  the  Appellant  was
                 properly represented, or whether he gave evidence,  are
                 irrelevant to this.


              2)  Facts  happening   since   the   first   Adjudicator's
                 determination can always be taken into account  by  the
                 second Adjudicator. If  those  facts  lead  the  second
                 Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at the date of  his
                 determination and  on  the  material  before  him,  the
                 Appellant makes his  case,  so  be  it.   The  previous
                 decision, on the material before the first  Adjudicator
                 and at that date, is not inconsistent.


              3)  Facts  happening  before   the   first   Adjudicator's
                 determination but having no  relevance  to  the  issues
                 before him can always be  taken  into  account  by  the
                 second Adjudicator.  The  first  Adjudicator  will  not
                 have  been  concerned  with   such   facts,   and   his
                 determination is not an assessment of them.


              4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were  not  brought
                 to the attention of  the  first  Adjudicator,  although
                 they were relevant to the issues before him  should  be
                 treated by the second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest
                 circumspection.   An Appellant who seeks,  in  a  later
                 appeal, to add to the available facts in an  effort  to
                 obtain a more favourable outcome is  properly  regarded
                 with suspicion from the point of view  of  credibility.
                 (Although considerations of  credibility  will  not  be
                 relevant in cases where the existence of the additional
                 fact is beyond dispute).  It must also be borne in mind
                 that the first Adjudicator's determination was made  at
                 a time closer to the events alleged  and  in  terms  of
                 both fact-finding and  general  credibility  assessment
                 would tend to have the advantage.  For this reason, the
                 adduction of such facts should not usually lead to  any
                 reconsideration of the conclusions reached by the first
                 Adjudicator.


              5) Evidence of other facts - for example country  evidence
                 -  may  not  suffer  from  the  same  concerns  as   to
                 credibility, but should be treated  with  caution.  The
                 reason is different from that in (4).  Evidence  dating
                 from before the determination of the first  adjudicator
                 might well have been relevant if it had  been  tendered
                 to him:  but it was not, and he made his  determination
                 without it.   The  situation  in  the  Appellant's  own
                 country at the  time  of  that  determination  is  very
                 unlikely  to  be  relevant  in  deciding  whether   the
                 Appellant's  removal  at  the  time   of   the   second
                 Adjudicator's  determination  would  breach  his  human
                 rights.  Those  representing  the  Appellant  would  be
                 better advised to assemble up-to-date evidence than  to
                 rely on material that  is  (ex  hypothesi)  now  rather
                 dated.

              6) If before the second Adjudicator the  Appellant  relies
                 on the facts that are  not  materially  different  from
                 those put to the first  Adjudicator,  and  proposes  to
                 support the claim  by  what  is  in  essence  the  same
                 evidence as that available to  the  Appellant  at  that
                 time, the second Adjudicator should regard  the  issues
                 as settled by the first Adjudicator's determination and
                 make his  findings  in  line  with  that  determination
                 rather than allowing the matter to be re-litigated.  We
                 draw attention to the phrase 'the same evidence as that
                 available to the Appellant' at the time  of  the  first
                 detention.  We have chosen  this  phrase  not  only  in
                 order to accommodate guidelines (4) and (5) above,  but
                 also because, in respect of evidence that was available
                 to the Appellant, he must be  taken  t  have  made  his
                 choices about how it should be presented.  An Appellant
                 cannot be expected to present evidence of which he  has
                 no knowledge:  but if (for example) he chooses  not  to
                 give oral evidence in his first appeal, that  does  not
                 mean that the issues or the available evidence  in  the
                 second  appeal  are  rendered  any  different  by   his
                 proposal to give oral evidence (of the same  facts)  on
                 this occasion.


              7) The force of the reasoning  underlying  guidelines  (4)
                 and (6) is greatly reduced if there is some  very  good
                 reason why the Appellant's failure to  adduce  relevant
                 evidence before the first Adjudicator should not be, as
                 it were, held against him.  We think such reasons  will
                 be rare.

              8) We do not suggest  that,  in  the  foregoing,  we  have
                 covered every possibility".


  10. Miss Bayati, who appeared before Mr Jordan as she did  before  us,
      submitted that the decision in the brother's case was a fact  that
      occurred after the making of Mrs Symon's determination and fell to
      be  taken  into  account  under  guideline  2.   The  Adjudicator,
      however, said:

           "The  underlying  facts,  however,  on  which  Mr  Phillip's
           determination was made, remain unchanged.  In  other  words,
           issues such as whether the Appellant's  brother  and  sister
           were members of the LTTE have not  changed,  albeit  another
           Adjudicator has reached  a  different  conclusion  on  those
           matters on the basis of hearing different evidence".

  11. He then pointed out that the facts upon which the Appellant relied
      in relation to risk upon return were  the  very  facts  which  Mrs
      Symons  had  found  not  established   in   the   asylum   appeal.
      Accordingly, in relation to those matters  he  concluded  that  he
      should follow her findings in accordance  with  guideline  6.   He
      also concluded that guideline 7 did not assist the Appellant.   He
      said at paragraph 22:

           "The brother did not give evidence at  the  hearing  of  the
           Appellant's appeal.  He  could  have  done  so.   I  do  not
           consider the fact that he had not received the determination
           in his own appeal as a satisfactory reason for failing to do
           so.  There may be a number of reasons why two witnesses  are
           not called  to  give  evidence  about  the  same  incidents.
           Clearly, there is a risk  that  inconsistencies  will  arise
           which may be avoided if the  evidence  is  restricted  to  a
           single witness".
  12. He then said at paragraph 23:

           "In essence, it is submitted that  I  should  approach  this
           appeal by reversing the findings  made  by  Mrs  Symons  and
           substituting the much more favourable findings  made  by  Mr
           Phillips.  There were no specific submissions  addressed  to
           me as to why I should prefer the conclusions of Mr  Phillips
           to those of Mrs Symons.   I  accept,  of  course,  that  the
           determination  of  the  one   is   inconsistent   with   the
           determination of the other.  For me to prefer  the  decision
           of Mr Philips would  not  remove  the  inconsistencies.   It
           might mean that the decisions in the brother's and  sister's
           case are rendered more consistent but then there would be an
           inconsistency between the decision in the Appellant's asylum
           claim and the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim.   Further,
           looking at the determination of Mrs Symons, it is plain  why
           she reached the decision  she  did  as  to  the  Appellant's
           credibility.   That  approach  has  been  endorsed  by   the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  On the other hand,  whilst  Mr
           Phillips found the brother to be credible, there  is  little
           by way of reasoning in his determination that encourages  me
           to prefer his conclusions to those of Mrs Symons".


  13.  At  this  stage,  the  Adjudicator  has  already  summarised  the
      decisions of both Mr Phillips and Mrs Symons.  He pointed out that
      each Adjudicator was required to reach a decision on the  material
      before him or her and given the differences in the evidence it was
      not altogether surprising that different conclusions were reached.
       He pointed out that it had been open to  the  Appellant  and  her
      brother to give evidence in each  other's  appeals  but  they  had
      chosen not to.

  14. This conclusion as to the relative value in  this  appeal  of  the
      earlier determinations is in our  view  entirely  justified.   Mrs
      Symons had to deal with a challenge  to  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant, but Mr Phillips, at least in general terms did not have
      to deal with a challenge to the brother's credibility because  the
      Respondent argued that even if  his  evidence  were  believed,  he
      could not succeed in making out his claim.   Mr  Phillips  reached
      shortly expressed conclusions in relation to risk  on  return  and
      persecution.  He did not therefore have  to  consider  the  issues
      which plainly and justifiably troubled Mrs Symons.

  15. The Adjudicator then pointed out correctly that the Appellant  had
      not  raised  her  brother's  decision  in  her   application   for
      permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  after  receipt  of  her
      brother's determination.  The Adjudicator then  set  out  what  he
      considered to be the correct approach for him to  adopt  in  these
      circumstances.  He said that it was for him to take  into  account
      the fact that there  had  been  two  inconsistent  determinations,
      without attempting  to  reverse  either  one  of  them.   He  then
      considered fresh medical evidence  directed  towards  establishing
      ill-treatment of the Appellant by the Sri  Lankan  army,  evidence
      that could have been but was not  made  available  in  the  asylum
      appeal.  He found that it did not assist in establishing that  the
      Appellant was ill-treated whilst in custody.  The Appellant made a
      short statement repeated in evidence before the Adjudicator giving
      details  of  her  claim  to  have  suffered   persecution.     The
      Adjudicator then concluded as follows in paragraphs 29, 30 and 31:

           "In  my   judgment,   nothing   has   happened   since   the
           determination of Mrs Symons that causes me  to  re-open  her
           findings of fact.  Just as she was not  satisfied  that  the
           appellant was at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka,
           I am not satisfied that the Appellant  will  suffer  adverse
           consequences amounting to a violation of her Article 3 or  8
           rights.


           The Appellant's brother  gave  evidence  in  line  with  the
           statement that he has made and which is to be found at pages
           34 to 35 in the Appellant's Personal Bundle.  He  reiterated
           the finds that were made in his favour  in  his  own  asylum
           appeal.  In the course  of  his  evidence,  the  Appellant's
           counsel did not  seek  to  re-litigate  the  facts  of  what
           happened in Sri Lanka.  Mr  Beer,  on  behalf  of  the  Home
           Office,  did  not  cross-examine  the  brother  as  to  what
           occurred to them in Sri Lanka.  There appears to  have  been
           some  sort  of  evidential  truce  based  on  an  underlying
           assumption that these matters had already been dealt with.


           The fact that the brother gave limited evidence  that  could
           have been given at the earlier hearing, does  not  undermine
           the findings of fact made in the asylum appeal.  As a matter
           of principle as the Devaseelan guidelines suggest, the  fact
           that an Appellant withholds a witness at  his  first  appeal
           cannot then entitle him (or her) to  re-litigate  the  issue
           when the witness could have given evidence before.  See  the
           seventh guideline".

  16. The Adjudicator then set out the claims under  Article  3  and  8.
      The first part of the claim related to  her  mental  health.   The
      Adjudicator considered a report from Dr Michael Seear of September
      2002 who had concluded that the Appellant  was  suffering  from  a
      major  depressive  episode  in  respect  of   which   she   needed
      antidepressants and support that might take the  form  of  helpful
      chats with her GP, for at least a year and possibly up to eighteen
      months, by  which  time  there  should  have  been  a  spontaneous
      improvement.  Were she to be returned to a frightening place,  she
      could lose the gains or possibly even deteriorate.

  17. However, the Appellant had not been seen by a psychiatrist in  the
      United Kingdom since her arrival in  March  1999.   There  was  no
      evidence that antidepressants were not  available  in  Sri  Lanka.
      The Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant had  not  established
      that her medical condition could not be treated in  Sri  Lanka  or
      that the consequences of her  return  established  a  sufficiently
      real risk, for her removal  in  those  terms  to  be  contrary  to
      Article 3 or 8.

  18. He then turned to the pure Article 8 claims as he called it  based
      on her United Kingdom family ties.  We have set these out already.
       She lives with the brother Balarmanan  and  sees  her  other  two
      brothers normally at least once a week.  She had  had  no  contact
      with the brother who had joined the LTTE in 1992 since  then,  nor
      with the sister who joined the LTTE just  before  1999.   However,
      the Adjudicator  noted  that  Mrs  Symons  had  not  accepted  her
      evidence that either her brother  or  sister  in  Sri  Lanka  were
      members of the LTTE.   Her  brother  gave  oral  evidence  to  the
      Adjudicator and  was  asked  some  questions  about  his  life  in
      England, though not about events which had happened to him in  Sri
      Lanka.  The Adjudicator pointed out that he supported  his  sister
      from his income, and could continue to do that if she were in  Sri
      Lanka.

  19. The Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant had a family life  in
      the United Kingdom and that her return would inevitably  prejudice
      it.   Such,  he  said,  was  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the
      fragmentation of this family by the  process  of  immigration  and
      relocation.  Had she remained in Sri Lanka, she  would  have  been
      able to visit her UK relatives as a visa  holder  and  would  have
      been in a position to apply for settlement.  He concluded that  it
      would be proportionate for the Appellant to  be  returned  to  Sri
      Lanka.  This was based on the finding that she was not at risk  of
      persecution or of inhuman or  degrading  treatment.   He  was  not
      satisfied about the position of her  brother  and  sister  in  Sri
      Lanka.  Her medical condition did not  prevent  her  return.   Her
      position in relation to her mother and sister in Canada  would  be
      unaltered.

  20. In her submissions before us, Miss Bayati accepted that  paragraph
      19 of the Adjudicator's determination in  which  he  set  out  the
      Devaseelan  guidelines  was  the  correct  starting  point.    The
      determination of the brother's appeal was further evidence  within
      the second guideline.  The Grounds of Appeal  had  suggested  that
      where there were two contradictory sets of findings  of  fact  the
      Adjudicator should have accepted that it is reasonably likely that
      the more favourable findings in the brother's appeal were true and
      should follow those.   Miss  Bayati,  however,  was  reluctant  to
      submit that that decision amounted by itself to a sufficient basis
      for the Adjudicator on the human rights  appeal  to  overturn  the
      findings of the Adjudicator in the asylum appeal.   She  submitted
      more  strongly  that  at  the  very  least,  if  there  were   two
      inconsistent  determinations,  the  Adjudicator  was  obliged   to
      reassess the evidence and although he could find the  brother  not
      to be credible after hearing all that he had to  say,  nonetheless
      his duty was to assess that evidence.   The  Adjudicator  had  not
      assessed it; he had simply said that he could  not  undermine  the
      decision of the first Adjudicator.  He was not bound to accept  as
      true what the brother said, but in this case the Home  Office  had
      not cross-examined the  brother  when  he  gave  evidence  in  his
      sister's second appeal about events in Sri Lanka.

  21. Miss Bayati explained that the brother had not given  evidence  in
      the Appellant's  first  appeal,  as  a  result  of  an  unreported
      decision of Ognall J on 29th  January  1997  called  Kimbesa.   In
      Kimbesa, two brothers, who had arrived  very  shortly  before  the
      hearing  of  the  Appellant's  appeal  and  had  claimed   asylum,
      contended that as their cases were  very  much  the  same  as  and
      involved with that of the Appellant, the  three  cases  should  be
      dealt with together.  Ognall J was  persuaded  that  it  would  be
      unfair to expect either of the two brothers to give  evidence  and
      be tested on it a short time after they  had  arrived  and  before
      they had been interviewed.

  22. Miss Bayati said that a  practice  had  grown  of  Appellants  not
      calling as witnesses those who  had  yet  to  have  their  appeals
      determined, even if they had had their interview.  Indeed, in this
      case the brother had actually given his evidence on appeal to  the
      Adjudicator before his sister's first appeal.

  23. Miss Hart for the Respondent submitted that the  determination  by
      Mr Phillips was unreasoned on the brother's  credibility,  because
      no challenge had been raised to credibility,  whereas  Mrs  Symons
      had undertaken a full and reasoned assessment  of  credibility  in
      relation to this Appellant and had rejected it.  It was  obviously
      right  for  this  Adjudicator  to  put   more   weight   on   that
      determination both because it considered credibility in detail and
      because it specifically  related  to  this  Appellant's  case  and
      evidence.  She submitted that the determination in  the  brother's
      appeal was not new evidence but rather a new view  of  the  facts,
      following a different interpretation  by  another  Adjudicator  of
      some of the same evidence.

  24. In reality the Adjudicator, it was submitted, had weighed  up  the
      merits of the evidence when pointing out that the determination of
      Mrs Symons was to be preferred and there was nothing that required
      her determination of this  Appellant's  first  appeal  to  be  re-
      thought.  The evidence which was placed before Mr  Jordan  by  the
      brother could have been placed before Mrs Symons but was not.   It
      could have been appealed and was not.

Conclusions

  25. The Adjudicator was right to treat this as a  case  to  which  the
      guidelines in Devaseelan applied.  That much was common ground  at
      least as a starting point.  They applied because this was a second
      appeal.  Devaseelan does not directly deal with  the  consequences
      for such an appeal of subsequent credibility findings which are to
      a degree inconsistent with the credibility findings in  the  first
      appeal.  Its guidance nonetheless enables a proper  answer  to  be
      given.

  26. The  determination  letter  in  the  brother's  appeal  was  said,
      tentatively, inevitably to be sufficient of itself to overturn the
      findings in the Appellant's first appeal.  The  argument  was  put
      more boldly in the Grounds of Appeal.  It appears  from  paragraph
      23 of Mr Jordan's determination that that is how the argument  was
      put to him.

  27. The suggestion was that in the light of the standard of  proof  in
      asylum and human rights  cases,  the  decision  in  the  brother's
      appeal raised a reasonable doubt about the untruthfulness  of  the
      Appellant's story as concluded by the  first  appeal  Adjudicator,
      and she should now be given the benefit of it.  We  cannot  accede
      to that suggestion.  The  second  Adjudicator  must  look  at  the
      determination of the first Adjudicator in the  framework  provided
      by the guidelines in Devaseelan.  He  must  examine  the  material
      before him in the light of the conclusions reached on the evidence
      before the  first  Adjudicator.   He  cannot  simply  defer  to  a
      different decision, albeit one to which his appeal is related,  on
      the grounds that it is more favourable to the Appellant's  version
      of events, regardless of the issues raised, the way the  case  was
      presented, or the evidence  given  or  the  nature  of  the  first
      Adjudicator's reasoning and conclusions  or  the  availability  of
      evidence which was not provided.  It would be wholly inappropriate
      for related Appellants to make  what  may  be  tactical  decisions
      about which  witnesses  to  call,  perhaps  hoping  to  avoid  the
      exposure of contractions which could damage all their  cases,  and
      then to require an Adjudicator to follow whichever  was  the  most
      favourable to an Appellant regardless of  that  Adjudicator's  own
      assessment of the evidence placed before him.

  28. The second Adjudicator was correct to say that he had to take into
      account that there were two  inconsistent  determinations  without
      attempting  to  reverse  either  of  them.   But   the   brother's
      determination is not itself a fact which has  happened  since  the
      first appeal, in the context of the second  Devaseelan  guideline.
      The starting point is always  the  first  Adjudicator's  decision.
      The purpose of the second guideline  was  to  deal  with  relevant
      events which thereafter happened which could cause an  Adjudicator
      hearing a human rights appeal to  consider  reaching  a  different
      conclusion from the earlier asylum decision.  The obvious  example
      is where subsequent events cause a rejected persecution  claim  to
      be re-examined when put forward as an Article 3 claim.   But  here
      the  Appellant  seeks  no  more  than  a  different  appraisal  on
      different evidence of the same or some of the same facts.  That is
      not what the guidelines had in mind to permit.

  29. Alternatively,  if  the  Appellant's  point  is  simply  that  the
      brother's determination had to be looked at to see if, of  itself,
      it  justified  overturning  the  Appellant's  first  adjudication,
      acknowledging that it could not do  so  automatically  and  solely
      because it was more favourable, the second  Adjudicator  did  that
      and for the reasons which he gave in  paragraph  23,  he  rejected
      that.  We agree with his assessment  of  the  two  determinations.
      That of Mrs Symons is  a  detailed  and  thorough  examination  of
      credibility, following  cross-examination.   That  issue  was  not
      really raised before Mr Phillips, because the HOPO had expected to
      win, even taking the brother's case at its highest.  It would have
      to be a remarkable set of circumstances justifiably to  cause  the
      second Adjudicator to set aside the findings of the  first  simply
      in the light of the findings of  another  Adjudicator  in  another
      person's appeal on different evidence and arguments.  A difference
      of view as to the credibility of a witness  would  not  of  itself
      remotely suffice.

  30. Here, the real point in the appeal relates to the  evidence  which
      the brother gave at his sister's second appeal, in  the  light  of
      the acceptance of his evidence at his own appeal, rather than that
      determination being a new fact by itself.  Evidence of  that  sort
      is governed by guidelines 4, 6 and 7.  That  evidence  had  to  be
      taken into account and appraised, submitted Miss Bayati, which the
      Adjudicator had not done.

  31. Guideline 4 deals with facts not brought to the attention  of  the
      first Adjudicator and the need for the greatest of  circumspection
      when they are raised in the second appeal.  The adduction of  such
      facts should not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of  the
      conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.  This guideline does
      not help the Appellant.  The relevant evidence for these  purposes
      given in the sister's second appeal  by  the  brother  related  to
      events in Sri Lanka rather than to events in the  United  Kingdom.
      The evidence was given  in  a  written  statement  which  in  this
      respect stood as the brother's evidence in the Appellant's  appeal
      and was not elaborated on.  There is nothing new in the few  short
      paragraphs except for the reference to the outcome of  his  appeal
      and the fact that, although Mr  Phillips  did  not  refer  to  his
      sister's arrest, that had  been  before  him  from  the  interview
      records.  All the substantive points which he made were before the
      first Adjudicator through his sister's evidence.  There is nothing
      in the brother's statement for example which deals with any of the
      points which the first Adjudicator raised  as  to  why  she  found
      inconsistencies and implausibilities in the sister's evidence.  In
      short, it wholly fails to address any point which would  naturally
      have had to be considered by any Adjudicator who was  being  asked
      to reach a different conclusion from the first Adjudicator.  It is
      not necessary to  consider  it  even  with  great  circumspection.
      There is no new material at all - apart from  the  result  of  the
      brother's  appeal  which  could  have  been  raised   before   the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal when leave to appeal was  sought  from
      the decision of Mrs Symons and refused.

  32. Guideline 6 is in point because the  facts  relied  on  before  Mr
      Jordan were not materially different from those before  the  first
      Adjudicator and the case was supported by "the  same  evidence  as
      that available to the Appellant at  that  time...".   Accordingly,
      the Adjudicator was obliged to regard the issues as settled by the
      first Adjudicator's determination and had to make his findings  in
      line with that determination.  Although the brother was a  witness
      whose evidence had not been given to the  first  Adjudicator,  the
      evidence which he gave was  not  materially  different  from  that
      given by his sister in her first appeal.  He was a witness who had
      been available to give evidence in that appeal.  He did not do so.

  33. Nothing in guideline 7 helps  the  Appellant  because  the  reason
      given for the evidence not being given in the first appeal was not
      a very good one.  We were  told  that  this  was  because  of  the
      practice to which we have referred.   But  that  practice,  if  it
      existed, was never sanctioned by the Tribunal; it was based  on  a
      complete misreading of Ognall J's decision in Kimbesa.  It  was  a
      case that depended upon earlier Rules, an application  being  made
      for an adjournment and evidence that was to be given in an  appeal
      shortly before the asylum interview; so it does not  parallel  the
      present case.  Kimbesa also dealt with the Procedure  Rules  which
      were superseded by the 2000 Rules.  The provisions in relation  to
      adjournment were made very much tighter in Rule 31(1) of the  2000
      Rules than they had been.

  34. In Rajan 8th February 2002 CC/51103/99 (01/TH/0244*)  the  general
      inapplicability of Kimbesa was dealt with.  There was  and  is  no
      obligation to adjourn pending appeals,  if  there  are  concurrent
      applications by relations, and Kimbesa was not authority for  that
      proposition.  We can see no reason why somebody  should  not  give
      evidence in an  appeal,  whilst  their  own  appeal  determination
      remains outstanding or before they have given  evidence  in  their
      own appeal.  It is particularly undesirable for that witness to be
      brought in to give evidence at  a  subsequent  appeal.   Now  that
      second, human rights, appeals should be diminishing in numbers, it
      is yet more important that all the evidence is brought forward  to
      be dealt with at the first opportunity; that is because it will be
      generally the Appellant's only opportunity.  As the Adjudicator in
      this case pointed out correctly,  a  second  witness  may  not  be
      called  in  the  first  appeal  for  the  tactical   reason   that
      discrepancies and contradictions  may  arise  and  wedges  may  be
      driven between the different accounts; thus it is hoped to advance
      the prospects of  success  for  an  Appellant  by  limiting  those
      opportunities.  It is highly undesirable for parties to litigation
      to seek to avoid that risk and then to bring the evidence in  when
      the initial strategy has not succeeded.  The  appeal  system  does
      not permit an attempted finesse, followed by a replay of the  lost
      trick.

  35. It is to be hoped that any misconception as to  the  propriety  or
      fairness of an Appellant giving evidence in someone else's appeal,
      when he has yet to give evidence in his own appeal or that  appeal
      has yet to be determined, can be laid to rest.

  36. Guideline 8, however, points out that the guidelines do not  cover
      every eventuality; but the major categories are  covered  and  the
      principles should be applied.  The factor which is not  explicitly
      dealt with in the guidelines is  the  effect  of  a  determination
      which has reached a relevant but  different  credibility  finding.
      It is relevant to consider that other determination, the  evidence
      which was given and the arguments addressed.  It  is  relevant  to
      see how far it contains factors not before the  first  Adjudicator
      and the extent to which it addresses matters  of  concern  to  the
      first Adjudicator.  It would be  relevant  to  examine  any  later
      evidence supplied to the second Adjudicator but to do so with  the
      guidelines 4, 6 and 7 firmly in mind.  But it would be  wrong  for
      the second Adjudicator not to give  the  greatest  weight  to  the
      decision  of  the  first  Adjudicator.   The  principles  of   the
      guidelines still apply to that situation.  We consider  that  that
      is how this Adjudicator in fact approached the problem.

  37. It was said that  there  was  nonetheless  an  obligation  on  the
      Adjudicator to assess the evidence of the brother  in  the  appeal
      and that had not been done.  Miss Bayati referred to the  language
      of paragraph 30 of the determination.  She said that the  decision
      had merely been noted but the evidence  had  not  been  appraised.
      The first sentence of the paragraph is not as clear  as  it  might
      be; it could be read as confining consideration to the  mere  fact
      of the brother giving evidence.  But that is too narrow a  reading
      of it.  There is a short appraisal of the  evidence  in  the  word
      "limited".  It is indeed limited evidence  as  we  have  discussed
      above.  There is nothing in it which could or should have impelled
      the second Adjudicator to a different conclusion about its weight,
      or to a different conclusion as to the sister's credibility.

  38. If the second Adjudicator did not in  fact  appraise  the  further
      evidence, we are in as good a position as he was to do so, because
      the relevant evidence was in written form and not supplemented  by
      oral evidence from the brother.  There is nothing of substance  in
      it to warrant a change in the first Adjudicator's  conclusions  on
      credibility.  There is no new material as such.  The evidence does
      not begin to grapple with the reasoning of the  first  Adjudicator
      in rejecting the sister's credibility.  The mere fact that another
      Adjudicator, on different evidence and  argument,  had  reached  a
      different conclusion as to the credibility of the brother does not
      mean that the same view should be taken of the sister's  evidence.
      There  is  nothing  in  the  coherence  or  thoroughness  of   the
      determination in the brother's appeal which makes it intrinsically
      more persuasive than that in the sister's first appeal.  It is the
      reverse.  But there was no real challenge anyway to the  brother's
      credibility in his appeal because, as we have said, the  focus  of
      the Secretary of State's argument was  that  he  could  safely  be
      returned even if what he said was  true.   His  evidence  was  not
      conceded to be correct in this appeal and the case  was  presented
      by the Home Office Presenting Officer to the second Adjudicator as
      one which was in effect covered by the guidelines, as in principle
      it is.  The fact that this  means  that  there  are  to  a  degree
      inconsistent credibility findings is not desirable, but it is  the
      consequence of the way the two chose to give evidence.  We  uphold
      the determination of the second Adjudicator.

  39. It was accepted that if we were to do so, there  was  no  need  to
      consider the other points  which  related  to  Article  3  and  8.
      Permission to appeal had been in effect refused on those  grounds.
      Miss Bayati made submissions in relation to those matters in  case
      we reached a conclusion favourable to her on the Grounds of Appeal
      which was permitted, but then  wished  to  consider  human  rights
      issues rather than remitting the matter  to  another  Adjudicator.
      We can record them and our conclusions briefly.  This assumes that
      the Appellant's evidence had been accepted, so it is in part on  a
      false hypothesis.

  40. The Appellant would be returning to Sri Lanka as  a  single  woman
      from the Jaffna area, who had had a low level involvement with the
      LTTE, doing sewing work for three months.  She had a  brother  and
      sister somewhere in Sri Lanka who were LTTE  members,  the  sister
      joining after the Appellant had left.  She had been detained  once
      with her brother briefly and then both had been released nearly  6
      years ago.  She had been ill treated in detention.  She  had  some
      body scarring.  She had no family in Sri Lanka  whose  whereabouts
      she knew or could access.  Her home  village  was  within  a  High
      Security Zone to which she  would  not  have  access.   A  medical
      report from September 2002 found her to be suffering from a  major
      depressive episode which required antidepressants and  support  in
      the form of helpful chats with her GP.  If she stayed  in  Colombo
      she would be an unsupported single female, which  according  to  a
      report by a Dr A Good on a  fact-finding  visit  in  August  2003,
      would be completely unfeasible.  It  was  culturally  unacceptable
      for a single woman to live on her own.  The  HSZs  had  created  a
      large number of refugees in Jaffna,  covering  as  they  did  some
      thirty percent of it.  The UNHCR were cautious in  its  assessment
      of the position.  It was premature to advocate the return  of  all
      asylum seekers to Sri Lanka.  Miss Bayati drew  attention  to  the
      fact that the President had declared a state of emergency,  albeit
      now reserved, and that there were more  roadblocks  and  searches.
      There was less scope for optimism  about  the  ceasefire  and  its
      durability.  Dr Good suggested in his August Report that the  LTTE
      were using the ceasefire to regroup  and  infiltrate  Colombo  and
      assassinating Tamil  opponents.   The  October  2003  CIPU  Report
      predated the uncertainties created by the actions of the President
      and her rift with the Prime Minister.

  41. We do not accept the submissions in relation to either  Article  3
      or  8.   Her  medical  condition  was  said  to   be   one   which
      antidepressants and gentle support for a year or perhaps  eighteen
      months would resolve.  That time has very nearly elapsed since the
      report was compiled.  The fear of a return of the  condition  must
      be seen in the light of the availability of antidepressants in Sri
      Lanka.  She does not require specialist treatment or support.  She
      has another brother whose asylum claim in this country has failed,
      who is waiting upon the determination by the Home  Office  of  his
      human rights claim.  There is nothing before us to suggest that he
      could not return.  The brother who was granted refugee status with
      whom she lives can continue to send her financial support,  as  he
      now supports her, so she would not be  an  unsupported  female  in
      Colombo.  Her family life here is with the brother with  whom  she
      lives and with another who has indefinite leave to remain;  it  is
      more precarious with the  brother  whose  asylum  claim  has  been
      rejected.  She would experience some  disruption  to  that  family
      life.  Her family is also in Canada, and her relations  with  them
      would not be disrupted.  We accept the  Adjudicator's  conclusions
      on this in paragraphs 41 and 42.

  42. As to the concern about the return of a single female to  Colombo,
      we are not persuaded that that is shown to be sound, by the single
      source  from  which  it  comes.   She  would  not  be  unsupported
      financially, even if she were alone and even if  her  unsuccessful
      asylum-seeker brother were not to  return.   She  would  be  in  a
      position to find accommodation, whether or not in  someone  else's
      house, in a capital which has many refugees from the civil war and
      many Tamils.  Dr Good's report in paragraph 76 refers to the  fact
      that in Jaffna there  are  20,000  female-headed  households,  who
      often live alone even though they feel that they have no security.

  43. On a more general level, Miss Bayati recognised that the  cautious
      note sounded by the UNHCR was  the  same  as  sounded  before  the
      Tribunal decided in Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01689  that  it  was
      only the exceptional case which would not be  able  to  return  in
      safety.  The position was reviewed  in  Thiagarajah  [2002]  UKIAT
      04917.  The current problems have been considered in a  number  of
      cases and  the  consistent  position  has  been  that  the  recent
      developments do not warrant a change  in  that  assessment.   Miss
      Bayati recognised that we should refer to our own  reported  cases
      on these country conditions.  The pessimism in Dr Good's report of
      August 2003 is consistent with the pessimistic line which  he  has
      taken in the  past,  an  approach  which  was  considered  by  the
      Tribunal in May 2003, in P (Sri Lanka) [2003]  UKIAT  00145.   The
      current problems had not  occurred  by  the  time  of  his  August
      report.  That decision also considered the availability of medical
      treatment in relation to a case where the problems of the claimant
      were markedly more severe than here.  He had been  detained  as  a
      LTTE  supporter  and  ill  treated  on  a  number  of   occasions.
      Nonetheless, the Tribunal concluded that he could be returned.

  44. The position after the declaration of the state of  emergency  was
      considered in N (Sri  Lanka)  [2003]  UKIAT  00150  in  which  the
      Tribunal also dealt with body scarring.  That was not  seen  as  a
      bar to return.  The October CIPU does not deal  with  the  current
      position politically, as  between  the  President  and  the  Prime
      Minister.   Nonetheless,  the  essential  features  are  that  the
      ceasefire is still holding, the ban on the LTTE remains lifted, it
      engages in political activities outside its area of control,  even
      if it has an unsavoury and violent undertone to some  of  what  it
      does, as Dr Good suggests.  There is nothing in any evidence which
      we have seen to suggest that the picture in the October 2003  CIPU
      Report or in the determinations to which  we  have  referred,  has
      significantly changed as regards the way returning asylum  seekers
      are treated on arrival or in the way in which searches are carried
      out.  There may be greater  tension  and  a  higher  incidence  of
      searches and roadblocks; there may be more arbitrary  restrictions
      imposed on the free movement of goods and  people,  as  the  UNHCR
      letter of 8th December 2003 to Sri and Co says may have  happened.
      But that does not support the notion that there would  be  a  real
      risk of treatment which breached Article 3.  The  assessment  made
      in Jeyachandran and  subsequent  cases  remains  good.   There  is
      nothing to suggest that the Appellant is wanted  in  a  relatively
      serious way.  She was a low level supporter briefly detained,  and
      released, who without further arrest later made her way to Colombo
      whence she department through the series of  checks  at  the  main
      airport.

  45. Accordingly, even had we concluded otherwise in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's credibility, we would not have allowed her appeal.  It
      is dismissed.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

