
H-SS-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |PN (Article 8 - Adults -    |
|                           |        |Proportionality - Delay) Sri|
|                           |        |Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00069    |
|On 22 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|16 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey - Chairman                                          |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Mr N W Renton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
| SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                           |        |(CLAIMANT)                  |

REPRESENTATION

For the Appellant:     Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Callaghan of Counsel representing
      Selva & Co Solicitors, London

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  with  permission   against   the
    determination of an Adjudicator Mr M Cohen, promulgated 7 August  2003,
    wherein he dismissed an asylum appeal made against a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State but allowed a human rights appeal under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.


The Adjudicator's Determination

2.    The Adjudicator largely accepted the truthfulness of  the  Claimant's
    case but did not consider he had a well-founded fear of persecution for
    a Refugee Convention reason on return to Sri Lanka.  He noted that  the
    Claimant was a 23 year old man, who had arrived in this country  on  12
    August 1998 and claimed asylum at that time.  He had been 17  years  of
    age when he arrived.  He did not receive a notice of refusal  from  the
    Secretary of State until 12 April 2001 and a Home Office bundle was not
    submitted until April 2003.  The matter then came  for  hearing  before
    the Adjudicator on 4 July 2003.

3.    We noted from the Reasons for Refusal Letter that there is  no  clear
    reference to an Article 8 ECHR  claim  set  out.   The  refusal  letter
    simply stated at paragraph 24 that consideration had been given to  the
    obligations of the United Kingdom under the ECHR and the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied on the information available, that the claimant
    qualified under any of the Articles.

4.    The Article 8 claim was however, argued before  the  Adjudicator  and
    the claimant's evidence  appears  to  have  been  largely  accepted  as
    credible.  He stated that one of his brothers, who had arrived in  this
    country in 1992, had received asylum and had become a British  citizen.
    In addition to that his father had also moved to the United Kingdom, on
    the basis of the brother's sponsorship.  It was  also  noted  that  the
    claimant's mother had been shot and killed when the army came to arrest
    one of his brothers.  This apparently took place in 1996.

5.    Since the claimant has been in the United Kingdom he has been  living
    with his elder brother and, after completing high school, has  gone  on
    to start a civil engineering degree.  The claimant has another  brother
    in the United Kingdom, who apparently has been refused asylum, but  has
    not yet returned to Sri Lanka.

6.    It was claimed that the claimant's father was in poor health and that
    the claimant himself gave a  considerable  amount  of  support  to  his
    father, when he was not at university  undertaking  his  studies.   The
    claimant's brother, who has British citizenship, has  paid  �1,000  for
    the claimant's courses at university.

7.    The findings, in relation to the Article 8 ECHR issue,  are  set  out
    between paragraphs 41 and 43 of the determination.

8.    The Adjudicator firstly noted the determination of  the  Tribunal  in
    Nhundu (01/TH/00613) and acknowledged that the correct approach was one
    which involved a step-by-step analysis.

9.    The Adjudicator accepted  that  private  and  family  life  had  been
    established in the United Kingdom and that removal to Sri  Lanka  would
    interfere with private and family life.  He then went  on  to  consider
    whether the interference with family  life  would  be  disproportionate
    when set against the requirements of maintaining effective  immigration
    control.  He set out factors relating to  the  family's  financial  and
    emotional support and stated that  he  considered  that  the  claimant,
    while 21 years old, "is obviously very young for  his  age".   He  also
    noted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  financial  situation  of
    relatives  in  Sri  Lanka  and  whether  he  could  be   supported   or
    accommodated on return.  All of the immediate family  were  settled  in
    the UK, save an older brother, who was an asylum seeker.   In  addition
    he noted that the claimant was obviously an  important  member  of  the
    family unit and assisted his 67 year old father who was in poor  health
    and needed to attend medical appointments.  He then went on to note the
    death of the mother and the additional stress and  suffering  that  was
    placed on the family.  He then reached a  decision  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect the claimant to return  to  Sri  Lanka.   In
    doing so he had particular regard to:

    (a)    The delay by the Secretary of State in deciding  the  claimant's
         application.


    (b)    Following the death of the claimant's mother,  the  family  unit
         had become a particularly close one and the removal  from  the  UK
         would cause the claimant and his family  "an  enormous  amount  of
         emotional and psychological distress".

10.   He then said that the claimant's removal to Sri  Lanka  would  breach
    Article 8 and that the claim had been substantiated.

The Appellant's Submissions

11.   At the outset Mr McGirr agreed that there did not appear  to  be  any
    proper engagement with the Article 8 issues by the Secretary  of  State
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  therefore  his  grounds  relied
    solely on the  Adjudicator's  determination  and  his  claim  that  the
    determination was substantively flawed to the extent that the  Tribunal
    could substitute its own determination.  He provided us with a copy  of
    the relevant starred determination of  the  Tribunal  in  [2004]  UKIAT
    00024  M  (Croatia)*  and  submitted  that   paragraph   28   of   that
    determination should be followed by us.

12.   In addition he submitted that the  Adjudicator  had  made  inadequate
    findings and did not fully consider the Respondent's  situation.   This
    was tantamount to an error of law by  the  Adjudicator.   He  submitted
    that the status of the claimant, as an adult rather than as part  of  a
    family group, had been overlooked by the Adjudicator.  It was necessary
    to look at the reality of the situation as it now stood.  The  claimant
    was a 23 year old and a statement by the Adjudicator that the  claimant
    was "young for his age" appeared to have no  substantive  or  objective
    grounds to support it, particularly  given  there  was  no  medical  or
    psychiatric report submitted.

13.   He submitted that the requirement  (as  set  out  in  the  Strasbourg
    determination in Advic v United Kingdom -6 September 1995) had not been
    followed, in that the Adjudicator had not considered  further  elements
    of dependency that went beyond normal emotional ties.  There was thus a
    substantive flaw  in  the  determination  and  in  that  situation  the
    Tribunal could assess whether removal of the  Appellant  was  within  a
    range of reasonable responses that could be made by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He submitted that there was nothing before the  Adjudicator  to
    indicate anything beyond normal emotional ties between the claimant and
    his family, now based in United Kingdom, beyond the  financial  support
    for his study.  This support, he  suggested,  could  also  be  provided
    whether the claimant was in this country or in  Sri  Lanka.   Thus,  he
    considered we should allow the appeal.

The Claimant's Submissions

14.   Mr O'Callaghan submitted to us that the conclusions  reached  by  the
    Adjudicator in paragraph 43 were within a range reasonably open to  the
    Adjudicator, particularly noting that the Secretary of  State  had  not
    considered Article 8.  The Adjudicator had correctly  referred  to  the
    Nhundu determination, which included the requirement to take account of
    proportionality  issues  and  required  balancing  against   legitimate
    immigration control policies of the Secretary of State.   He  submitted
    that the Adjudicator did take into account the  dependency  issues  and
    the family relationship that existed.  He claimed that there  was  more
    than just a situation of the claimant being young  for  his  age.   The
    dependency of the father on the claimant, that had grown up over recent
    times, had to be taken into account, as well as the delay factor in the
    assessment and the obvious  situation  that  had  developed  after  the
    claimant's mother had been shot and a close family  bond,  between  the
    remaining members, had developed.

15.   He noted that the delay in the initial  decision,  between  September
    1998 and March 2001, involved a period of two and  a  half  years.   In
    this situation it was invalid for the Secretary of State now  to  claim
    that effective immigration control  required  the  claimant's  removal.
    This situation was further weakened by  the  additional  two  years  of
    delay in proceeding with the appeal to the  Adjudicator.   During  that
    time the father's health had been deteriorating and the  dependency  on
    the claimant had clearly  grown.   Mr  O'Callaghan  conceded  that  the
    claimant was not the Sponsor of the  father  but  the  reality  of  the
    situation was that because the claimant was a younger man, who  was  at
    home for considerable periods, while not at university, did  contribute
    to the dependency of the father on this claimant.

16.   He submitted therefore that it was reasonably open to the Adjudicator
    to reach the conclusions he did and that the grounds now put forward by
    the Secretary of State were too narrow.

17.   We asked the significance of the statement by  the  Adjudicator  that
    removal would cause "an enormous amount of emotional and  psychological
    distress", and whether there was any medical support to back  this  up.
    Mr O'Callaghan told us that there was not, but clearly as  this  was  a
    family who had lost the mother in such a  tragic  fashion,  then  there
    would be a much higher degree of emotional support required between the
    remaining members.

18.   We also asked whether there was information on  the  middle  brother,
    who evidently was claiming asylum in this country.  We were advised  by
    both parties that they could not advise us further on that issue.

19.   Finally, we were advised that it appeared that if  the  Secretary  of
    State had processed the claimant's application  at  the  time  when  he
    arrived, when he  was  17,  then  exceptional  leave  to  remain  would
    possibly have been granted, if no reception facilities  were  available
    in Sri Lanka.  That period of exceptional leave would have  been  until
    the Applicant was 18.  Mr McGirr could point  to  no  changes  in  that
    policy that may have been relevant.

20.   In final reply Mr McGirr also submitted that the delay  factor  could
    not be seen as undermining the Secretary of State's  valid  application
    of immigration control policy.  Indeed this  claimant  would  be  in  a
    situation where, if the health of the father continued to  deteriorate,
    visits could be made to this country from time to time by the claimant.



The Issues

21.   We found the issues before us to be:

    (a)     Given  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed   to   give
         consideration  to  the  Article  8   issues   himself,   was   the
         determination made by the Adjudicator  one  that  was  lawful  and
         proportionate and when set against immigration  control  or  would
         the decision to remove this claimant be so  disproportionate  that
         no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could  remove  him  in   the
         circumstances that prevailed?


    (b)    If the determination of the Adjudicator was unlawful, or did not
         take into account relevant jurisprudence, could we substitute  our
         determination, particularly take into account the  guidelines  set
         out in the starred determination 00024 M (Croatia)*?

Decision

22.   At the outset we are satisfied that the Adjudicator has made an error
    of law in not placing the Applicant's claim  under  Article  8  in  the
    correct perspective, particularly taking into  account  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence and that these are  relationships between adult siblings,
    and an adult child with  one  of  his  parents.   The  Adjudicator  has
    referred to Nhundu,  a  decision  of  this  Tribunal  that  covers  the
    Article 8 relationship of family life  between  a  married  couple  and
    their immediate children.  Indeed that decision refers to  the  leading
    Court of Appeal determination in Mahmood [2001] INLR 01 which set out a
    number of helpful guidelines in the  assessment  of  such  relationship
    cases at paragraph 55.  This however is the situation of an adult child
    of 23 living with an adult brother who  is  a  British  citizen  and  a
    father, who has some dependency on the  claimant  and  is  legitimately
    (apparently) indefinitely in this country.  The  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in Ali Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698 directly addresses a situation
    such as this and finds that it should  be  placed  within  the  correct
    perspective and applicable Strasbourg jurisprudence.  It notes that  in
    MacDonald's Immigration Law and Practice  (5th  Edition)  at  paragraph
    8.59 it is said:

         "Generally, relationships between adult siblings or adult children
         and their parents will not fall within the scope of Article 8, but
         in each case it is a question of fact whether  there  exists  ties
         strong enough to constitute family life within the meaning of  the
         Article."

      The authority for this is taken from the Strasbourg decision in Advic
    which sets out that such a relationship will  not  necessarily  require
    the protection of Article 8 without evidence  of  further  elements  of
    dependency, involving more than normal emotional ties.

23.   The Adjudicator  in  this  case  did  not  start  his  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article 8(2) from  that  premise.   His  approach
    therefore, we consider was fundamentally flawed.   He  has  given  some
    consideration  to  the  emotional  ties,  but  has   not   demonstrated
    dependency beyond normal emotional ties.  Indeed he has stated, without
    medical or psychiatric evidence, that removal from the  United  Kingdom
    would cause  the  claimant  and  his  family  "an  enormous  amount  of
    emotional and psychological distress".  We see no basis for  concluding
    that any distress  would  be  "enormous".   Particularly  when  in  the
    totality of the evidence there would appear to be  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant's middle brother could not return with him to Sri  Lanka  and
    beyond that financial support, now provided by his elder brother, could
    continue to be provided in Sri Lanka.  In addition to that, while there
    has developed some dependency between the claimant and his  father,  it
    is the claimant's elder brother who has been the Sponsor and is clearly
    the  person  who  the  father  has  looked  to   obtain   support   and
    accommodation with, in his old age.

24.   As we consider that the Adjudicator commences his assessment  without
    consideration of the relevant family association and the  relevant  law
    relating to it, the determination must therefore be seen  as  wrong  in
    law.  We are  thus  in  a  position  where  we  should   make  our  own
    assessment.

25.   In this regard we have noted particularly  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    starred determination in 00024 M (Croatia).  This states:

    "28.   The starting point should be that if in  the  circumstances  the
         removal could reasonably be regarded as proportionate, whether  or
         not the Secretary of State has actually said  so  or  applied  his
         mind to the issue, it is lawful.  The  Tribunal  and  Adjudicators
         should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali   as   providing   clear
         exemplification of the limits of what is lawful and proportionate.
          They should normally hold that a decision to remove  is  unlawful
         only when  the  disproportion  is  so  great  that  no  reasonable
         Secretary of State could remove in those circumstances.   However,
         where the Secretary of State, e.g. through a consistent  decision-
         making pattern or through decisions in relation to members of  the
         same  family,  has  clearly  shown  where  within  the  range   of
         reasonable responses his own assessment would  lie,  it  would  be
         inappropriate to assess proportionality by reference  to  a  wider
         range of possible responses  than  he  in  fact  uses.   It  would
         otherwise have to be a  truly  exceptional  case,  identified  and
         reasoned, which would justify  the  conclusion  that  the  removal
         decision was unlawful by reference to an assessment  that  removal
         was within the range of reasonable assessments of proportionality.
          We cannot think of one at present; it is simply  that  we  cannot
         rule it out.  This decision is  starred  for  what  we  say  about
         proportionality."

26.   As we have set out above, following Advic, this is  not  a  situation
    where there are further elements  of  dependency  involving  more  than
    normal emotional ties.  There are clearly  some  emotional  ties  which
    have arisen through the death of the  mother  and  the  recent  support
    provided by the claimant to his father.   These  are  however,  nothing
    beyond what would normally be accepted between adult family members and
    an adult child and parent.   We  are  also  satisfied  that  the  delay
    factors, while they have assisted in the establishment of a family  and
    private life for the Applicant, would not impact on the proportionality
    determination to the extent that it would be disproportionate for  this
    claimant to be  removed.   We  are  satisfied  therefore,  taking  into
    account all matters, and particularly noting the  need  to  acknowledge
    that the Secretary of State is entitled to take into account his lawful
    immigration policy, that a decision to remove this Appellant would  not
    be so disproportionate that no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  would
    remove him in these circumstances.  In reaching this decision  we  also
    take into account the submission of  Mr  McGirr  that  on  the  factors
    mentioned above, the Applicant could, apply, on compassionate  grounds,
    to visit his father in  this  country.   Beyond  that  his  brother  or
    brothers could clearly visit him in Sri Lanka.  All  of  these  factors
    come within a legitimate immigration policy provided by  the  Secretary
    of State.

27.   In this situation therefore, having found that the  determination  of
    the Adjudicator is a flawed one,  we  consider  that  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant would not be disproportionate or outside  a  range
    of valid options open  to  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  appeal  is
    therefore allowed.
                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
