
ar                           OB (Immigration - Student - Change of
                                                      Circumstances)
Nigeria  [2004] UKIAT 00055


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                             Date of HearingDetermination  : 3 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               25 March 2004

                                   Before:

                          Mr C P Mather (Chairman)
                                Mr R Hamilton
                             Mrs S I Hewitt, JP




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and




                     Chief Immigration Officer Heathrow

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation
For the appellant : Miss C. Boaitey, counsel, instructed by BSO Solicitors
For the respondent : Mr M. Davidson, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, Ola Bamidele, is a citizen of Nigeria.

   2. With permission, he appeals the determination of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr
      W.A. Jeffries, promulgated on 23 June 2003.  In that determination the
      Adjudicator dismissed his  appeal  on  immigration  and  human  rights
      grounds.  The appeal to the Adjudicator was from  a  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 14 December 2002 to cancel the appellant's leave to
      enter.

3.    Despite the appeal number, this  was not an  appeal  on  human  rights
      only. It is an immigration appeal  with  some  human  rights  aspects.


4.    The appellant was granted leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
      student on 11 October 2002.  He had  previously  been  granted  twelve
      months leave to enter to enable him to commence studies as  a  student
      at South Chelsea College.   During  the  second  period  of  leave  he
      returned to Nigeria for a short time. He was stopped on  arrival  back
      on 4 December 2002. On  14  December  2002  his  leave  to  enter  was
      cancelled.  This was done under the provisions of Rule  321(A)  of  HC
      395 which, so far as relevant, reads as follows:


             '321.   The  following  grounds  for  the  cancellation  of  a
                   person's leave to enter or remain  which is in  force  on
                   his arrival in, or  whilst  he  is  outside,  the  United
                   Kingdom apply:


             (i)   There has been such a change  in  the  circumstances  of
                   that person's case, since leave was given, that it should
                   be cancelled.'

5.    There are other grounds for cancelling leave to enter  which  are  not
      relevant to this appeal.

6.     The  reasons  for  the  respondent's  decision  are  set  out  in  an
      explanatory statement dated 31 January 2003. The statement followed an
      interview with the appellant on 14 December 2002.   It  is  relatively
      long and should be read for its full terms and effects.  However,  the
      thrust of it  is  that  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  until  30
      September 2003 was subject to a  prohibition  on  recourse  to  public
      funds and a restriction on the taking  of  employment.   He  told  the
      interviewing immigration officer that he had been  studying  at  South
      Chelsea College since September 2001 but was also working twenty hours
      a week in W.H. Smith. Because records indicated that  the  appellant's
      wife and son had applied for, and been refused, visit visas to come to
      see him in the United Kingdom, the interviewer  was  concerned  as  to
      whether he was a bona fide student.  He was therefore given  temporary
      admission and interviewed again. By the next interview  enquiries  had
      been made. South Chelsea College  said  that  the  appellant  had  not
      attended the college since May 2002.  The college's academic year  ran
      from September to May with the vacation  between  May  and  September.
      During the course of the interview  it  became  apparent  that,  after
      finishing the academic year in May 2002, the appellant registered as a
      student for the year beginning September 2002.  However,  he  did  not
      attend any classes. He told the interviewing officer that  the  course
      was not right for him and that the college registrar had  advised  him
      to remain registered but change to a different course in January.

7.    The appellant said his father-in-law  had  died  in  Nigeria  in  late
      September. He also said  he visited his sick son in  Nigeria  from  13
      November 2002.  He admitted that he had been working for up to thirty-
      nine hours a week at W.H. Smith and at  Parkwood Health Care.

8.    Further enquiries showed the appellant  told  the  respondent  in  his
      application to extend  his  leave  in  September  2002,  that  he  was
      following a full time three year course  of  study  at  South  Chelsea
      College and intended to continue doing so.   A letter from W.H. Smith,
      dated 16 December 2002, confirmed that he had  been,  and  was  still,
      working as a part time sales assistant at Kings Cross from July  2002.
      A Lloyds Bank statement  produced  by  the  appellant  showed  he  was
      employed by Parkwood Health Care between 11  October  and  8  November
      2002.  The  respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant  was   working
      considerably more than the twenty hours per week allowed.

9.    There was  a further interview  with  the  appellant,  on  4  December
      2002. The appellant  accepted  he  had  been  working  more  than  the
      permitted twenty hours per week and had not told the  respondent  when
      applying for his extension of  leave.  Following  a  consideration  of
      paragraph 321(A) of HC 395 the respondent  noted that  the  leave  had
      been extended to enable the appellant to pursue a course  in  computer
      studies, but he had not attended any classes since  the  beginning  of
      the academic year on 16 September  2002.  There  was  no  satisfactory
      explanation for that.  He had,  however,   during  that  period  taken
      employment for longer than the permitted hours and knew that he should
      not have done so.  The respondent decided that the appellant was not a
      bona fide student and was engaged  in  employment  for  which  a  work
      permit  was  required.  He  therefore  considered  that  a  change  in
      circumstances had occurred since the leave was  given  on  11  October
      2002 such that it should be cancelled.

10.   The explanatory statement also considered the appellant's  claim  that
      the decision to refuse leave to enter would breach  his  human  rights
      under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article
      2 of Protocol 1 to the Convention (the right to education).

11.   The Adjudicator did not refer to paragraph 321(A) of HC 395  but  only
      to those rules dealing with the requirements for  leave  to  enter  or
      remain as a student.  The issue the Adjudicator said he had to  decide
      was whether the appellant still met the requirements for  entry  as  a
      student, or whether there had been such a change in circumstances that
      the leave to enter should be cancelled.  He considered the appropriate
      issues,  notwithstanding not mentioning Rule 321(A) of HC 395 and made
      the following findings of fact:

       (a)  The appellant has successfully completed the  first  year  of  a
           three year course which concluded in May 2002. He  had  enrolled
           on the second year of the course commencing September 2002


       (b)  During the vacation between the end of one course (sic) and  the
           beginning of the other, the appellant worked in excess of twenty
           hours per week which he was entitled to at that time.


       (c)  The appellant had continued to work in excess  of  twenty  hours
           per week during term time until he left the United Kingdom on  a
           trip home to Nigeria.  He has not attended the  college  at  all
           during the academic year starting September 2002.

       (d)  In the interview on 5 December the appellant said  that  he  had
           registered in September but the class was no good and  told  the
           college he wanted to start 'all over' in January. He produced  a
           letter  from  South  Chelsea  College  dated  12  December  2002
           confirming he was registered as a full time  student  until  the
           end of the academic year on 30 May 2003.  The  letter  said  the
           college had no objection to the student  continuing his  current
           course in January on companionated (sic) grounds.

12.   The appellant produced no evidence to the Adjudicator (at the  hearing
      on 2 June 2003) that he had attended at all during the balance of  the
      academic year which had concluded on 30 May 2003. There  was  also  no
      evidence before the Adjudicator as to whether or not the appellant had
      kept his employment within the required limits during that time.

13.   Finally, the Adjudicator said he was unable to make a  finding  as  to
      the reason the  appellant  returned  to  Nigeria.  At  one  point  the
      appellant said he had gone home  because  his  father  had  died;   at
      another point his father-in-law died at the end of October;  elsewhere
      that his father-in-law died at the end of  September.   The  appellant
      produced evidence to  show that there had been a burial service on  30
      November. At another time he said he went to see his son who was  sick
      with malaria, and elsewhere that he had intended to bring his wife and
      family to the United Kingdom for Christmas but their  application  had
      been refused. At one time  he  gave  as  the  reason  for  wishing  to
      recommence studies in January that his son was sick. Elsewhere he says
      that it was because the class was no good.  The  Adjudicator  said  he
      was unable to make a finding of fact as  to  which  if  any  of  those
      accounts were true.

14.   The Adjudicator found that there would not be a breach  of  Article  2
      of the First Protocol to the European Convention on Human  Rights.  He
      said that counsel did not expand on the  two  Articles  (she  did  not
      before us either).  Article 2  provides  the  right  to  an  effective
      education but  does  not  provide  that  the  education,  in  whatever
      subject, must be available wherever and  whenever  the  appellant  may
      choose.  In any event, the appellant  has  himself  distanced  himself
      from his education. The Adjudicator found there  was  no  evidence  to
      support the assertion that there would be a breach of Article  8  ECHR
      if the appellant is removed from the United Kingdom.

15.   Before us Miss Boaitey sought to argue that following the decision  in
      Zhou [2003] EWCA Civ 51 the appellant was entitled to be treated as  a
      student because he had leave to enter as a  student.   We  heard  long
      submissions from her about this but we do not accept that the case  of
      Zhou has any bearing on this appeal.  The  facts  of  Zhou  are  quite
      different. Mr Zhou had leave to enter and started attending a  college
      which found him an unsatisfactory student. He left  that  college  but
      did not take immediate steps to enrol at an alternative establishment.
      His first college notified the immigration  authorities  that  he  had
      left and  he  was  arrested.  The  respondent  detained  Mr  Zhou  and
      concluded that he was liable to administrative removal  in  accordance
      with Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 because he  was
      a person who had failed to observe a condition of leave  to  enter  or
      remain.  Not only had Mr Zhou had a  poor  attendance  at   his  first
      college but he  had  also  been  working  in  breach  of  his  landing
      conditions.

16.   The first and most immediate  difference  is  that  Mr  Zhou  was  in-
      country, when the respondent made his decision, whereas the  appellant
      was seeking to enter. Second, the method of dealing with Mr  Zhou  was
      such that he did not have a right of appeal. Because he had  no  right
      of appeal he had applied for judicial review of the decision.  He  was
      refused permission and the Court  of  Appeal  dealt  with  the  appeal
      against that refusal. At paragraph 35 of the judgement, Lord Phillips,
      LR said this:

             'If the Secretary of State  considers  it  objectionable  that
             those who have been given leave to enter as students  are  not
             pursuing their studies, the appropriate course would  seem  to
             us to be to take steps to remove  them  for  that  reason.  At
             present the appropriate way of doing this would seem to be  to
             curtail, under Section 3(3)(a) of the 1971 Act  and  paragraph
             323 of HC 395, the period for which the student has been given
             leave to enter, and then to remove the student  under  Section
             10 of the 1991 Act. The former step would  give  rise  to  the
             right of an in-country appeal.'

  17. The court considered the meaning of the word 'student' and found  that
      Mr Zhou remained a student for  the  purposes  of  Chapter  4  of  the
      Immigration Directorates Instructions. He was not  in  breach  of  any
      entry condition by working as students are permitted to do.  For  that
      reason Mr Zhou was not liable to administrative removal under  Section
      10 of the Asylum and Immigration Act 1991 which provides that a person
      may be removed from the United Kingdom if:

              '(a) Having only limited leave to enter or  remain,  he  does
                 not observe a condition attached to the  leave  or  remains
                 beyond the time limited by the leave.'

18.   The course of action in this  appellant's  case  is  similar  to  that
      recommended by the Master of the Rolls in Zhou.  In the case  of  Zhou
      the appropriate course would have been to act under paragraph  323  of
      HC 395.  Paragraph 323 was appropriate because the appellant  was  in-
      country with leave to remain. The equivalent  provision,  relevant  to
      this appellant as he  was  seeking  to  enter,  is  paragraph  321(A).
      Whichever of those two paragraphs is invoked  by  the  respondent,  it
      generates an in-country right of appeal. Any question  of  whether  or
      not this appellant is or was a student is  therefore  irrelevant.  The
      case of Zhou has no application in these circumstances.

19.   Having established that, we looked at the Adjudicator's decision.   He
      upheld the  respondent's  decision  to  cancel  the  leave  to  enter.
      Although  Miss  Boaitey  argued  that  discretion  should  have   been
      exercised differently, Mr Davidson quite properly argued that this  is
      not a rule in which discretion plays a part.  The respondent may  have
      had discretion whether to invoke the rule in the first place, but that
      is not a matter that we and the Adjudicator can consider.

20.   It is quite clear  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  not
      following his studies as he  had  indicated  that  he  would  when  he
      obtained his extended leave. He was working full  time  and  had  been
      back to Nigeria during term time. The Adjudicator was  quite  entitled
      to find that the appellant was not being truthful  about  why  he  had
      gone back to Nigeria when he  told  so  many  different  stories.  The
      letter from the college saying that they had  released  the  appellant
      until January on compassionate grounds was written only after  he  had
      been stopped on his return to the United Kingdom.   That  letter  does
      not tally with his account that he wished to start his course again.

21.   The respondent, and the Adjudicator, were both  entitled  to  conclude
      that there has been such a change in circumstances since the leave  to
      enter was given that it should be cancelled.  It cannot be  said  that
      the Adjudicator's decision is plainly wrong or perverse. We  have  set
      out above why there is no error of law in his determination.

22.   The appeal is dismissed.




                                                                 C.P. MATHER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      1


