

PG (Article 8 - child - contact ) Serbia & Montenegro [2004] UKIAT
                                                          00255          | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date of Hearing: 28 July2004
                                       Determination prepared: 1 August 2004
                              Date Determination notified: 15 September 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                              Mr A.E. Armitage

Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mrs L. Prince, Home Office
                                  Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:      Mr P. Simm, Counsel, instructed by AS
                                  Law, Solicitors


  1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator, Dr O.T.C. Ransley, in which she allowed to the Claimant's
     human rights appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  to
     refuse both his asylum  and  human  rights  claims.   The  Adjudicator
     rejected the Claimant's asylum appeal.  No challenge is made  to  that
     finding.

  2. The Appellant is a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro and was born on 10
     October 1960.  He is 43 years old.  He  is  an  ethnic  Albanian  from
     Kosovo who claimed to have been persecuted  by  the  Serbian  army  in
     1998.  He claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  September
     2000, avoiding immigration controls, at  a  time  after  the  NATO-led
     forces had entered Kosovo.

  3. Shortly after his arrival, he formed a  relationship  with  a  British
     citizen,        [           ], known as [     ].  They started  living
     together in May 2001.  They became engaged.  Their daughter, [      ],
     was born on 19 February 2002.       [     ]  is  now  two  years  old.
     Unfortunately, the couple separated in June 2002.  At  the  time,  the
     conditions of the Claimant's stay prohibited his taking employment and
     he was unable to support either [     ] or [        ].   The  Claimant
     was refused contact with his daughter.  He  approached  solicitors.  A
     contact order was made in November 2002.  The current order  was  made
     in the Liverpool Family Proceedings Court  on  5  August  2003.   This
     permits the Claimant frequent contact with [      ].   [      ]  is  a
     student.  During term-time, contact takes place three  times  a  week.
     During the  vacations,  contact  takes  place  each  weekend  both  on
     Saturday and Sunday.   In  paragraph  20  of  the  determination,  the
     Adjudicator expressly finds that the Claimant has  maintained  regular
     contact with his daughter, as well as contacting the nursery  which  [
         ] attends to find out about her progress.

  4. The Claimant gave evidence that his parents are no  longer  alive  and
     that he has no other family in Kosovo.  He submitted that  his  former
     partner has consistently adopted a hostile attitude  towards  contact,
     such that it would be difficult or  impossible  for  contact  to  take
     place  were  the  Claimant  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
     Adjudicator found that it was highly  unlikely  that  [       ]  would
     bring [      ] to see the Claimant in Kosovo.  (See  paragraph  22  of
     the determination.)

  5.  In paragraph 23 of the determination, the Adjudicator  accepted  that
     the Claimant had the  right  to  apply  under  paragraph  246  of  the
     Immigration Rules, HC 395, for leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  in
     order  to  maintain  contact  with  his  daughter.   The  Adjudicator,
     however, considered this might not provide  practical  assistance  for
     the Claimant because he has no assets to finance his  journey  to  the
     United Kingdom and is not permitted  to  work  in  United  Kingdom  at
     present.  The Adjudicator's approach appears to  have  overlooked  the
     fact that the Claimant is capable of work in Kosovo.  Indeed, there is
     no evidence (as far as we are aware)  that  he  is  in  any  different
     position from any  other  ethnic  Albanian  for  these  purposes.   In
     addition, whilst as a  failed  asylum  seeker,  the  Claimant  may  be
     subject to restrictions on his ability to work, no  such  restrictions
     would apply on his being granted leave to enter under paragraph 246.

  6.  Nevertheless,  the  Adjudicator  found  in  paragraph   24   of   the
     determination that the Claimant would have  considerable  difficulties
     meeting the requirements regarding maintenance and accommodation under
     paragraph 246 of HC 395 in the short or medium term.  As a result, she
     decided that there would be a break in the regular contact  which  the
     Claimant now has with [      ] in United Kingdom.  The Adjudicator was
     entitled to take into account the age of the child.  She was  entitled
     to accept as credible the evidence that  the  Claimant  had  formed  a
     close and affectionate relationship with  Lisa  as  a  result  of  the
     regular contact and his active involvement in  the  child's  care  and
     development.  The Adjudicator regarded a two-year-old child  as  being
     in particular need of contact, although it is arguable that  the  same
     might apply to a child of almost any age.

  7. As a result of the need to maintain contact  with  his  daughter,  the
     Adjudicator concluded that it would be a violation of  the  Claimant's
     Article 8 rights for him  to  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.
     Accordingly, she allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.   In
     reaching this conclusion, it is apparent that the Adjudicator was  not
     concerned to consider whether the Claimant could  or  should  make  an
     application for  entry  clearance  on  the  basis  of  satisfying  the
     requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Instead,  the  Adjudicator
     appears to have accepted that the Claimant was unable to satisfy those
     requirements.  Accordingly, the Adjudicator used Article 8 as a  means
     of circumventing the Rules.

  8. The Secretary of State appeals.  He relies upon the  decision  of  the
     Court of Appeal as expressed by the Master of  the  Rolls  in  Mahmood
     [2001] Imm AR 229.  In paragraph 65 of the judgment, the Master of the
     Rolls says:

           "I do not consider the possibility that his application may  not
           succeed is any reason for excusing him from the  requirement  to
           make an application  from  outside  the  country  if  he  wishes
           permission to settle here with his wife and family."

      It is suggested that, by parity of reasoning, the same  consideration
     applies in the instant appeal.  If the Claimant is unable to make  out
     his case under the provisions of the Immigration Rules, there is every
     reason to reject his claim  on  human  rights  grounds.   Rather  than
     allowing it, as the Adjudicator did, it is argued that the  fact  that
     the Claimant is likely to fail under the Rules  is  reason  enough  to
     find that his removal is not disproportionate.


  9. Part 7 of the Immigration Rules include provisions for persons to seek
     leave to enter or remain in United Kingdom in order to exercise rights
     of access to a child resident in United Kingdom.  The requirements for
     leave to enter are set out in paragraph 246:
           246. The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  leave  to
           enter the United Kingdom to exercise access rights  to  a  child
           resident in the United Kingdom are that:
           (i) the applicant is the parent of a child who  is  resident  in
                 the United Kingdom; and
           (ii) the parent or carer with whom the child permanently resides
                 is resident in the United Kingdom; and
           (iii) the applicant produces evidence that he has access  rights
                 to the child in the form of:
                       (a) a Residence Order or a Contact Order granted by a
                       Court in the United Kingdom;...and
           (iv) the applicant intends to take an active role in the child's
           upbringing; and
           (v) the child is under the age of 18; and
           (vi) there will be adequate accommodation for the applicant  and
                 any  dependants  without  recourse  to  public   funds   in
                 accommodation  which  the  applicant   owns   or   occupies
                 exclusively; and
           (vii) the applicant will be able to  maintain  himself  and  any
                 dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and


           (viii)  the  applicant  holds  a  valid  United  Kingdom   entry
      clearance              for entry in this capacity.


 10.  It is apparent from the foregoing  that  an  application  made  under
     paragraph 246 should be made out-of-country.  Where there is a  viable
     option of making an application from abroad for entry clearance  under
     the Immigration Rules,  this  is  usually  sufficient  to  render  the
     removal proportionate and it will only be in exceptional circumstances
     that the decision will not be  so.   See  Baljit  Singh  [2002]  UKIAT
     00660, (Dr H. H. Storey, Chairman).  This accords with the decision of
     the Court of Appeal in Mahmood [2001] Imm AR 229 in which Laws LJ said
     at paragraph 23 of the judgment that, if it were not so,

           "... it would be manifestly unfair to other  would-the  entrants
           who are content to take their place in the entry clearance queue
           in their country of origin."


 11. There does not appear to be any doubt that the Claimant is  likely  to
     establish the requirements of sub-paragraphs  246  (i),  (ii),  (iii),
     (iv) and (v).   It  was  only  in  relation  to  the  maintenance  and
     accommodation requirements set out in sub-paragraphs  (vi)  and  (vii)
     that the Adjudicator considered the Claimant was at risk  of  failure.
     Her reason for reaching this conclusion appears to be  because,  under
     the terms of his present temporary admission,  he  is  precluded  from
     finding work.  In our judgment, there is no reason to assume  he  will
     be prevented from working if he is granted admission  under  paragraph
     246.  Indeed, we would have thought that  anybody  seeking  settlement
     under the Immigration Rules must, by implication, be entitled to work.
     Consequently, we consider the Adjudicator was in error in her  finding
     that the Claimant was unlikely to establish the  requirements  of  the
     rules because he is presently unable to work.  We do not consider that
     the Adjudicator was entitled to rely upon the fact that  the  Claimant
     sold his land in order to finance his journey to  the  United  Kingdom
     and is, therefore, without assets in Kosovo.  We were not told of  any
     credible evidence that the Claimant cannot  find  work  sufficient  to
     fund his journey  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  we  do  not
     consider that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  that  the  Claimant  is
     unlikely to establish the requirements of the rules is sustainable for
     the reasons given by her.

 12. There is, however, in our judgment, another more important reason  why
     the Adjudicator was in error in seeking to use Article 8 to circumvent
     the provisions of the Immigration Rules.   Paragraph  246  as  it  now
     stands came into force on 2 October 2000, the same day as the European
     Human Rights Convention was made part of English domestic  law.   This
     strongly suggests that paragraph 246 was a  recognition  that  persons
     wishing to exercise rights of access to  their  children  resident  in
     United Kingdom should be permitted to do so pursuant to their  Article
     8 rights to enjoy a family or private life.  In our judgment, however,
     that does not mean those seeking leave to  enter  have  an  unfettered
     right to do so.  It is a proportionate response on  the  part  of  the
     government  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  make  the  right  of   entry
     conditional upon establishing entry  requirements.   The  right  of  a
     father to settle in the United Kingdom in order  to  maintain  contact
     with his child is different in character  to  his  right  to  visit  a
     child.  This enlarged right has  to  be  balanced  against  the  wider
     purpose of maintaining immigration control.  The  Adjudicator  appears
     to have given no significant weight to this aspect of the  appeal  and
     to have concentrated exclusively on the position of the  Claimant  and
     his daughter.

 13. It seems to us that the requirement in the Immigration  Rules  that  a
     father in the position of the  Claimant  should  be  allowed  to  join
     daughter on condition that his entry into the  United  Kingdom  should
     not  be  an  added  burden  upon  the  United  Kingdom   taxpayer   is
     proportionate and proper, in the sense that it does not violate either
     the child's or the father's human rights.   It  is  to  be  noted,  of
     course,  that  paragraph  2  of  the  Rules  sets  down  the  specific
     requirement that the Rules should be applied  in  such  a  way  as  to
     comply with the parties' human rights. That is  a  far  cry,  however,
     from saying that the Rules themselves should be rewritten or,  in  the
     context of  the  present  appeal,  that  the  maintenance  requirement
     omitted altogether. We see it difficult to envisage the  circumstances
     in which an applicant's human rights require  he  be  given  leave  to
     enter or remain in circumstances that are contrary to the  Immigration
     Rules which have, themselves, been drafted with the intention  that  a
     fair  balance  is  struck  between  the  rights  of  the  parties  and
     reasonable restrictions made upon entry clearance in order to protect,
     amongst  other  things,  the  State  and  the  taxpayer   from   being
     overburdened.

 14. In cases where  there  is  a  viable  option  of  applying  under  the
     Immigration Rules, it is likely to be extremely rare that the Claimant
     will succeed under the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  though
     likely to fail  under  the  Rules.   In  our  judgment,  there  is  an
     additional reason why an applicant should seek to  make  out  a  claim
     under the Rules, rather than under the ECHR.  Where leave to enter  or
     remain is sought, the primary decision-maker is either  the  Secretary
     of State or the Entry Clearance Officer.  It  is  open  to  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer to interview  the  applicant  and  require  that  he
     provides documentary evidence in support of his application.  In cases
     where the application is  made  out-of-country,  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer will often have valuable local knowledge that  an  Adjudicator
     will not possess.   In many cases, the assessment of  the  facts  will
     often best be made by the primary decision maker.  We do not  consider
     that, where there is a viable application under the Rules, whether in-
     or out-of-country, the Adjudicator should  seek  to  second-guess  the
     decision in an entry clearance case under the umbrella of an Article 8
     claim.  It has to be remembered that if the Entry Clearance Officer or
     the Secretary of State is in error,  the  applicant  has  an  in-built
     right of appeal as well as a right to require that any  decision  made
     complies with his human rights.

 15. We accept in the circumstances of this appeal that it is important for
     the Claimant to maintain  contact  with  his  daughter.   We  are,  of
     course, unable to reach any conclusion as  to  what  is  in  the  best
     interests of the child.  All the more so since we have not heard  from
     the mother, nor from those reporting to the Family  Court  as  to  the
     advisability of contact.  For our purposes,  it  is  quite  sufficient
     that there is a Contact Order.  The Immigration Rules provide a  means
     by which this Claimant may seek to maintain contact with his daughter.
      In our judgment, there is no reason to think that the Rules, properly
     applied, will not result in a decision that  adequately  reflects  the
     competing interests of the Claimant and his daughter on the  one  hand
     and the social and economic interests implicit in immigration  control
     on the other.   The Adjudicator, whilst considering the former did not
     properly assess the importance of the latter.  We do not consider,  as
     the Adjudicator did, that a period of separation  between  father  and
     daughter was decisive in allowing the appeal in the Claimant's favour.
      It is, of course, preferable that decisions of this nature  are  best
     made sooner rather than later.  That said, however, the Tribunal is in
     no position to know whether the urgency in this case  is  any  greater
     than in other cases that Entry Clearance Officers have to decide, many
     of which will have similar calls made for a swift determination.

 16. We are satisfied that the Adjudicator reached the wrong conclusion  in
     allowing this appeal under Article 8.  Accordingly, the appeal of  the
     Secretary of State is allowed.









                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                        Approved for electronic distribution

