

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |RS (Hezbe Islami - expert   |
|                           |        |evidence) Afghanistan [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00278                 |
|Date:  29 July 2004        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|30 September 2004                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Vice President)                                   |
|His Honour Judge Huskinson (Vice President)                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  has  been  given
      permission to appeal the determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M  T
      Sykes, dismissing on both Refugee Convention and human rights  grounds
      his appeal against the respondent's decision to  give  directions  for
      his removal from the United Kingdom following the refusal of asylum.

2.    Ms J Leivesley of Counsel instructed  by  Lawrence  &  Co,  Solicitors
      appeared for the appellant.  The appellant attended the hearing.  Mr L
      Parker, a Home Office Presenting Officer, represented the  respondent.



3.    The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  illegally  on  28  June
      2003.   He applied for asylum that day.   Illegal  entry  papers  were
      served on 28 June 2003.  The notice containing  the  decision  against
      which he appeals is dated 15 October 2003.   The Adjudicator heard the
      appeal on 19 December 2003 and permission to appeal was granted  on  1
      March 2004.

4.    The appellant's  claim  was  based  on  his  fear  of  persecution  if
      returned to Afghanistan because of his membership of Hezbe Islami  and
      his brother's high profile within Hezbe Islami.

5.    In paragraph 16 of the determination the Adjudicator said,

      "16.  Although I accept that the appellant and his brother were  Hezbi
           Islami party members and that his brother was  a  commander  who
           had a position of prominence, I  do  not  find  the  appellant's
           account of his arrest and detention credible."


6.    The Adjudicator set out more detailed conclusions and the reasons  for
      them in paragraphs 17 to 24 of  the  determination  in  the  following
      terms,

      "17.  The  appellant  says  that  after  the  incident  involving  the
           surrender  of  the  weapons  to  the  Taliban  in  October  1996
           'Following  this  my  brother  and  I  abandoned  our  political
           activities.  My brother began to farm on his land.  I set  up  a
           shop in Jalalabad. We did not have any further problems with the
           Taliban. We led a very  peaceful  life."  (paragraph  6  of  his
           statement at B3).  He  expands  on  this  in  his  interview  at
           question 45 at D11  where  he  says  in  relation  to  the  1996
           incident: 'Actually Hezbi Islami ceased to exist after that, the
           leadership and the party organisation was no more there.  We had
           no choice to remain in the party after that,  but  traditionally
           in Afghanistan once you join a group or party  then  the  people
           will consider you a member of that party till the end.   We  did
           not leave the party as such but it was no more functional.'


      18.   The appellant does not say that he or his brother had  any  more
           involvement  with  politics  in  general  or  Hezbi  Islami   in
           particular between then and 1 February 2003 when they were  both
           detained and the appellant was interrogated about his  brother's
           activities.  He relates the interest in them to the hostility of
           the Northern Alliance  following  the  declaration  of  a  jihad
           against foreign troops by the leader of the Hezbi Islami  party,
           Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.


      19.   The CIPU report says this about the Hezbi Islami party at  Annex
           B:


           'Hisb-i Islami Gulbuddin (Islamic Party Gulbuddin)


           Pashtun/Turkmen/Tajik;  led  by  Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar.   Radical
           Islamist, controlled few military or political resources in June
           2001.  In December 2002  Hekmatyar  issued  holy  jihad  against
           foreign troops.  According to reports his whereabouts are  still
           unknown after he was expelled from Iran in summer of 2002. There
           are however reports that he is in Afghanistan.  In January  2003
           it was reported that the expelled Taliban regime  had  regrouped
           and allied itself to Hekmatyar. Reports of an  alliance  between
           Hizb-i-Islami and the Taliban were denied by  Taliban  officials
           and supporters of Hekmatyar.  In August  2003  it  was  reported
           that Hizb-i-Islami are one of the groups believed to  have  been
           responsible for  a  spate  of  attacks  on  Afghan  and  Western
           government, military and humanitarian targets.'


           And says this about Gulbuddin Hekmatyar at Annex C:


           'HEKMATYAR (Engineer) Gulbuddin


           Leader  of  Hizb-i-Islami  Gulbuddin.   Prime   Minister   1996.
           Hekmatyar was at  one  time  supported  by  Pakistan  and  Saudi
           Arabia, but eventually Pakistan turned against him preferring to
           give support to the  Taliban.  Hekmatyar  fled  Kabul  when  the
           Taliban swept to power and was given  refuge  by  the  Iranians.
           His  vocal  opposition  to  the  new  president  Karzai  was  an
           embarrassment to the Iranian  government  who  expelled  him  in
           February 2002 and closed his offices in Tehran.  A number of his
           supporters were detained in  Kabul  in  April  2002  accused  of
           conspiring to plant bombs.  Hekmatyar  himself  remains  elusive
           although there are reports that he is in Afghanistan.'


      20.   I acknowledge that if the appellant or his brother had supported
           the resuscitated Hezbi Islami party  and  more  particularly  if
           they had been publicly active on its  behalf,  they  might  well
           have attracted the adverse attention of  the  Northern  Alliance
           and indeed of coalition forces.  I  do  not  find  it  credible,
           however that more  than  five  years  after  their  last  active
           involvement with the party, the Northern  Alliance  should  have
           decided to arrest and detain them.


      21.   I note further that the alleged arrests took place10  months  or
           so after the arrests of his supporters accused of conspiring  to
           plant bombs.  It seems to me that if prominent former members of
           Hezbi Islami were considered to be worthy of attention as  such,
           then the appellant's  brother  would  have  been  detained  much
           sooner, in  April  2002  or  thereabouts,  the  time  the  party
           supporters were detained in Kabul.


      22.   It also seems to me that the appellant  and  his  brother  would
           have had some warning signs that this was likely to happen.   He
           says in paragraph 7 on B4 that incidents in their own area,  the
           bomb explosion in Jalalabad and the rocket attack  on  Jalalabad
           airport, were also blamed on the Hezbi  Islami,  and  that  'All
           this worried my brother and I as we did not know how this  would
           affect us', but he does not say that people who  had  previously
           been prominent Hezbi Islami members were being arrested. If,  as
           he says at question 12 on D4, about 60% of  the  people  in  his
           village supported Hezbi Islami earlier,  there  must  have  been
           many more people like his brother who  had  been  commanders  or
           better and who had held positions of authority  who  would  also
           have been  of  interest  to  the  authorities  from  early  2002
           onwards, yet he does not mention any other such detentions.


      23.   Nor, and much more importantly of course, as  far as I am  aware
           are there any reports of such detentions of previously prominent
           Hezbi Islami members. The report of the arrests in April 2002 in
           Kabul make it clear that it was current supporters of  Gulbuddin
           Hekmatyar who were being detained (see  the  CIPU  report  about
           Hekmatyar quoted above  and  the  report  at  page  299  of  the
           appellant's bundle 'Last week, authorities arrested at least 160
           people accused of plotting to undermine the government of  Prime
           Minister Hamid Karzai - most  of  them  members  of  Hekmatyar's
           Hezbi Islami party.  As of Thursday, about 100 remain  in  jail,
           officials said.').


      24.   For these reasons I do not find the appellant credible and I  do
           not consider that he would be at any risk on his return  to  his
           home area for the reasons he states in connection with the Hezbi
           Islami Party."


6.    The two grounds of appeal are that,

      "1.   The Adjudicator erred in finding the appellant's account of  his
           arrest and detention was not credible due to


           i)    the five year gap in his support for the party during  the
                 Taliban regime;


           ii)   the fact that the appellant was  not  arrested  closer  to
                 April 2002; and


           iii)  the fact that only current members were of interest to the
                 authorities.


      2.    The Adjudicator has failed to  consider  whether  membership  of
           Hezbe  Islami  alone  would  be  enough  to  found  a  fear   of
           persecution given the  increasing  acts  of  violence  allegedly
           committed by the group during 2003."


7.    Permission was granted in the following terms,

           "Permission is given under r.18.4b of the  Procedure  Rules,  so
           the Tribunal can consider generally  the  evidence  relating  to
           risk on return for  members  or  former  members  of  the  Hezbe
           Islami.  Since Dr Lau is to  be  called,  the  hearing  will  be
           listed in London."


8.    We have an appellant's bundle running to  five  hundred  and  eighteen
      pages, a chronology, Dr Lau's expert opinion dated 14 July 2004  and,
      from the Home  Office,  the  April  2004  CIPU  Report,  the  Tribunal
      determination [2003] UKIAT 00088 S and the Danish report of June 2004,
      the last being an update of the Danish report of March 2003 which  was
      before the Adjudicator.

9.    Dr Lau attended and gave  evidence.   He  adopted  his  report  before
      answering a number of supplementary questions and  then  being  cross-
      examined at some length by Mr Parker.   Ms Leivesley  submitted  that
      insofar as the Adjudicator did not accept the appellant's  account  of
      events his  findings  of  fact  were  not  supported  by  the  country
      information.  She argued that the partial adverse credibility  finding
      was flawed and, in the circumstances,  we  should  remit  for  hearing
      afresh before a different Adjudicator. She submitted that we could not
      repair the error.  She argued and we find that the Adjudicator gave no
      reasons for rejecting some elements of the appellant's  account  other
      than by reference to the country information.  Mr Parker asked  us  to
      dismiss the appeal on the basis that the Adjudicator reached  findings
      of fact which were open to him on the evidence.

10.   The Adjudicator deals with the appellant and  his  brother  giving  up
      their political activities with Hezbe Islami  between  late  1996  and
      their claimed arrest  in  February  2003  in  the  paragraphs  of  his
      determination which we  have  set  out,  reaching  the  conclusion  in
      paragraph 20 that he did not find it  credible  that  more  than  five
      years after their last active involvement with the party the  Northern
      Alliance should have decided to arrest and detain them.

11.   Having read his report, noted his qualifications and  heard  him  give
      evidence we find Dr Lau to be an impressive, authoritative and careful
      expert witness.  We give considerable weight to his opinions.  Indeed,
      except for one point where Mr Parker suggested we  should  prefer  the
      Danish Report, he did not suggest we should give any less weight to Dr
      Lau's opinions.

12.   Dr Lau's opinion merits inclusion in full.   He states:

      "1)   I have been instructed by Lawrence & Co, Solicitors, to  provide
           an expert opinion  on  the  legal  and  political  situation  in
           Afghanistan on behalf of their client Mr Rahim Sherzad.


      Qualifications


      2)    I am a Barrister and the Head  of  the  Law  Department  of  the
           School of Oriental and African Studies,  University  of  London,
           where I teach courses on South Asian law  at  both  postgraduate
           and undergraduate level.  I hold academic qualifications in  law
           and in South Asian history from the University of Heidelberg and
           the University of London.  I am  the  Deputy  Secretary  of  the
           British Association of Pakistan Studies and was the Director  of
           the Centre of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law from April 1995  to
           March 1998.  I am the Chief Examiner  for  Islamic  Law  of  the
           External LLB of the University of London.  My  current  position
           involves intensive research on modern Afghan and Pakistani law.


      3)    I have visited Afghanistan five times in the past two years.  In
           January of this year I visited Heart and Kabul on behalf of  the
           German office in connection with consultations on  Afghanistan's
           new constitution.  In July 2003 I held a series of workshops  on
           the reform of Afghanistan's criminal procedure law on behalf  of
           the US Institute of Peace and the International Resources Group.
           The governmental partners in Afghanistan were  the  Ministry  of
           Interior, the Office of the State  Prosecutor  and  the  Supreme
           Court.  On previous occasions I carried  out  an  evaluation  of
           Afghanistan's  legal  system  on  behalf  of  the  International
           Commission of Jurists, Geneva.  In the course of  my  visits  to
           Afghanistan I  have  met  with  many  judges,  police  officers,
           prosecutors and lawyers as well as with NGOs, UN  officials  and
           government officials.


      4)    In the beginning of May 203 I organized a  conference  on  legal
           education in Afghanistan on behalf of the German government  and
           was able to meet inter alia the Chief Justice of Afghanistan and
           the country's Minister of Justice.


      5)    The opinions expressed in this report are based on my experience
           of working on Afghan legal issues including human rights and the
           assessment of the dynamics of law enforcement.


      6)    I am aware of the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  relating  to  expert
           evidence (SI 1998 No. 3131) and I understand that as  an  expert
           witness I owe an overriding duty to this Court  rather  than  to
           those instructing me.


      Opinion


      7)    I have seen a copy of the appellant's statements in  support  of
           his case, a copy of the  Refusal  Letter  of  the  Secretary  of
           State, a copy of the appeal statement and a copy of the  reasons
           to grant leave to appeal to the IAT.


      8)    The background to this  matter  is  set  out  in  the  documents
           mentioned above.  Mr Sherzad was  arrested  by  members  of  the
           Northern  Alliance  in  February  2003  apparently   under   the
           suspicion of having worked for the opposition. His  brother  and
           he himself were members of the Hezb-I-Islami.


      9)    Both the IAT and the Home Office have been referred to objective
           reports on Afghanistan and in this opinion I  shall  not  repeat
           the same.  The main reason for the decision to permit an  appeal
           was  'so  the  Tribunal  can  consider  generally  the  evidence
           relating to the risk for members or former members of the Hezb e-
           Islami.' In this regard I have been asked by  those  instructing
           me to deal with several issues.


      10)   Firstly, I have been  asked  whether  Mr  Sherzad's  account  of
           events is plausible.  In my opinion it  is.   I  note  that  one
           reason for doubting the veracity of the appellant's account  was
           the timing of the events,  in  particular,  the  timing  of  the
           arrest which occurred long after the  two  brothers  had  ceased
           their respective activities for the Hezb-Islami  and  some  time
           after a spate of arrests of  members  of  that  party  following
           several acts of terrorism.


      11)   The war against terrorism in  Afghanistan  is  being  fought  by
           numerous agencies and groups. It is fought largely in secret and
           has so far stayed clear  of  Afghanistan's  legal  system.   The
           silence of the objective evidence  on  the  trial  of  suspected
           terrorists,  of  the  rate  of  those  arrested   as   suspected
           terrorists,  indeed  the  almost   complete   absence   of   any
           information in the  public  domain  on  the  number  of  persons
           arrested because they are accused of being  associated  with  Al
           Qaeda, the Taliban and Hezb-I-Islami is  deceptive.   Occasional
           newspaper reports reveal  that  arrests  and  interrogations  of
           suspects take place on a very regular basis. They are carried by
           Afghan internal security and intelligence agencies, US  agencies
           and even private mercenaries cooperating  with  members  of  the
           Northern Alliance.  Last week an American mercenary was arrested
           in Kabul: five Afghans, strung up  by  their  feet,  were  found
           hanging in the living room of his bungalow in Wazir Khan, a very
           up-market residential area of Kabul.  It appeared  that  he  was
           trying  to  get  information  from  the  five  men   about   the
           whereabouts of Osama Bin Laden and other terrorists.


      12)   In my opinion, the timing of the arrests does  not  in  any  way
           indicate that the appellant has made it up and  in  my  opinion,
           based on my knowledge of the events in Afghanistan, his  account
           is plausible.


      13)   Secondly, I have been  asked  whether  his  continuing  fear  of
           return to Afghanistan for reasons given  in  his  statement  are
           well-founded.  In my opinion the most serious risk  arises  from
           his association with the Hezb-I-Islami.  The  group  is  without
           doubt a very  dangerous  terrorist  organization  determined  to
           attack  and  destroy  the  current  government   and   to   turn
           Afghanistan into a 'pure' Islamic state.  Its leader is believed
           to be hiding in Afghanistan and despite concerted efforts he has
           not  been  apprehended.   His  group  continues  to  carry   out
           terrorist attacks.


      14)   In my opinion it is difficult to discount the  appellant's  fear
           as irrational only because his own association with the  Hezb-I-
           islami ceased some time ago.  It appears  that  members  of  the
           Northern Alliance think otherwise, as evidenced by  his  arrest,
           interrogation and mistreatment. I am not  aware  of  any  public
           trials of suspected terrorists and thus  there  is  no  judicial
           forum for him to protest his innocence.  Given  the  substantial
           financial rewards for  information  leading  to  the  arrest  of
           suspected  terrorists  promised  by  the  US  there   is   ample
           motivation to 'test' the knowledge of anyone who is believed  to
           have been  close  to  the  Hezb-I-lslami.   In  my  opinion  the
           appellant's fear in this regard is well-founded.


      15)   I am, however, not so pessimistic about any risk arising from  a
           perception that he might have become  'Westernised'  during  his
           stay  in  the  UK.   Numerous  Afghans  work  for  Western   and
           international agencies in Afghanistan. Many wear Western  dress,
           speak English in the course of their work and receive Western tv
           programmes via satellite in the evenings.   At  least  in  Kabul
           none of them have come to harm on that account.   The  situation
           is different outside Kabul where a number of Afghans working for
           aid agencies  have  been  killed.   However,  they  were  killed
           because of  their  cooperation  with  the  'enemy'  rather  than
           because they were perceived to have converted from Islam or  had
           ceased to be Muslims.


      16)   Thirdly, I have been asked to comment on the availability of the
           option of internal flight. In  my  opinion  internal  flight  in
           Afghanistan  is  very  problematic.   The   country's   societal
           structure is very tribal in nature and it  is  most  problematic
           for an outsider to fit into an area where he has no  family  and
           relatives.  The economic problems, especially  the  scarcity  of
           land, have made communities hostile to outsiders. Even returning
           refugees trying to reclaim land  which  used  to  be  owned  and
           occupied by them prior to leaving the  country  are  finding  it
           very difficult to settle in their areas of  origin.  A  complete
           outsider would find it almost impossible. Ethnic tensions  would
           also work against him:  recent  country  reports  indicate  that
           Pashtun minorities continue to be harassed  and  intimidated  in
           the North.


      17)   Fourthly, I have been asked to comment on  the  ability  of  the
           government to protect him.  I think that the current  government
           has little interest in protecting suspected  terrorist.  In  any
           event, the legal system is virtually  non-existent  and  I  very
           much doubt that it  would  be  able  to  protect  the  appellant
           against threats from within the Northern Alliance. The state  of
           the legal system  and  the  law  enforcement  agencies  is  well
           documented.  I  am  personally  involved  in  the  attempts   to
           reconstruct and rebuild the country's legal  system  and  in  my
           opinion there is little chance of any effective protection being
           provided currently.  It should  be  added  that  ISAF  does  not
           protect  individuals  but  assists   the   government   in   the
           implementation of the Bonn Agreement. Its presence in Kabul has,
           however, improved the security situation in Kabul significantly.


      18)   I believe that the facts I have stated in this report  are  true
           and that the opinions I have expressed are correct."


13.   Whilst the Adjudicator concluded  that  more  than  five  years  after
      their last active involvement with Hezbe Islami the Northern  Alliance
      were not likely to have decided to arrest and detain the appellant and
      his brother, the appellant's evidence  was  that  once  an  individual
      joined a group or party then others considered that he  was  a  member
      "till the end".   This is a credible assertion  in  the  light  of  Dr
      Lau's oral evidence that the appellant's home area was well known  for
      its support of Hezbe Islami and that the enormous rewards  offered  by
      the United States for senior members of Hezbe Islami, the Taliban  and
      Al Qaeda mean that regular and irregular forces and  even  individuals
      and groups of mercenaries  have  a  strong  incentive  to  detain  and
      question those thought or known to have  been  associated  with  Hezbe
      Islami, even if there is no recent evidence  of  involvement.   It  is
      clear that Hezbe Islami is a secretive organisation.   It is  unlikely
      that those currently  associated  with  Hezbe  islami  would  wish  to
      publicise their involvement.  They are more likely  to  do  everything
      possible to hide it.   Against this background, known low-level former
      supporters are still likely to be at risk, particularly if,  like  the
      appellant, they had  a  brother  who  was  known  as  a  Hezbe  Islami
      commander.

14.   In paragraph 21 of the determination the Adjudicator  argues  that  if
      prominent members of Hezbe Islami were detained in Kabul in April 2002
      it is not likely that the appellant or his brother would not have been
      detained until February 2003.   We find that the Adjudicator is making
      a false comparison.  It does not follow that  the  appellant  and  his
      brother were arrested in February 2003 because  of  what  happened  in
      Kabul in April 2002.   The appellant did not claim  that  he  and  his
      brother were arrested because of what happened in Kabul. He said  that
      they were arrested, some considerable distance from Kabul, in his home
      area, because of the efforts of the Northern Alliance to  "combat  and
      get rid of those opposing them"  in  particular  those  involved  with
      Hezbe Islami.   The point made by the Adjudicator does not go  to  the
      appellant's credibility.

15.   It is not clear whether what the Adjudicator is  saying  in  paragraph
      22 of the determination, that the appellant and his brother would have
      been likely to have some warning that they were going to be  arrested,
      was intended to be a point  going  to  credibility.   The  Adjudicator
      draws  no  direct  adverse  conclusion.   However,  assuming  that  he
      intended that an adverse inference should be drawn, we do not consider
      it justified.  Whilst the evidence indicates that  the  appellant  and
      his brother may have known that  their  past  association  with  Hezbe
      Islami could at  some  time  have  adverse  consequences,  it  is  not
      suggested that there were any immediate warning  signs,  certainly  in
      their area, to which they should have paid heed.   It  is  speculation
      on the part of the Adjudicator, not supported by  any  evidence,  that
      there must have been many more people in the appellant's village, like
      his brother, who had been commanders or  who  had  held  positions  of
      authority with Hezbe Islami.

16.   Mr Parker took us  to  the  following  passages  in  the  Danish  Fact
      Finding Mission Report between 20 March and 2 April 2004 at  pages  66
      and 67.

            "The source  was  of  the  opinion  that  individuals  who  were
           included as earlier supporters of Hezbe Islami including  former
           Hezbe Islami commanders  do  not  have  any  problems  with  the
           government in Afghanistan at the present time if  they  make  it
           clear that they do  not  work  with  Hekmatyar.    Some  of  the
           earlier Hezbe Islami members occupy high  positions  within  the
           government.  As an example the source mentioned that Hekmatyar's
           former right hand man currently holds a  high  position  in  the
           government.  The source added that it depends  on  the  person's
           history whether a former Hezbe Islami  member  runs  a  risk  of
           being persecuted at present in Afghanistan.


            Hezbe Islami earlier had a lot of civil servants connected  with
           them, and the source added that President Karzai has decided  to
           involve such former Hezbe Islami officials into the  government.
           President Karzai has among other things appointed various former
           Hekmatyar supporters as governors.  The question as to whether a
           member of Hezbe Islami runs a risk of being  persecuted  depends
           on the connection of the person involved with Hekmatyar  and  to
           what extent the person concerned  has  conflicts  with  powerful
           people in Afghanistan.


           Unama had knowledge of  a  case  in  which  a  person  had  been
           captured by the ANA and was  accused  of  being  connected  with
           Hezbe Islami.  The person was freed because his brother was able
           to prove to the ANA  that  the  person  in  question  no  longer
           supported Hezbe Islami.   The source stated that if the security
           forces believe that one has  connections  to  Hezbe  Islami  one
           risks arrest. There is also a risk that people accuse others  of
           having connections to Hekmatyar for personal motives.


           ICG was of the opinion that  Hezbe  Islami  does  not  exist  at
           present as an actual party, but on the  other  hand  is  a  lose
           structure of individual levers of armed groups.   The source was
           also of the opinion that the Hekmatyar faction of  Hezbe  Islami
           cannot be regarded as an appreciable factor  in  the  resistance
           against the government, but rather as an irritation....   People
           who at  the  present  time  are  active  for  Hezbe  Islami  are
           considered as being at war against the present government  on  a
           par with the Taliban supporters.  They  would  not  be  able  to
           remain in the country without problems."


17.   Mr Parker argued that after five years  of  not  being  involved  with
      Hezbe Islami those who lived in the appellant's home  area  would  not
      believe that he and his brother were still active. This may or may not
      be correct.  Our attention has not been drawn to any  questions  asked
      of the appellant about this.   However, even if those who lived in the
      area did not suspect  the  appellant  and  his  brother  of  continued
      involvement with Hezbe Islami it does not  mean  that  those  involved
      with the Northern Alliance would have any reason to come to a  similar
      conclusion, particularly if they suspected that  many  people  in  the
      appellant's area were, as Dr Lau said, likely  to  be  involved  with
      Hezbe  Islami.   The  appellant's  brother's  involvement  with  Hezbe
      Islami, as a commander, is likely to mean that he  was  known  outside
      his home area.

18.   The Danish report contains not wholly consistent  assessments  of  the
      risk facing those involved with Hezbe Islami.  At one point it is said
      that supporters do not have problems with the government if they  make
      it clear that they do not work with Hekmatyar.   Some  former  members
      occupy high positions in the government.  It is said that the question
      of whether a former member of Hezbe Islami is at risk  of  persecution
      depends on his individual history.  It is said that  risk  depends  on
      the connection of the person concerned  with  Hekmatyar  and  to  what
      extent that person has  been  in  conflict  with  powerful  people  in
      Afghanistan.   Finally, it is said that people who are at the  present
      time active for Hezbe Islami are considered as being  at  war  against
      the government and on a par with Taliban  supporters.   In  a  country
      where the rule of law has  broken  down  and  there  is  no  realistic
      prospect of an  individual  establishing  his  innocence  through  due
      process, where there are incentives  to  detain  and  ill-treat  those
      suspected of involvement with Hezbe Islami in the  hope  of  obtaining
      information which may lead to senior wanted men and enormous  rewards,
      there is a real risk that not only those who are genuinely active  for
      Hezbe Islami  but  those  suspected  of  such  involvement,  past  and
      present, face similar risks.

19.   The Danish report contains varying indications.   Dr Lau is  clear  in
      his conclusions.   On the particular facts of the appellant's case  he
      believes that his fear is well-founded.   Normally we  might  consider
      that an expert was usurping the functions of  an  Adjudicator  or  the
      Tribunal in reaching such a conclusion.  However, we find that Dr  Lau
      has reached his conclusions through proper reasoning and  an  informed
      assessment of country conditions.

20.    The  partial  adverse  credibility  finding  is  unsafe.   In   these
      circumstances, both representatives agreed that the findings  of  fact
      were unsafe and we were in no position to remedy  the  error.   A  new
      hearing is required so that clear findings of fact can be made.

21.   Because of the conclusion that we  must  remit  this  will  not  be  a
      country guidance case but it is reported for the information  relating
      to Hezbe Islami and in particular the opinions of Dr Lau.





                                                                 P R Moulden
                                                              Vice President






