

                      BT (Former solicitors' alleged misconduct) Nepal
[2004] UKIAT 00311
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 14 September 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                               Date Determination notified: 25 November 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms S K Tucker of Asghar & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations about  the  conduct
of former representatives, there must be  evidence  that  those  allegations
have been put to the former representative, and the Tribunal must  be  shown
either the response or correspondence indicating  that  there  has  been  no
response.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nepal, appeals, with  permission,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr C  C  Wright,  dismissing  her
     appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  on  28  February  2003
     refusing her leave to enter after refusing asylum.  Her appeal to  the
     Adjudicator was on asylum and human  rights  grounds.   Permission  to
     appeal was refused by the Tribunal but granted  on  Statutory  Review,
     the judge remarking that the  Adjudicator's  determination  failed  to
     indicate an independent approach  to  the  material  before  him,  but
     rather appeared to adopt the reasoning of the Secretary  of  State  in
     refusing the Appellant's application.

  2. Before us, two matters  have  been  mentioned,  one  relating  to  the
     procedure before the Adjudicator and the other, as expected,  relating
     to the Adjudicator's determination.  Ms Tucker, who  appears  for  the
     Appellant, now represented by a firm of solicitors which is her third,
     at least, tells us that  the  Appellant  did  not  appear  before  the
     Adjudicator because she was let down by a previous firm of solicitors,
     Adams Solicitors of 129 Mile End Road, London E1.

  3. The history of that firm's engagement in the appeal appears  from  the
     Authority's file to be as follows.   They  replaced  another  firm  of
     solicitors and wrote to the Authority on 18 July 2003  asserting  that
     they had been authorised to represent the Appellant at the hearing  of
     the appeal and were satisfied that all necessary financial  and  other
     arrangements had been made to enable them to do so.   However,  on  11
     August 2003, that is to say sixteen days before the hearing before the
     Adjudicator, they wrote again to inform the  Authority  that  they  no
     longer acted for the Appellant and should be removed from  the  record
     as her representative.  When the matter was heard by the  Adjudicator,
     there was no appearance by the Appellant and there was  no  appearance
     by anybody on her behalf.

  4. Ms Tucker asserts that the letter from the solicitors dated 11  August
     was in response to the Appellant's refusal to pay their fees.   We  do
     not know whether or not that is right  and  we  decline  to  make  any
     finding  against  Adams  Solicitors  in  a  case  in  which,  although
     allegations are made implicitly against them, they have been given  no
     opportunity at all to reply to them.  If the  certificate  which  they
     gave in July is true, then the reason for the letter of 11 August may,
     in truth, be that the Appellant had decided no longer to  retain  them
     as her solicitors.  We do not know.

  5. We wish to make it clear that, in general, we will not make a  finding
     of fact based on an allegation against former representatives  unless,
     first, it is clear that the former representatives have been given  an
     opportunity to respond to the allegation which is being made expressly
     or implicitly against them, and secondly,  we  are  either  shown  the
     response or shown correspondence which indicates that there  has  been
     no response.

  6. We pass to the issue which concerned the judge.  The  Adjudicator  was
     faced with a case in which, although he was holding a hearing, neither
     party appeared before him.  In those circumstances, the position under
     the Rules is quite clear.  He is to consider, first  of  all,  whether
     notice of the time and the place of  the  hearing  has  been  properly
     served on the parties.  He is then to consider whether  there  is  any
     satisfactory explanation for the absence of the parties.  If there  is
     no satisfactory explanation, he is obliged to proceed in  the  absence
     of the party in question.  If there is a satisfactory explanation,  he
     retains a discretion as to whether to proceed or not.  In the  present
     circumstances, the Adjudicator went through  that  process  in  a  way
     which we regard as entirely without fault.   In  paragraph  2  of  his
     determination, he sets out the process which he went through and  that
     resulted in his decision that he should proceed in the absence of  the
     parties.

  7. When an Adjudicator is faced with that situation, he must, of  course,
     do all he can to ensure that the  determination  fairly  reflects  the
     input that both the parties have made to the proceedings so  far.   In
     many cases, the absence of the Appellant or any representative  before
     the Adjudicator is quite properly taken as an indication  of  lack  of
     interest in the appeal.   In  those  circumstances,  and  particularly
     where there  are  no  substantive  grounds  of  appeal  or  no  proper
     challenge to what the Secretary of State has said  in  the  letter  of
     refusal, it may well be right for the Adjudicator to record  precisely
     that.  He may say "There has been  no  substantive  challenge  to  the
     conclusions or arguments of the Secretary of State in  the  letter  of
     refusal save in standard form, or save by standard terms, or  save  as
     follows - which I do (or do not) accept".  In those circumstances, his
     determination may read as an acceptance of the  Secretary  of  State's
     reasoning.  In those circumstances, it would be entirely proper for it
     to do so.

  8. Those circumstances, however, are not this case.  The Adjudicator  had
     before him grounds of appeal relating to  asylum  which  ran  to  some
     three pages and were carefully set out as a response to the  Secretary
     of State's letter of  refusal  with  reference  to  facts  which  were
     available to the Secretary of State in reaching his conclusion.   (The
     grounds of appeal relating to  human  rights  are  substantially  less
     material.)  It appears to us that the Adjudicator here erred,  as  the
     judge suspected, in that he  failed  to  take  into  account  all  the
     material that was before him in order to reach his own  assessment  of
     whether the Secretary of State's decision should stand in the light of
     the specific challenges to it  made  in  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
     appeal.

  9. For these reasons, although we regard the  Adjudicator's  decision  to
     proceed in the Appellant's absence as entirely correct, we  are  bound
     to agree with the  judge  that  his  determination  failed  to  engage
     properly with  the  issues  or  show  that  he  had  reached  his  own
     conclusion on the issues which the Appellant specifically raised.  For
     those reasons, we have decided  that  this  appeal  will  have  to  be
     reheard.  We allow this appeal to the Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
     appeal be considered afresh by an Adjudicator other than Mr Wright.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
