

                          AK (Failure to assess witnesses' evidence) Turkey
[2004] UKIAT 00230


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination notified  |
|On: 11 August 2004                                 |                        |
|Prepared: 12 August 2004                           |23 August 2004          |

                                   Before:

                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                                Ms V S Street
                                Mr M L James

Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:           Mr S Taghavi of counsel, instructed by  Hackney
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals  with  permission  against
    the determination of an adjudicator (Mr B M Suchak), sitting at  Taylor
    House, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal on both asylum  and
    human  rights  grounds  against  the  respondent's  decision  to   give
    directions for his removal from United Kingdom as  an  illegal  entrant
    after refusing an application for asylum made by him.

2.    The appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  March  2000.   He
    applied for asylum some three weeks later.  The grounds on which he did
    so were that he and a number of the other members of  his  family  were
    involved with TKP/ML (Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist  Leninist)  and
    TIKKO  (Turkish  Workers  and  Peasants  Liberation  Army),  and  as  a
    consequence he  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  by  the  Turkish
    authorities in the past.  He therefore feared that he would be at  risk
    of further detention and ill-treatment for the same reason if  he  were
    to be returned to Turkey.

3.     In  his  determination,  the  adjudicator  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence in all material respects.  In arriving at that conclusion,  he
    took into account the fact that  the  adjudicator  who  had  heard  the
    appellant's previous asylum appeal had found him to be "totally lacking
    in credibility". He concluded that the appellant had never in fact been
    involved with TKP/ML and TIKKO as claimed.  It was on that  basis  that
    he dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

4.    The appellant's  challenge  to  the  adjudicator's  determination  was
    based on a number of grounds which may be summarised as follows:

      1. The adjudicator erred in his approach to the determination  of  the
         first adjudicator;
      2. He failed to make proper findings of fact on material issues;
      3. He failed to give proper consideration to the psychiatric evidence;
      4. He erred in his assessment of the risk to the appellant  on  return
         to Turkey;
      5. He erred in his assessment of the claim  under  Article  8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights.

5.    At the start of the hearing before us, Mr Buckley,  who  appeared  for
    the respondent, acknowledged that the adjudicator's  determination  was
    unsustainable, and that the appeal would inevitably have to be remitted
    for rehearing by another adjudicator.  Mr Taghavi, who appeared for the
    appellant, confirmed that he was content with that the proposal.

6.    With respect to this experienced adjudicator,  we  are  bound  to  say
    that Mr Buckley was entirely right to concede  that  the  determination
    was plainly unsustainable.  Our principal reason for arriving  at  that
    conclusion arises out of the second ground of appeal referred to above.
     The adjudicator has recorded in his determination that  oral  evidence
    was given before him, not only by the appellant himself, but by no less
    than five witnesses who were called on his behalf.  The adjudicator has
    referred to the evidence given by those witnesses at paragraphs 9 to 13
    (inclusive) of his determination.

7.    However, the adjudicator's references to the evidence given  by  those
    five witnesses are wholly inadequate.  By way of example, at  paragraph
    9 of his determination, he has  recorded  the  evidence  given  by  the
    second witness in the following terms:

         "The second person called to evidence  (sic)  was  the  appellant's
         wife, [        ].  She relied on her witness statement.  She  takes
         tablets for her back pain".

8.    The evidence given by the remaining four witnesses is recorded in  the
    following four paragraphs of the  determination  in  similarly  cryptic
    terms.  There is no further reference in the determination to any  part
    of that evidence, apart from a brief reference at paragraph 26  in  the
    following terms:

         "Both the appellant and  his  wife  told  me  that  they  were  not
         receiving any medical treatment for any psychiatric condition".

9.    At no stage has the adjudicator given any further indications  to  the
    nature or content of the evidence given by the five witnesses.   Whilst
    there is of course no general requirement for an adjudicator to set out
    at length the oral evidence given before him,  and  in  many  cases  no
    useful purpose would be served by doing so, nevertheless he ought as  a
    matter of good practice to summarise at least the material parts of the
    evidence which he has heard so as  to  enable  an  informed  reader  to
    ascertain the nature and content of that evidence, and also  to  enable
    him to be satisfied that the adjudicator has directed his mind properly
    to the material aspects  of  the  evidence.   In  general,  it  is  not
    sufficient for an adjudicator merely  to  record  that  a  witness  has
    relied  on  his  or  her  witness  statement,  although  there  may  be
    particular circumstances in which that would suffice,  e.g.  where  the
    evidence in question relates to facts which are not in dispute  between
    the parties, or which are irrelevant to the issues on which the outcome
    of the appeal will turn.

10.   In addition to his failure to summarise properly  the  evidence  given
    by the five witnesses called on the appellant's behalf, the adjudicator
    has also failed to  make  any  assessment  as  to  the  credibility  or
    otherwise of that evidence, or to give any reasons for arriving at  his
    assessment.  Save in those exceptional cases where the  material  facts
    are not in issue between the parties, it is an  essential  part  of  an
    adjudicator's responsibility to make clear  findings  of  fact  on  the
    material issues, and to give proper, intelligible and adequate  reasons
    for arriving at those findings.  An adjudicator who fails to do  so  is
    liable to find that his determination is  vulnerable  to  challenge  on
    appeal at the suit of the losing party.  That is the position here.

11.   With respect to this experienced adjudicator,  we  are  bound  to  say
    that his failure to make any findings of fact in relation to any of the
    five witnesses called on the appellant's behalf was a serious error  on
    his  part.   It  is  an  error  which,  as  Mr  Buckley  very  properly
    recognised, is in itself sufficient to render the determination fatally
    flawed.

12.   Unfortunately, it is also an error which this Tribunal has noticed  is
    being made with increased frequency by adjudicators when oral  evidence
    is given, not only by the relevant appellant himself, but also  by  one
    or more witnesses called on his behalf.  The necessity to  make  proper
    findings of fact in relation to all the oral evidence, and  not  merely
    that given by the appellant,  is  one  which  is  being  overlooked  by
    adjudicators with  unfortunate  frequency.   For  that  reason,  it  is
    intended that this determination should be reported for the guidance of
    adjudicators as to  the  necessity  to  make  proper  findings  on  the
    evidence of all the witnesses called before them.

13.   Although the  ground  referred  to  above  constitutes  our  principal
    reason  for  concluding  that  the   adjudicator's   determination   is
    unsustainable, it is unfortunately not the only  reason.   If  it  were
    necessary for us to do so, we would arrive at the  same  conclusion  in
    relation to  ground  3  as  well.   The  adjudicator  has  recorded  at
    paragraphs 2(C) and 5(2) of his determination that the evidence  before
    him included a psychiatric report relating to the appellant.  The dates
    given by the adjudicator in those two paragraphs differ  slightly,  but
    it appears to be the same report in each case.  It was  argued  on  the
    appellant's behalf that this psychiatric evidence was corroborative  of
    his claim that he had been subjected to  severe  ill-treatment  at  the
    hands of the Turkish authorities when he  was  returned  to  Turkey  in
    August 1997 following the  dismissal  of  his  earlier  asylum  appeal.
    There was also other medical evidence adduced before  the  adjudicator,
    such as the two letters dated 23 June 2000 and 6 July 2000  from  Dr  R
    Stanowski, copies of  which are contained in the appellant's bundle  of
    documents.

14.   Unfortunately, the adjudicator has carried out no  assessment  of  any
    of the psychiatric or medical evidence before him,  and  has  given  no
    indication as to his conclusions regarding that evidence, apart from  a
    brief reference at paragraph 26 of his determination in  the  following
    terms:

         "I should state that  I  have  considered  the  medical/psychiatric
         reports that were submitted.  However I pointed  out  to  Ms  Ahmad
         [the appellant's counsel  before  him]  that  these  were  somewhat
         dated.  Both the appellant and his wife told me that they were  not
         receiving any medical treatment for any psychiatric  condition.   I
         do not believe that the medical/psychiatric reports add anything to
         the appellant's cause".

15.   With respect to the adjudicator,  that  plainly  does  not  constitute
    adequate consideration of the medical and psychiatric evidence.  It was
    of course for him to consider that evidence and to decide  what  weight
    (if any) he was prepared  to  attach  to  it.   However,  it  was  also
    incumbent upon him to give proper, intelligible  and  adequate  reasons
    for arriving at his conclusions on that evidence.   A  brief  statement
    that the reports were "somewhat dated" and that he did not believe that
    they added "anything to the appellant's cause" was not sufficient.   He
    also  needed  to  explain  why  he  had  arrived  at  that  conclusion.
    Unfortunately, he did not do so.

16.   In light of our conclusions on these two grounds, we do  not  find  it
    necessary to deal with the remaining grounds on which  the  appellant's
    challenge to  the  adjudicator's  determination  was  mounted.   As  Mr
    Buckley   properly   acknowledged,   the   determination   is   plainly
    unsustainable.  In the circumstances, we are left with  no  alternative
    save to remit this appeal for rehearing by another adjudicator.  Whilst
    it is a  matter  for  those  responsible  for  listing  hearing  before
    adjudicators, not us, we would respectfully recommend that care  should
    be taken to ensure that the  remitted  appeal  is  listed  for  hearing
    before a full-time adjudicator  or  experienced  part-time  adjudicator
    only in light of the number of witnesses who are likely to be called to
    give oral evidence at the remitted hearing.

17.   This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is  remitted  for
    a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than Mr B M Suchak.


Signed                            Dated

L V Waumsley

Vice President



Approved for electronic distribution
