
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
    RS (Spouse's pending claim: removal bar?) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00195

Heard:      02.07.2004
Signed:     06.07.2004
Sent out:  16.07.2004


             NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-2002



Before:
                       John Freeman (a vice-president)
                       Mrs ME McGregor and
                       Mr BD Yates

Between:

                                  appellant

and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent

Miss G Peterson (counsel instructed by MK Sri & Co) for the appellant
Mr P Deller for the respondent

                             DECISION ON APPEAL

   This is an appeal from a decision of an adjudicator (Mr  AM  Kopi?czek),
   sitting at Hatton Cross on 23 September 2003, dismissing an  asylum  and
   human rights appeal by a Tamil  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.  Permission  to
   appeal the adjudicator's decision under article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
   Convention was given on the basis that the fact that the claimant's wife
   had a asylum and  human  rights  appeal  pending  was  regarded  by  the
   adjudicator as "no bar to her returning to Sri Lanka  with  her  husband
   and children".

2. Since both the adjudicator and the vice-president  who  gave  permission
   were writing, the  ground-rules  for  article  8  cases  were  radically
   altered by [2004] UKIAT 00024 M* (Croatia), which does not seem to  have
   been affected by the decision of the House of  Lords  in  Razgar  [2004]
   UKHL 27. There the House made clear that article 8 cases required a high
   level of interference with rights before an appeal could  succeed:  from
   24 M* it seems that  the  question  for  the  appellate  authorities  is
   whether any reasonable Secretary of State could have pursued removal  in
   the light of such interference. Decisions such as  ul-Haq  [2002]  UKIAT
   04685 (the present writer) and Xhacka [2002] UKIAT   03352  (Collins  P,
   saying expressly that it was not to be taken  as  a  precedent  for  any
   other case at all), though produced by Miss Peterson,  were  wisely  not
   relied on by her in the current state of the law:  they  should  not  be
   cited again.

3. The relevant history is as follows:

   22.03.1996    claimant first applies  for  asylum:  refused  and  appeal
   dismissed
   11.08.1997    claimant returns by car from Spain: re-applies for asylum
        07.1999  claimant meets wife (asylum-seeker from Sri Lanka) here
   21.08.1999     claimant  and  wife  go  through  religious  ceremony  of
   marriage
   21.07.2000    Tharshika ? born
        11.2000  wife's claim refused
   11.04.2001    wife makes fresh claim for asylum and on human rights
   02.02.2002    removal directions served on claimant
   12.05.2002    Liyoshika ? born


4. There has still been no decision on the wife's fresh claim (even  as  to
   whether  it  is  one,  in  its  asylum  aspect).  This   is   a   wholly
   unsatisfactory situation, where it must have  been  known  to  the  Home
   Office for some time that these parties have not only been living as man
   and wife, but have had two children together. Mr Deller  was  unable  in
   the course of a short adjournment to get us any indication  of  progress
   on her claim; so we are left with a situation without any resolution  in
   sight and, we suspect, all too familiar to adjudicators. We hope what we
   are going to say may be some help in dealing with it in future.

5. The way Miss Peterson put her case in her "skeleton argument" is this:

   ... what was relevant is that the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom for two years without having his status determined at  the  time
   of his marriage, and nearly five years before his claim  was  ultimately
   refused, by which time his first child was born, another was on the way,
   and he had started a business with his wife. Another year passed  before
   his appeal was heard, and he has now been in the United  Kingdom  almost
   seven years. Similarly his wife's fresh application for asylum and under
   the Human Rights Act has not been dealt with in a  timely  fashion,  and
   her status remains undetermined.

6. This, said Miss Peterson, would justify the  Tribunal  in  allowing  the
   appeal in line with Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233, or else (it is not  clear
   why) sending it back for a fresh hearing. As will be clear to those  who
   have read 24 M*, Shala is a decision on its own particular facts, where,
   if the Home Office had decided the application at the proper time, their
   policy then would at least have led to a grant of exceptional  leave  to
   remain. No such policy applied here. Miss Peterson did suggest that,  if
   the claimant's asylum application had been decided at the  proper  time,
   then as things stood in Sri Lanka in those days, it might well have been
   granted. However, to see whether that was right or  not,  we  should  in
   effect have had to retry the asylum case, on which permission to  appeal
   was (quite rightly) not even asked for, and on a set of background facts
   of historical interest only. That cannot be justifiable.

7. The other feature of Shala is that, if the Home Office had acted at  the
   proper time in accordance with their  own  published  policy,  then  the
   leave to remain granted to the claimant would have enabled him to make a
   marriage  application,  with  a  right  of  appeal   from   within   the
   jurisdiction if refused. While that might  have  applied  here,  to  the
   extent that the religious ceremony gone through was recognized at  least
   as setting the seal on a long-term relationship, there was of course  no
   such policy in force in the first place. There is and  was  in  fact  no
   Home Office policy which would have entitled this claimant to  leave  to
   remain at any time. Not until Tharshika reaches the age of   7  in  2007
   will the policy against the removal of young  children  who  have  spent
   their lives here till that age apply.

8. The House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 took the view that there was
   a  "small  minority  of  exceptional  cases"  where  removal  would   be
   disproportionate to the legitimate purpose  of  immigration  control  in
   terms  of  article  8.2  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.  While   we
   acknowledge that this claimant and his wife have built  up  an  entirely
   worthy family life in this country, that to an extent must  be  its  own
   reward. As we pointed out to Miss Peterson, we must assume that they got
   married and had children together because they loved each other, and not
   merely to take advantage of the Home Office's inaction. So far  as  that
   is concerned, however, they have gained, not lost by it.  The  delay  in
   this case is regrettably common: we have  to  say  that  we  should  not
   regard such delay as exceptional, where removal following it broke  none
   of the Home Office's published policies.

9. It follows that, if there is an exceptional element in this case, it  is
   only to be found in the wife's having a pending claim to remain here. As
   Mr Deller rather elegantly put it, that is not by definition  a  bar  to
   return to one's country of origin, but only  to  removal  there  by  Her
   Majesty's Government. In  this  case  the  claimant  and  his  wife  are
   represented by different firms of  solicitors,  and  Miss  Peterson  was
   unable to provide us with any details at all of her  claim.  We  do  not
   know why the claimant's solicitors did not ask those acting for his wife
   to get her consent to release details of her claim: no doubt as the  two
   of them are on good, not to say devoted terms, that  could  easily  have
   been done.

10. Without any details of  what  the  wife's  claim  is  based  on,  it  is
   impossible for us to say that in her individual case it  represents  any
   bar to her returning to Sri Lanka  with  the  claimant.  While  she  has
   renewed her asylum claim, there is nothing to show that her fresh  claim
   (if it is one) is  based  on  anything  more  than  the  one  previously
   rejected. If there was any appeal against that,  as  to  which  we  have
   heard nothing, there is none outstanding.

11. So far as her human rights claim is concerned, if that for  some  reason
   raised an arguable case of article 3 risk on return, which did not arise
   on the previous asylum application, then it might reasonably be regarded
   as a bar to her return till any appeal had been dealt with;   but  there
   is nothing at all to show that is so. For all we know, the wife's  human
   rights claim is based on nothing more than the suggestion that it  would
   be disproportionate in terms of article 8.2  to  remove  her  while  her
   husband's present claim is pending.  To  allow  two  such  arguments  to
   succeed on what would be a wholly circular basis would in our view bring
   the whole appellate process into well-deserved disrepute.

12. It follows that we see no reason on the  evidence  before  us  why  this
   claimant and his whole family should not go to  Sri  Lanka:  though  the
   children were born here, they are too young to have started  school.  So
   far as the parents' business is concerned, they would have  to  wind  it
   up; but, even if there were no money to be made by that,  they  have  no
   doubt managed to make some as they went along,


   which would stand them in good stead in a  country  with  a  much  lower
   standard of living  than  this.  We  regard  the  adjudicator  as  fully
   justified in the decision to which he came, including the point on which
   permission to appeal was given.

Appeal


                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
