
Heard at: Field House | | | |
|                           |        |AD (Fresh Evidence) Algeria |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00155          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date of Hearing:  18th May 2004                                   |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|16th June 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)                     |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Between:                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Easty, instructed by Richard Payne & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Algeria  born  on  3rd  July  1970  who
     arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd May 2002 using his own  Algerian
     passport.  On the  following  day  he  applied  for  asylum  at  port.
     Following completion of a screening form, he submitted a statement  of
     evidence form and statement on 5th June 2002, which had been completed
     with the assistance of his then solicitors.

  2. On 5th July 2002 he was interviewed on behalf of the Respondent in the
     presence of his  representative  with  the  assistance  of  an  Arabic
     interpreter.  At the commencement of the interview he said he was  fit
     and  well  and  confirmed  that  his  self-evidence  form   previously
     submitted was a true and accurate account of his claim.  He  confirmed
     that his only fear of persecution in Algeria was  from  the  group  of
     terrorists he had referred to in his earlier statement and that he had
     no problem prior to 6th February 2000 when he was first approached  by
     two men asking him to supply medical equipment to which he had  access
     from his employment as a paramedic  technician  in  a  pharmacy  in  a
     hospital in his home town in Bifda.  That was  the  only  occasion  on
     which they approached him in any way although they warned him that  he
     had to comply with their requests.  On the same day  he  reported  the
     matter to the police but they said there was nothing they could do  at
     that stage although he should return if anything further happened.  He
     did not then return to work because he was scared.  On 3rd April  2000
     he was informed that his car, which  he  had  left  parked,  had  been
     burned out.  The police were made aware of this by him and gave him  a
     record of the report but they had no suspects.  He became increasingly
     depressed and took extended leave, not returning to work until  August
     2001 when his employers said  that  they  required  him  to  go  on  a
     training course in France, which he undertook between  10th  and  25th
     January 2002.  After this he returned to  Algeria  and  to  his  work.
     About two weeks later he learned that some men had  come  to  see  him
     again when he was absent from the office and  subsequently  after  two
     days he was told by neighbours that some men had come looking for  him
     at his home during his absence.  He then went to live  with  a  friend
     until he left the country on 22nd May 2002.  He did not know to  which
     group the men belonged but he knew that  they  were  terrorists  "from
     their features and their speech".  He said he meant "the  body  build,
     they were not normal people".  He explained at interview  that  during
     his prolonged absence from work when he was suffering from depression,
     his employers used to call him frequently to return which  he  finally
     did when his health had improved, commencing with the course  referred
     to above.  He was asked whether there were any other incidents that he
     had not told the interviewer about that he wished to  mention  and  he
     replied "no".  He was  asked  whether  he  had  any  further  comments
     relevant to his claim and again replied "no".  He agreed that  he  had
     understood all the questions and the  interpreter  and  was  satisfied
     with the conduct of the interview although he  declined  to  sign  the
     interview record.

  3. The Secretary of State refused his asylum application for the  reasons
     set out in a letter  of  10th  July  2002  which  included  a  general
     challenge to credibility, and expressed the  view  that  if  true  the
     Appellant could have sought the protection of the  state  and  in  any
     event also could reasonably have relocated elsewhere in Algeria if  he
     had any fear in his home area.  On 15th July  2002  the  Secretary  of
     State issued directions for his removal to Algeria  following  refusal
     of leave to  enter  after  refusal  of  his  asylum  application.   He
     appealed against that decision on both asylum and human rights grounds
     in wholly generalised terms.

  4. His appeal was listed for substantive hearing on  20th  November  2002
     before Mr Bernard  Dawson,  an  Adjudicator,  when  he  was  initially
     represented by Mr B Obszinski, a solicitor.   It  is  clear  from  the
     Adjudicator's determination that  no  additional  statement  had  been
     filed and served for that hearing and there is  no  reference  in  the
     Adjudicator's careful determination to any documentary evidence having
     been served either.  Miss Easty was unable to refer us to any evidence
     to show that any such documents had been filed either prior to  or  at
     the hearing.

  5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Obszinski asked that  it  be  heard
     with the public excluded and then applied for an adjournment to  which
     the Presenting Officer indicated he had no objection.  The Adjudicator
     records  the  nature  of  that  application  at  paragraph  2  of  his
     determination as follows:

           " ...  He had seen the Appellant on 11 November  for  finalising
           his statement.  In going through that statement it  emerged  the
           Appellant had omitted his account of rape by the police when  he
           returned from France (25 January 2002) when he reported to  them
           harassment by terrorists.  They had regarded him as  an  Islamic
           spy and beat him and raped him.  In  the  light  of  the  latter
           aspect the Appellant was not willing to go into  detail  and  Mr
           Obszinski had offered him the opportunity  of  seeing  a  female
           solicitor in his office.  He had not yet seen her. The Appellant
           also wanted an all female Court and further time would be needed
           for a medical report  ... ."


  6. The proceedings before the  Adjudicator  were  then  governed  by  the
     Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000 which provide as
     follows at Rule 31:

           (1)   Where an adjournment  of  the  appeal  is  requested,  the
                 Appellate Authority shall not adjourn the  hearing  unless
                 it  is  satisfied  that  refusing  the  adjournment  would
                 prevent the just disposal of the appeal.


           (2)   Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing,  he
                 shall, where practicable, notify all other parties of  the
                 application and -


                 (a)   show good reason why an adjournment is necessary;


                 (b)   establish any fact or matter relied on in support of
                       the application; and


                 (c)   offer a new date for the hearing.


  7. Whether an  adjournment  should  be  granted  is  not,  of  course,  a
     consensual matter for the parties  to  decide  but  requires  judicial
     consideration by the Adjudicator having regard to the requirements  of
     the Procedure Rules.

  8. The Adjudicator then deals with what next happened as follows:

           "4.   I reminded the representatives of the overriding objective
                 in these appeals and I did  not  consider  an  adjournment
                 necessary  for  the  just  disposal  of  the  appeal.    I
                 indicated that in order to  accommodate  the  Appellant  I
                 would hear the appeal  in  camera.   I  directed  that  Mr
                 Obszinski take a further statement from the  Appellant  on
                 these new aspects of his case and gave him time to  do  so
                 whilst I heard another appeal.  I also indicated  I  would
                 give such further directions as I felt necessary once  the
                 statement had been prepared.


           5.    Some 1� hours later the  hearing  resumed.   Mr  Obszinski
                 asked me to reconsider my decision.  He had not been  able
                 to  take  a  statement  from  the  Appellant  without   an
                 interpreter.  I indicated this was  a  point  he  had  not
                 raised  earlier  and  Mr  Obszinski  submitted  this   was
                 something I might have been aware of.  In the course of my
                 further enquiries, it emerged that the Appellant, who  had
                 previously instructed White Ryland,  had  instructed  Rees
                 Wood Terry [who still represent him at the  present  time]
                 on 4 September 2002. Mr Obszinski had made no attempt  to
                 notify the Immigration Appellate Authority of his need for
                 an adjournment even though he first became  aware  of  the
                 matter some nine days ago.  The female solicitor to  which
                 the matter had been passed was on holiday but she had  not
                 gone until the week commencing 18  November.   It  was  Mr
                 Obszinski's view that the time available was  insufficient
                 for the female solicitor to take a statement.


           6.    I rose to consider this matter again and announced that  I
                 had  given  the  matter  further   careful   thought.    I
                 reiterated my earlier conclusion that an  adjournment  was
                 not justified having regard to the time the Appellant  had
                 had to bring this aspect to  his  advisors'  attention.  I
                 remained of the view that  the  Appellant's  sensitivities
                 regarding the evidence to be given could  be  accommodated
                 by the hearing being in camera.


           7.    Mr Obszinski then withdrew.  He indicated he  had  advised
                 the Appellant it was a matter for him to give evidence  or
                 not.   However  Mr  Obszinski  remained   throughout   the
                 hearing.


           8.    I then addressed the  Appellant  having  satisfied  myself
                 that he understood the interpreter giving his evidence  in
                 Algerian Arabic.


           9.    I explained to the Appellant  the  application  which  had
                 been made by Mr Obszinski and the  decision  which  I  had
                 reached.


           10.   The Appellant indicated that  he  did  not  want  to  give
                 evidence without his representative when I asked if he had
                 any objection to Mr Obszinski being in what was  to  be  a
                 closed hearing. I indicated to him that he did not have to
                 give evidence  if  he  did  not  want  to  but  he  should
                 understand that the hearing was going to go ahead  and  it
                 was his opportunity to add to his account set out  in  the
                 record of interview and  in  his  statement  and  to  make
                 himself available for the Home Office to question him.


           11.   The Appellant then asked  to  address  me.   He  expressed
                 concern that he could  be  asked  questions  by  the  Home
                 Office and put in a position  he  would  not  be  able  to
                 answer.  He went on to say somewhat obliquely because  all
                 the answers and the solutions were in what happened  next.
                 I  reminded  the  Appellant  that  the  hearing  was   his
                 opportunity to give that evidence.  He asked if this would
                 be about everything  which  I  confirmed.   The  Appellant
                 however  stated  he  was  not  comfortable  about   giving
                 evidence.  I reminded him that I had excluded  the  public
                 from the Court for that reason and that he would be  given
                 the fullest opportunity to put across  his  story.   If  I
                 considered the questions asked by the Home  Office  to  be
                 unreasonable I would stop them.


           12.   I then asked the Appellant how he would like  to  proceed.
                 I reminded him that he did not have to give evidence if he
                 did not want to do so. He did not wish to give evidence."


  9. The Adjudicator then heard submissions from the Presenting Officer and
     noted the Appellant's claim as contained in his original statement  on
     the self evidence form  and  interview  record.   He  noted  that  the
     Appellant was unequivocal in his answers at  interview  that  he  only
     feared persecution from "those groups" and not from anybody else;  the
     absence of any problems prior to 2000;  his ignorance of the  identity
     of the terrorist group to whom those he  referred  to  belonged;   his
     lack of knowledge whether any colleagues have been  approached;   that
     he had never supported a political organisation; and that  during  the
     time he was off work he had suffered depression  and  had  been  asked
     frequently to come back.  He noted  that  he  was  specifically  asked
     whether there were any other incidents he had not mentioned  and  that
     he had answered "no".  The Adjudicator noted the issues raised in  the
     refusal letter to which we have briefly referred above; the fact  that
     the government was, on the objective evidence produced, in control  of
     the majority of its territory and  that  the  GIA  were  no  longer  a
     nationwide organisation;  the Appellant's  delay  in  leaving  Algeria
     from February 2000 until May 2002;  and the fact that  he  could  have
     sought protection in France  in  January  2002.    He  identified  the
     burden and standard of proof in asylum and human  rights  claims.   He
     noted that according to the objective evidence produced on  behalf  of
     the Respondent that the main terrorist  groups  operating  in  Algeria
     were the GIA and the GSPC who  appeared  to  pursue  their  aims  with
     violent force.  He recorded that he drew no adverse inference from the
     failure of the Appellant to give evidence but that he must accept  the
     consequences  of  not  having  done  so;   he  considered   that   the
     Respondent's challenge as recorded in the reasons for  refusal  letter
     and in submissions before him  "was  legitimate  and  justified".   He
     dealt with the evidence before him as follows:

           "24.  I think it significant the Appellant  came  to  no  actual
                 harm from the terrorists  he  believed  the  men  who  had
                 approached him represented. Given the reputation of  those
                 groups in the background material, I question whether they
                 would have  been  content  not  to  pursue  the  Appellant
                 further other than burning his car when he did not respond
                 positively to their  requests  for  medical  and  surgical
                 equipment.  I have  some  difficulty  in  reconciling  the
                 Appellant's explanation at interview that he had not asked
                 colleagues at work whether they had been approached.  This
                 seems implausible. Certainly his employers appear to  have
                 been very tolerant in allowing him a year off  and  it  is
                 odd that they then decided  to  send  him  on  a  training
                 course to France.  According to the Appellant's  statement
                 he was told by  this  colleague  that  two  men  had  come
                 looking for him and seemed upset.  It  is  surprising  the
                 Appellant did not discuss matters further with him.


           ...


           26.   I have given careful thought how I should  deal  with  the
                 intimation by Mr Obszinski  of  the  Appellant's  proposed
                 evidence of rape on the occasion of his reporting  to  the
                 police the second occasion of demands after his return  to
                 work in January this  year.   I  had  endeavoured  at  the
                 hearing to reassure the Appellant that he would be able to
                 give his evidence in a safe environment and that  I  would
                 prohibit any unreasonable questions.  Again the  Appellant
                 must  accept  the  consequences   of   not   taking   this
                 opportunity.  He has not established even to a  reasonable
                 degree of likelihood any new  factors.   On  the  material
                 before me I conclude the Respondent was  right  to  reject
                 his claim.


           27.   My conclusion therefore is that the Appellant has not told
                 the truth of the reasons why he left Algeria and  has  not
                 therefore established a need for international protection.
                  Even if it were the case the demands had been made on the
                 Appellant, the fact that so long passed without any actual
                 harm leads me to the view that were he to return, there is
                 no real risk of any harm coming  about.   The  Appellant's
                 problems stemmed from his employment.  He could  perfectly
                 well take up employment with another firm."


 10. The Appellant sought leave to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
     dismissal of his appeal by the Adjudicator.  The challenge mounted  in
     the grounds of appeal is essentially that the  Adjudicator  was  wrong
     not to grant the adjournment requested to  an  all  female  Court  and
     wrong to conclude there was sufficient time for a  statement  to  have
     been taken prior to the hearing;   nor  was  it  possible  to  take  a
     statement  without  the  presence  of  an  interpreter  in  the  short
     adjournment while the hearing of the  appeal  was  put  back  and  the
     Adjudicator  should  have  realised  that.   The  implication  of  the
     introduction of new evidence at a late stage required  an  adjournment
     for a medical examination "in order to  check  for  evidence  of  anal
     scarring" and "it is likely that a psychiatric report would also  have
     been  necessary".   The  Adjudicator  could  not  have  prevented  the
     Presenting  Officer  from  asking  question  which  he  deemed  to  be
     unreasonable.  For those reasons the Adjudicator was wrong to conclude
     that the Appellant had not told the truth of the reasons why  he  left
     Algeria and he did not have the opportunity  of  considering  all  the
     evidence.

 11. Leave to appeal to us was granted because it was  considered  that  it
     was just arguable that medical evidence might have been of  sufficient
     relevance in provision of evidence that  the  claimant  had  been  the
     subject of anal penetration at some point  in  time  and  because  the
     grant of leave would enable Adjudicators to be given current  guidance
     in relation to late applications for adjournment "notwithstanding that
     the rules are predicated against adjournment (see Rule  31(1))  unless
     the Adjudicator is satisfied that refusing the  adjournment  prevented
     the just disposal of the  appeal".   It  was  pointed  out  that  just
     disposal was one which took account of the interests of  both  parties
     to the appeal in securing  the  overriding  objective  of  the  "just,
     timely and effective  disposal  of  appeals"  (Rule  30(2)).   It  was
     observed that cogent medical evidence  would  no  doubt  be  filed  to
     support the Appellant's case.

 12.  We  note  that  the  Procedure  Rules  currently  relevant  are   the
     Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003 which came  into
     force on 1st April 2003.  The  relevant  rule  is  Rule  40  which  is
     couched in terms which are not dissimilar from those contained in Rule
     31 of the 2000 Procedure Rules, but for the sake  of  completeness  we
     set them out now:

           (1)   Subject to any provision of these Rules or  of  any  other
                 enactment, an Adjudicator or the Tribunal may adjourn  the
                 hearing of any appeal or application.


           (2)   An Adjudicator or Tribunal must not adjourn a  hearing  on
                 the application of  a  party  unless  satisfied  that  the
                 appeal  or  application   cannot   otherwise   be   justly
                 determined.


           (3)   Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing,  he
                 must -


                 (a)   if practicable, notify  all  other  parties  of  the
                       application;


                 (b)   show good reason why an  adjournment  is  necessary;
                       and


                 (c)   produce evidence of any fact or matter  relied  upon
                       in support of the application.


 13. What  we  say  in  this  determination  in  relation  to  adjournment,
     therefore,  applies  equally  whether  the   appropriate   Rules   for
     consideration are the 2000 or 2003 Rules.

Hearing in public

 14. At the commencement of the hearing  before  us,  Miss  Easty  made  an
     application that the public should be excluded from the hearing.  This
     was on the basis that it would be unfair  to  the  Appellant  for  the
     public to be admitted because the appeal before us  depended  in  part
     upon his allegation that he had been subjected to anal rape in January
     2002.  It was Miss Easty's broad submission  that  where  evidence  of
     such a nature was involved, the public should be excluded  whether  or
     not the Appellant was to give evidence.  She was asked whether she had
     any authority for this proposition but said she did not.  It would  be
     the position in the Employment Tribunals.

 15. We refused this application.  Whatever may be the  position  in  other
     Tribunals, the  2003  Procedure  Rules  make  specific  provision  for
     proceedings before the Immigration  Appellate  Authority  in  Rule  50
     which provides as follows:

           (1)   Subject to the following provisions of  this  rule,  every
                 hearing before an Adjudicator or the Tribunal must be held
                 in public.


           (2)   Where an Adjudicator or the  Tribunal  is  considering  an
                 allegation referred to in Section 108 of the 2002 Act, all
                 members of the public must be excluded from the hearing.


           (3)   An Adjudicator or the Tribunal  may  exclude  any  or  all
                 members of the public  from  any  hearing  or  part  of  a
                 hearing if it is necessary -


                 (a)    in  the  interests  of  public  order  or  national
                       security; or


                 (b)   to protect the  private  life  of  a  party  or  the
                       interests of a minor.


           (4)   An Adjudicator or the Tribunal may  also,  in  exceptional
                 circumstances, exclude any or all members  of  the  public
                 from any hearing or part  of  a  hearing  to  ensure  that
                 publicity does not prejudice the interests of justice, but
                 only if and to the extent that it is strictly necessary to
                 do so.


 16. The reference to Section 108 of the 2002 Act has no relevance to  Miss
     Easty's application.  It relates only where  there  is  an  allegation
     that a document relied on is a forgery  and  that  disclosure  to  the
     party propounding the document of a matter relating to  the  detection
     of the forgery would be contrary to the public interest.   Subject  to
     this the principal position is that proceedings should be  in  public.
     In the present case the fact  of  the  late  allegation  made  by  the
     Appellant is already a matter of public record  in  the  Adjudicator's
     determination.  There has been no application  for  the  Appellant  to
     give evidence before us and there is no danger to him or prejudice  to
     his case from the discussion as necessary of  the  allegation  in  the
     course of submissions to us.  There was in our  judgment  no  arguable
     basis for excluding the public from this hearing.

The refusal of an adjournment

 17. Miss Easty then sought remittal of the appeal  so  that  it  might  be
     heard afresh before another Adjudicator.  This was on the basis of the
     additional evidence now sought to be adduced before  the  Tribunal  in
     the subjective bundle filed on behalf of the Appellant.  This included
     a witness statement dated 5th May 2004 made  by  him,  photocopies  of
     some original documents from Algeria with certified translations dated
     prior to the Appellant's departure together  with  letters  from  some
     family members, a psychiatric report of 25th February 2003, a  medical
     report from his General Practitioner  of  23rd  February  2004  and  a
     report prepared by a mental health nurse of 19th  April  2004.   There
     was a separate small objective bundle comprising documents post dating
     the hearing before the Adjudicator and the Respondent  had  filed  the
     CIPU Algerian Assessment of October 2003.  We note that those  bundles
     had not been received until the day before the hearing contrary to the
     Tribunal's standing directions that any documents relied  on  must  be
     filed and served not later than 14 days prior to hearing if  they  are
     to be taken into account.

 18. It remained Miss Easty's submission that the Adjudicator had erred  in
     refusing to adjourn the hearing before him and in then determining the
     appeal without the benefit of hearing  evidence  from  the  Appellant.
     Although apart from the current objective evidence,  she  was  seeking
     this remittal on the basis of evidence which could and should, had the
     Appellant so desired, have been made available to the  Adjudicator  at
     the hearing before him, it was her somewhat bold  submission  that  we
     could not in any way evaluate evidence and its relevance because  this
     was a matter which could be dealt with only by  an  Adjudicator  at  a
     fresh hearing following remittal and that  the  interests  of  justice
     demanded a remittal to  which  Mr  McGirr  did  not  object.   If  the
     Appellant's case were taken at its highest on all the information  now
     available which was not before the Adjudicator  the  Appellant's  case
     was at least arguable.  If the documents from Algeria had been  before
     the Adjudicator then he had failed to deal  with  them  but,  although
     this did not appear in the Appellant's statement in the bundle, it was
     her  case  that  the  Appellant  had  given  the  documents   to   his
     representatives  prior  to  the  hearing.   No   evidence   from   the
     representatives in this respect had been included in the bundle filed.

 19. Mr McGirr indicated to us that he had supported  the  application  for
     remittal on the somewhat  different  basis  that  the  documents  from
     Algeria  provided  some  corroboration  for  the  account  which   the
     Appellant had originally given and that the medical reports went  some
     way to assist  on  credibility  issues  but,  nevertheless,  he  would
     otherwise rely on what was said in the refusal letter and even if  the
     Appellant's claims as now made were taken at their highest there  must
     at least be open to him the alternative of internal  relocation  which
     he could reasonably be required to undertake.

 20. In the course of her  submissions,  Miss  Easty  made  it  clear  that
     subject to what she said about the failure by the Adjudicator to grant
     an adjournment, she made no criticism of his approach to the  evidence
     which was before him subject to the question of his  failure  to  make
     any reference to the Algerian documents in existence at  the  time  of
     the Appellant's departure from Algeria.   So far  as  those  documents
     are concerned, there is no evidence before us that they were  produced
     to the Adjudicator and, having regard to the careful way in  which  he
     deals with what took place before him at the hearing, and the  way  in
     which he considered the evidence before him, it seems to us clear that
     these documents were not in fact produced to him. We have proceeded on
     that basis.

 21. The argument that the Adjudicator erred in  refusing  the  adjournment
     application either when made initially or later is not  tenable.   The
     framework for his decision is the  provision  in  the  Rules  that  no
     adjournment should be granted unless he was satisfied that refusing it
     would prevent the just disposal of the appeal.   He  has  to  consider
     that in the light of  the  overriding  objective  and  the  procedural
     requirements as to how such an adjournment application should be made.
      It is a discretionary decision which will only be  overturned  if  it
     has  been  shown  that  the  discretion  has  not  been  exercised  in
     accordance with the relevant principles.

 22. Here, the application had not been  notified  in  advance  and  it  is
     difficult to see that any steps were taken to establish the basis  for
     it;  there was merely what Mr Obszinski said.

 23. The Appellant had had ample time to prepare his  appeal,  to  consider
     his  evidence  and  his  new  claims  and  to  seek  advice  from  his
     solicitors, which could have led to medical evidence  being  obtained.
     We note that he apparently chose to change his representatives who had
     acted for him throughout the asylum  process,  just  over  two  months
     before the hearing date.

 24. We do not accept that even with the late change of  story,  some  nine
     days before the hearing, it  would  have  been  impractical  for  some
     statement to have been taken, or for the female solicitor if necessary
     to take it before she went on holiday.  Besides, it was the  Appellant
     who created this problem.

 25. We also note that there was no evidence before the Adjudicator  as  to
     why the story of anal rape could not have been  brought  out  earlier.
     We were told by counsel that this was because of  the  cultural  shame
     and trauma the Appellant felt.  That does not explain  the  timing  so
     close to the appeal and after a  change  of  solicitors,  nor  was  it
     supported by evidence.

 26. Besides, the key change to the story, as revealed in the new statement
     sought to be adduced before us, is that the Appellant was detained  by
     the police for two months on suspicion of being a  terrorist  when  he
     went to tell the police of the approaches of terrorists, was  kept  in
     harsh conditions, beaten up and also raped in detention by some people
     (seemingly police because the same  people  released  him  later)  for
     going to the police in the first place when he had been told not to by
     the terrorists.  The rape became an incident in the course of a larger
     story which showed both a fear of terrorists and an absence of  police
     protection.  There was no explanation in that detailed statement as to
     why the story was changed so late, nor as to why no part of  it,  even
     excluding the rape, had been revealed or even hinted at earlier.

 27. The Adjudicator was asked to adjourn in part so that medical  evidence
     could be obtained.  In the light of the circumstances before him,  the
     explanations given and also those matters which were  unexplained,  he
     was entitled and right not to adjourn.  It is impossible to  speculate
     as to what would have happened  had  the  Appellant  given  apparently
     credible evidence on his new story.   He  would  certainly  have  been
     cross-examined.  This was not one of those cases where, on the day, no
     Home Office Presenting Officer was present which restricts the  extent
     of the questioning of a change such as this.  But the fact is that  he
     had the opportunity to give evidence and declined to do so, even  with
     his lawyer present.

 28. Nothing that we have subsequently heard causes us to  think  that  the
     Adjudicator was wrong.

 29.  An  adjournment  was  also  sought  so  that  an  all-female   court,
     Adjudicator, interpreter,  usher  could  be  set  up.   There  may  be
     circumstances in which consideration is given to such  a  request  for
     such a court in the IAA, but its lack of availability is not the basis
     for  an  adjournment.   The  parties  cannot  choose   the   judge   -
     Adjudicators are appointed to hear all cases within their appointment.

 30. Finally, we turn to the attitude and withdrawal of Mr  Obszinski.   He
     decided to withdraw representation  but  not  his  presence  when  his
     adjournment application was refused, telling the  Adjudicator  he  was
     leaving it to the Appellant whether or  not  to  give  evidence.   The
     Adjudicator  was  right  to  proceed  and  gave  the  Appellant  every
     opportunity to say all that he wished to say.  It was his decision  to
     stay silent.  It might be possible to regard Mr Obszinski's  behaviour
     as irresponsible but  we  have  not  heard  from  him,  nor  have  any
     allegations of misconduct been made to him by those  now  representing
     the Appellant.  Nor  has  the  Appellant  provided  evidence,  waiving
     privilege, as to misconduct.  It is not for us to make further comment
     because it is always possible that where a case ceases to be one which
     public funds will properly support, an application for an  adjournment
     is the last step which can be made, following the  refusal  of  which,
     withdrawal is inevitable.  Here,  Mr  Obszinski  stayed,  for  unknown
     reasons.

 31. What would be entirely wrong would be for an Adjudicator to  grant  an
     adjournment which was not otherwise merited because of a withdrawal or
     threatened  withdrawal  by  a  representative  if  an  adjournment  is
     refused.  A representative cannot withdraw, and an Appellant refuse to
     give evidence, when an adjournment is refused  in  the  hope  that  an
     adjournment can thereby be forced on  the  Adjudicator,  or  that  the
     evidence which could have been  given  to  him  will  be  admitted  on
     appeal, leading to a remittal.  That is a  dangerously  misguided  and
     unrealistic hope.  The appeal process envisages that each  party  will
     play his proper  part,  and  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  it
     provides within the Rules.

 32. Of course, if an adjournment for the obtaining of evidence is properly
     refused, as it was here, it makes it rather more  difficult  for  that
     evidence to be subsequently successfully adduced on appeal,  for  that
     would simply have the effect of holding, rather contradictorily,  that
     the adjournment should have been granted in reality.

 33. Having properly indicated that the appeal was to continue before  him,
     the Adjudicator explained the options available to the Appellant in an
     exemplary manner and we agree with him that the  Appellant  must  take
     the consequences of his own decision not to give evidence before him.

 34. We must, therefore, first consider whether it is appropriate for  this
     evidence to be submitted in evidence at all.  This appeal is doomed to
     fail unless the new evidence is permitted to be adduced and  persuades
     us that there was an error of  fact  or  law  in  consequence  in  the
     determination.  This appeal was pending in  the  Tribunal  before  1st
     April 2003 and the effect of the transitional provisions in  the  2003
     Rules, notably Rule 61(3), is to preserve the right of appeal on error
     of fact and law.

 35. The admission of evidence not  before  the  Adjudicator  is,  however,
     governed by the 2003 Rules, Rule 21.  This is apparently tighter  than
     Rule 22 of the 2000 Rules in requiring an explanation as  to  why  the
     evidence was not  produced  by  the  Adjudicator,  but  the  principle
     expressed was already generally applicable.

 36. In E & R [2004] EWCA Civ 49, the Court of Appeal  was  concerned  with
     whether the Tribunal should have looked at evidence which had not been
     made available to it at the time when it  heard  the  appeal  from  an
     Adjudicator,  but  was  only  produced  when  it  was  considering  an
     application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal against its own
     promulgated decision. In that case, as  in  the  present  appeal,  the
     right of appeal to the Tribunal was  under  the  earlier  regime.   In
     paragraph 92 of that judgment, Carnwath LJ said:

           "In relation to the role of the IAT, we have concluded:


                 (i)   The Tribunal  remains  seized  of  the  appeal,  and
                       therefore able to take account of  new  evidence,  up
                       until  the  time  when  the  decision  was   formally
                       notified to the parties;


                 (ii)  following the decision, where it was considering the
                       application for leave to appeal to this Court, it had
                       a discretion to direct a rehearing;  this  power  was
                       not dependent on its finding an arguable error of law
                       in its decision;


                 (iii) however, in exercising such discretion the principle
                       of finality  would  be  important.   To  justify  re-
                       opening the case, the IAT would normally need  to  be
                       satisfied that there was a risk of serious injustice,
                       because of something which  had  gone  wrong  at  the
                       hearing, or some important evidence  which  had  been
                       overlooked; and in considering whether to  admit  new
                       evidence, it should be  guided  by  Ladd  v  Marshall
                       principles, subject to any exceptional factors."


 38. The Ladd v Marshall factors are summarised  as  follows  in  paragraph
     23(ii):

           "New evidence will normally be admitted only in accordance  with
           'Ladd v Marshall principles' (see Ladd v Marshall [1954]  1  WLR
           1489), applied with some additional flexibility  under  the  CPR
           (see Hertfordshire Investments Ltd v Bubb  [2000]  1  WLR  2318,
           2325; White Book para 52.11.2). The Ladd v  Marshall  principles
           are, in summary: first, that the fresh evidence could  not  have
           been obtained with reasonable diligence for use  at  the  trial;
           secondly, that if given, it probably would have had an important
           influence on the result; and, thirdly,  that  it  is  apparently
           credible although not necessarily incontrovertible. As a general
           rule, the fact that the failure to adduce the evidence was  that
           of the party's legal advisers provides no excuse: see Al-Mehdawi
           v Home Secretary [1990] 1AC 876."


 39. Although the Court of Appeal was dealing with the Tribunal's power  to
     remit a case to itself instead of granting  leave  to  appeal  to  the
     Court of Appeal, we consider  that  it  sets  out  principles  equally
     applicable to the reception of fresh evidence when hearing the  appeal
     originally and as it would do were it to remit the appeal  to  itself.
     The approach ought to be the same in each instance.  The principles do
     not just cover the  decision  to  rehear,  with  different  principles
     governing the hearing of the appeal.

 40. We are therefore satisfied that the admissibility of the new  evidence
     now sought to be introduced is to be determined  by  Ladd  v  Marshall
     principles subject to any exceptional factors meaning that  it  should
     be admitted in the interests of justice.   We  have  to  consider  the
     reasons for its late  production,  its  importance  and  its  apparent
     credibility, and the interests of justice.

 41. For this purpose, we must, notwithstanding its very  late  submission,
     consider that evidence.

 42. In his statement of 5th May 2004, the Appellant adds to  his  original
     account by saying that on 20th February 2002 he once again  approached
     the police and told them what had happened but  they  accused  him  of
     helping the terrorists and then seeking  police  protection;   he  was
     detained in a cell in bad conditions  having  been  forced  to  strip.
     Two days later he says that two or three men came into  the  cell  who
     told him that he had been warned not to go to the police  and  because
     he had not obeyed he was going to pay the price.  He was then hit by a
     metal bar or instrument over the head and anally raped  and  otherwise
     sexually  abused.   Such  assaults  occurred  more  than  four   times
     subsequently whilst he was held in prison for two months  until  those
     who had raped and abused him dragged him out of the cell,  blindfolded
     him, drove him off in a car and released him.  He  initially  returned
     to his parents' house and then went to live with a friend, his  mother
     remaining with him to nurse him back to health until he  was  able  to
     leave the country through arrangements which  his  parents  had  made.
     The statement contains no explanation of why this additional  and  far
     more serious basis of his claim was not given until a few  days  prior
     to the appeal before the Adjudicator some  two  months  after  he  had
     first instructed those then and currently advising him.   It  was  not
     produced to the Adjudicator because of the Appellant's late change  of
     story, and the asserted difficulties in taking a  statement,  together
     with his refusal, as a matter of his own choice, not to give evidence.
      He said he  was  concerned  about  being  questioned,  which  is  not
     altogether surprising.

 43. As to the documents which were said to  originate  from  Algeria,  the
     first purports to be a civil juridical report  of  the  finding  of  a
     burned out car on  11th  April  2000  following  a  request  from  the
     Appellant, a copy of which was, it said, given to  him  on  that  day;
     secondly,  what  is  described  in  the  translation  as   a   medical
     certificate of 2nd February 2000 from a psychiatrist at the University
     Medical Centre in Bijda certifying that the Appellant had been treated
     on many occasions for depression and was given sick leave  from  April
     2000 to August 2001.  It is possible that the date on the photocopy of
     the original is 2/04/2000.  Finally, there is what purports  to  be  a
     police report dated 3rd  April  2000  concerning  the  burnt  car  and
     summarising information provided by the Appellant that on 6th February
     2000 he had been visited by two people belonging to a terrorist group,
     seeking medicines and asking him not to tell  the  authorities;   they
     returned a week later and said that if he did not bring the  medicines
     "they would kill me for sure";  he asked for more  time,  and  shortly
     afterwards he received news that his car was burnt.  As  to  the  last
     document, we noted that what is said there does  not  wholly  coincide
     with what the  Appellant  claimed  in  his  initial  statement  or  at
     interview where there was no reference to a second visit a week  later
     when he asked the terrorists for  more  time.   As  to  the  purported
     medical certificate there is the additional oddity that it appears  on
     the face of it to give him leave  of  absence  through  sickness  from
     April 2000 until August 2001, a period of some  sixteen  months  which
     would suggest remarkable prescience on the part of its maker.   As  we
     have said, there is no evidence that these documents were  before  the
     Adjudicator and no specific explanation as to why that was so.  It may
     be that the Appellant had them but did not disclose them as he did not
     give evidence.  It may be that he did not have them then, but, if  so,
     he has offered no explanation as to why not.

 44. Turning to the medical evidence, there is a psychiatric report of 25th
     February 2003 based on a  single  interview  for  one  hour  early  in
     February.  The report sets out what the Appellant told Dr N Janil, who
     describes himself as a Consultant Psychiatrist approved under  Section
     12 of the Mental Health Act 1983.  It adds a new detail that he claims
     to have been admitted to a mental hospital  for  one  month  in  April
     2000, but is otherwise an uncritical recital and records that he  says
     at the time of his report that he spends most of his time  walking  in
     the streets and perhaps reading occasionally but had  been  unable  to
     continue with courses he started in September 2002.  There is  nothing
     in the report dealing with the Appellant's failure to mention  any  of
     the matters in 2002 which now form a central  part  of  his  basis  of
     claim but equally there is nothing to suggest that Dr Janil  was  ever
     informed of this.  On the basis of his acceptance of what he was  told
     by the Appellant, the doctor arrives at the following conclusions:

           "11.1 [AD] suffered as  a  consequence  of  sexual  assault  and
                 imprisonment post traumatic stress disorder as defined  by
                 DSM4 of the American Psychiatric Association,  a  copy  of
                 which is enclosed. [None was provided  with  the  document
                 submitted to us].


           11.2  [AD] is also moderately  depressed  as  evidenced  by  low
                 mood,  fleeting  suicidal  thoughts  and  guilt   feelings
                 consistent with a depressive episode."


      Dr Janil expresses no view  as  to  the  effect  of  the  Appellant's
      claimed mental condition resulting in his admission as an  in-patient
      to a mental hospital in April 2000 or to what extent such symptoms as
      he notes briefly may be referable to that period.  He says he is  not
      qualified to give an opinion  following  a  physical  examination  to
      validate the experience of rape.  He recommends cognitive behavioural
      therapy.

 45. The reason why this material was not provided to the Adjudicator  goes
     back to the very reason why the adjournment was sought and  refused  -
     the late change of story.

 46. There is also a letter of 19th  April  2004  from  a  Mr  Maddern  who
     describes himself as a community mental health nurse with  the  Asylum
     Seeker Service but he has no personal knowledge of the  Appellant  and
     is working solely from notes and the psychiatric report  to  which  we
     have referred.  He records that  it  appears  he  has  been  receiving
     support from the Mental Health Service for Asylum Seekers since  March
     2003, having made significant progress so that his  symptoms  although
     still present are not having a major impact upon his  functioning  and
     he has commenced voluntary work and is able to  socialise  well.   The
     mental health nurse with whom he  had  direct  contact  had  left  the
     service but she had advised  him  on  21st  January  2004,  given  his
     improvement, to contact her if he required any further input.   As  he
     had not made contact by 23rd March his case had been closed.  This  is
     an update which relates to mental condition relevant as an  aspect  of
     credibility and as a possible Article 8 point.

 47. The final medical report was apparently dated 23rd February  2004  and
     was intended to deal with any physical symptoms.  It recorded that the
     only physical scar was a 2cm scar over the left side of his  forehead.
     It also noted that he had been referred to the University Hospital  of
     Wales  Gastroenterology  Department  for  altered  bowel  habit  which
     started after his serious sexual assaults  but  the  report  gives  no
     clinical evaluation as to causation of any such problem or its  nature
     and so in our view is of little assistance being once more based on an
     uncritical acceptance of what the Appellant chose to tell  the  writer
     of the report.  It gives no indication of his own  experience  in  the
     field.  It is notably silent as to any anal examination or as to  what
     could or could not be deduced from what was or was not seen.   It  was
     the grounds of appeal which raised the need for a report to check  for
     evidence of anal scarring.  The reason it  was  not  produced  to  the
     Adjudicator goes back to the  late  change  of  story  for  which  the
     Appellant was responsible.

 48. Finally, there are  four  copy  letters  with  translations  from  the
     Appellant's brother, but the only one which might  have  any  possible
     relevance is dated 8th September 2002 and was thus in existence at the
     date of the hearing before the Adjudicator.  It claims that three  men
     came to look for him at home  but  they  are  not  further  identified
     beyond the letter saying they are doing the same to  the  majority  of
     people who work in hospitals and  refuse  to  help  them.   Subsequent
     letters make no reference to any repetition  of  such  incidents.   No
     explanation was proffered for its not being before the Adjudicator.

 49. The fresh evidence does not in general satisfy the  first  requirement
     of the test in Ladd  v  Marshall.   The  new  story  could  have  been
     provided earlier in written form and at the hearing, even more readily
     if the crucial part (detention, beating and lack  of  protection)  had
     been covered;  the rape allegation  could  be  seen  as  providing  an
     excuse for later revelation, but does not explain the particular  late
     timing here.  The medical documents could have been  obtained  if  the
     new story had been revealed a while earlier.  The reports from Algeria
     and the one relevant  letter  were  all  in  existence;   no  evidence
     suggests they were not available or could not have been made available
     with reasonable diligence.

 50. The third requirement of apparent credibility, albeit not  necessarily
     incontrovertible, is not met  by  his  new  statement.   He  gives  no
     explanation for the  change  of  story  at  that  stage  or  the  late
     production of the new documents.

 51. The  Appellant  had  been  given  a  clear  opportunity  by  a  female
     interviewer to state whether there were any other incidents  which  he
     had not previously mentioned and unequivocally replied that there were
     not.  Even had he been unwilling to refer to his claims to  have  been
     sexually assaulted, we can see  no  reason  why  he  should  not  have
     referred to an apparent unlawful detention in harsh  conditions  where
     he was beaten, by the police for a period of two months, the nature of
     which he says caused him to believe they were  in  league  with  those
     whom he had previously claimed to be terrorists.  It could hardly have
     been a matter more central to his whole basis of claim because he  was
     suggesting collusion by the authorities with those he feared  and  not
     simply that he had a fear of no one but the unidentified men  to  whom
     he had referred.  Without that additional claim, the  basis  of  claim
     disclosed was clearly weak and he had been given very detailed reasons
     by the Respondent in the refusal letter as to why it did not  lead  to
     any recognition of a need for international protection.  The claim  as
     expanded would engage those identified shortcomings  in  the  original
     claim.  He is trying to identify a lack of police protection, hitherto
     ignored.  It was a last minute change.  He had  every  opportunity  to
     state it to the Adjudicator.  His refusal of the opportunity to do so,
     does not now entitle him to do so when he has got in order what he now
     wishes to say.  It is notably not supported by  any  physical  medical
     evidence;  the silence as to anal examination seems  deliberate.   The
     psychiatric evidence is wholly dependant on what he has to say and  is
     of limited analytical quality anyway.

 52. Insofar as Miss Easty submits that we have no power  to  evaluate  the
     additional evidence which  she  seeks  to  introduce,  she  is  wholly
     mistaken.  That evaluation is a necessary part of the  application  of
     the Ladd v Marshall tests.

 53. We are therefore wholly satisfied that the additional evidence  sought
     to be introduced should be excluded on  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles.
     There is nothing about  it  in  the  circumstances  which  suggest  an
     exception is appropriate.  The essential point is that he had  a  full
     opportunity to prepare his case, to disclose its  essentials,  and  to
     say what he wished to say to the Adjudicator.  He cannot say in effect
     that if an adjournment is properly refused, he will obtain  the  fresh
     evidence and achieve the same result through an appeal.

 54.  The  underlying  basis  of  Miss  Easty's  argument   has   therefore
     disappeared.  She conceded, and we would so have found in  any  event,
     that on the evidence before him the Adjudicator's findings are clearly
     sustainable so that the only possible area of argument  left  open  is
     that irrespective  of  the  manifest  failures  on  the  part  of  the
     Appellant and his advisors, and irrespective of the inadmissibility of
     the evidence now sought to be relied  on,  the  procedure  before  the
     Adjudicator  was  so  fundamentally  flawed  that  the  Appellant  was
     deprived of an opportunity to put his case.  As we have explained,  he
     was not.

 55. The updated background material would be admissible, as would  updated
     medical evidence in an Article 8 claim, because  changes  in  personal
     circumstances or country conditions are relevant to the decision on an
     appeal following Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97,  SK  (Croatia)  [2002]
     UKIAT 05613 and DD (Croatia)* [2004] UKIAT 00032.

 56. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.



                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

