
LSH
|Heard at Field House by    |        |                            |
|Video Link to Manchester   |        |                            |
|On 8 June 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|RB (Credibility - Objective evidence) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00339   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|8 October 2004                                                    |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson - Vice President                              |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Ms S S Ramsumair JP                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr R O'Ryan of Counsel, instructed by
                   Parker Rhodes, Solicitors
For the respondent:        Mr John Wyatt, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant appeals with  leave  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr J Sommerville, who dismissed his appeal on both asylum
      and human rights grounds.  Leave to appeal was granted on all  grounds
      and in particular on a ground referred to as Ground 5, in which it was
      agreed at the beginning of the hearing was  in  fact  Ground  4.   The
      numbering of the grounds is  not  particularly  helpful  and  for  the
      purpose of this  decision  the  Tribunal  summarises  the  grounds  as
      follows:


      "1.   In relation to paragraph 24 of the  Adjudicator's  determination
           that the  Adjudicator's  finding  in  that  paragraph  that  the
           appellant gave the impression of being  a  credible  witness  is
           inconsistent with his later finding that the appellant's account
           is not to be believed.


       2.   In relation  to  paragraph  25  that  the  Adjudicator  was  not
           entitled to make assertions with regard to a theoretical  system
           in place for handling cheques for larger amounts than the  limit
           in question (the passage in brackets not being relied on  by  Mr
           O'Ryan) and that this issue was never put to  the  appellant  at
           the hearing and  it  was  therefore  both  unreasonable  and  in
           contravention of the laws of natural justice.


       3.   In relation to paragraphs 26 and 28 of  the  determination  that
           the Adjudicator misunderstood the appellant's account during his
           evidence the appellant's account being that the  fraud  did  not
           reach as high as the Defence Minister but involved  a  group  of
           people  involved  including  the  Commander  Cashier  who  would
           misappropriate  and  split  the  funds.    On  that  basis   the
           Adjudicator was said to  have  erred  in  considering  that  the
           cheque could simply re-issued as four cheques  for  500  million
           Tomans each available at the relevant time.


       4.   In relation to paragraph 29 that given that Uganda is a  country
           where corruption and  violence  are  endemic  the  Adjudicator's
           finding that the appellant  should  have  contacted  the  police
           rather than taking the safer option and fleeing the  country  is
           perverse:  the appellant had already spoken to his employers and
           the police before he  was  assaulted  and  matters  had  clearly
           already gone far beyond the fact of being unwilling to cash  the
           cheques concerned.


       5.   In relation to  paragraph  30  of  the  determination  that  the
           credibility finding as a whole is unsafe, the centrepiece of the
           appellant's story is plausible  and  internally  consistent  and
           consistent with the objective material.


       6.   The ground marked ground 3 in the  grounds  of  appeal  was  not
           relied on at all at the hearing.


       7.   The appellant argues  that  in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  the
           grounds  of  credibility  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  consider
           adequately or at  all  the  objective  evidence  and  background
           material  faced  before  him  or  to  give   due   consideration
           adequately or  at  all  to  the  appellant's  rights  under  the
           European Convention on Human Rights in particular to breaches of
           Articles 2 and 3 and 6".


   2. The Tribunal heard submissions from Mr O'Ryan against these  headings.
       Ground 1 paragraph 24:  he submitted that the Adjudicator's  findings
      were inconsistent.   Ground 2 paragraph 25: the appellant had given  a
      plausible explanation  of  what  he  would  ordinarily  do  which  the
      Adjudicator did not mention in his determination (appellant's  witness
      statement, page 13, paragraphs 12 to 13).  Ground 3: it had never been
      the appellant's case that the Minister was responsible for the  fraud,
      appellant's bundle page 15 to 16, paragraph  19  and  Question  26  at
      C(3).   The advice from his superiors was given before  the  appellant
      was beaten up and the  Adjudicator  had  misunderstood  the  evidence.
      Ground 3:  paragraphs 26  and  28  the  Adjudicator  should  not  have
      expected cheques to be re-issued for lesser amounts and the  Commander
      Cashier who was the fraudster could not get a fresh  cheque.    Ground
      4: the appellant  did  report  the  problem  to  the  police  but  the
      Adjudicator should have had regard to  the  extent  of  corruption  in
      Uganda, see ground 7.


      At page 45 of the  appellant's  bundle  the  April  2003  CIPU  report
      stated:


      "5.79 In an effort to tackle corruption and inefficiency in  the  army
           the Government raised the pay of soldiers by 5% - to  discourage
           pilfering.  The UPDF established a  special  pay  unit  to  curb
           fraud  and  corrupt  practices,  and  will  be  in   charge   of
           procurement of goods and supplies.  President Museveni estimated
           that US $4.8 million was lost annually through fraud in salaries
           and food supplies by one division alone."


      The Adjudicator should have read this passage and indeed the whole  of
      the CIPU.   The Tribunal pointed out that that passage did not  appear
      in the April 2004 version of the CIPU report and could  not  therefore
      be regarded as  current  background  evidence.    Mr  O'Ryan  did  not
      comment.


   3. Mr O'Ryan then dealt with the detailed arguments  under  ground  7  in
      relation to the objective evidence.  The Adjudicator should have  read
      the whole of the appellant's 248 page bundle or at  least  pages  217,
      219 and 223 covering the period June 2000 to April 2003 without  being
      directed to do so.  At  page  245  and  following  of  the  Tribunal's
      current bundle in the 2003 US State Department  Report  issued  on  25
      February 2004 the Adjudicator should have considered the  question  of
      corruption as therein summarised.   Plausibility  had  therefore  been
      considered in a vacuum and the credibility finding was erroneous.   He
      asked the Tribunal to remit the appeal.   He accepted that  there  was
      no risk to returning asylum seekers per se and that if  the  appellant
      was not at risk as set out in  his  core  account  that  he  could  be
      returned safely.


   4. For the respondent, Mr Wyatt took the Tribunal to  paragraph  2.51  of
      the current CIPU report:    2.51 and paragraph 7 of the determination.
       All the documents which were before the Adjudicator were now  out  of
      date, in particular 5.73 of the old report.  The Adjudicator  did  not
      err at paragraph 25 in considering  that  the  appellant  should  have
      considered referring Commander Cashier's request to a superior officer
      or discussing it with the Commander and the Adjudicator  was  entitled
      to  reach  the  conclusion  that  he  did.    The  challenge  to   the
      appellant's credibility at paragraph 10 of the letter refusal:


      "The Secretary of State has carefully considered your claim,  made  in
      paragraph 6 of your statement, that you could  not  cash  the  cheque,
      purportedly from the Ministry of Defence, because it is prohibited  by
      bank regulations to cash cheques for such a large sum of  money.   The
      Secretary of State is of the view that the Ministry of  Defence  would
      be aware of the Regulations surrounding it's account with the  Central
      Bank.  The Secretary of State  therefore  does  not  accept  that  the
      Ministry would have sent a cheque for more than four times  the  money
      which it was legally able to obtain.  The Secretary of State considers
      that this indicates that your claims cannot be accepted."


      This meant that the appellant was on notice of the matters referred to
      in paragraph 28 of the Adjudicator's determination and  in  particular
      that the Ugandan Ministry of Defence could be taken to be aware of the
      bank's procedures for the encashment of cheques.     At  paragraph  24
      the  Adjudicator  merely  said  that  the  appellant  had  given   the
      impression of being an implausible witness and then gone  through  the
      four facts showing why his account was  not  in  fact  credible.   The
      individual aspects of this account did not add up and the  Adjudicator
      was right not to accept the account.  At paragraph 29 the  Adjudicator
      considered that there had been no effort to report  the  abduction  to
      the authorities or indeed  to  the  government's  bank  which  as  the
      appellant  was  only  doing  his  job  seemed  unusual.   Overall  the
      Adjudicator's finding of fact was one which he was  entitled  to  make
      and he asked us to dismiss the appeal.


   5. Mr O'Ryan did not have anything to add in reply and the  determination
      was reserved for postal delivery which we now give.


   6. As the Tribunal observed to Mr O'Ryan at the beginning of the  hearing
      there were two heads of challenge to the Adjudicator's  determination:
      first,  that  his  findings  of  fact  are  perverse   or   Wednesbury
      unreasonable and second that in consequence he fails to give  adequate
      weight to the objective evidence and background material before him.


   7. On Mr O'Ryan's account and having regard to the paragraphs relied upon
      in the appellant's subjective evidence,  the  core  account  is  this.
      The appellant worked for the Bank of Uganda from 1993  until  December
      2002 when he decided to leave Uganda.   By that time he was  a  senior
      Bank Officer with  authority to cash cheques for Government Ministries
      and departments including the Ministry of Defence up to a  maximum  of
      500 million Ugandan Shillings.   In  the  appellant's  statement,  his
      evidence is that the Commander would frequently withdraw large amounts
      just under the authorised maximum.   Significantly, (paragraph  12  of
      the determination) there was a procedure  for  larger  withdrawals  in
      other currencies; a 2 billion shilling withdrawal had been made on  an
      earlier  occasion.     Extra  documentation  was  required  on   these
      occasions.   Frequently cheques would  be  returned,  represented  and
      cashed,  (paragraph  13).  Despite  his  thorough  knowledge  of   the
      procedures, on the day in question Commander Cashier came to the  bank
      with inadequate documentation (the cheque and the banking voucher) and
      wanted to be paid only in Ugandan shillings.  The  appellant  refused;
      he  believed  that  the  Ministry  of  Defence  would  issue   further
      appropriate cheques which could be cashed, and so initially he did not
      report the problem to his superiors.


   8. If that is the evidence which the Adjudicator is said to have  omitted
      to consider, it is not to the appellant's advantage:  the  appellant's
      case as summarised by the Adjudicator is that he had no  authority  at
      all above the 500,000 shilling level,  whereas  it  now  appears  that
      there was a well known procedure for dealing with larger amounts which
      required further documentation and for them to be paid at least partly
      in  non  Ugandan  currencies.    It  is  also  quite  clear  that  the
      procedures were well known to Commander Cashier.    This supports  the
      Adjudicator's findings at paragraphs 25 to 28; the Tribunal  does  not
      find that the Adjudicator's findings are perverse.     Even  if  there
      were a problem with corruption in Uganda (as undoubtedly there was) it
      simply beggars belief that Commander Cashier, who was in the habit  of
      using known systems , would go out of his way where a systems  existed
      for larger payments , would make a request which he  must  have  known
      could not be met.  That is the core of the appellant's claim and it is
      not  sustainable.    The  Adjudicator's   credibility   findings   are
      sufficiently reasoned and are sound.


   9. On that basis, no  consideration  of  objective  evidence  would  have
      altered the Adjudicator's core findings which are sustainable  on  the
      appellant's own subjective evidence.    We  therefore  return  to  the
      detailed grounds which Mr O'Ryan put forward.


  10. Grounds 1 to 5 fall at that hurdle; we also note that  the  record  of
      proceedings reflects that the question of systems for handling cheques
      for larger amounts was put to the appellant at the hearing, as well as
      forming part of the appellant's own statemented evidence.  As we  have
      already stated, Ground 6 was withdrawn.


  11. We turn to the question of alleged failure to consider  the  objective
      evidence and background  material  placed  before  him.   We  have  no
      sympathy with the suggestion that an Adjudicator faced with a 243 page
      bundle of largely out of date  material  is  required  to  read  every
      single page of it in order to determine whether it  raises  any  issue
      which he should consider, whether or not he has been referred  to  it.
      We have considered the skeleton  argument  upon  which  the  appellant
      relied at  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator;  that  contains  no
      specific references to items in the objective evidence  bundle.    The
      only other  reference  in  the  record  of  proceedings  to  objective
      evidence is a reference to the index provided  in  the  bundle,  which
      sets out the matters which are of interest in the  objective  part  of
      the appellant's bundle.  That index occupies 9 pages and is a  mixture
      of a list of documents and excerpts  from  the  documents  themselves.
       Amongst the excerpts the only matter to which  Mr  O'Ryan  wished  to
      draw our attention appears on page 1 of the index of documents and  is
      an excerpt from page 6 of the CIPU report for  April  2003  confirming
      that bribery and corruption are widespread  amongst  officers  of  the
      lower Courts and that there is a military court system.   That has  no
      relevance to the facts of this case.


  12. The Tribunal indicated that we were not prepared to be referred simply
      to "the bundle before the Adjudicator" or indeed the entirety  of  the
      bundle before us, which now runs to  some  327  pages.   We  asked  Mr
      O'Ryan to indicate which documents he considered relevant.  Mr  O'Ryan
      argued that three press reports which appear in the bundle before  the
      Adjudicator, to which the Adjudicator was not  taken,  should  in  any
      event have interested him because of their titles.   The  reports  all
      deal with corruption; the first is dated April  2003  and  relates  to
      police corruption; the  second  (dated  30  August  2002)  relates  to
      corruption in general and the final  document  is  headlined  "Kampala
      June 2000".    There appears  to  have  been  no  dispute  before  the
      Adjudicator, even  on  the  appellant's  own  grounds  of  appeal,  in
      relation to the known corruption problem in Uganda.   Accordingly,  we
      cannot see why the Adjudicator should be expected to trawl through the
      back of the bundle to convince himself of  that  which  the  appellant
      asserts he had already  accepted;  that  Uganda  had  a  problem  with
      corruption.   None of these documents relates to the banking system.


  13. Mr O' Ryan did not rely  upon  any  other  document  in  the  enormous
      Tribunal bundle and had not provided in that bundle (despite its date)
      a  copy  of  the  latest  CIPU  report.   Fortunately,  the  Tribunal,
      regarding that report as in the public domain, had brought a  copy  to
      the hearing.  In relation therefore to ground 7, the Tribunal  is  not
      satisfied  that  there  is  any  objective  material  to   which   the
      Adjudicator's attention was drawn which he failed  to  consider.    We
      deplore  the  practice  of  filing  enormous  bundles  of   irrelevant
      documents  especially  in  publicly  funded  cases  and  there  is  no
      authority for requiring the Adjudicator to  read  the  whole  of  such
      bundles unless his attention is drawn to them.


  14. For all of the above reasons, on  both  its  limbs,  this  appellant's
      appeal cannot succeed under the Refugee Convention.  The Adjudicator's
      record of proceedings records that Counsel accepted  that  the  appeal
      under grounds 2 and 3 of the ECHR would stand or fall with that of the
      Refugee Convention.    In relation to Article 6,  we  have  not  heard
      detailed argument from Mr O'Ryan but we observe that there appears  to
      be nothing with which this appellant would be likely to be charged and
      therefore that issues of fair trial simply do not arise.


  15. For all of the above reasons, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.




                                             J A J C Gleeson
                                             Vice President


                                             8 June 2004




